{"id": "62414", "revid": "4286505", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62414", "title": "Global Crossing", "text": "U.S. telecommunications company (1997\u20132011)\nGlobal Crossing Limited was a telecommunications company that provided computer networking services and operated a tier 1 carrier. It maintained a large backbone network and offered peering, virtual private networks, leased lines, audio and video conferencing, long-distance telephone, managed services, dialup, colocation centres and VoIP. Its customer base ranged from individuals to large enterprises and other carriers, with emphasis on higher-margin layered services such as managed services and VoIP with leased lines. Its core network delivered services to more than 700 cities in more than 70 countries.\nGlobal Crossing was the first global communications provider with IPv6 natively deployed in both its private and public networks. It was legally domiciled in Bermuda and had its administrative headquarters in New Jersey.\nIn 1999, during the dot-com bubble, the company was valued at US$47 billion, but it never had a profitable year. In 2002, the company filed for one of the largest bankruptcies in history and its executives were accused of covering up an accounting scandal. On October 3, 2011, Global Crossing was acquired by Level 3 Communications for $3 billion, including the assumption of $1.1 billion in debt.\nHistory.\nFounding and early growth.\nIn March 1997, Global Crossing was founded by Gary Winnick, the former manager of the bond desk of Drexel Burnham Lambert, and his Drexel colleagues who moved on to work at Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce (CIBC): Abbott L. Brown, David L. Lee, and Barry Porter. In 1997, the company raised $35 million, including investments by Winnick and the CIBC Argosy Merchant Funds (later Trimaran Capital Partners). Winnick was chairman of the company from 1997 until 2002. In 1998, he hired Lodwrick Cook, former CEO of Atlantic Richfield Company, as co-chairman. John Scanlon became the first CEO of the company in the same year, but was replaced in March 1999 by Robert Annunziata, who had resigned as president of AT&amp;T Corporation's Business Services group to \"build a company from start to finish\".\nIn May 1999, Global Crossing made an offer to acquire US West, but was outbid by Qwest. In July 1999, the company acquired Global Marine Systems, the undersea cable maintenance arm of Cable &amp; Wireless, for $885 million. Later that year, in September 1999, the company acquired Frontier Communications, the former Rochester Telephone Corporation, for $9.9 billion and renamed it Global Crossing North America. That same month, Global Crossing acquired 49% of SB Submarine Systems, and formed Asia Global Crossing, a $1.3 billion joint venture with SoftBank Group and Microsoft to build a fiber-optic network in Asia linking Japan, China, Singapore, Hong Kong, Taiwan, South Korea, Malaysia and the Philippines. In November 1999, Global Crossing acquired Racal Telecom for $1.65 billion.\nIn January 2000, the company formed a 50/50 joint venture with Hutchison Whampoa, valued at $1.2 billion, for a fiber-optic network in Hong Kong. In March 2000, Annunziata resigned, receiving $160 million during his 13-month tenure. Leo Hindery, who had joined the company a few months earlier as head of its web hosting division, GlobalCenter, then became CEO. In September 2000, the company announced a deal to sell GlobalCenter to Exodus Communications for $6.5 billion in stock. By the time the deal closed in January 2001, the stock was only worth $1.95 billion. Hindery then resigned as CEO and was replaced with Thomas Casey, a lawyer who came to Global Crossing from Merrill Lynch, where he was co-head of the global telecom investment banking group. For the year 2000, the company lost $1.4 billion.\nIn 2001, the company sold its local telephone operations and the Frontier name in 2001 to Frontier Communications for $3.65 billion in cash. In the summer of 2001, the company began discussing a transaction with Enron in which the company would pay Enron $650 million for its fiber-optic network in exchange for Enron paying the company $650 million to use the network, a move that would boost both companies' revenues without costing them anything. The transaction did not materialize. In October 2001, Casey was replaced by John Legere, the CEO of Global Crossing subsidiary Asia Global Crossing.\nBankruptcy and reemergence.\nIn the fourth quarter of 2001, the company lost $3.4 billion on revenue of $793 million. In January 2002, the company filed bankruptcy. It listed total assets of $22.4 billion and debts of $12.4 billion and was paying annual interest of $600 million. As part of the bankruptcy, Hutchison Whampoa and ST Telemedia agreed to invest $750 million in the company. Hutchinson Whampoa later pulled out of the deal due to regulatory resistance.\nCIBC realized an estimated gain of $2 billion from its relatively small equity investment in the company, making it one of the most profitable investments by a financial institution in the 1990s. Winnick salvaged $735 million from his $20 million investment, although his interest was worth $6 billion on paper at its peak.\nIn April 2002, Hutchinson Whampoa bought the company's 50% interest in the Hong Kong joint venture for $120 million.\nIn November 2002, Global Crossing's Asian subsidiary, Asia Global Crossing, filed bankruptcy and sold its assets to Asia Netcom, a subsidiary of China Netcom.\nBetween 1998 and 2001, Winnick sold approximately $420 million in company stock and other executives sold an additional $900 million in company stock.\nOn December 9, 2003, the company emerged from bankruptcy and on April 1, 2004, the company once again became a public company.\nIn March 2004, Gary Winnick and other ex-executives settled lawsuits filed by investors and former employees accusing the executives of committing securities fraud by using improper accounting to inflate the company's revenue.\nIn October 2006, the company announced the acquisition of UK-based Fibernet Corp. for \u00a349.8 million.\nIn May 2007, the company acquired Impsat, a leading Argentine telecommunications company. Global Crossing and Impsat have had a commercial relationship since 2000, when Global Crossing selected Impsat as one of its providers of Point of Presence (PoP) facilities for Global Crossing's Latin American network, known as South American Crossing. Impsat has also been a customer of Global Crossing in Latin America since 2000.\nIn October 2011, Level 3 Communications acquired the company for $3 billion, including the assumption of $1.1 billion in debt.\nControversies.\nPolitical activity.\nThe company contributed $250,000 to each of the 2000 Republican National Convention and the 2000 Democratic National Convention and made major contributions to politicians of both parties. The company also courted politicians to invest in the company. The company hired lobbyist and former United States Assistant Attorney General Anne Bingaman, married to Democratic New Mexico Senator Jeff Bingaman, paying her $2.5 million between January and June 1999 to try to block licensing of an AT&amp;T, MCI, and Sprint consortium to lay cable from the U.S. to Japan.\nExecutive bonuses.\nDespite the massive layoffs, unpaid employees, and cancelled pensions as a result of the 2002 bankruptcy, executives received huge bonuses and loan relief.\nRussian submarine rescue.\nIn August 2000, the company was involved in an attempted rescue of a Russian submarine during the Kursk submarine disaster. Global Crossing's undersea cable division contracted with British Defense Ministry to operate the LR5 rescue submersible. As part of the agreement, Global Crossing was to keep it on call for emergencies.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "62415", "revid": "50529220", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62415", "title": "Salerno", "text": "City in Campania, Italy\nSalerno (, ; ; ) is an ancient city and \"comune\" (municipality) in Campania, southwestern Italy, and is the capital of the province of the same name. It is the second largest city in the region by number of inhabitants, after Naples. It is located on the Gulf of Salerno on the Tyrrhenian Sea. Some of the Allied landings during Operation Avalanche (the invasion of Italy) occurred near Salerno. For a time the city became home to Victor Emmanuel III, the King of Italy, who moved from Rome in 1943 after Italy negotiated a peace with the Allies in World War II. Salerno thus became the capital of the Kingdom of the South, the seat of the provisional government and Italy's de facto capital for six months. The city has 125,958 inhabitants as of 2025.\nHuman settlement at Salerno has a rich past dating back to pre-historic times. In the early Middle Ages it was an independent Lombard principality, the Principality of Salerno, which around the 11th century comprised most of Southern Italy. During this time, the Schola Medica Salernitana, the first medical school in the world, was founded. In 1077, the Normans made Salerno the capital of their lands in all of continental southern Italy. In the 16th century, under the Sanseverino family, who were among the most powerful feudal lords in southern Italy, the city became a great centre of learning, culture and the arts, and the family hired several of the greatest intellectuals of the time. Later, in 1694, the city was struck by several catastrophic earthquakes and plagues. During a period of Spanish rule the city suffered a crisis which would last until the 18th century, but under Napoleon Salerno became part of the Parthenopean Republic. In the 19th century Salerno supported ideas of the Risorgimento and welcomed Garibaldi in 1861.\nThe city is divided into three distinct zones: the medieval centre (or \"centro storico\"), a 19th century area and more extensive residential areas developed in the post-war era, which are made up mainly of apartment blocks. One of Salerno's patron saint is Saint Matthew, the Apostle, whose relics are kept here at the crypt of Salerno Cathedral.\nHistory.\nPrehistory and antiquity.\nThe area of what is now Salerno has been continuously settled since pre-historical times, as the discoveries of Neolithic mummy remains documents. Inhabited by Oscan-speaking populations, the region was colonized by the Etruscans, who founded the city of Irnthi in the 6th century BC, across the Irno river, in what is today city quarter of Fratte, as a part of their \"Dodecapolis\" political model they essentially replicated in Campania. This settlement represented an important base for Etruscan trade with the nearby Greek colonies of Posidonia and Elea. It was occupied by the Samnites around the 5th century BC as a consequence of the Battle of Cumae (474 BC) as part of the Syracusan sphere of influence.\nWith the Roman advance in Campania, Irna began to lose its importance, being supplanted by the new Roman colony (197 BC) of Salernum, developing around an initial \"castrum\". The new city, which gradually lost its military function in favour of its role as a trade centre, was connected to Rome by the Via Popilia, which ran towards Lucania and Reggio Calabria.\nArchaeological remains, although fragmentary, suggest the idea of a flourishing and lively city. Under the Emperor Diocletian, in the late 3rd century AD, Salernum became the administrative centre of the \"Lucania and Bruttii\" province.\nIn the following century, during the Gothic Wars, the Goths were defeated by the Byzantines, and the Salerno briefly returned to the control of Constantinople (from 553 to 568), before the Lombards invaded almost the whole peninsula. Like many coastal cities of southern Italy (Gaeta, Sorrento, Amalfi), Salerno initially remained untouched by the newcomers, falling only in 646. It subsequently became part of the Duchy of Benevento.\nMiddle Ages to early modern age.\nUnder the Lombard dukes Salerno enjoyed the most splendid period of its history.\nIn 774 Arechis II of Benevento transferred the seat of the Duchy of Benevento to Salerno, in order to elude Charlemagne's offensive and to secure for himself the control of a strategic area, the centre of coastal and internal communications in Campania.\nWith Arechis II, Salerno became a centre of studies with its famous Medical School. The Lombard prince ordered the city to be fortified; the Castle on the Bonadies mountain had already been built with walls and towers. In 839 Salerno declared independence from Benevento, becoming the capital of a flourishing principality stretching out to Capua, northern Calabria and Apulia up to Taranto. In 871\u2013872, the Aghlabids besieged Salerno, but the city was relieved by Louis II of Italy.\nAround the year 1000 prince Guaimar IV annexed Amalfi, Sorrento, Gaeta and the whole duchy of Apulia and Calabria, starting to conceive a future unification of the whole southern Italy under Salerno's arms. The coins minted in the city circulated all over the Mediterranean, with the \"Opulenta Salernum\" wording to certify its richness.\nHowever, the stability of the Principate was continually shaken by the Saracen attacks and, most of all, by internal struggles. In 1056, one of the numerous plots led to the fall of Guaimar. His weaker son Gisulf II succeeded him, but the decline of the principality had begun. In 1077 Salerno reached its zenith but soon lost all its territory to the Normans.\nOn 13 December 1076, the Norman conqueror Robert Guiscard, who had married Guaimar IV's daughter Sikelgaita, besieged Salerno and defeated his brother-in-law Gisulf. In this period the royal palace of Castel Terracena and the cathedral were built, and science was boosted as the Schola Medica Salernitana, open to women like Trota of Salerno and Mercuriade also, considered the most ancient medical institution of the European West, reached its maximum splendour with text like \"Trotula\". At this time in the late 11th century, the city was home to 50,000 people.\nIn 1100, Salerno was made the capital of Norman southern Italy, after Melfi.\nSalerno was the most important city of the Normans for half a century, but with the Norman conquest of southern Italy, the city of Palermo started to substitute Salerno as the most important city for the Normans. Indeed, Salerno played a little part in the fall of the County of Sicily, after the Emperor Henry VI's invasion on behalf of his wife, Constance, the heiress to the kingdom, in 1191, Salerno surrendered and promised loyalty on the mere news of an incoming army.\nThis so disgusted the archbishop, Nicol\u00f2 d'Aiello (from Naples), that he abandoned the city and fled to Naples, which held out in a siege. In 1194, the situation reversed itself: Naples capitulated, along with most other cities of the Mezzogiorno, and only Salerno resisted. It was sacked and pillaged, much reducing its importance and prosperity.\nHenry had his reasons, though. He had entrusted Constance to some important Salerno citizens (advised &amp; \"ruled\" by the archbishop d'Aiello) and after his retreat from invasion in 1191 they had received letters about the events from Nicol\u00f2 D'Aiello and so betrayed Henry, attacked Constance at Castel Terracena and handed her over to King Tancred of Sicily, making the Empress captive for nearly one year. The combined treachery and stubbornness of D'Aiello and his followers cost Salerno much after the Hohenstaufen conquest: Henry's son, Frederick II, moreover, issued a series of edicts that reduced Salerno's role in favour of Naples (in particular, the foundation of the University of Naples in that city).\nAt Charles II of Naples, his father Charles I of Anjou granted the Principality of Salerno in the Kingdom of Sicily (or Regno) in 1272.\nFrom the 14th century onwards, most of the Salerno province became the territory of the Princes of Sanseverino, powerful feudal lords who acted as real owners of the region. They accumulated enormous political and administrative power and attracted artists and men of letters in their own princely palace. In the 15th century, the city was the scene of battles between the Angevin and the Aragonese royal houses with whom the local lords took sides alternatingly.\nIn the first decades of the 16th century, the last descendant of the Sanseverino princes, Ferdinando Sanseverino, was in conflict with the viceroy of the king of Spain, mainly because of his opposition to the Inquisition, causing the ruin of the whole family and the beginning of a long period of decadence for the city.\nA slow renewal of the city occurred in the 18th century with the end of the Spanish dominion and the construction of many refined houses and churches characterising the main streets of the historical centre. In 1799 Salerno was incorporated into the Parthenopean Republic. During the Napoleonic era, first Joseph Bonaparte and then Joachim Murat ascended the Neapolitan throne. The latter decreed the closing of the Schola Medica Salernitana, which had been declining for decades to the level of a theoretical school. In the same period, even the religious orders were suppressed and numerous ecclesiastical properties were confiscated.\nThe city expanded beyond the ancient walls and sea connections were potentiated as they represented an important road network that crossed the town connecting the eastern plain with the area leading to Vietri and Naples.\nLate modern and contemporary.\nSalerno was an active center of Carbonari activities supporting the unification of Italy in the 19th century. The majority of the population of Salerno supported ideas of the Risorgimento against the Bourbon, and in 1861 many of them joined Garibaldi in his struggle for unification.\nAfter the unification of Italy, a slow urban development continued, many suburban areas were enlarged and large public and private buildings were created. The city went on developing until World War II. Its population rose from 20,000 people around 1861s unification to 80,000 in the early 20th century.\nDuring the 19th century, foreign industries started settling in Salerno: in 1830 the first textile mill was established by the Swiss entrepreneur Z\u00fcblin Vonwiller, followed by Schlaepfer-Wenner's textile mills and dye factories; the Wenner family settled permanently in Salerno. In 1877 the city was the site of as many as 21 textile mills employing around ten thousand workers; in comparison with the four thousand employed in Turin's textile industry, Salerno was sometimes referred to as the \"Manchester of the two Sicilies\".\nIn September 1943, during World War II, Salerno was the scene of Operation Avalanche, the invasion of Italy launched by the Allies of World War II, and suffered a great deal of damage. Henry Wellesley, 6th Duke of Wellington, who was killed in action during the fighting, is buried in Salerno War Cemetery. From 12 February to 17 July 1944, it hosted the Government of Marshal Pietro Badoglio. In those months Salerno was the provisional government seat of the Kingdom of Italy, and the King Vittorio Emanuele III lived in a mansion in its outskirts.\nAfter the war the population of the city doubled in a few years, going from 80,000 in 1946 to nearly 160,000 in 1976.\nGeography.\nThe city is situated at the northwestern end of the plain of the Sele River, at the exact beginning of the Amalfi coast. The small river Irno crosses through the central section of Salerno. The highest point is \"Monte Stella\" with its .\nClimate.\nSalerno has a Mediterranean climate, with a hot and relatively dry summer (highs of in July and August) and a rainy fall and winter (highs of in January). Usually there is nearly of rain every year. The strong wind that comes from the mountains toward the Gulf of Salerno makes the city very windy (mainly in winter). However, this gives Salerno the advantage of being one of the sunniest towns in Italy.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;In 2007, there were 140,580 people residing in Salerno, located in the province of Salerno, Campania, of whom 46.7% were male and 53.3% were female. Minors (children ages 18 and younger) totalled 19.61 per cent of the population compared to pensioners who number 21.86 per cent. This compares with the Italian average of 18.06 per cent (minors) and 19.94 per cent (pensioners). The average age of Salerno residents is 42 compared to the Italian average of 42. In the five years between 2002 and 2007, the population of Salerno grew by 2.02 per cent, while Italy as a whole grew by 3.85 per cent. The current birth rate of Salerno is 7.77 births per 1,000 inhabitants compared to the Italian average of 9.45 births.\nAs of 31 December 2010, there were 4,355 foreigners in Salerno. The largest immigrant group came from other European countries (mainly Ukraine and Romania). The population is overwhelmingly Roman Catholic.\nEconomy.\nThe economy of Salerno is mainly based on services and tourism, as most of the city's manufacturing base did not survive the economic crisis of the 1970s. The remaining ones are connected to pottery and food production and treatment.\nThe Port of Salerno is one of the most active of the Tyrrhenian Sea. It handles about 10 million tons of cargo per year, 60% of which is made up by containers.\nTransport.\nSalerno is connected to the A2, Autostrada A3 and Autostrada A30 motorways.\nSalerno station is the main railway station of the city. It is connected to the high-speed railway network via the Milan-Salerno corridor. The main bus stop of Salerno is also at the train station, with both CSTP buses and SITA buses.\nA metro light rail line connects the train station with Stadio Arechi, with seven intermediate stops.\nA new Maritime Terminal Station, designed by Zaha Hadid Architects, was completed in 2016 and was opened for the 2017 cruise season. Salerno features three marinas: Manfredi Pier, Masuccio Salernitano, and Marina di Arechi (opened in 2015). The commercial port of Manfredi is connected with the Amalfi coast and the islands of Gulf of Naples.\nSalerno Airport is located in the neighboring towns of Pontecagnano Faiano and Bellizzi. However, the airport provide direct routes to some European destinations. Naples International Airport is also close by which offer more domestic and international destinations. It is located north west of Salerno.\nEducation.\nSalerno hosted the oldest medical school in the world, the Scuola Medica Salernitana, the most important source of medical knowledge in Europe in the early Middle Ages. It was closed in 1811 by Joachim Murat.\nIn 1944 king Vittorio Emanuele III established Istituto Universitario di Magistero \"Giovanni Cuomo\". In 1968 the university became state-controlled. Today University of Salerno is located in the neighboring town of Fisciano and has about 34,000 students and ten faculties: Arts and Philosophy, Economics, Education, Engineering, Foreign language and literature, Law, Mathematics, Physics and Natural Sciences, Medicine, Pharmacy and Political Science.\nSport.\nThe city's main football team is U.S. Salernitana 1919, that plays in the third level of Italian football, Serie C. Their home stadium is Stadio Arechi, opened in 1990 and with a capacity of 37,245.\nThe most successful team in the city is the women's handball team PDO Handball Team Salerno, with its four national titles, four national cups and two national supercups; other noteworthy teams are Arechi in rugby and Rari Nantes Salerno in water polo.\nThe city has also a tradition in motorsport.\nAttractions.\nSalerno is located at the geographical center of a triangle commonly referred to as the \"Tourist Triangle of the 3 P's,\" formed by the historic sites of Pompeii, Paestum, and Positano. This strategic location, along with its rich history and coastal charm, has made Salerno a significant tourist destination in southern Italy.\nAmong the most prominent landmarks is the Cathedral of Salerno (Duomo), an 11th-century Romanesque structure housing the relics of Saint Matthew, one of the twelve apostles. Overlooking the city from the hills is the medieval Arechi Castle (\"Castello di Arechi\"), offering panoramic views of the Gulf of Salerno.\nVisitors can walk along the Lungomare Trieste (Trieste Seafront Promenade), a palm-lined boulevard that stretches along the coast. Another notable site is the Giardino della Minerva, one of Europe\u2019s oldest botanical gardens, which once served as an educational space for students of the famed Schola Medica Salernitana, the first medical school in the Western world.\nThe city also hosts several museums, including the Museo Didattico della Scuola Medica Salernitana and the Museo Archeologico Provinciale di Salerno, which preserves artifacts from the ancient Etruscan and Roman periods. The 19th-century Teatro Verdi is a cultural highlight, modeled after Naples\u2019 Teatro San Carlo.\nSalerno\u2019s Centro storico (historic center) is a vibrant area filled with narrow alleys, baroque churches, artisan shops, and traditional eateries.\nInternational relations.\nTwin towns \u2013 sister cities.\nSalerno is twinned with:\nNotable People from Salerno.\nThe following is a list of notable individuals from Salerno, Italy:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "62417", "revid": "46696839", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62417", "title": "J. B. S. Haldane", "text": "Geneticist and evolutionary biologist (1892\u20131964)\nJohn Burdon Sanderson Haldane (; 5 November 1892\u00a0\u2013 1 December 1964), nicknamed \"Jack\" or \"JBS\", was a British-born scientist who later moved to India and acquired Indian citizenship. He worked in the fields of physiology, genetics, evolutionary biology, and mathematics. With innovative use of statistics in biology, he was one of the founders of neo-Darwinism. Despite his lack of an academic degree in the field, he taught biology at the University of Cambridge, the Royal Institution, and University College London. Renouncing his British citizenship, he became an Indian citizen in 1961 and worked at the Indian Statistical Institute until his death in 1964.\nHaldane's article on abiogenesis in 1929 introduced the \"primordial soup theory\", which became the foundation for the concept of the chemical origin of life. He established human gene maps for haemophilia and colour blindness on the X chromosome, and codified Haldane's rule on sterility in the heterogametic sex of hybrids in species. He correctly proposed that sickle-cell disease confers some immunity to malaria. He was the first to suggest the central idea of in vitro fertilisation, as well as concepts such as hydrogen economy, cis and trans-acting regulation, coupling reaction, molecular repulsion, the darwin (as a unit of evolution), and organismal cloning.\nIn 1957, Haldane articulated Haldane's dilemma, a limit on the speed of beneficial evolution, an idea that is still debated today. He is also remembered for his work in human biology, having coined \"clone\", \"cloning\", and \"ectogenesis\". With his sister, Naomi Mitchison, Haldane was the first to demonstrate genetic linkage in mammals. Subsequent works established a unification of Mendelian genetics and Darwinian evolution by natural selection whilst laying the groundwork for modern synthesis, and helped to create population genetics.\nHaldane served in World War I, and obtained the rank of captain. He was a professed socialist, Marxist, atheist, and secular humanist whose political dissent led him to leave England in 1956 and live in India, becoming a naturalised Indian citizen in 1961. Arthur C. Clarke credited him as \"perhaps the most brilliant science populariser of his generation\". Brazilian-British biologist and Nobel laureate Peter Medawar called Haldane \"the cleverest man I ever knew\". According to Theodosius Dobzhansky, \"Haldane was always recognized as a singular case\"; Ernst Mayr described him as a \"polymath\" (as did others); Michael J. D. White described him as \"the most erudite biologist of his generation, and perhaps of the century\"; James Watson described him as \"England's most clever and eccentric biologist\", and Sahotra Sarkar described him as \"probably the most prescient biologist of this [20th] century\". According to a Cambridge student, \"he seemed to be the last man who might know all there was to be known\". He willed his body for medical studies, as he wanted to remain useful even in death.\nBiography.\nEarly life and education.\nHaldane was born in Oxford in 1892. His father was the Scottish physiologist, scientist, philosopher, and Liberal, John Scott Haldane, who was the grandson of evangelist James Alexander Haldane. His mother Louisa Kathleen Trotter, was a Conservative of Scottish ancestry. His only sibling, Naomi Mitchison, became a prominent Scottish writer. His uncle was Viscount Haldane and his aunt was the author Elizabeth Haldane. Descended from an aristocratic and secular family of the Clan Haldane, he later claimed that his Y chromosome could be traced back to Robert the Bruce.\nHaldane grew up at 11 Crick Road, North Oxford. He learnt to read at the age of three, and at four, after injuring his forehead, he asked the physician treating him about the bleeding, \"Is this oxyhaemoglobin or carboxyhaemoglobin?\" He was raised as an Anglican Christian. From age eight he worked with his father in their home laboratory where he experienced his first self-experimentation, the method he would later be famous for. He and his father became their own \"human guinea pigs\", such as in their investigation on the effects of poison gases. In 1899, his family moved to \"Cherwell\", a late Victorian house at the outskirts of Oxford with its own private laboratory. At age 8, in 1901, his father brought him to the Oxford University Junior Scientific Club to listen to a lecture on Mendelian genetics, which had been recently rediscovered. Although he found the lecture given by Arthur Dukinfield Darbishire, Demonstrator of Zoology at Balliol College, Oxford, \"interesting but difficult\", it influenced him permanently such that genetics became the field in which he made his most important scientific contributions.\nHis formal education began in 1897 at Oxford Preparatory School (now Dragon School), where he gained a First Scholarship in 1904 to Eton College. In 1905 he joined Eton, where he experienced severe abuse from senior students for allegedly being arrogant, but was befriended by Julian Huxley. The indifference of authority left him with a lasting hatred for the English education system. However, the ordeal did not stop him from becoming captain of the school.\nHe participated for the first time in scientific research as a volunteer subject for his father in 1906. John was the first to study the effects of decompression (relief from high pressure) in humans. He investigated the physiological condition called \"bends\", such as when goats lift and bend their legs if discomforted, that also may affect deep-sea divers. In July 1906, on board \"HMS Spanker\" off the west coast of Scotland, Rothesay, young Haldane jumped into the Atlantic Ocean with the experimental diving suit. The study was published in a 101-paged article in \"The Journal of Hygiene\" in 1908; where Haldane was described as \"Jack Haldane (age 13)\" for whom it \"was the first time [he] had ever dived in a diving dress\". The research became a foundation for a scientific theory called Haldane's decompression model.\nHe studied mathematics and classics at New College, Oxford, and obtained first-class honours in mathematical Moderations in 1912. He became engrossed in genetics and presented a paper on gene linkage in vertebrates in the summer of 1912. His first technical paper, a 30-page long article on haemoglobin function, was published that same year, as a co-author alongside his father. His mathematical treatment of the study was published in December 1913 in the \"Proceedings of the Physiological Society\".\nHaldane did not want his education to be confined to a specific subject; he took up Greats (classics) and graduated with first-class honours in 1914. While he had full intention of studying physiology, his plan was, as he described later, referring to World War I, \"somewhat overshadowed by other events\". His only formal education in biology was an incomplete course in vertebrate anatomy.\nCareer.\nTo support the war effort, Haldane volunteered to join the British Army, and was commissioned a temporary second lieutenant in the 3rd Battalion of the Black Watch (Royal Highland Regiment) on 15 August 1914. He was assigned as the trench mortar officer, to lead his team for hand-bombing the enemy trenches, the experience of which he described as \"enjoyable\". In his article in 1932 he described how \"he enjoyed the opportunity of killing people and regarded this as a respectable relic of primitive man\". He was promoted to temporary lieutenant on 18 February 1915 and to temporary captain on 18 October. While serving in France, he was wounded by artillery fire and sent back to Scotland, where he served as instructor of grenades for the Black Watch recruits. In 1916, he joined the war in Mesopotamia (Iraq), where an enemy bomb severely wounded him. He was relieved from action and sent to India, where he stayed for the rest of the war. He returned to England in 1919 and relinquished his commission on 1 April 1920, retaining his rank of captain. For his ferocity and aggressiveness in battles, his commander described him as the \"bravest and dirtiest officer in my Army\". Another senior officer of his regiment called him 'mad' and 'cracked'.\nBetween 1919 and 1922, he served as Fellow of New College, Oxford, where, despite his lack of formal education in the field, he taught and researched in physiology and genetics. During his first year at Oxford, six of his papers dealing with physiology of respiration and genetics were published. He then moved to the University of Cambridge, where he accepted a newly created readership in biochemistry in 1923 and taught until 1932. During his nine years at Cambridge, he worked on enzymes and genetics, particularly the mathematical side of genetics. While working as a visiting professor at the University of California in 1932, he was elected Fellow of the Royal Society.\nHaldane worked part-time at the John Innes Horticultural Institution (later named John Innes Centre) at Merton Park in Surrey from 1927 to 1937. When Alfred Daniel Hall became the director in 1926, one of his earliest tasks was to appoint as assistant director \"a man of high quality in the study of genetics\" who could become his successor. Upon the recommendation of Julian Huxley, the council appointed Haldane in March 1927, with the terms: \"Mr. Haldane to visit the Institution fortnightly for a day and a night during the Cambridge terms, to put in two months also at Easter and long vacations in two continuous blocks and to be free in the Christmas vacation.\" He was officer in charge of Genetical Investigations. He became the Fullerian Professor of Physiology at the Royal Institution from 1930 to 1932 and in 1933 he became Professor of Genetics at University College London, where he spent most of his academic career. As Hall did not retire until 1939, Haldane did not in fact succeed him, but resigned from the John Innes in 1936 to become the first Weldon Professor of biometry at University College London. Haldane was credited with helping the John Innes become \"the liveliest place for research in genetics in Britain\". He moved his team to the Rothamsted Experimental Station in Hertfordshire from 1941 to 1944, during World War II, to escape bombings. Reginald Punnett, founder of the \"Journal of Genetics\" in 1910 with William Bateson, invited him to become editor in 1933, a post he retained until his death.\nIn India.\nIn 1956, Haldane left University College London, and joined the Indian Statistical Institute (ISI) in Calcutta where he worked in the biometry unit. Haldane gave many reasons for moving to India. Officially he stated that he left the UK because of the Suez Crisis, writing: \"Finally, I am going to India because I consider that recent acts of the British Government have been violations of international law.\" He believed that the warm climate would do him good, and that India shared his socialist dreams. In an article \"A passage to India\" that he wrote in \"The Rationalists Annual\" in 1958, he stated: \"For one thing I prefer Indian food to American. Perhaps my main reason for going to India is that I consider that the opportunities for scientific research of the kind in which I am interested are better in India than in Britain, and that my teaching will be at least as useful there as here.\" The university had sacked his wife Helen for being drunk and disorderly and refusing to pay a fine, triggering Haldane's resignation. He decided that he would no longer wear socks, stating that \"Sixty years in socks is enough.\" Afterwards, he always dressed in Indian attire.\nHaldane was keenly interested in inexpensive research. Explaining in \"A passage to India\", he said, \"Of course, if my work required electron microscopes, cyclotrons, and the like, I should not get them in India. But the sort of facilities which Darwin and Bateson used for their researches\u2014such as gardens, gardeners, pigeon lofts, and pigeons\u2014are more easily obtained in India than in England.\" He wrote to Julian Huxley about his observations on \"Vanellus malabaricus\", the yellow-wattled lapwing. He advocated the use of \"Vigna sinensis\" (cowpea) as a model for studying plant genetics. He took an interest in the pollination of \"Lantana camara\". He lamented that Indian universities forced those who took up biology to drop mathematics. He took an interest in the study of floral symmetry. In January 1961 he befriended Canadian lepidopterist Gary Botting, the 1960 U.S. Science Fair winner in zoology (who had first visited the Haldanes along with Susan Brown, 1960 U.S. National Science Fair winner in botany), inviting him to share the results of his experiments hybridising \"Antheraea\" silk moths. He, his wife Helen Spurway, and student Krishna Dronamraju were present at the Oberoi Grand Hotel in Calcutta when Brown reminded the Haldanes that she and Botting had a previously scheduled event that would prevent them from accepting an invitation to a banquet proposed by the Haldanes in their honour and had regretfully declined the honour. After the two students had left the hotel, Haldane went on his much-publicized hunger strike to protest what he regarded as a \"U.S. insult\". When the director of the ISI, P. C. Mahalanobis, confronted Haldane about both the hunger strike and the unbudgeted banquet, Haldane resigned from his post (in February 1961), and moved to a newly established biometry unit in Bhubaneswar, the capital of Orissa (Odisha).\nHaldane took Indian citizenship; he was interested in Hinduism and became a vegetarian. In 1961, Haldane described India as \"the closest approximation to the Free World\". Jerzy Neyman objected that \"India has its fair share of scoundrels and a tremendous amount of poor unthinking and disgustingly subservient individuals who are not attractive.\" Haldane retorted:Perhaps one is freer to be a scoundrel in India than elsewhere. So one was in the U.S.A in the days of people like Jay Gould, when (in my opinion) there was more internal freedom in the U.S.A than there is today. The \"disgusting subservience\" of the others has its limits. The people of Calcutta riot, upset trams, and refuse to obey police regulations, in a manner which would have delighted Jefferson. I don't think their activities are very efficient, but that is not the question at issue.When on 25 June 1962 he was described in print as a \"Citizen of the World\" by Groff Conklin, Haldane responded:No doubt I am in some sense a citizen of the world. But I believe with Thomas Jefferson that one of the chief duties of a citizen is to be a nuisance to the government of his state. As there is no world state, I cannot do this. On the other hand, I can be, and am, a nuisance to the government of India, which has the merit of permitting a good deal of criticism, though it reacts to it rather slowly. I also happen to be proud of being a citizen of India, which is a lot more diverse than Europe, let alone the U.S.A, the U.S.S.R or China, and thus a better model for a possible world organisation. It may of course break up, but it is a wonderful experiment. So, I want to be labeled as a citizen of India.Haldane found science teaching in India wanting. He said \"the stupidity of the \"mynah\" shows that in birds, as in men, linguistic and practical abilities are not very highly correlated. A student who can repeat a page of a text book may get first class honours, but may be incapable of doing research.\"\nPersonal life.\nHaldane was married twice, first to Charlotte Franken and then to Helen Spurway. In 1924, Haldane met Charlotte Franken, who was a journalist for the \"Daily Express\" and married to Jack Burghes. Following the publication of Haldane's \"Daedalus, or Science and the Future\", she interviewed Haldane and they began a relationship. In order to marry Haldane, Franken filed a divorce suit, which resulted in controversy as Haldane was involved as co-respondent in the legal proceeding. Additionally, as Sahotra Sarkar reported: \"For her to secure a divorce, Haldane overtly committed adultery with her\". Haldane's conduct was described as \"gross immorality\", for which he was formally dismissed by Cambridge's Sex Viri (a six-member disciplinary committee) from the university in 1925. Cambridge professors, including G. K. Chesterton, Bertrand Russell, and W. L. George, raised their defence for Haldane insisting that the university should not make such judgements, based solely on a professor's private life. The ouster was revoked in 1926. Haldane and Charlotte Franken were married in 1926. Following their separation in 1942, they divorced in 1945. Later that year he married Helen Spurway, his former PhD student. He also had an affair with Angel Records founder Dorle Soria.\nHaldane once boasted about himself, saying, \"I can read 11 languages and make public speeches in three; but am unmusical. I am a fairly competent public speaker.\" He had no children, but he and his father were important influences to his sister Naomi's children, of whom Denis Mitchison, Murdoch Mitchison, and Avrion Mitchison became professors of biology at the University of London, Edinburgh University, and University College London, respectively.\nInspired by his father, Haldane often used self-experimentation and would expose himself to danger in order to obtain data. To test the effects of acidification of the blood he drank dilute hydrochloric acid, enclosed himself in an airtight room containing 7% carbon dioxide, and found that it 'gives one a rather violent headache'. One experiment to study elevated levels of oxygen saturation triggered a fit that resulted in his suffering crushed vertebrae. In his decompression chamber experiments, he and his volunteers suffered perforated eardrums. But, as Haldane stated in \"What is Life\", \"the drum generally heals up; and if a hole remains in it, although one is somewhat deaf, one can blow tobacco smoke out of the ear in question, which is a social accomplishment\".\nHaldane made himself unpopular among his colleagues from the start of his academic career. In Cambridge, he annoyed most of the senior faculty due to his uninhibited behaviour, particularly at dinner. His partisan, Edgar Adrian (a 1932 Nobel laureate), had almost convinced Trinity College to offer him an appointment as a Fellow, but that was ruined by an incident when Haldane arrived at the dining table carrying a gallon jar of urine from his laboratory.\nLater life and death.\nIn the autumn of 1963, Haldane visited the US for a series of scientific conferences. At the University of Wisconsin, Sewall Wright introduced him before his speech, noting many of Haldane's achievements, after which Haldane modestly remarked that the introduction would have been more accurate if all the references to \"Haldane\" were replaced with \"Wright\". In Florida, he met, for the first and only time, the Russian biochemist Alexander Oparin, who had developed an origin of life theory quite independent of his own in the 1920s. It was while there that he started feeling abdominal pains.\nHaldane went to London for a diagnosis. He was found to have colorectal cancer, and had a surgery in February 1964. Around that time Philip Dally was making a BBC documentary about eminent living scientists, which included Sewall Wright and the double Nobel laureate Linus Pauling. Dally's team approached Haldane at the hospital for the documentary profile, but instead of a filmed interview, Haldane gave them a self-obituary, the opening lines of which run:I am going to begin with a boast. I believe that I am one of the [originally as \"I am the most\"] most influential people living today, although I haven't got a scrap of power. Let me explain. In 1932 I was the first person to estimate the rate of mutation of a human gene.He also wrote a comic poem while in the hospital, mocking his own incurable disease. It was read by his friends, who appreciated the consistent irreverence with which Haldane had lived his life. The poem first appeared in print on 21 February 1964 issue of the \"New Statesman\", and runs:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe poem ends:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHe willed that his body be used for medical research and instruction at the Rangaraya Medical College, Kakinada. \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;My body has been used for both purposes during my lifetime and after my death, whether I continue to exist or not, I shall have no further use for it, and desire that it shall be used by others. Its refrigeration, if this is possible, should be a first charge on my estate.His surgery in London was declared successful. But the symptoms reappeared after returning to India in June, and in August, the Indian doctors confirmed that his condition was terminal. Writing to John Maynard Smith on 7 September, he said, \"I am not appreciably upset by the prospect of dying fairly soon. But I am very angry [at the English doctor who performed the operation].\"\nHe died on 1 December 1964 in Bhubaneswar. On that day the BBC broadcast his self-obituary as \"Professor J.B.S. Haldane, obituary.\" Following his will, his body was moved to Kakinada where Vissa Ramachandra Rao performed post-mortem and preservation of his body parts. His skeleton and organs are on display to the public in the Haldane Museum, located in the pathology department of Rangaraya Medical College.\nScientific contributions.\nFollowing his father's footsteps, Haldane's first publication was on the mechanism of gaseous exchange by haemoglobin in \"The Journal of Physiology\", and he subsequently worked on the chemical properties of blood as a pH buffer. He investigated several aspects of kidney functions and mechanism of excretion.\nGenetic linkage.\nIn 1904, Arthur Dukinfield Darbishire published a paper on an experiment attempting to test Mendelian inheritance between Japanese waltzing and albino mice. When Haldane came across the paper, he noticed that Darbishire had overlooked the possibility of genetic linkage in the experiment. Having sought advice from Reginald Punnett, a professor of biology at the University of Cambridge, he was ready to write a paper, but only after an independent experiment. With his sister Naomi and a friend one year his senior, Alexander Dalzell Sprunt, he started the experiment in 1908 using guinea pigs and mice. By 1912, the report was ready. The paper was entitled \"Reduplication in mice\" and published in the \"Journal of Genetics\" only in December 1915. It became the first demonstration of genetic linkage in mammals, showing that certain genetic traits tend to be inherited together (this was later discovered to be due to their proximity on chromosomes). (Between 1912 and 1914, genetic linkage had been reported in the fruit fly \"Drosophilla\", silk moth, and plants.)\nAs the paper was written during Haldane's service during World War I, James F. Crow called it \"the most important science article ever written in a front-line trench\". Haldane recalled that he was the \"only officer to complete a scientific paper from a forward position of the Black Watch\". As was Haldane, Sprunt had joined 4th Battalion Bedfordshire Regiment at the start of World War I, and was killed at the Battle of Neuve Chapelle on 17 March 1915. It was upon this news that Haldane submitted the paper for publication, in which he remarked: \"Owing to the war it has been necessary to publish prematurely, as unfortunately one of us (A. D. S.) has already been killed in France.\" He was also the first to demonstrate linkage in chickens in 1921, and (with Julia Bell) in humans in 1937.\nEnzyme kinetics.\nIn 1925, with G.E. Briggs, Haldane derived a new interpretation of the enzyme kinetic law of Victor Henri in 1903, better known as the 1913 Michaelis\u2013Menten equation. Leonor Michaelis and Maud Menten assumed that enzyme (catalyst) and substrate (reactant) are in fast equilibrium with their complex, which then dissociates to yield product and free enzyme. By contrast, at almost the same time, Donald Van Slyke and G. E. Cullen treated the binding step as an irreversible reaction. The Briggs\u2013Haldane equation was of the same algebraic form as both of the earlier equations, but their derivation is based on the quasi-steady state approximation, which is the concentration of intermediate complex (or complexes) does not change. As a result, the microscopic meaning of the \"Michaelis Constant\" (\"Km\") is different. Although commonly referring to it as Michaelis\u2013Menten kinetics, most of the current models typically use the Briggs\u2013Haldane derivation.\nHaldane's principle.\nIn his essay \"On Being the Right Size\" he outlines Haldane's principle, which states that the size very often defines what bodily equipment an animal must have: \"Insects, being so small, do not have oxygen-carrying bloodstreams. What little oxygen their cells require can be absorbed by simple diffusion of air through their bodies. But being larger means an animal must have complicated oxygen pumping and distributing systems to reach all the cells.\"\nHaldane's sieve.\nIn 1927, Haldane pointed out that because selection mainly acts on heterozygotes, newly arisen dominant mutations are much more likely to be fixed, than are recessive ones, a mechanism now called \"Haldane's sieve\". This leads to the expectation that adaptation from new mutations in large outcrossing populations should primarily proceed via fixing non-recessive beneficial mutations.\nOrigin of life.\nIn 1929, Haldane introduced the modern concept of abiogenesis in an eight-page article entitled \"The Origin of Life\" in \"The Rationalist Annual\", describing the primitive ocean as a \"vast chemical laboratory\" containing a mixture of inorganic compounds \u2013 like a \"hot dilute soup\" in which organic compounds could have formed. Under the solar energy the anoxic atmosphere containing carbon dioxide, ammonia, and water vapour gave rise to a variety of organic compounds, \"living or half-living things\". The first molecules reacted with one another to produce more complex compounds, and ultimately the cellular components. At some point a kind of \"oily film\" was produced that enclosed self-replicating nucleic acids, thereby becoming the first cell. J. D. Bernal named the hypothesis \"biopoiesis\" or \"biopoesis\", the process of living matter spontaneously evolving from self-replicating, but lifeless molecules. Haldane further hypothesised that viruses were the intermediate entities between the prebiotic soup and the first cells. He asserted that prebiotic life would have been \"in the virus stage for many millions of years before a suitable assemblage of elementary units was brought together in the first cell\". The idea was generally dismissed as \"wild speculation\".\nAlexander Oparin had suggested a similar idea in Russian in 1924 (published in English in 1936). The hypothesis gained some empirical support in 1953 with the classic Miller\u2013Urey experiment. Since then, the primordial soup theory (Oparin\u2013Haldane hypothesis) has become the foundation in the study of abiogenesis.\nAlthough Oparin's theory became widely known only after the English version in 1936, Haldane accepted Oparin's originality and said, \"I have very little doubt that Professor Oparin has the priority over me.\"\nHaldane is famous for the (possibly apocryphal) response that he gave when some theologians asked him what could be inferred about the mind of the Creator from the works of His Creation: \"an inordinate fondness for beetles\", or sometimes he would respond: \"an inordinate fondness for stars and beetles\".\nHaldane recognized that although evolution took random path, that science typically examined adaptations in hindsight. He wrote that \"Teleology is like a mistress to a biologist: he cannot live without her but he's unwilling to be seen with her in public.\"\nMalaria and sickle-cell anemia.\nHaldane was the first to realise the evolutionary link between genetic disorder and infection in humans. While estimating the rates of human mutation in different situations and diseases, he noted that mutations expressed in red blood cells, such as thalassemias, were prevalent only in tropical regions where deadly infection such as malaria has been endemic. He further observed that these were favourable traits (heterozygous inheritance of sickle cell trait) for natural selection that protected individuals from receiving malarial infection. He introduced his hypothesis at the Eighth International Congress of Genetics held in 1948 at Stockholm on a topic \"The Rate of Mutation of Human Genes\". He proposed that genetic disorders in humans living in malaria-endemic regions provided a condition (phenotype) that makes them relatively immune to malarial infections. He formalised the concept in a technical paper published in 1949 in which he made a prophetic statement: \"The corpuscles of the anaemic heterozygotes are smaller than normal, and more resistant to hypotonic solutions. It is at least conceivable that they are also more resistant to attacks by the sporozoa which cause malaria.\" This became known as \"Haldane's malaria hypothesis\", or concisely, the \"malaria hypothesis\". This hypothesis was eventually confirmed by Anthony C. Allison in 1954 in the case of sickle-cell anemia.\nPopulation genetics.\nHaldane was one of the three major figures to develop the mathematical theory of population genetics, along with Ronald Fisher and Sewall Wright. He thus played an important role in the modern evolutionary synthesis of the early 20th century. He re-established natural selection as the central mechanism of evolution by explaining it as a mathematical consequence of Mendelian inheritance. He wrote a series of ten papers, A Mathematical Theory of Natural and Artificial Selection, deriving expressions for the direction and rate of change of gene frequencies, and also analyzing the interaction of natural selection with mutation and migration. The series consists of ten papers published between 1924 and 1934 in journals such as \"Biological Reviews\" (part II), \"Mathematical Proceedings of the Cambridge Philosophical Society\" (parts I and from III to IX), and \"Genetics\" (part X). He gave a set of lectures based on this series at the University of Wales in 1931, and they were summarised in his book, \"The Causes of Evolution\" in 1932.\nHis first paper on the series in 1924 specifically deals with the rate of natural selection in peppered moth evolution. He predicted that environmental conditions can favour the increase or decline of either the dominant (in this case the black or melanic forms) or the recessive (the grey or wild type) moths. For a sooty environment such as Manchester, where the phenomenon was discovered in 1848, he predicted that the \"fertility of the dominants must be 50% greater than that of the recessives\". According to his estimate, assuming 1% dominant form in 1848 and about 99% in 1898, \"48 generations are needed for the change [for the dominant to appear]... After only 13 generations the dominants would be in a majority.\" Such mathematical prediction was considered improbable for natural selection in nature, but it was subsequently proven by an elaborate experiment (named Kettlewell's experiment) that was performed by an Oxford zoologist Bernard Kettlewell between 1953 and 1958. Haldane's prediction was proven further by a Cambridge geneticist Michael Majerus in his experiments conducted between 2001 and 2007.\nHis contributions to statistical human genetics included: the first methods using maximum likelihood for the estimation of human linkage maps; pioneering methods for estimating human mutation rates; the first estimates of mutation rate in humans (2 \u00d7 10\u22125 mutations per gene per generation for the X-linked haemophilia gene); and the first notion that there is a \"cost of natural selection\". He was the first to estimate the rate of human mutation in his 1932 book entitled \"The Causes of Evolution\". At the John Innes Horticultural Institution, he developed the complicated linkage theory for polyploids; and extended the idea of gene-enzyme relationships with the biochemical and genetic study of plant pigments.\nAlthough Haldane did not come up with an explicit gene-centric view of life he had an idea of inclusive fitness when he responded to whether he would lay down his life for his brother by supposedly replying that he would give up his life for \"two brothers or eight cousins\".\nPolitical views.\nHaldane became a socialist during the First World War, supported the Second Spanish Republic during the Spanish Civil War, and then became an open supporter of the Communist Party of Great Britain in 1937. A pragmatic dialectical-materialist Marxist, he wrote many articles for the \"Daily Worker\". In \"On Being the Right Size\", he wrote that \"while nationalization of certain industries is an obvious possibility in the largest of states, I find it no easier to picture a completely socialized British Empire or United States than an elephant turning somersaults or a hippopotamus jumping a hedge\".\nIn 1938, Haldane proclaimed enthusiastically: \"I think that Marxism is true.\" He joined the Communist Party in 1942. He was pressed to speak out about the rise of Lysenkoism and the persecution of geneticists in the Soviet Union as anti-Darwinist and the political suppression of genetics as incompatible with dialectical materialism. He shifted his polemic focus to the United Kingdom, criticizing the dependence of scientific research on financial patronage. In 1941, he wrote about the Soviet trial of his friend and fellow geneticist, Nikolai Vavilov:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The controversy among Soviet geneticists has been largely one between the academic scientist, represented by Vavilov and interested primarily in the collection of facts, and the man who wants results, represented by Lysenko. It has been conducted not with venom, but in a friendly spirit. Lysenko said (in the October discussions of 1939): 'The important thing is not to dispute; let us work in a friendly manner on a plan elaborated scientifically. Let us take up definite problems, receive assignments from the People's Commissariat of Agriculture of the USSR and fulfil them scientifically. Soviet genetics, as a whole, is a successful attempt at synthesis of these two contrasted points of view.'\nBy the end of the Second World War, Haldane had become an explicit critic of the Soviet regime. He left the party in 1950, shortly after considering standing for Parliament as a Communist Party candidate. He continued to admire Joseph Stalin, describing him in 1962 as \"a very great man who did a very good job\". Haldane has been accused by authors including Peter Wright and Chapman Pincher of having been a Soviet GRU spy codenamed \"Intelligentsia\".\nSocial and scientific views.\nHuman cloning.\nHaldane was the first to have thought of the genetic basis for human cloning, and the eventual artificial breeding of superior individuals. For this he introduced the terms \"clone\" and \"cloning\", modifying the earlier \"clon\" that had been used in agriculture since the early 20th century (from Greek \"kl\u014dn\", twig). He introduced the term in his speech on \"Biological Possibilities for the Human Species of the Next Ten Thousand Years\" at the \"Ciba Foundation Symposium on Man and his Future\" in 1963. He said:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;It is extremely hopeful that some human cell lines can be grown on a medium of precisely known chemical composition. Perhaps the first step will be the production of a clone from a single fertilized egg, as in \"Brave New World\"...\nOn the general principle that men will make all possible mistakes before choosing the right path, we shall no doubt clone the wrong people [such as Hitler]...\nAssuming that cloning is possible, I expect that most clones would be made from people aged at least fifty, except for athletes and dancers, who would be cloned younger. They would be made from people who were held to have excelled in a socially acceptable accomplishment.\nEctogenesis and in vitro fertilisation.\nHis essay \"Daedalus; or, Science and the Future\" (1924) posited the concept of in vitro fertilisation, which he called ectogenesis. He envisioned ectogenesis as a tool for creating better individuals (eugenics). Haldane's work was an influence on Huxley's \"Brave New World\" (1932) and was also admired by Gerald Heard. Various essays on science were collected and published in a volume entitled \"Possible Worlds\" in 1927. His book, \"A.R.P. (Air Raid Precautions)\" (1938) combined his physiological research into the effects of stress upon the human body with his experience of air raids during the Spanish Civil War to provide a scientific account of the likely effects of the air raids that Britain was to endure during the Second World War.\nCriticism of C. S. Lewis.\nAlong with Olaf Stapledon, Charles Kay Ogden, I. A. Richards, and H. G. Wells, Haldane was accused by C. S. Lewis of scientism. Haldane criticised Lewis and his Ransom Trilogy for the \"complete mischaracterisation of science, and his disparagement of the human race\". Haldane wrote a book for children entitled \"My Friend Mr. Leakey\" (1937), containing the stories \"A Meal With a Magician\", \"A Day in the Life of a Magician\", \"Mr. Leakey's Party\", \"Rats\", \"The Snake with the Golden Teeth\", and \"My Magic Collar Stud\". Later editions featured illustrations by Quentin Blake. Haldane also wrote an essay criticising Lewis's arguments for the existence of God, entitled \"More Anti-Lewisite\", a reference to the poison gas and its antidote.\nHydrogen-generating windmills.\nIn 1923, in a talk given in Cambridge entitled \"Science and the Future\", Haldane, foreseeing the exhaustion of coal for power generation in Britain, proposed a network of hydrogen-generating windmills. This is the first proposal of the hydrogen-based renewable energy economy.\nScientists.\nIn his \"An Autobiography in Brief\", published shortly before his death in India, Haldane named four close associates as showing promise to become illustrious scientists: T. A. Davis, Dronamraju Krishna Rao, Suresh Jayakar, and S. K. Roy.\nAwards and honours.\nHaldane was elected a Fellow of the Royal Society in 1932. The French Government conferred him its National Order of the Legion of Honour in 1937. In 1952, he received the Darwin Medal from the Royal Society. In 1956, he was awarded the Huxley Memorial Medal of the Anthropological Institute of Great Britain. He received the Feltrinelli Prize from Accademia Nazionale dei Lincei in 1961. He also received an Honorary Doctorate of Science, an Honorary Fellowship at New College, Oxford, and the Kimber Award of the National Academy of Sciences in the United States. He was awarded the Linnean Society of London's prestigious Darwin\u2013Wallace Medal in 1958.\nLegacy.\nThe Haldane Lecture at the John Innes Centre, where Haldane worked from 1927 to 1937 is named in his honour. The JBS Haldane Lecture of The Genetics Society is named in his honour as well.\nIn the novel \"Antic Hay\" (1923) Haldane was parodied by his friend Aldous Huxley as an obsessive self-experimenter described as \"the biologist too absorbed in his experiments to notice his friends bedding his wife\".\nA major thoroughfare in Kolkata is named in his honor. J.\u202fB.\u202fS.\u202fHaldane Avenue is a busy connector road from the Eastern Metropolitan Bypass to the Park\u202fCircus\u2013Science\u202fCity area. Named after Haldane, who headed the biometry unit at the Indian Statistical Institute in Kolkata after moving to India in 1957, the avenue runs past the prominent Science\u202fCity complex and serves as a key traffic link in the eastern part of the city.\nCollections.\nHaldane's archive is held at University College London. It includes personal and family papers, correspondence, documents relating to his involvement in committees and societies, and extensive scientific research notes.\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "62418", "revid": "1319922666", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62418", "title": "Modena", "text": "City in Emilia-Romagna, Italy\nModena (, ; ; ; ; ) is a city and \"comune\" (municipality) on the south side of the Po Valley, in the Province of Modena, in the Emilia-Romagna region of northern Italy. It has 184,739 inhabitants as of 2025.\nA town, and seat of an archbishop, it is known for its car industry since the factories of the famous Italian upper-class sports car makers Ferrari, De Tomaso, Lamborghini, Pagani and Maserati are, or were, located there and all, except Lamborghini, (having their factory in Sant'Agata Bolognese), have headquarters in the city or nearby. One of Ferrari's cars, the 360 Modena, was named after the town itself. Ferrari's production plant and Formula One team Scuderia Ferrari are based in Maranello south of the city.\nThe University of Modena, founded in 1175 and expanded by Francesco II d'Este in 1686, focuses on economics, medicine and law, and is the second oldest athenaeum in Italy. Italian military officers are trained at the Military Academy of Modena, and partly housed in the Baroque Ducal Palace. The Biblioteca Estense houses historical volumes and 3,000 manuscripts. The Cathedral of Modena, the Torre della Ghirlandina and Piazza Grande are a UNESCO World Heritage Site since 1997. Modena is also known in culinary circles for its production of balsamic vinegar.\nFamous \"Modenesi\" include Mary of Modena, the Queen consort of England and Scotland; operatic tenor Luciano Pavarotti and soprano Mirella Freni, born in Modena itself; Enzo Ferrari, eponymous founder of the Ferrari motor company; Catholic priest Gabriele Amorth; chef Massimo Bottura; comics artist Franco Bonvicini; the band Modena City Ramblers and singer-songwriter Francesco Guccini, who lived here for several decades.\nHistory.\nAncient times.\nThe territory around Modena (, ) was inhabited by the Villanovans in the Iron Age, and later by Ligurian tribes, Etruscans, and the Gaulish Boii (the settlement itself being Etruscan). Although the exact date of its foundation is unknown, it is known that it was already in existence in the 3rd century BC, for in 218 BC, during Hannibal's invasion of Italy, the Boii revolted and laid siege to the city. Livy described it as a fortified citadel where Roman magistrates took shelter. The outcome of the siege is not known, but the city was most likely abandoned after Hannibal's arrival. Mutina was refounded as a Roman colony in 183 BC, to be used as a military base by Marcus Aemilius Lepidus, causing the Ligurians to sack it in 177 BC. Nonetheless, it was rebuilt, and quickly became the most important centre in Cisalpine Gaul, both because of its strategic importance and because it was on an important crossroads between Via Aemilia and the road going to Verona.\nIn the 1st century BC, Mutina was besieged twice. The first siege was by Pompey in 78 BC, when Mutina was defended by Marcus Junius Brutus (a populist leader, not to be confused with his son, Caesar's best known assassin). The city eventually surrendered out of hunger, and Brutus fled, only to be slain in Regium Lepidi. In the civil war following Caesar's assassination, the city was besieged again, this time by Mark Antony, in 44 BC, and defended by Decimus Junius Brutus. Octavian relieved the city with the help of the Senate (see: Battle of Mutina).\nCicero called it \"Mutina splendidissima\" (\"most beautiful Mutina\") in his \"Philippics\" (44 BC). Until the 3rd century AD, it kept its position as the most important city in the newly formed province Aemilia, but the fall of the Empire brought Mutina down with it, as it was used as a military base both against the barbarians and in the civil wars. It is said that Mutina was never sacked by Attila, for a dense fog hid it (a miracle said to be provided by Saint Geminianus, bishop and patron of Modena), but it was eventually buried by a great flood in the 7th century and abandoned.\nIn December 2008, Italian researchers discovered the pottery center where the oil lamps that lit the ancient Roman empire were made. Evidence of the pottery workshops emerged in Modena, during construction work to build a residential complex near the ancient walls of the city. \"We found a large ancient Roman dumping filled with pottery scraps. There were vases, bottles, bricks, but most of all, hundreds of oil lamps, each bearing their maker's name\", Donato Labate, the archaeologist in charge of the dig, stated.\nMiddle Ages.\nIts exiles founded a new city a few miles to the northwest, still represented by the village of Cittanova (literally \"new city\"). About the end of the 9th century, Modena was restored and refortified by its bishop, Ludovicus. At about this time the \"Song of the Watchmen of Modena\" was composed. Later the city was part of the possessions of the Countess Matilda of Tuscany, becoming a free comune starting from the 12th century. In the wars between Emperor Frederick II and Pope Gregory IX Modena sided with the emperor.\nThe Este family were identified as lords of Modena from 1288 (Obizzo d'Este). After the death of Obizzo's successor (Azzo VIII, in 1308) the comune reasserted itself, but by 1336 the Este family was permanently in power. Under Borso d'Este, Modena was made a duchy.\nRenaissance and modern.\nEnlarged and fortified by Ercole II, it was made the primary ducal residence when Ferrara, the main Este seat, fell to the Pope in 1598. Francesco I d'Este, Duke of Modena (1629\u20131658) built the citadel and began the palace, which was largely embellished by Francesco II. In the 18th century, Rinaldo d'Este was twice driven from his city by French invasions, and Francesco III built many of Modena's public buildings, but the Este pictures were sold and many of them wound up in Dresden. Ercole III died in exile at Treviso, having refused Napoleonic offers of compensation when Modena was made part of the Napoleonic Cispadane Republic. His only daughter, Maria Beatrice d'Este, married Ferdinand I, Archduke of Austria-Este, son of Empress Maria Theresa of Austria; and in 1814 their eldest son, Francis IV, received back the estates of the Este. Quickly, in 1816, he dismantled the fortifications and began Modena's years under Austrian rule.\nHis son Francis V was considered a just ruler, and famously tended the victims of war and cholera with his own hands. However, he too had to face yet more foreign-inspired revolutions and was temporarily expelled from Modena in the Revolutions of 1848. He was restored, amidst wide popular acclaim, by Austrian troops. Ten years later, on 20 August 1859, the revolutionaries again invaded (this time the Piedmontese), annexing Modena to the revolutionary Savoyard Kingdom of Italy.\nGeography.\nModena lies on the Pianura Padana, and is bounded by the two rivers Secchia and Panaro, both affluents of the Po River. Their presence is symbolized by the Two Rivers Fountain in the city's center, by Giuseppe Graziosi. The city is connected to the Panaro by the Naviglio channel. The Apennines begin some from the city, to the south. The comune is divided into four \"circoscrizioni\". These are:\nClimate.\nModena has a humid subtropical climate, with continental influences. It has an average annual precipitation of . Summers are hot and winters are cool, with snowfall. This climate is described by the K\u00f6ppen climate classification as \"Cfa\".\nAdministration.\nFrom 1946 to 1992, Modena had a series of Communist mayors. From the 1990s, the city has been governed by center-left coalitions. The legislative body of the municipality (\"comune\") is the City Council (), which is composed by 32 members elected (jointly with the mayor) by the citizens every five years. Modena's executive body is the City Committee (\"Giunta Comunale\"), which is composed by 9 assessors (appointed and dismissed by the mayor), of which one is deputy-mayor, and the mayor. The mayor from 2019 to 2024 of Modena was Gian Carlo Muzzarelli, a member of the Democratic Party.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAs of 2025, Modena has a population of 184,739, with the population density being at . In 2011, minors (children ages 18 and younger) totaled 16.2 percent of the population compared to pensioners who number 22.5 percent. This compares with the Italian average of 18.1 percent (minors) and 19.9 percent (pensioners). The average age of Modena resident is 44 compared to the Italian average of 42. Between 2011 and 2021, Modena grew by 3.2%, while Italy as a whole declined by 0.7%. The current birth rate of Modena is 9.62 births per 1,000 inhabitants compared to the Italian average of 9.45 births.\nAs of 2006[ [update]], 89.6% of the population was Italian. The largest foreign group comes from other parts of Europe (namely Romania and Albania): 3.9%, followed by North Africa: 2.4%, and Sub-Saharan Africa: 1.9%.\nMain sights.\nDucal Palace.\nThe Ducal Palace of Modena, initiated by Francesco I d'Este in 1634 and completed by Francis V, was the seat of the Este court from the 17th to 19th century. The palace occupies the site of the former Este Castle, once located in the periphery of the city. Although generally credited to Bartolomeo Avanzini, it has been suggested that advice and guidance in the design process had been sought from the contemporary luminaries, Cortona, Bernini, and Borromini.\nThe Palace currently houses the Accademia Militare di Modena, the Military Museum and a precious library.\nThe Palace has a Baroque fa\u00e7ade, from which the Honour Court (where the military ceremonies are held) and the Honour Staircase can be accessed. The Central Hall has a frescoed ceiling with the 17th-century \"Incoronation of Bradamante\" by Marco Antonio Franceschini. The \"Salottino d'Oro\" (\"Golden Hall\"), covered with gilted removable panels, was used by Duke Francis III as his main cabinet of work.\nTown Hall.\nFacing the Piazza Grande (a UNESCO World Heritage Site), the Town Hall of Modena was put together in the 17th and 18th centuries from several pre-existing edifices built from 1046 as municipal offices.\nIt is characterized by a Clock Tower (\"Torre dell'Orologio\", late 15th century), once paired with another tower (\"Torre Civica\") demolished after an earthquake in 1671. In the interior, noteworthy is the \"Sala del Fuoco\" (\"Fire Hall\"), with a painted frieze by Niccol\u00f2 dell'Abbate (1546) portraying famous characters from Ancient Rome against a typical Emilia background. The \"Camerino dei Confirmati\" (\"Chamber of the Confirmed\") houses one of the symbols of the city, the \"Secchia Rapita\", a bucket kept in memory of the victorious Battle of Zappolino (1325) against Bologna. This relic inspired the poem of the same title by Alessandro Tassoni. Another relic from the Middle Ages in Modena is the \"Preda Ringadora\", a rectangular marble stone next to the palace porch, used as a speakers' platform, and the statue called \"La Bonissima\" (\"The Very Good\"): the latter, portraying a female figure, was erected in the square in 1268 and later installed over the porch.\nThe Cathedral and the Ghirlandina.\nThe Cathedral of Modena and the annexed campanile are a UNESCO World Heritage Site. Begun under the direction of the Countess Matilda of Tuscany with its first stone laid 6 June 1099 and its crypt ready for the city's patron, Saint Geminianus, and consecrated only six years later, the Duomo of Modena was finished in 1184. The building of a great cathedral in this flood-prone ravaged former center of Arianism was an act of urban renewal in itself, and an expression of the flood of piety that motivated the contemporary First Crusade. Unusually, the master builder's name, Lanfranco, was celebrated in his own day: the city's chronicler expressed the popular confidence in the master-mason from Como, Lanfranco: by God's mercy the man was found (\"inventus est vir\").\nThe sculptor Wiligelmus who directed the mason's yard was praised in the plaque that commemorated the founding. The program of the sculpture is not lost in a welter of detail: the wild dangerous universe of the exterior is mediated by the Biblical figures of the portals leading to the Christian world of the interior. In Wiligelmus' sculpture at Modena, the human body takes on a renewed physicality it had lost in the schematic symbolic figures of previous centuries. At the east end, three apses reflect the division of the body of the cathedral into nave and wide aisles with their bold, solid masses. Modena's Duomo inspired campaigns of cathedral and abbey building in emulation through the valley of the Po.\nThe Gothic campanile (1224\u20131319) is called \"Torre della Ghirlandina\" from the bronze garland surrounding the weathercock.\nCulture.\nMuseums.\nMuseum Palace.\nThe Museum Palace, on the St. Augustine square, is an example of civil architecture from the Este period, built as a Hostel for the poor, together with the nearby Hospital in the late 18th century. Today it houses the main museums of Modena:\nThe Estense Gallery and Library have reopened on 29 May 2015 after the earthquake of 2012. The Gallery has been completely restored but some pieces are still damaged and thus cannot be seen.\nMuseums of the Cathedral.\nOpened for the Great Jubilee in 2000, the Museum of the Cathedral houses a rich collection of artistic heritage, in particular liturgical ornaments and furnishings. Apart from the finds of the cathedral building site by Wiligelmus and Lanfranco, such as romanesque metopes and roof decorations, in the Lapidary there are also reliefs, sculptures and inscriptions of the Roman, Medieval and Renaissance era found in the cathedral area during the restoration works between the 19th and the 20th century.\nMuseum Enzo Ferrari.\nInaugurated on 10 March 2012, the museum complex includes Enzo Ferrari's birthplace and a futuristic automotive design gallery, painted in the yellow that Enzo Ferrari chose as the background for the Prancing horse on his logo. The exhibition gallery was designed by the famous architect Jan Kaplick\u00fd, who suddenly died in 2009, and carried on by his associate and loyal assistant Andrea Morgante.\nThe interior features a multimedia display of pictures, unpublished films and precious mementoes of Enzo Ferrari's life as a man, driver and car-maker throughout the 20th century.\nThe Exhibition Gallery houses a flexible mounting representing story, figures, places and races of the Modenese sport motor racing.\nMuseum of Collectible Cards.\nFounded in 1986 by Giuseppe Panini, who then decided to donate his collection to the city, the Museo della figurina was opened to the public on 15 December 2006. It is located inside the Santa Margherita Palace, which also houses the Delfini Library and the City Gallery.\nThe Museum houses several collections, including, apart from the classic stickers, cigarette cards, letter seals, matchboxes and calendars, all of which represent a very important historical document of the development of picture cards throughout the years.\nTeatro Comunale Modena.\nThe Teatro Comunale Modena (Community Theatre of Modena, but renamed in October 2007 as \"Teatro Comunale Luciano Pavarotti\") is an opera house in Modena. The idea for the creation of the present theatre dates from 1838, when it became apparent that the then-existing Teatro Comunale di via Emilia (in dual private and public ownership) was no longer suitable for staging opera. However, this house had been the venue for presentations of all of the works of Donizetti, Bellini and Rossini up to this time, and a flourishing operatic culture existed in Modena.\nUnder the Mayor of Modena in collaboration with the Conservatorio dell'Illustrissima Comunit\u00e0 (Conservatory of the Most Illustrious Community), architect Francesco Vandelli was engaged to design the Teatro dell'Illustrissima Comunit\u00e0, as the theatre was first called, \"for the dignity of the city and for the transmission of the scenic arts\". Paid for in the manner typical of the time \u2013 from the sale of boxes \u2013 in addition to a significant gift from Duke Friedrich IV, Vandelli created a design for the new theatre combining ideas from those in Piacenza, Mantua, and Milan, and it opened on 2 October 1841 with a performance of Gandini's \"Adelaide di Borgogna al Castello di Canossa\", an opera specially commissioned for the occasion.\nCuisine.\nModena has a rich and diversified cuisine, often including meats, hams and salamis. One of the most famous \"modenese\" dishes is \"zampone\" (the fatter and heartier version) or \"cotechino Modena\" (\"cotechino\" is leaner and less fat than \"zampone\"). \"Cotechino\" dates back to around 1511 to Mirandola, where, whilst besieged, the people had to find a way to preserve meat and use the less tender cuts, so made the \"cotechino\". By the 18th century it had become more popular than the yellowish sausage had been around at the time, and in the 19th century was in mass production in and around the area.\nModena's contribution to the Italian pasta culture are \"tortellini\" and \"tortelloni\", which are squares of pasta shaped in the form of a ring and stuffed with meat or cheese.\n\"Cappello del prete\" is also a popular meal, which is a very fatty pig's trotter. Other dishes include \"torta Barozzi\" or \"torta nera\", which is a black tart (a dessert made with a coffee/cocoa and almond filling encased in a fine pastry dough), \"ciccioli\", made by slowly cooking, compressing, drying, and aging fatty, leftover pieces of pork, and \"pesto modenese\", which is cured pork back fat pounded with garlic, rosemary and Parmesan, used to fill borlenghi and crescentine.\nBalsamic vinegar of Modena became a protected geographical indication under EU law in 2000. The Balsamic Vinegar is a condiment for salad, cheese, strawberries and many other dishes. The practice of cooking the must of grapes can be traced back to the ancient Romans: the so-called sapum was used both as a medicinal product and in the kitchen as a sweetener and condiment. The long history of the Balsamic Vinegar came to us through centuries and now is most consumed abroad than in Italy.\nModena contains Italy's most acclaimed restaurant, Osteria Francescana, which holds three stars in the Michelin Guide since 2013 and, as of 2018, has been named as the best restaurant in the world in The World's 50 Best Restaurants.\nArts.\nArt studio fuse* is based in Modena.\nEconomy.\nModena and its province is one of Italy's most affluent areas, thanks to a rich agriculture and numerous small and medium manufacturing enterprises. Among the largest employers are BPER Banca, the publishing company Panini Group; Cremonini Group, one of Europe's largest meat packaging and catering companies; Grandi Salumifici Italiani and Parmareggio, other large food processing companies; Liu Jo, a large clothing company.\nAutomotive industry.\nModena alongside Turin, are among Italy's main centres of the automotive industry, having a rich history and tradition in this field. The iconic Ferrari brand was founded in Modena by Modenese legendary car tycoon Enzo Ferrari, and today is headquartered just outside the city, in the suburb of Maranello. Several other Italian luxury automobile manufacturers such as Pagani and Maserati are headquartered in the Modena area. The electric motorcycle maker Energica Motor Company is headquartered in the city.\nCarrozzeria Autodromo Modena, originally a maker of racing cars, which later became one of the best-known bus manufacturers in Italy, was based in Modena and in business from 1949 to 2004.\nNotable people.\n \nTransport.\nRail.\nModena railway station, opened in 1859, forms part of the Milan\u2013Bologna railway, and is also a terminus of two secondary railways, linking Modena with each of Verona and Sassuolo.\nUrban transport.\nModena's urban public transport network is operated by SETA. The network includes the Modena trolleybus system.\nSport.\nModena has a strong sporting tradition, linked mainly to motor racing as the birthplace of Enzo Ferrari, founder of the eponymous motor racing team and car manufacturer based in nearby Maranello. The Ferrari 360 Modena was named after the city. Modena is known as the world's 'Supercar Capital', being the nearest large town to the homes of Maserati, Lamborghini, Pagani and previously also Ducati and De Tomaso.\nThe city has had two major football clubs: Modena F.C., who played in Serie B for many years but was dissolved in 2017, and Serie B team Carpi F.C. 1909. In 2018, Modena F.C. was reincarnated as Modena F.C. 2018 who play at the 21,151-seat Stadio Alberto Braglia, the former home of Modena F.C. which has also hosted international rugby union.\nVolleyball plays an important role in Modena's sport history, with Modena Volley having won 12 National championships, four Champion's League seasons, and other trophies.\nThere is also a baseball club with 50 years' tradition\u2014the Modena BBC, currently playing in the A-Series of the Italian Baseball League.\nInternational relations.\nTwin towns \u2013 sister cities.\nModena is twinned with:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "62419", "revid": "24043204", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62419", "title": "Hominoid", "text": ""}
{"id": "62421", "revid": "16090338", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62421", "title": "Standard enthalpy change of combustion", "text": ""}
{"id": "62422", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62422", "title": "UUNet", "text": ""}
{"id": "62424", "revid": "125972", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62424", "title": "List of pharmaceutical companies", "text": "This listing is limited to those independent companies and subsidiaries notable enough to have their own articles in Wikipedia. Both going concerns and defunct firms are included, as well as firms that were part of the pharmaceutical industry at some time in their existence, provided they were engaged in the production of human (as opposed to veterinary) therapeutics. Included here are companies engaged not only in pharmaceutical development, but also supply chain management and device development, including compounding pharmacies.\nFirms with no marketed products but which are working on pharmaceutical development as well as mature firms with a post-marketed portfolios have been included here.\nTypes of firms not include here include\nEntry titles have been shortened in a number of cases, so that if the article title of a company is \"XYZ Pharma\", for instance, the entry will appear here as \"XYZ\"; likewise for \"XYZ Biotech\", \"XYZ Therapeutics\" and related.\nCompanies which existed as a joint venture for their entire existence are indicated by a super-script \"JV\", as in PerseidJV.\nAlphabetical listing\u2014active firms.\n#\u2014A.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nB.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nC.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nD-E.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nF\u2014G.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nH\u2014I.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nJ\u2014L.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nM.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nN.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nO.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nP-Q.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nR.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nS.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nT.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nU\u2014Z.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAlphabetical listing\u2014defunct firms.\n#\u2014A.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nB\u2014D.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nE\u2014L.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nM\u2014P.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nR\u2014T.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nU\u2014Z.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;"}
{"id": "62426", "revid": "50970500", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62426", "title": "Tier 1 network", "text": "Top level network on the internet\nA Tier 1 network is an Internet Protocol (IP) network that can reach every other network on the Internet solely via settlement-free interconnection (also known as settlement-free peering). In other words, tier 1 networks can exchange traffic with other Tier 1 networks without paying any fees for the exchange of traffic in either direction. In contrast, some Tier 2 networks and all Tier 3 networks must pay to transmit traffic on other networks. \nThere is no authority that defines tiers of networks participating in the Internet. The most common and well-accepted definition of a Tier 1 network is a network that can reach every other network on the Internet without purchasing IP transit or paying for peering. By this definition, a Tier 1 network must be a transit-free network (purchases no transit) that peers for no charge with every other Tier 1 network and can reach all major networks on the Internet. Not all transit-free networks are Tier 1 networks, as it is possible to become transit-free by paying for peering, and it is also possible to be transit-free without being able to reach all major networks on the Internet.\nThe most widely quoted source for identifying Tier 1 networks is published by Renesys Corporation, but the base information to prove the claim is publicly accessible from many locations, such as the RIPE RIS database, the Oregon Route Views servers, Packet Clearing House, and others.\nIt can be difficult to determine whether a network is paying for peering or transit, as these business agreements are rarely public information, or are covered under a non-disclosure agreement. The Internet peering community is roughly the set of peering coordinators present at the Internet exchange points on more than one continent. The subset representing Tier 1 networks is collectively understood in a loose sense, but not published as such.\nCommon definitions of Tier 2 and Tier 3 networks:\nSince approximately 2010, this hierarchical organization of Internet relationships has evolved. Large content providers with private networks and CDNs, like Google, Netflix, and Meta, have greatly reduced the role of Tier 1 ISPs and flattened the internet topology since the content providers interconnect directly with most other ISPs, bypassing Tier 1 transit providers.\nHistory.\nThe original Internet backbone was the ARPANET when provided the routing between most participating networks. The development of the British JANET (1984) and U.S. NSFNET (1985) infrastructure programs to serve their nations' higher education communities, regardless of discipline, resulted in the NSFNet backbone by 1989. The Internet could be defined as the collection of all networks connected and able to interchange Internet Protocol datagrams with this backbone. Such was the weight of the NSFNET program and its funding ($200 million from 1986 to 1995)\u2014and the quality of the protocols themselves\u2014that by 1990, when the ARPANET itself was finally decommissioned, TCP/IP had supplanted or marginalized most other wide-area computer network protocols worldwide.\nWhen the Internet was opened to the commercial markets, multiple for-profit Internet backbone and access providers emerged. The network routing architecture then became decentralized and this meant a need for exterior routing protocols: in particular, the Border Gateway Protocol emerged. New Tier 1 ISPs and their peering agreements supplanted the government-sponsored NSFNet, that program being officially terminated on April 30, 1995. The NSFnet-supplied regional networks then sought to buy national-scale Internet connectivity from these now-numerous private long-haul networks.\nRouting through peering.\nA bilateral private peering agreement typically involves a direct physical link between two partners. Traffic from one network to the other is then primarily routed through that direct link.\nA Tier 1 network may have various such links to other Tier 1 networks. Peering is founded on the principle of equality of traffic between the partners and as such disagreements may arise between partners in which usually one of the partners unilaterally disconnects the link in order to force the other into a payment scheme. Such disruptive de-peering has happened several times during the first decade of the 21st century. When this involves large-scale networks involving many millions of customers this may effectively partition a part of the Internet involving those carriers, especially if they decide to disallow routing through alternate routes. This is not largely a technical issue but a commercial matter in which a financial dispute is fought out using the other party's customers as hostages to obtain a better negotiating position. In the worst case, single-homed customers of each network will not be able to reach the other network at all. The de-peering party then hopes that the other network's customers will be hurt more by the decision than its own customers which may eventually conclude the negotiations in its favor. Lower tier ISPs and other parties not involved in the dispute may be unaffected by such a partition as there exist typically multiple routes onto the same network. The disputes referenced have also typically involved transit-free peering in which one player only exchanged data with the other that involved each other's networks\u2014there was no data transiting \"through\" the other's network destined for other parts of the Internet. By the strict definition of peering and the strict definition of a Tier 1 network, a Tier 1 network only peers with other Tier 1 networks and has no transit routes going anywhere. More practically speaking, Tier 1 networks \"serve\" as transit networks for lower tier networks and only peer with other Tier 1 networks that offer the same services on an adequate scale\u2014effectively being \"peers\" in the truest sense of the word.\nMore appropriately then, peering means the exchange of an equitable and fair amount of data-miles between two networks, agreements of which do not preclude any pay-for-transit contracts to exist between the very same parties. On the subject of routing, settlement-free peering involves conditions disallowing the abuse of the other's network by sending it traffic not destined for that network (i.e. intended for transit). Transit agreements however would typically cater for just such outbound packets. Tier 1 providers are more central to the Internet backbone and would only purchase transit from other Tier 1 providers, while selling transit to providers of all tiers. Given their huge networks, Tier 1 providers often do not participate in public Internet Exchanges but rather sell transit services to such participants and engage in private peering. Colocation centers often host private peering connections between their customers, internet transit (tier 1) providers and cloud providers.\nIn the most logical definition, a Tier 1 provider will never pay for transit because the set of all Tier 1 providers sells transit to all of the lower tier providers everywhere, and becauseAs such, by the peering agreement, all the customers of any Tier 1 provider already have access to all the customers of all the other Tier 1 providers without the Tier 1 provider itself having to pay transit costs to the other networks. Effectively, the actual transit costs incurred by provider A on behalf of provider B are logically identical to the transit costs incurred by provider B on behalf of provider A\u2014hence there not being any payment required.\nThe Rise of Hyperscale Networks and CDNs.\nThe traditional tiered hierarchy of the internet was challenged by the emergence of hyperscaler content and cloud providers. These providers have become major sources of global internet traffic, and in response, have built their own global network infrastructure that operates in parallel to, and in many cases bypasses, the traditional Tier 1 backbones.\nA few hyperscale companies\u2014specifically Google (YouTube, Cloud), Meta (Facebook, Instagram), Amazon (AWS, Prime Video), Microsoft (Azure, Xbox), and Netflix\u2014are the dominant source of this traffic, accounting for nearly 75% of all used international bandwidth as of 2024. This marks a significant shift from the earlier internet, where traffic sources were more diffuse. The concentration of traffic provided an economic incentive to build their own infrastructure. When the majority of an end-user's traffic is destined for only a handful of networks, the value of a single, paid transit connection to the \"entire internet\" diminishes for an access ISP. It becomes more efficient for that ISP to peer directly with the major traffic sources, a dynamic that reduces the value of the core transit product offered by Tier 1s and fuels the rise of direct interconnection and on-net content caching.\nIn response to their traffic generation, hyperscalers have made substantial investments in building their own private global backbones, which in scale and sophistication can rival or exceed those of traditional Tier 1 ISPs. This infrastructure has several key components:\nTo deliver content to end-users with lower latency and cost, hyperscalers employ two primary strategies to bypass the traditional transit model and move their services closer to the network edge.\nThe structural changes to internet traffic flows have prompted a re-evaluation of the role and definition of Tier 1 networks. While the classic model is not obsolete, its dominance has been reduced, and its business focus has shifted to enterprises in response to the rise of hyperscale backbones.\nHyperscaler vs Tier 1 networks.\nA common discussion in network engineering circles is whether hyperscale networks like Google, Amazon, and Microsoft should now be considered Tier 1. In terms of physical infrastructure\u2014global fiber backbones, submarine cable ownership, and points of presence\u2014their networks are on par with, or in the case of Google greatly exceed, those of traditional Tier 1s. They are also largely \"transit-free,\" meaning they do not purchase significant amounts of transit to reach destinations.\nHowever, they do not fit the functional definition of a Tier 1 network because their primary purpose is not to sell universal IP transit to third parties. Their networks are built to serve their own applications, and their extensive peering is a distribution strategy designed to optimize that delivery.\nThus, instead of replacing Tier 1s, the hyperscalers have created a distinct, parallel category of internet backbone. The modern internet core is less of a strict hierarchy with Tier 1s at the apex, and more of a complex ecosystem where two types of large-scale global backbones (Tier 1 and Hyperscale) interconnect with each other and with thousands of smaller networks below them.\nList of Tier 1 networks.\nThese networks are universally recognized as Tier 1 networks, because they can reach the entire internet (IPv4 and IPv6) via settlement-free peering. The CAIDA AS rank is a rank of importance on the internet.\nWhile most of these Tier 1 providers offer global coverage (based on the published network map on their respective public websites), there are some which are restricted geographically. However these do offer global coverage for mobiles and IP-VPN type services which are unrelated to being a Tier 1 provider.\nA 2008 report shows Internet traffic relying less on U.S. networks than previously.\nRegional Tier 1 networks.\nA common point of contention regarding Tier 1 networks is the concept of a \"regional Tier 1\" network. A regional Tier 1 network is a network which is not transit-free globally, but which maintains many of the classic behaviors and motivations of a Tier 1 network within a specific region.\nA typical scenario for this characteristic involves a network that was the incumbent telecommunications company in a specific country or region, usually tied to some level of government-supported monopoly. Within their specific countries or regions of origin, these networks maintain peering policies which mimic those of Tier 1 networks (such as lack of openness to new peering relationships and having existing peering with every other major network in that region). However, this network may then extend to another country, region, or continent outside of its core region of operations, where it may purchase transit or peer openly like a Tier 2 network.\nA commonly cited example of these behaviors involves the incumbent carriers within Australia, who will not peer with new networks in Australia under any circumstances, but who will extend their networks to the United States and peer openly with many networks. Less extreme examples of much less restrictive peering requirements being set for regions in which a network peers, but does not sell services or have a significant market share, are relatively common among many networks, not just regional Tier 1 networks.\nWhile the classification \"regional Tier 1\" holds some merit for understanding the peering motivations of such a network within different regions, these networks do not meet the requirements of a true global Tier 1 because they are not transit-free globally.\nOther major networks.\nThis is a list of networks that are often considered and close to the status of Tier 1, because they can reach the majority (50+%) of the internet via settlement-free peering with their global rings. However, routes to one or more Tier 1 are missing or paid. Therefore, they are technically Tier 2, though practically something in between.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "62427", "revid": "279219", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62427", "title": "Tier 1 ISP", "text": ""}
{"id": "62428", "revid": "50922246", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62428", "title": "Partial evaluation", "text": "Technique for program optimization\nIn computing, partial evaluation is a technique for several different types of program optimization by specialization. The most straightforward application is to produce new programs that run faster than the originals while being guaranteed to behave in the same way.\nA computer program formula_1 is seen as a mapping of input data into output data:\nformula_2\nwhere formula_3, the \"static data\", is the part of the input data known at compile time.\nThe partial evaluator transforms formula_4 into formula_5 by precomputing all static input at compile time. formula_6 is called the \"residual program\" and should run more efficiently than the original program. The act of partial evaluation is said to \"residualize\" formula_1 to formula_6.\nFutamura projections.\nA particularly interesting example of the use of partial evaluation, first described in the 1970s by Yoshihiko Futamura, is when formula_1 is an interpreter for a programming language.\nIf formula_3 is source code designed to run inside that interpreter, then partial evaluation of the interpreter with respect to this data/program produces formula_6, a version of the interpreter that only runs that source code, is written in the implementation language of the interpreter, does not require the source code to be resupplied, and runs faster than the original combination of the interpreter and the source. In this case formula_6 is effectively a compiled version of formula_3.\nThis technique is known as the first Futamura projection, of which there are three:\nThey were described by Futamura in Japanese in 1971 and in English in 1983.\nPyPy's RPython and GraalVM's Truffle framework are examples of real-world JIT compilers that implement Futamura's first projection.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nGeneral references.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "62431", "revid": "15638483", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62431", "title": "Eager evaluation", "text": ""}
{"id": "62432", "revid": "11290120", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62432", "title": "Pawnee people", "text": "Native American tribe in Oklahoma\nThe Pawnee, also known by their endonym (which translates to \"Men of Men\"), are an Indigenous people of the Great Plains that historically lived in Nebraska and northern Kansas but today are based in Oklahoma. They are the federally recognized Pawnee Nation of Oklahoma, who are headquartered in Pawnee, Oklahoma. Their Pawnee language belongs to the Caddoan language family.\nHistorically, the Pawnee lived in villages of earth lodges near the Loup, Republican, and South Platte rivers. The Pawnee tribal economic activities throughout the year alternated between farming crops and hunting buffalo.\nIn the early 18th century, the Pawnee numbered more than 60,000\u00a0people. They lived along the Loup () and Platte () river areas for centuries; however, several tribes from the Great Lakes began moving onto the Great Plains and encroaching on Pawnee territory, including the Dakota, Lakota (, 'cut throat / cuts the throat'), and Cheyenne (). The Arapaho (, 'dog eater') also moved into Pawnee territory. Collectively, the Pawnee referred to these tribes as ('enemy tribe') or ('enemy'). The Pawnee were occasionally at war with the Comanche () and Kiowa () further south. They had suffered many losses due to Eurasian infectious diseases brought by the expanding Europeans and European-Americans. By 1860, the Pawnee population was reduced to just 4,000. It further decreased, because of disease, crop failure, warfare, and government rations policy, to approximately 2,400 by 1873, after which time the Pawnee were forced to move to Indian Territory, which later became Oklahoma. Many Pawnee warriors enlisted to serve as Indian scouts in the US Army to track and fight their old enemies, the Lakota, Dakota, and Cheyenne on the Great Plains.\nGovernment.\nIn 2011, there were approximately 3,200\u00a0enrolled Pawnee and nearly all of them reside in Oklahoma. Their tribal headquarters is in Pawnee, Oklahoma, and their tribal jurisdictional area includes parts of Noble, Payne, and Pawnee counties. \nThe tribal constitution established the government of the Pawnee Nation of Oklahoma. This government consists of the Resaru Council, the Pawnee Business Council, and the Supreme Court. Enrollment into the tribe requires a minimum of one-eighth Pawnee blood quantum.\nThe R\u00eas\u00e2ru\u2019karu, also known as the Nasharo or Chiefs' Council consists of eight members, each serving four-year terms. Each band has two representatives on the Nasharo Council selected by the members of the tribal bands, Cawi, Kitkahaki, Pitahawirata, and Ckiri. The Nasharo Council has the right to review all acts of the Pawnee Business Council regarding the Pawnee Nation of Oklahoma citizenship and Pawnee Nation of Oklahoma claims or rights growing out of treaties between the Pawnee Nation of Oklahoma and the United States, according to provisions listed in the Pawnee Nation Constitution.\nAs of 2025[ [update]], the current administration is:\nIn 2020 Jimmy Whiteshirt was recalled as Pawnee Nation President. Becoming the shortest-serving president on the Pawnee Nation Business Council after being recalled in 5 months.\nEconomic development.\nThe Pawnee operate two casinos, three smoke shops, two fuel stations, and one truck stop. Their estimated economic impact for 2010 was $10.5\u00a0million. Increased revenues from the casinos have helped them provide for education and welfare of their citizens. They issue their own tribal vehicle tags and operate their housing authority. In December 2023, the Pawnee Nation and electric vehicle manufacturer Canoo announced an agreement that aims to help the community with workforce skills in the clean technology sector.\nCulture.\nThe Pawnee were divided into two large groups: the Skidi / Skiri-Federation living in the north and the South Bands, which were further divided into several villages. While the Skidi / Skiri Federation were the most populous group of Pawnee, the Cawi / Chaui Band of the South Bands were generally the politically leading group, although each band was autonomous. As was typical of many Native American tribes, each band saw to its own. In response to pressures from the Spanish, French, and Americans, as well as neighboring tribes, the Pawnee began to draw closer together.\nVillages.\nHistorically, the Pawnee led a lifestyle combining village life and seasonal hunting, which had long been established on the Plains. Archeology studies of ancient sites have demonstrated the people lived in this pattern for nearly 700\u00a0years, since about 1250\u00a0CE.\nThe Pawnee generally settled close to the rivers and placed their lodges on the higher banks. They built earth lodges that by historical times tended to be oval in shape; at earlier stages, they were rectangular. They constructed the frame, made of 10\u201315\u00a0posts set some apart, which outlined the central room of the lodge. Lodge size varied based on the number of poles placed in the center of the structure. Most lodges had 4, 8, or 12\u00a0center-poles. A common feature in Pawnee lodges were four painted poles, which represented the four cardinal directions and the four major star gods (not to be confused with the Creator). A second outer ring of poles outlined the outer circumference of the lodge. Horizontal beams linked the posts together.\nThe frame was covered first with smaller poles, tied with willow withes. The structure was covered with thatch, then earth. A hole left in the center of the covering served as a combined chimney / smoke vent and skylight. The door of each lodge was placed to the east and the rising sun. A long, low passageway, which helped keep out outside weather, led to an entry room that had an interior buffalo-skin door on a hinge. It could be closed at night and wedged shut. Opposite the door, on the west side of the central room, a buffalo skull with horns was displayed. This was considered great medicine.\nMats were hung on the perimeter of the main room to shield small rooms in the outer ring, which served as sleeping and private spaces. The lodge was semi-subterranean, as the Pawnee recessed the base by digging it approximately below ground level, thereby insulating the interior from extreme temperatures. Lodges were strong enough to support adults, who routinely sat on them, and the children who played on the top of the structures. (See photo above.)\nAs many as 30\u201350\u00a0people might live in each lodge, and they were usually of related families. A village could consist of as many as 300\u2013500\u00a0people and 10\u201315\u00a0households. Each lodge was divided in two (the north and south), and each section had a head who oversaw the daily business. Each section was further subdivided into three duplicate areas, with tasks and responsibilities related to the ages of women and girls, as described below. The membership of the lodge was quite flexible.\nThe tribe went on buffalo hunts in summer and winter. Upon their return, the inhabitants of a lodge would often move into another lodge, although they generally remained within the village. Men's lives were more transient than those of women. They had obligations of support for the wife (and family they married into), but could always go back to their mother and sisters for a night or two of attention. When young couples married, they lived with the woman's family in a matrilocal pattern.\nPolitical structure.\nThe Pawnee are a matrilineal people. Ancestral descent is traced through the mother, and children are considered born into the mother's clan and are part of her people. In the past, a young couple moved into the bride's parents' lodge. People work together in collaborative ways, marked by both independence and cooperation, without coercion. Both women and men are active in political life, with independent decision-making responsibilities.\nWithin the lodge, each north\u2013south section had areas marked by activities of the three classes of women:\nAmong the collection of lodges, the political designations for men were essentially between:\nWomen tended to be responsible for decisions about resource allocation, trade, and inter-lodge social negotiations. Men were responsible for decisions which pertained to hunting, war, and spiritual/health issues.\nWomen tended to remain within a single lodge, while men would typically move between lodges. They took multiple sexual partners in serially monogamous relationships.\nAgriculture.\nThe Pawnee women are skilled horticulturalists and cooks, cultivating and processing ten varieties of corn, seven of pumpkins and squashes, and eight of beans.\n They planted their crops along the fertile river bottomlands. These crops provided a wide variety of nutrients and complemented each other in making whole proteins. In addition to varieties of flint corn and flour corn for consumption, the women planted an archaic breed which they called \"Wonderful\" or \"Holy Corn\", specifically to be included in the sacred bundles.\nThe holy corn was cultivated and harvested to replace corn in the sacred bundles prepared for the major seasons of winter and summer. Seeds were taken from sacred bundles for the spring planting ritual. The cycle of corn determined the annual agricultural cycle, as it was the first to be planted and first to be harvested (with accompanying ceremonies involving priests and men of the tribe as well.)\nIn keeping with their cosmology, the Pawnee classify the varieties of corn by color: black, spotted, white, yellow, and red (which, excluding spotted, related to the colors associated with the four semi-cardinal directions). The women kept the different strains separate as they cultivated the corn. While important in agriculture, squash and beans were not given the same theological meaning as corn.\nIn 2005, the last 25 remaining seeds of the Pawnee Eagle Corn variety were successfully sprouted. The unique taste of Eagle Corn is described as being similar to almonds with cream. In November\u00a02010, a traditional Pawnee ceremony with Eagle Corn soup was held in Oklahoma. According to \"True West Magazine\", Eagle Corn soup had not been available for ceremonies for 125 years.\nHunting.\nAfter they obtained horses, the Pawnee adapted their culture and expanded their buffalo hunting seasons. With horses providing a greater range, the people traveled in both summer and winter westward to the Great Plains for buffalo hunting. They often traveled or more in a season. In summer the march began at dawn or before, but usually did not last the entire day.\nOnce buffalo were located, hunting did not begin until the tribal priests considered the time propitious. The hunt began by the men stealthily advancing together toward the buffalo, but no one could kill any buffalo until the warriors of the tribe gave the signal, in order not to startle the animals before the hunters could get in position for the attack on the herd. Anyone who broke ranks could be severely beaten. During the chase, the hunters guided their ponies with their knees and wielded bows and arrows. They could incapacitate buffalo with a single arrow shot into the flank between the lower ribs and the hip. The animal would soon lie down and perhaps bleed out, or the hunters would finish it off. An individual hunter might shoot as many as five buffalo in this way before backtracking and finishing them off. They preferred to kill cows and young bulls, as the taste of older bulls was disagreeable.\nAfter successful kills, the women processed the bison meat, skin and bones for various uses: the flesh was sliced into strips and dried on poles over slow fires before being stored. Prepared in this way, it was usable for several months. Although the Pawnee preferred buffalo, they also hunted other game, including elk, bear, panther, and skunk, for meat and skins. The skins were used for clothing and accessories, storage bags, foot coverings, fastening ropes and ties, etc.\nThe people returned to their villages to harvest crops when the corn was ripe in late summer, or in the spring when the grass became green and they could plant a new cycle of crops. Summer hunts extended from late June to about the first of September; but might end early if hunting was successful. Sometimes the hunt was limited to what is now western Nebraska. Winter hunts were from late October until early April and were often to the southwest into what is now western Kansas.\nReligion.\nLike many other Native American tribes, the Pawnee had a cosmology with elements of all of nature represented in it. They based many rituals in the four cardinal directions. Pawnee priests conducted ceremonies based on the sacred bundles that included various materials, such as an ear of sacred corn, with great symbolic value. These were used in many religious ceremonies to maintain the balance of nature and the Pawnee relationship with the gods and spirits. In the 1890s, already in Oklahoma, the people participated in the Ghost Dance movement.\nThe Pawnee believed that the Morning Star and Evening Star gave birth to the first Pawnee woman. The first Pawnee man was the offspring of the union of the Moon and the Sun. As they believed they were descendants of the stars, cosmology had a central role in daily and spiritual life. They planted their crops according to the position of the stars, which related to the appropriate time of season for planting. Like many tribal bands, they sacrificed maize and other crops to the stars.\nMorning Star ritual.\nThe Skidi Pawnees in Village Across a Hill practiced human sacrifice, specifically of captive girls, in the \"Morning Star ritual\". They continued this practice regularly through the 1810s and possibly after 1838 \u2013 the last reported sacrifice. They believed the longstanding rite ensured the fertility of the soil and success of the crops, as well as renewal of all life in spring and triumphs on the battlefields. The sacrifice was related to the belief that the first human being was a girl, born of the mating of the Morning Star, the male figure of light, and the unwilling Evening Star, a female figure of darkness, in their creation story.\nThe ritual stood outside the organization of the ceremonial year and was not necessarily an annual occurrence. The commencement of the ceremony required that a man had been commanded to sponsor it while asleep. Typically, a warrior would dream of the Morning Star, usually in the autumn, which meant it was time to prepare for the various steps of the ritual. The visionary would consult with the Morning Star priest, who helped him prepare for his journey to find a sacrifice. During the initial meeting both would cry and cry, because they knew the missions forced upon them by divine demand were wrong to carry out. With help from others, the warrior would capture a young unmarried girl from an enemy tribe. The Pawnee kept the girl and cared for her over the winter, taking her with them as they made their buffalo hunt. They arranged her sacrifice in the spring, in relation to the rising of the Morning Star. She was well treated and fed throughout this period.\nWhen the morning star (either the planet Mars, Jupiter, or some times Venus) rose ringed with red, the priest knew it was the signal for the sacrifice. He directed the men to carry out the rest of the ritual, including the construction of a scaffold outside the village. It was made of sacred woods and leathers from different animals, each of which had important symbolism. It was erected over a pit with elements corresponding to the four cardinal directions. All the elements of the ritual related to symbolic meaning and belief, and were necessary for the renewal of life. The preparations took four days.\nMost of the actual ceremony took place in the earth lodge of the visionary, since the Pawnee villages did not have a special ceremonial lodge. Bystanders outside dug holes in the wall and tore the roof apart to follow the elaborate ceremony. A procession of all the men and boys \u2013 even male infants carried among the men \u2013 accompanied the girl out of the village to the scaffold. Together they awaited the morning star. When the star was due to rise, the girl was placed and tied on the scaffold. At the moment the star appeared above the horizon, the girl was shot with an arrow from a sacred bow, then the priest cut the skin of her chest to increase bleeding. She was shot quickly with arrows by all the participating men and boys to hasten her death. The girl was carried to the east and placed face down so her blood would soak into the earth, with appropriate prayers for the crops and life she would bring to all life on the prairie.\nAbout 1820\u20131821, news of these sacrifices reached the East Coast; it caused a sensation among European Americans. Before this, US Indian agents had counseled Pawnee chiefs to suppress the practice, as they warned of how it would upset the American settlers, who were arriving in ever greater number. Superintendent William Clark in St. Louis had pointed out the government's view on the ceremony to a visiting Pawnee delegation already in 1811. Slowly, a Skidi faction that opposed the old rite developed. Two Skidi leaders, Knife Chief and his young relative Petalesharo, spearheaded the reformist movement. Knife Chief ransomed at least two captives before a sacrifice. Petalesharo cut loose a Comanche captive from the scaffold in 1817 and carried her to safety. For this, he received lasting fame among the whites. Indian agent John Dougherty and a number of influential Pawnees tried in vain to save the life of a captive Cheyenne girl on 11\u00a0April 1827. For any individual, it was extremely difficult to try to change a practice tied so closely to Pawnee belief in the renewal of life for the tribe. In June\u00a01818, the \"Missouri Gazette\" of St.\u00a0Louis contained the account of a sacrifice. The last known sacrifice was of \"Haxti\", a 14-year-old Oglala Lakota girl, on 22\u00a0April 1838.\nWriting in the 1960s, the historian Gene Weltfish drew from earlier work of Wissler and Spinden to suggest that the sacrificial practice might have been transferred in the early 16th\u00a0century from the Aztec of present-day Mexico. More recent historians have disputed the proposed connection to Mesoamerican practice: They believe that the sacrifice ritual originated independently, within ancient, traditional Pawnee culture.\nHistory.\nBefore metal or horses.\nThe ancestors of the Pawnees also spoke Caddoan languages and had developed a semi-sedentary lifestyle in valley-bottom lands on the Great Plains. Unlike other groups of the Great Plains, they had a stratified society with priests and hereditary chiefs. Their religion included ritual cannibalism and human sacrifice.\nAt first contact, they lived through what is now Oklahoma and Kansas, and they reached Nebraska in about 1750. (Other Caddoan speakers lived in the Southern Plains into Texas and Arkansas, forming a belt of related populations along the eastern edge of the Great Plains.)\nThey lived in spacious villages of grass lodges and earth lodges. These were unfortified, reflecting an assumption that large raiding parties would not arrive without warning. They did not need to rapidly coordinate defense against a large party of enemies. The Pawnees, with the Wichita and Arikara survived European encroachment, and they all adapted to forming compact villages on high ground and surrounding them with ditch-and-wall defenses. They lived most of the year in these well-insulated homes, but many would travel on multi-day communal deer hunts. Many also hunted buffalo, which, before the induction of horses, was challenging and dangerous. \nThe first written records of Caddoans come from Coronado's \"entrada\" in 1541. With cavalry, steel weapons, and guns he had forced his way through the Apaches, Pueblos, and other nations of the modern southeastern US, but they had no gold. Coronado's interpreter repeated rumors (or confirmed Coronado's fantasies) that gold was to be had elsewhere in a location named Quivira.\nAfter more than 30-day journey, Coronado found a river larger than any he had seen before. This was the Arkansas, probably a few miles east of present-day Dodge City, Kansas. The Spaniards and their Indian allies followed the Arkansas northeast for three days and found Quivirans hunting buffalo. The Indians greeted the Spanish with wonderment and fear, but calmed down when one of Coronado's guides addressed them in their own language.\nCoronado reached Quivira itself after a few more days of traveling. He found Quivira \"well settled ... along good river bottoms, although without much water, and good streams which flow into another\". Coronado believed that there were twenty-five settlements in Quivira. Both men and women Quivirans were nearly naked. Coronado was impressed with the size of the Quivirans and all the other Indians he met. They were \"large people of very good build\". Coronado spent 25 days among the Quivirans trying to learn of richer kingdoms just over the horizon. He found nothing but straw-thatched villages of up to two hundred houses and fields containing corn, beans, and squash. A copper pendant was the only evidence of wealth he discovered. The Quivirans were almost certainly Caddoans, and they built grass lodges as only the Wichita were still doing by 1898.\nCoronado was escorted to the further edge of Quivira, called Tabas, where the neighboring land of Harahey began. He summoned the \"Lord of Harahey\" who, with two hundred followers, came to meet with the Spanish. He was disappointed in his hopes for riches. The Harahey Indians were \"all naked \u2013 with bows, and some sort of things on their heads, and their privy parts slightly covered\". Hyde identifies them as Awahis, the old Caddoan name for the Pawnees, possibly including the ancestors of the Skidis and the Arikara. Another group, the Guas, may have been known later as the Paniouace. These people put up ferocious resistance when Coronado started to plunder their villages.\nIn 1601, Juan de O\u00f1ate led another \"entrada\" in search of the wealth of Quivira. He met \"Escansaques\", probably Apaches, who tried to persuade him to plunder and destroy \"Quiviran\" villages.\nArrival of horses and metal weapons.\nAbout 1670 the Apaches of the Southern Plains obtained horses and metal weapons in sufficient quantity to make them the dread of all their neighbors. For some decades the Pawnees were the victims of intensive raiding by large bands of mounted Apaches with iron weapons, and also by war parties of Chickasaws and Choctaws from the east who had firearms as well. The Siouan groups that became Quapaws, Osages, Omahas, Poncas and Kansas also appeared on the Plains about this time, driven west by the expansion of the Iroquois, and they too raided the Pawnees. Archaeology indicates that pressure from hostile Apaches may have persuaded the Skidi Pawnees to move from their settlements on the Republican River to the upper Loup River in the course of the next century or so. Their settlement pattern also changed from little villages of small rectangular earth-lodges to more defensible larger, compact villages of larger, circular lodges, the Skidis uniting in this way about 1680 while their close relations the Arikaras established a separate identity.\nPawnees enslaved.\nIn French Canada, Indian slaves were generally called \"Panis\" (anglicized to Pawnee), as most, during this period, had been captured from the Pawnee tribe or their relations. Pawnee became synonymous with \"Indian slave\" in general use in Canada, and a slave from any tribe came to be called \"Panis.\" As early as 1670, a reference was recorded to a \"Panis\" in Montreal. \"In the middle of the 17th century the Pawnees were being savagely raided by eastern tribes that had obtained metal weapons from the French, which gave them a terrible advantage over Indians who had only weapons of wood, flint, and bone. The raiders carried off such great numbers of Pawnees into slavery, that in the country on and east of the upper Mississippi the name Pani developed a new meaning: \"slave\". The French adopted this meaning, and Indian slaves, no matter from which tribe they had been taken, were presently being termed \"Panis\". It was at this period, after the middle of the 17th century, that the name was introduced into New Mexico in the form \"Panana\" by bands of mounted Apaches who brought large numbers of Pawnee slaves to trade to the Spaniards and Pueblo Indians.\" George E. Hyde, \"The Pawnee Indians\" :24Raiders primarily targeted women and children, to be sold as slaves. In 1694, Apaches brought a large number of captive children to the trading fair in New Mexico, but for some reason, there were not enough buyers, so the Apaches beheaded all their slaves in full view of the Spaniards.\nBy 1757 Louis Antoine de Bougainville considered that the Panis nation \"plays ... the same role in America that the Negroes do in Europe.\" The historian Marcel Trudel documented that close to 2,000\u00a0\"panis\" slaves lived in Canada until the abolition of slavery in the colony in 1833. Indian slaves comprised close to half of the known slaves in French Canada (also called Lower Canada).\nPawnees acquire metal and horses.\nBy 1719 when de la Harpe led an expedition to Caddoan lands at the mouth of the Arkansas River, the Pawnees had also acquired horses and metal weapons from French traders, and they were attacking Apaches in turn, destroying their villages and carrying off Apache women and children. In 1720, Boisbriant reported that the Paniassas or Black Pawnees had recently captured a hundred Apaches, whom they were burning, a few each day. de\u00a0la\u00a0Harpe planned to establish French trading posts at the mouth of the Canadian River and elsewhere in Caddoan territory, but this was not done and the Pawnee remained dependent on infrequent and casual traders, while their enemies \u2013 the Osages \u2013 benefited from a regular trade.\nIn 1720, Spanish colonists sent the Villasur expedition try to turn the Pawnees away from their French connections (which had been greatly magnified in Spanish imagination). Guided mainly by Apaches and led by an officer lacking experience with Indians, the expedition approached the Skidi Pawnee villages along the outflow of the Loup River into the Platte River in modern Nebraska. The expedition sent their only Pawnee slave to make contact; he did not obtain any welcome for the Spanish party and he failed to return to the Spanish camp. The Pawnees attacked at dawn, shooting heavy musketry fire and flights of arrows, then charging into combat clad only in paint, headband, moccasins and short leggings. Villasur, 45 other Spaniards, and 11 Pueblos were killed, and the survivors fled. In 1721, pressure on the Pawnees was increased by the establishment of a colony in Arkansas by John Law's Mississippi Company; this settlement too formed a market for Indian (mostly Caddoan) slaves and a convenient source of weapons for the Osages and their relations.\nThe French responded by sending Bourgmont to make peace (in the French interest) between the Pawnees and their enemies in 1724. He reported that the Pawnee were a strong tribe and good horsemen, but, located at the far end of every trade route for European goods, were unfamiliar with Europeans and were treated like country bumpkins by their southern relatives. The mutual hatred between Pawnees and Apaches was so great that both sides were cooking and eating many of their captives. Bourgmont's \"peace\" had little effect.\nIn 1739 the Mallet brothers visited the Skidi Pawnee. In 1750 the Skidis were reported to be ruled by a grand chief who had 900 warriors.\nFrom about 1760, smallpox epidemics broke out on the Great Plains, reducing the Skidi from eight large villages in 1725 to one by 1800.\nIncreasing contact with English-speakers, ongoing tribal warfare.\nA Pawnee tribal delegation visited President Thomas Jefferson. In 1806 Lieutenant Zebulon Pike, Major G. C. Sibley, Major S. H. Long, among others, began visiting the Pawnee villages. Under pressure from Siouan tribes and European-American settlers, the Pawnee ceded territory to the United States government in treaties in 1818, 1825, 1833, 1848, 1857, and 1892. In 1857, they settled on the Pawnee Reservation along the Loup River in present-day Nance County, Nebraska, but maintained their traditional way of life. They were subjected to continual raids by Lakota from the north and west.\n Until the 1830s, the Pawnee in what became United States territory were relatively isolated from interaction with Europeans. As a result, they were not exposed to Eurasian infectious diseases, such as measles, smallpox, and cholera, to which Native Americans had no immunity. In the 19th century, however, they were pressed by Siouan groups encroaching from the east, who also brought diseases. Epidemics of smallpox and cholera, and endemic warfare with the Sioux and Cheyenne caused dramatic mortality losses among the Pawnee. From an estimated population of 12,000 in the 1830s, they were reduced to 3,400 by 1859, when they were forcibly constrained to a reservation in modern-day Nance County, Nebraska.\nThe Pawnee won a \"hard fought\" defensive battle around 1830, when they defeated the whole Cheyenne tribe. A Pitahawirata Pawnee captured one of the most sacred tribal bundles of the Cheyenne, the Sacred Arrows, and Skidi Chief Big Eagle secured it quickly. The Cheyennes stopped fighting at once and returned to their own country.\nThe Pawnees in the village of Chief Blue Coat suffered a severe defeat on 27\u00a0June 1843. A force of Lakotas attacked the village, killed more than 65\u00a0inhabitants and burned 20\u00a0earth lodges.\nIn 1852, a combined Indian force of Cheyennes and invited Kiowa and Kiowa Apaches attacked a Pawnee camp in Kansas during the summer hunt. First when a Pawnee shot a very reckless Cheyenne with an arrow in the eye, it was discovered he wore a hidden scale mailed armor under his shirt. The killing of this notable Cheyenne affected the Cheyennes to the point, that they carried their Sacred Arrows against the Pawnee the following summer in an all-out war.\nWarriors enlisted as Pawnee Scouts in the latter half of the 19th century in the United States Army. Like other groups of Native American scouts, Pawnee warriors were recruited in large numbers to fight on the Northern and Southern Plains in various conflicts against hostile Native Americans. Because the Pawnee people were old enemies of the Sioux, Cheyenne, Arapaho, Comanche, and Kiowa tribes, they served with the army for 14 years between 1864 and 1877, earning a reputation as being a well-trained unit, especially in tracking and reconnaissance. The Pawnee Scouts took part with distinction in the Battle of the Tongue River during the Powder River Expedition (1865) against Lakota, Cheyenne, and Arapaho and in the Battle of Summit Springs. They also fought with the US in the Great Sioux War of 1876. On the Southern Plains, they fought against their old enemies, the Comanches and Kiowa, in the Comanche Campaign.\nRelocation and reservation.\nAs noted above, the Pawnee were subjected to continual raids by Lakota from the north and west. On one such raid, 5\u00a0August 1873, a Sioux war party of over 1,000 warriors ambushed a Pawnee hunting party of 350\u00a0men, women, and children. The Pawnee had gained permission to leave the reservation and hunt buffalo. About 70\u00a0Pawnee were killed in this attack, which occurred in a canyon in present-day Hitchcock County. The site is known as Massacre Canyon. Because of the ongoing hostilities with the Sioux and encroachment from American settlers to the south and east, the Pawnee decided to leave their Nebraska reservation in the 1870s and settle on a new reservation in Indian Territory, located in what is today Oklahoma.\nIn 1874, the Pawnee requested relocation to Indian Territory (Oklahoma), but the stress of the move, diseases, and poor conditions on their reservation reduced their numbers even more. During this time, outlaws often smuggled whiskey to the Pawnee. The teenaged female bandits Little Britches and Cattle Annie were imprisoned for this crime.\nIn 1875 most citizens of the nation moved to Indian Territory, a large area reserved to receive tribes displaced from east of the Mississippi River and elsewhere. The warriors resisted the loss of their freedom and culture, but gradually adapted to reservations. On 23\u00a0November 1892, the Pawnee in Oklahoma were forced by the US federal government to sign an agreement with the Cherokee Commission to accept individual allotments of land in a breakup of their communal holding.\nBy 1900, the Pawnee population was recorded by the US Census as 633. Since then the tribe has begun to recover in numbers.\nRecent history.\nIn 1906, in preparation for statehood of Oklahoma, the US government dismantled the Pawnee tribal government and civic institutions. The tribe reorganized under the Oklahoma Indian Welfare Act of 1936 and established the Pawnee Business Council, the Nasharo (Chiefs) Council, and a tribal constitution, bylaws, and charter.\nIn the 1960s, the government settled a suit by the Pawnee Nation regarding their compensation for lands ceded to the US government in the 19th century. By an out-of-court settlement in 1964, the Pawnee Nation was awarded $7,316,097 for land ceded to the US and undervalued by the federal government in the previous century.\nBills such as the Indian Self-Determination and Education Assistance Act of 1975 have allowed the Pawnee Nation to regain some of its self-government. The Pawnee continue to practice cultural traditions, meeting twice a year for the intertribal gathering with their kinsmen the Wichita Indians. They have an annual four-day Pawnee Homecoming for Pawnee veterans in July. Many Pawnee also return to their traditional lands to visit relatives and take part in scheduled powwows.\nIn 2004, Pawnee Nation College was founded. The college's buildings are built with sandstone from the historical Pawnee Agency and Indian Boarding School. In 2025, the college only had ten students enrolled and was still seeking accreditation.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "62433", "revid": "892079", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62433", "title": "Evaluation", "text": "Characterizing and appraising something\nIn common usage, evaluation is a systematic determination and assessment of a subject's merit, worth and significance, using criteria governed by a set of standards. It can assist an organization, program, design, project or any other intervention or initiative to assess any aim, realizable concept/proposal, or any alternative, to help in decision-making; or to generate the degree of achievement or value in regard to the aim and objectives and results of any such action that has been completed.\nThe primary purpose of evaluation, in addition to gaining insight into prior or existing initiatives, is to enable reflection and assist in the identification of future change. Evaluation is often used to characterize and appraise subjects of interest in a wide range of human enterprises, including the arts, criminal justice, foundations, non-profit organizations, government, health care, and other human services. It is long term and done at the end of a period of time.\nDefinition.\nEvaluation is the structured interpretation and giving of meaning to predicted or actual impacts of proposals or results. It looks at original objectives, and at what is either predicted or what was accomplished and how it was accomplished. So evaluation can be formative, that is taking place during the development of a concept or proposal, project or organization, with the intention of improving the value or effectiveness of the proposal, project, or organization. It can also be summative, drawing lessons from a completed action or project or an organization at a later point in time or circumstance.\nEvaluation is inherently a theoretically informed approach (whether explicitly or not), and consequently any particular definition of evaluation would have been tailored to its context\u00a0\u2013 the theory, needs, purpose, and methodology of the evaluation process itself. Having said this, evaluation has been defined as:\nPurpose.\nThe main purpose of a program evaluation can be to \"determine the quality of a program by formulating a judgment\" Marthe Hurteau, Sylvain Houle, St\u00e9phanie Mongiat (2009). An alternative view is that \"projects, evaluators, and other stakeholders (including funders) will all have potentially different ideas about how best to evaluate a project since each may have a different definition of 'merit'. The core of the problem is thus about defining what is of value.\"\nFrom this perspective, evaluation \"is a contested term\", as \"evaluators\" use the term evaluation to describe an assessment, or investigation of a program whilst others simply understand evaluation as being synonymous with applied research.\nThere are two functions considering to the evaluation purpose. Formative Evaluations provide the information on improving a product or a process. Summative Evaluations provide information of short-term effectiveness or long-term impact for deciding the adoption of a product or process.\nNot all evaluations serve the same purpose some evaluations serve a monitoring function rather than focusing solely on measurable program outcomes or evaluation findings and a full list of types of evaluations would be difficult to compile. This is because evaluation is not part of a unified theoretical framework, drawing on a number of disciplines, which include management and organizational theory, policy analysis, education, sociology, social anthropology, and social change.\nDiscussion.\nHowever, the strict adherence to a set of methodological assumptions may make the field of evaluation more acceptable to a mainstream audience but this adherence will work towards preventing evaluators from developing new strategies for dealing with the myriad problems that programs face. It is claimed that only a minority of evaluation reports are used by the evaluand (client) (Data, 2006). One justification of this is that \"when evaluation findings are challenged or utilization has failed, it was because stakeholders and clients found the inferences weak or the warrants unconvincing\" (Fournier and Smith, 1993). Some reasons for this situation may be the failure of the evaluator to establish a set of shared aims with the evaluand, or creating overly ambitious aims, as well as failing to compromise and incorporate the cultural differences of individuals and programs within the evaluation aims and process. None of these problems are due to a lack of a definition of evaluation but are rather due to evaluators attempting to impose predisposed notions and definitions of evaluations on clients. The central reason for the poor utilization of evaluations is arguably due to the lack of tailoring of evaluations to suit the needs of the client, due to a predefined idea (or definition) of what an evaluation is rather than what the client needs are (House, 1980). The development of a standard methodology for evaluation will require arriving at applicable ways of asking and stating the results of questions about ethics such as agent-principal, privacy, stakeholder definition, limited liability; and could-the-money-be-spent-more-wisely issues.\nStandards.\nDepending on the topic of interest, there are professional groups that review the quality and rigor of evaluation processes.\nEvaluating programs and projects, regarding their value and impact within the context they are implemented, can be ethically challenging. Evaluators may encounter complex, culturally specific systems resistant to external evaluation. Furthermore, the project organization or other stakeholders may be invested in a particular evaluation outcome. Finally, evaluators themselves may encounter \"conflict of interest (COI)\" issues, or experience interference or pressure to present findings that support a particular assessment.\nGeneral professional codes of conduct, as determined by the employing organization, usually cover three broad aspects of behavioral standards, and include inter-collegial relations (such as respect for diversity and privacy), operational issues (due competence, documentation accuracy and appropriate use of resources), and conflicts of interest (nepotism, accepting gifts and other kinds of favoritism). However, specific guidelines particular to the evaluator's role that can be utilized in the management of unique ethical challenges are required. The Joint Committee on Standards for Educational Evaluation has developed standards for program, personnel, and student evaluation. The Joint Committee standards are broken into four sections: Utility, Feasibility, Propriety, and Accuracy. Various European institutions have also prepared their own standards, more or less related to those produced by the Joint Committee. They provide guidelines about basing value judgments on systematic inquiry, evaluator competence and integrity, respect for people, and regard for the general and public welfare.\nThe American Evaluation Association has created a set of Guiding Principles for evaluators. The order of these principles does not imply priority among them; priority will vary by situation and evaluator role. The principles run as follows:\nIndependence is attained through ensuring independence of judgment is upheld such that evaluation conclusions are not influenced or pressured by another party, and avoidance of conflict of interest, such that the evaluator does not have a stake in a particular conclusion. Conflict of interest is at issue particularly where funding of evaluations is provided by particular bodies with a stake in conclusions of the evaluation, and this is seen as potentially compromising the independence of the evaluator. Whilst it is acknowledged that evaluators may be familiar with agencies or projects that they are required to evaluate, independence requires that they not have been involved in the planning or implementation of the project. A declaration of interest should be made where any benefits or association with project are stated. Independence of judgment is required to be maintained against any pressures brought to bear on evaluators, for example, by project funders wishing to modify evaluations such that the project appears more effective than findings can verify.\nImpartiality pertains to findings being a fair and thorough assessment of strengths and weaknesses of a project or program. This requires taking due input from all stakeholders involved and findings presented without bias and with a transparent, proportionate, and persuasive link between findings and recommendations. Thus evaluators are required to delimit their findings to evidence. A mechanism to ensure impartiality is external and internal review. Such review is required of significant (determined in terms of cost or sensitivity) evaluations. The review is based on quality of work and the degree to which a demonstrable link is provided between findings and recommendations.\nTransparency requires that stakeholders are aware of the reason for the evaluation, the criteria by which evaluation occurs and the purposes to which the findings will be applied. Access to the evaluation document should be facilitated through findings being easily readable, with clear explanations of evaluation methodologies, approaches, sources of information, and costs incurred.\nFurthermore, the international organizations such as the I.M.F. and the World Bank have independent evaluation functions. The various funds, programmes, and agencies of the United Nations has a mix of independent, semi-independent and self-evaluation functions, which have organized themselves as a system-wide UN Evaluation Group (UNEG), that works together to strengthen the function, and to establish UN norms and standards for evaluation. There is also an evaluation group within the OECD-DAC, which endeavors to improve development evaluation standards. The independent evaluation units of the major multinational development banks (MDBs) have also created the Evaluation Cooperation Group to strengthen the use of evaluation for greater MDB effectiveness and accountability, share lessons from MDB evaluations, and promote evaluation harmonization and collaboration.\nPerspectives.\nThe word \"evaluation\" has various connotations for different people, raising issues related to this process that include; what type of evaluation should be conducted; why there should be an evaluation process and how the evaluation is integrated into a program, for the purpose of gaining greater knowledge and awareness? There are also various factors inherent in the evaluation process, for example; to critically examine influences within a program that involve the gathering and analyzing of relative information about a program.\nMichael Quinn Patton motivated the concept that the evaluation procedure should be directed towards:\nFounded on another perspective of evaluation by Thomson and Hoffman in 2003, it is possible for a situation to be encountered, in which the process could not be considered advisable; for instance, in the event of a program being unpredictable, or unsound. This would include it lacking a consistent routine; or the concerned parties unable to reach an agreement regarding the purpose of the program. In addition, an influencer, or manager, refusing to incorporate relevant, important central issues within the evaluation\nApproaches.\nThere exist several conceptually distinct ways of thinking about, designing, and conducting evaluation efforts. A number of the evaluation approaches in use today make unique contributions to solving important problems, while others refine existing approaches in some way.\nClassification of approaches.\nTwo classifications of evaluation approaches by House and Stufflebeam and Webster can be combined into a manageable number of approaches in terms of their unique and important underlying principles.\nHouse considers all major evaluation approaches to be based on a common ideology entitled liberal democracy. Important principles of this ideology include freedom of choice, the uniqueness of the individual and empirical inquiry grounded in objectivity. He also contends that they are all based on subjectivist ethics, in which ethical conduct is based on the subjective or intuitive experience of an individual or group. One form of subjectivist ethics is utilitarian, in which \"the good\" is determined by what maximizes a single, explicit interpretation of happiness for society as a whole. Another form of subjectivist ethics is intuitionist/pluralist, in which no single interpretation of \"the good\" is assumed and such interpretations need not be explicitly stated nor justified.\nThese ethical positions have corresponding epistemologies\u2014philosophies for obtaining knowledge. The objectivist epistemology is associated with the utilitarian ethic; in general, it is used to acquire knowledge that can be externally verified (intersubjective agreement) through publicly exposed methods and data. The subjectivist epistemology is associated with the intuitionist/pluralist ethic and is used to acquire new knowledge based on existing personal knowledge, as well as experiences that are (explicit) or are not (tacit) available for public inspection. House then divides each epistemological approach into two main political perspectives. Firstly, approaches can take an elite perspective, focusing on the interests of managers and professionals; or they also can take a mass perspective, focusing on consumers and participatory approaches.\nStufflebeam and Webster place approaches into one of three groups, according to their orientation toward the role of values and ethical consideration. The political orientation promotes a positive or negative view of an object regardless of what its value actually is and might be\u2014they call this pseudo-evaluation. The questions orientation includes approaches that might or might not provide answers specifically related to the value of an object\u2014they call this quasi-evaluation. The values orientation includes approaches primarily intended to determine the value of an object\u2014they call this true evaluation.\nWhen the above concepts are considered simultaneously, fifteen evaluation approaches can be identified in terms of epistemology, major perspective (from House), and orientation. Two pseudo-evaluation approaches, politically controlled and public relations studies, are represented. They are based on an objectivist epistemology from an elite perspective. Six quasi-evaluation approaches use an objectivist epistemology. Five of them\u2014experimental research, management information systems, testing programs, objectives-based studies, and content analysis\u2014take an elite perspective. Accountability takes a mass perspective. Seven true evaluation approaches are included. Two approaches, decision-oriented and policy studies, are based on an objectivist epistemology from an elite perspective. Consumer-oriented studies are based on an objectivist epistemology from a mass perspective. Two approaches\u2014accreditation/certification and connoisseur studies\u2014are based on a subjectivist epistemology from an elite perspective. Finally, adversary and client-centered studies are based on a subjectivist epistemology from a mass perspective.\nSummary of approaches.\nThe following table is used to summarize each approach in terms of four attributes\u2014organizer, purpose, strengths, and weaknesses. The organizer represents the main considerations or cues practitioners use to organize a study. The purpose represents the desired outcome for a study at a very general level. Strengths and weaknesses represent other attributes that should be considered when deciding whether to use the approach for a particular study. The following narrative highlights differences between approaches grouped together.\nPseudo-evaluation.\nPolitically controlled and public relations studies are based on an from an elite perspective. Although both of these approaches seek to misrepresent value interpretations about an object, they function differently from each other. Information obtained through politically controlled studies is released or withheld to meet the special interests of the holder, whereas public relations information creates a positive image of an object regardless of the actual situation. Despite the application of both studies in real scenarios, neither of these approaches is acceptable evaluation practice.\nObjectivist, elite, quasi-evaluation.\nAs a group, these five approaches represent a highly respected collection of disciplined inquiry approaches. They are considered quasi-evaluation approaches because particular studies legitimately can focus only on questions of knowledge without addressing any questions of value. Such studies are, by definition, not evaluations. These approaches can produce characterizations without producing appraisals, although specific studies can produce both. Each of these approaches serves its intended purpose well. They are discussed roughly in order of the extent to which they approach the objectivist ideal.\nMethods and techniques.\nEvaluation is methodologically diverse. Methods may be qualitative or quantitative, and include case studies, survey research, statistical analysis, model building, and others such as:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "62434", "revid": "45789152", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62434", "title": "Mathematical", "text": ""}
{"id": "62437", "revid": "7957594", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62437", "title": "SCADA", "text": "Control system architecture for supervision of machines and processes\nSupervisory control and data acquisition (SCADA) is a control system architecture comprising computers, networked data communications and graphical user interfaces for high-level supervision of machines and processes. It also covers sensors and other devices, such as programmable logic controllers, also known as a distributed control system (DCS), which interface with process plant or machinery.\nThe operator interfaces, which enable monitoring and the issuing of process commands, such as controller setpoint changes, are handled through the SCADA computer system. The subordinated operations, e.g. the real-time control logic or controller calculations, are performed by networked modules connected to the field sensors and actuators.\nThe SCADA concept was developed to be a universal means of remote-access to a variety of local control modules, which could be from different manufacturers and allowing access through standard automation protocols. In practice, large SCADA systems have grown to become similar to DCSs in function, while using multiple means of interfacing with the plant. They can control large-scale processes spanning multiple sites, and work over large distances. It is one of the most commonly used types of industrial control systems.\nControl operations.\nThe key attribute of a SCADA system is its ability to perform a supervisory operation over a variety of other proprietary devices.\nLevel 1 contains the programmable logic controllers (PLCs) or remote terminal units (RTUs).\nLevel 2 contains the SCADA to readings and equipment status reports that are communicated to level 2 SCADA as required. Data is then compiled and formatted in such a way that a control room operator using the human-machine interface (HMI) can make supervisory decisions to adjust or override normal RTU (PLC) controls. Data may also be fed to a historian, often built on a commodity database management system, to allow trending and other analytical auditing.\nSCADA systems typically use a \"tag database\", which contains data elements called \"tags\" or \"points\", which relate to specific instrumentation or actuators within the process system. Data is accumulated against these unique process control equipment tag references.\nComponents.\nA SCADA system usually consists of the following main elements:\nAlarm handling.\nAn important part of most SCADA implementations is alarm handling. The system monitors whether certain alarm conditions are satisfied, to determine when an alarm event has occurred. Once an alarm event has been detected, one or more actions are taken (such as the activation of one or more alarm indicators, and perhaps the generation of email or text messages so that management or remote SCADA operators are informed). In many cases, a SCADA operator may have to acknowledge the alarm event; this may deactivate some alarm indicators, whereas other indicators remain active until the alarm conditions are cleared.\nAlarm conditions can be explicit\u2014for example, an alarm point is a digital status point that has either the value NORMAL or ALARM that is calculated by a formula based on the values in other analogue and digital points\u2014or implicit: the SCADA system might automatically monitor whether the value in an analogue point lies outside high and low- limit values associated with that point.\nExamples of alarm indicators include a siren, a pop-up box on a screen, or a coloured or flashing area on a screen (that might act in a similar way to the \"fuel tank empty\" light in a car); in each case, the role of the alarm indicator is to draw the operator's attention to the part of the system 'in alarm' so that appropriate action can be taken.\nPLC/RTU programming.\n\"Smart\" RTUs, or standard PLCs, are capable of autonomously executing simple logic processes without involving the supervisory computer. They employ standardized control programming languages (such as those under IEC 61131-3, a suite of five programming languages including function block, ladder, structured text, sequence function charts and instruction list), that are frequently used to create programs which run on these RTUs and PLCs. Unlike a procedural language like C or FORTRAN, IEC 61131-3 has minimal training requirements by virtue of resembling historic physical control arrays. This allows SCADA system engineers to perform both the design and implementation of a program to be executed on an RTU or PLC.\nA programmable automation controller (PAC) is a compact controller that combines the features and capabilities of a PC-based control system with that of a typical PLC. PACs are deployed in SCADA systems to provide RTU and PLC functions. In many electrical substation SCADA applications, \"distributed RTUs\" use information processors or station computers to communicate with digital protective relays, PACs, and other devices for I/O, and communicate with the SCADA master in lieu of a traditional RTU.\nPLC commercial integration.\nSince about 1998, virtually all major PLC manufacturers have offered integrated HMI/SCADA systems, many of them using open and non-proprietary communications protocols. Numerous specialized third-party HMI/SCADA packages, offering built-in compatibility with most major PLCs, have also entered the market, allowing mechanical engineers, electrical engineers and technicians to configure HMIs themselves, without the need for a custom-made program written by a software programmer. The Remote Terminal Unit (RTU) connects to physical equipment. Typically, an RTU converts the electrical signals from the equipment to digital values. By converting and sending these electrical signals out to equipment the RTU can control equipment.\nCommunication infrastructure and methods.\nSCADA systems have traditionally used combinations of radio and direct wired connections, although SONET/SDH is also frequently used for large systems such as railways and power stations. The remote management or monitoring function of a SCADA system is often referred to as telemetry. Some users want SCADA data to travel over their pre-established corporate networks or to share the network with other applications. The legacy of the early low-bandwidth protocols remains, though.\nSCADA protocols are designed to be very compact. Many are designed to send information only when the master station polls the RTU. Typical legacy SCADA protocols include Modbus RTU, RP-570, Profibus and Conitel. These communication protocols, with the exception of Modbus (Modbus has been made open by Schneider Electric), are all SCADA-vendor specific but are widely adopted and used. Standard protocols are IEC 60870-5-101 or 104, IEC 61850 and DNP3. These communication protocols are standardized and recognized by all major SCADA vendors. Many of these protocols now contain extensions to operate over TCP/IP. Although the use of conventional networking specifications, such as TCP/IP, blurs the line between traditional and industrial networking, they each fulfill fundamentally differing requirements. Network simulation can be used in conjunction with SCADA simulators to perform various 'what-if' analyses.\nWith increasing security demands (such as North American Electric Reliability Corporation (NERC) and critical infrastructure protection (CIP) in the US), there is increasing use of satellite-based communication. This has the key advantages that the infrastructure can be self-contained (not using circuits from the public telephone system), can have built-in encryption, and can be engineered to the availability and reliability required by the SCADA system operator. Earlier experiences using consumer-grade VSAT were poor. Modern carrier-class systems provide the quality of service required for SCADA.\nRTUs and other automatic controller devices were developed before the advent of industry wide standards for interoperability. The result is that developers and their management created a multitude of control protocols. Among the larger vendors, there was also the incentive to create their own protocol to \"lock in\" their customer base. A list of automation protocols is compiled here.\nAn example of efforts by vendor groups to standardize automation protocols is the OPC-UA (formerly \"OLE for process control\" now Open Platform Communications Unified Architecture).\nArchitecture development.\nSCADA systems have evolved through four generations as follows:\nEarly SCADA system computing was done by large minicomputers. Common network services did not exist at the time SCADA was developed. Thus SCADA systems were independent systems with no connectivity to other systems. The communication protocols used were strictly proprietary at that time. The first-generation SCADA system redundancy was achieved using a back-up mainframe system connected to all the remote terminal unit sites and was used in the event of failure of the primary mainframe system. Some first generation SCADA systems were developed as \"turn key\" operations that ran on minicomputers such as the PDP-11 series.\nSCADA information and command processing were distributed across multiple stations which were connected through a LAN. Information was shared in near real time. Each station was responsible for a particular task, which reduced the cost as compared to first generation SCADA. The network protocols used were still not standardized. Since these protocols were proprietary, very few people beyond the developers knew enough to determine how secure a SCADA installation was. Security of the SCADA installation was usually overlooked.\nSimilar to a distributed architecture, any complex SCADA can be reduced to the simplest components and connected through communication protocols. In the case of a networked design, the system may be spread across more than one LAN network called a process control network (PCN) and separated geographically. Several distributed architecture SCADAs running in parallel, with a single supervisor and historian, could be considered a network architecture. This allows for a more cost-effective solution in very large scale systems.\nThe growth of the internet has led SCADA systems to implement web technologies allowing users to view data, exchange information and control processes from anywhere in the world through web SOCKET connection. The early 2000s saw the proliferation of Web SCADA systems. Web SCADA systems use web browsers such as Google Chrome and Mozilla Firefox as the graphical user interface (GUI) for the operators HMI. This simplifies the client side installation and enables users to access the system from various platforms with web browsers such as servers, personal computers, laptops, tablets and mobile phones.\nSecurity.\nSCADA systems that tie together decentralized facilities such as power, oil, gas pipelines, water distribution and wastewater collection systems were designed to be open, robust, and easily operated and repaired, but not necessarily secure. The move from proprietary technologies to more standardized and open solutions together with the increased number of connections between SCADA systems, office networks and the Internet has made them more vulnerable to types of network attacks that are relatively common in computer security. For example, United States Computer Emergency Readiness Team (US-CERT) released a vulnerability advisory warning that unauthenticated users could download sensitive configuration information including password hashes from an Inductive Automation Ignition system utilizing a standard attack type leveraging access to the Tomcat Embedded Web server. Security researcher Jerry Brown submitted a similar advisory regarding a buffer overflow vulnerability in a Wonderware InBatchClient ActiveX control. Both vendors made updates available prior to public vulnerability release. Mitigation recommendations were standard patching practices and requiring VPN access for secure connectivity. Consequently, the security of some SCADA-based systems has come into question as they are seen as potentially vulnerable to cyber attacks.\nIn particular, security researchers are concerned about:\nSCADA systems are used to control and monitor physical processes, examples of which are transmission of electricity, transportation of gas and oil in pipelines, water distribution, traffic lights, and other systems used as the basis of modern society. The security of these SCADA systems is important because compromise or destruction of these systems would impact multiple areas of society far removed from the original compromise. For example, a blackout caused by a compromised electrical SCADA system would cause financial losses to all the customers that received electricity from that source. How security will affect legacy SCADA and new deployments remains to be seen.\nThere are many threat vectors to a modern SCADA system. One is the threat of unauthorized access to the control software, whether it is human access or changes induced intentionally or accidentally by virus infections and other software threats residing on the control host machine. Another is the threat of packet access to the network segments hosting SCADA devices. In many cases, the control protocol lacks any form of cryptographic security, allowing an attacker to control a SCADA device by sending commands over a network. In many cases SCADA users have assumed that having a VPN offered sufficient protection, unaware that security can be trivially bypassed with physical access to SCADA-related network jacks and switches. Industrial control vendors suggest approaching SCADA security like Information Security with a defense in depth strategy that leverages common IT practices. Apart from that, research has shown that the architecture of SCADA systems has several other vulnerabilities, including direct tampering with RTUs, communication links from RTUs to the control center, and IT software and databases in the control center. The RTUs could, for instance, be targets of deception attacks injecting false data or denial-of-service attacks. \nThe reliable function of SCADA systems in our modern infrastructure may be crucial to public health and safety. As such, attacks on these systems may directly or indirectly threaten public health and safety. Such an attack has already occurred, carried out on Maroochy Shire Council's sewage control system in Queensland, Australia. Shortly after a contractor installed a SCADA system in January 2000, system components began to function erratically. Pumps did not run when needed and alarms were not reported. More critically, sewage flooded a nearby park and contaminated an open surface-water drainage ditch and flowed 500 meters to a tidal canal. The SCADA system was directing sewage valves to open when the design protocol should have kept them closed. Initially this was believed to be a system bug. Monitoring of the system logs revealed the malfunctions were the result of cyber attacks. Investigators reported 46 separate instances of malicious outside interference before the culprit was identified. The attacks were made by a disgruntled ex-employee of the company that had installed the SCADA system. The ex-employee was hoping to be hired by the utility full-time to maintain the system.\nIn April 2008, the \"Commission to Assess the Threat to the United States from Electromagnetic Pulse (EMP) Attack\" issued a \"Critical Infrastructures Report\" document which discussed the extreme vulnerability of SCADA systems to an electromagnetic pulse (EMP) event. After testing and analysis, the commission concluded: \"SCADA systems are vulnerable to EMP insult. The large numbers and widespread reliance on such systems by all of the Nation\u2019s critical infrastructures represent a systemic threat to their continued operation following an EMP event. Additionally, the necessity to\nreboot, repair, or replace large numbers of geographically widely dispersed systems will considerably impede the Nation\u2019s recovery from such an assault.\"\nMany vendors of SCADA and control products have begun to address the risks posed by unauthorized access by developing lines of specialized industrial firewall and VPN solutions for TCP/IP-based SCADA networks as well as external SCADA monitoring and recording equipment.\nThe International Society of Automation (ISA) started formalizing SCADA security requirements in 2007 with a working group, WG4. WG4 \"deals specifically with unique technical requirements, measurements, and other features required to evaluate and assure security resilience and performance of industrial automation and control systems devices\".\nThe increased interest in SCADA vulnerabilities has resulted in vulnerability researchers discovering vulnerabilities in commercial SCADA software and more general offensive SCADA techniques presented to the general security community. In electric and gas utility SCADA systems, the vulnerability of the large installed base of wired and wireless serial communications links is addressed in some cases by applying bump-in-the-wire devices that employ authentication and Advanced Encryption Standard encryption rather than replacing all existing nodes.\nIn June 2010, anti-virus security company VirusBlokAda reported the first detection of malware that attacks SCADA systems (Siemens' WinCC/PCS 7 systems) running on Windows operating systems. The malware is called Stuxnet and uses four zero-day attacks to install a rootkit which in turn logs into the SCADA's database and steals design and control files. The malware is also capable of changing the control system and hiding those changes. The malware was found on 14 systems, the majority of which were located in Iran.\nIn October 2013 \"National Geographic\" released a docudrama titled \"American Blackout\" which dealt with an imagined large-scale cyber attack on SCADA and the United States' electrical grid.\nUses.\nBoth large and small systems can be built using the SCADA concept. These systems can range from just tens to thousands of control loops, depending on the application. Example processes include industrial, infrastructure, and facility-based processes, as described below:\nHowever, SCADA systems may have security vulnerabilities, so the systems should be evaluated to identify risks and solutions implemented to mitigate those risks.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "62438", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62438", "title": "John Walker (runner)", "text": "New Zealand middle-distance runner and politician\nSir John George Walker, (born 12 January 1952) is a former middle-distance runner from New Zealand who won the gold medal in the men's 1500 m event at the 1976 Olympics. He was also the first person to run the mile in under 3:50. After his running career was over he was active in local government, as an Auckland Councillor and representing the Manurewa-Papakura ward.\n1974 Commonwealth Games.\nWalker achieved world prominence in 1974 when he finished second to Filbert Bayi of Tanzania in the 1500 metre run at the Commonwealth Games in Christchurch, New Zealand. In one of the greatest 1500 m races in history, Walker and Bayi both broke the existing world record, and others in the race recorded the fourth, fifth, and seventh fastest performances ever. Walker also took the bronze medal in the 800 metres in 1:44.92, his lifetime best for the distance; it still ranks him third-fastest New Zealander ever, behind James Preston and Peter Snell.\nThroughout his career as a world-class miler, Walker was coached by Arch Jelley, a school principal and a middle distance runner himself, whose work with runners has been typified by meticulous training programmes on a scientific basis and effective communications in person.\nWorld record breaking runs.\nWalker broke the world record in the mile run with a time of 3:49.4 in Gothenburg, Sweden, on 12 August 1975, bettering the previous time of 3:51.0 set earlier that year by Filbert Bayi and becoming the first man to break 3:50.0 for the distance. Coincidentally, Walker's time was exactly 10 seconds faster than Roger Bannister's historic first sub-four-minute mile of 3:59.4, run twenty-one years previously. He was named Athlete of the Year by \"Track and Field News\" the same year. In the 1976 New Year Honours, Walker was appointed an Officer of the Order of the British Empire, for services to athletics, especially as the first person to run the mile in less than 3 minutes and 50 seconds.\nWalker's new record lasted until 17 July 1979, when it was lowered by the Briton Sebastian Coe.\nThe following year, Walker broke the world record for the 2000 metres, running 4:51.4 in Oslo, Norway, on 30 June 1976. He smashed the ten-year-old existing record, held by Michel Jazy of France, by nearly five seconds. Walker regarded this run as the best race of his life. Steve Cram of Great Britain broke the record by one one-hundredth of a second on 4 August 1985, running 4:51.39 at Budapest, Hungary. Indoors, Walker broke the 1500 metre world record in 1979 with a time of 3:37.4.\n1976 Montr\u00e9al Olympic Games.\nIn the 800 metres, Walker finished in 1:47.63, outside the two qualifying spots in his heat, and failed to advance to the semi-final round.\nHowever, Walker was the favourite in the 1500 metres due to the African boycott of the Games, which deprived the event of several strong competitors including Tanzania's Filbert Bayi, his main rival. The 1500 metres final started at a slow pace, with a first 800 metres in 2:03. The race would come down to a fast finish. In a bid to outlast runners who were quicker over shorter distances, Walker started his finishing sprint 300 metres from the finish. He was fading in the last 20 metres but held off Ivo Van Damme of Belgium and Paul-Heinz Wellmann of West Germany to win the gold medal.\nIt later emerged that Bayi likely would not have competed because of an attack of malaria.\nIn 1977, Walker saw his position as the world's top miler challenged by Steve Ovett of Great Britain, who beat him in the IAAF World Cup 1500 metres.\nNew Zealand records.\nDuring 1981, Walker set a New Zealand all-comers' mile record of 3:50.6 in Auckland.\nIn 1982 in Oslo, Norway, Steve Scott (3:47.69), Walker (3:49.08), and Ray Flynn (3:49.77) took the top three spots in the Dream Mile, establishing American, New Zealand, and Irish national records for the mile in the same race. All three national records stood for 25 years until 21 July 2007, when Alan Webb broke Scott's American record. Walker and Flynn's times remain national records.\nLater career.\nAt the 1982 Commonwealth Games in Brisbane, Walker took the silver medal in the 1500 metres behind Steve Cram of Great Britain. He moved up to the 5000 metres distance for both the 1984 Olympic Games and the 1986 Commonwealth Games with limited success. He raced at the 1990 Commonwealth Games, competing in both the 800 and 1500 metres; he was tripped early in the latter event but finished the race. The winner, Peter Elliott of Great Britain, persuaded Walker to accompany him on a lap of honor.\nIn 1985, Walker became the first man in history to run 100 sub-4 minute miles, achieving that feat just before his friend and rival Steve Scott of the United States. There was some controversy about this: Scott claimed that the two had agreed to reach 99 sub-4:00 miles apiece and then race each other, with the winner becoming the first to 100. Walker denied that such an agreement existed.\nAs his career wore on, leg injuries and stomach cramps started to affect his training. In the early 1990s he aimed to be the first runner over 40 years of age to run a mile under four minutes, but his attempts failed due to a leg injury. His rival Eamonn Coghlan became the first to achieve this, in 1993. At this point his international career had shown unusual longevity, spanning almost two decades. Walker ended his racing career with 135 sub-four-minute miles.\nWalker was inducted into the New Zealand Sports Hall of Fame in 1990, in the 1992 Queen's Birthday Honours he was promoted to Commander of the Order of the British Empire for services to athletics, and in 1996, the International Olympic Committee awarded him the Olympic Bronze Order."}
{"id": "62439", "revid": "44103609", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62439", "title": "Expression", "text": "Expression may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "62440", "revid": "4052843", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62440", "title": "The Sting", "text": "1973 caper film directed by George Roy Hill\nThe Sting is a 1973 American caper film. Set in 1936, it involves a complicated plot by two professional grifters (Paul Newman and Robert Redford) to con a mob boss (Robert Shaw). The film was directed by George Roy Hill, who had directed Newman and Redford in \"Butch Cassidy and the Sundance Kid\" (1969). The screenplay, by David S. Ward, was inspired by real-life cons perpetrated by brothers Fred and Charley Gondorff and documented by David Maurer in his 1940 book \"The Big Con: The Story of the Confidence Man\".\nThe film plays out in sections introduced by old-fashioned title cards, drawn by artist Jaroslav \"Jerry\" Gebr in a style reminiscent of the \"Saturday Evening Post\". It is noted for its use of ragtime, particularly the melody \"The Entertainer\" by Scott Joplin, which was adapted (along with other Joplin pieces) for the film by Marvin Hamlisch, producing a Billboard-topping soundtrack and a top-10 single. The film's success created a resurgence of interest in Joplin's work.\nReleased on Christmas Day of 1973, \"The Sting\" was a critical and commercial success and hugely successful at the 46th Academy Awards, where it won seven of its 10 Oscar nominations, including Best Picture, Best Director, Best Film Editing and Best Original Screenplay; Redford was also nominated for Best Actor. The film grossed $257 million worldwide and rekindled Newman's career after a series of big-screen flops. Regarded by the Writers Guild of America as having one of the best screenplays ever written, \"The Sting\" was selected in 2005 for preservation in the U.S. National Film Registry of the Library of Congress as being \"culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant\". A sequel film, also written by Ward, was released in 1983.\nPlot.\nIn 1936, amid the Great Depression, grifter Johnny Hooker and his partners, Luther Coleman and Joe Erie, con $11,000 in cash from an unsuspecting victim in Joliet, Illinois. Hooker loses his share of the con on a rigged roulette game, while Luther, buoyed by the windfall, decides to retire. He tells Hooker to seek out his old friend, Henry Gondorff, in Chicago, to learn \"the big con\". Corrupt Joliet police lieutenant William Snyder confronts Hooker, revealing that their mark was a courier for vicious Irish-American crime boss Doyle Lonnegan. Lonnegan's men murder Luther and the courier. After finding Luther dead, Hooker flees to Chicago.\nHooker finds Gondorff drunk and in hiding from the FBI, running a carousel that is a front for a brothel, and asks for help taking down Lonnegan. Initially reluctant, Gondorff relents and recruits a team of experienced con men. They decide to resurrect an elaborate, obsolete scam known as \"the wire\", using a large crew to create a phony off-track betting parlor. Snyder and Lonnegan's men track Hooker to Chicago; Gondorff warns Hooker that if either of them finds him, the con will have to be called off.\nAboard the opulent \"20th Century Limited\", Gondorff, posing as the boorish Chicago bookie \"Shaw\", buys into Lonnegan's private, high-stakes poker game, being facilitated by the train's conductor. \"Shaw\" infuriates Lonnegan with his obnoxious behavior, then cheats him out of $15,000 &amp;lpar;&amp;dollar;\u00a0in &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Tooltip/styles.css\" /&gt;). Hooker, posing as \"Shaw's\" disgruntled employee \"Kelly\", is sent to collect the winnings and convince Lonnegan to help him take over \"Shaw's\" operation \u2013 a tactic Lonnegan has used repeatedly to build his crime empire. Hooker returns home to find Lonnegan's men waiting to assassinate him, but he avoids their efforts. Their attempt spooks Gondorff, but Hooker convinces him to keep the con alive.\nLonnegan, frustrated with his men's inability to kill Hooker for the Joliet con \u2013 and unaware that \"Kelly\" is Hooker \u2013 orders the job to be given to Salino, his best assassin. A mysterious figure, wearing black leather gloves, begins to follow and observe Hooker. Meanwhile, Snyder's pursuit of Hooker attracts the attention of undercover FBI agents led by Agent Polk, who orders Snyder to bring Hooker in to entrap Gondorff.\n\"Kelly\" gives Lonnegan a tip on a 7-to-1 long shot in a horse race that pays off. When Lonnegan presses him for details, he reveals that he has a partner, \"Les Harmon\" (actually con man Kid Twist), in the Chicago Western Union office, who will help them topple \"Shaw\" by winning bets he books on horse races through past-posting. Lonnegan is convinced after being provided the trifecta of another race, and agrees to finance a $500,000 bet &amp;lpar;&amp;dollar;\u00a0in &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Tooltip/styles.css\" /&gt;) to break \"Shaw\" and get revenge. Shortly thereafter, Snyder captures Hooker and brings him before Polk, who forces Hooker to betray Gondorff by threatening to jail Luther Coleman's widow.\nFeeling despondent the night before the sting, Hooker sleeps with a diner waitress named Loretta. The next morning, as she walks toward him in an alley, the black-gloved man appears and shoots her dead before she can shoot Hooker. The man reveals to Hooker that Gondorff hired him to protect him, and that the waitress was, in fact, Salino.\nAfter \"Harmon\" telephones directions to \"Place it on Lucky Dan\", Lonnegan bets $500,000 at \"Shaw's\" parlor on the horse named Lucky Dan to win. As the race begins, \"Harmon\" arrives and expresses shock at Lonnegan's bet: when he said \"place it\", he meant that the horse would \"place\" (i.e., finish \"second\"). In a panic, Lonnegan rushes to the teller window and demands his money back, at which point Polk, Snyder, and a half-dozen FBI agents storm the parlor. Polk tells Hooker he is free to go. Shocked at the betrayal, Gondorff shoots Hooker. Polk shoots Gondorff and orders Snyder to get the ostensibly respectable Lonnegan away from the crime scene.\nWith Lonnegan and Snyder safely away, Hooker and Gondorff rise (\"bleeding\" only from fake bullets) amid cheers and laughter: \"Polk\" is actually Hickey, a fellow con man, who has been running a con on the con, with his \"FBI agents\" to divert Snyder and ensure that Lonnegan abandons the money without ever realizing he was taken. As the con men strip the room of its contents, Hooker refuses his share of the money, claiming he would lose it anyway, and walks away with Gondorff.\nCast.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;* Paul Newman as Henry Gondorff\nProduction.\nWriting.\nScreenwriter David S. Ward has said in an interview that he was inspired to write \"The Sting\" while researching pickpockets: \"Since I had never seen a film about a confidence man before, I said I gotta do this.\" Daniel Eagan said: \"One key to plots about con men is that film goers want to feel they are in on the trick. They don't have to know how a scheme works, and they don't mind a twist or two, but it's important for the story to feature clearly recognizable 'good' and 'bad' characters.\" It took Ward a year to fine-tune this aspect of the script and to determine how much information he could withhold from the audience while still making the leads sympathetic. He also imagined an underground brotherhood of thieves who assemble for a big operation and then melt away afterward.\nYears later, director Rob Cohen recounted how he found the script in the slush pile when working as a reader for Mike Medavoy, a future studio head, but then an agent. He wrote in his coverage that it was \"the great American screenplay and\u00a0\u2026 will make an award-winning, major-cast, major-director film.\" Medavoy said that he would try to sell it on that recommendation, promising to fire Cohen if he could not. Universal bought it that afternoon, and Cohen keeps the coverage framed on the wall of his office.\nAcademic David Maurer sued for plagiarism, claiming the screenplay was based too heavily on his 1940 book \"The Big Con\", about real-life tricksters Fred and Charley Gondorff. Universal settled out of court for $600,000, irking Ward, who resented the presumption of guilt implied by an out-of-court settlement done for business expediency.\nWriter/producer Roy Huggins maintained in his Archive of American Television interview that the first half of \"The Sting\" plagiarized the 1958 \"Maverick\" television series episode \"Shady Deal at Sunny Acres\", starring James Garner and Jack Kelly.\nCasting.\nJack Nicholson was offered the lead role but declined it. He later said \"I had enough business acumen to know \"The Sting\" was going to be a huge hit, [but] at the same time \"Chinatown\" and \"The Last Detail\" were more interesting films to me.\"\nNewman signed on to the film after the producers agreed to give him top billing, $500,000, and a percentage of the profits. His previous five films had been box-office disappointments.\nIn her 1991 autobiography \"You'll Never Eat Lunch in This Town Again\", producer Julia Phillips writes that Hill wanted Richard Boone to play Lonnegan. Much to her relief, Newman had sent the script to Robert Shaw while shooting \"The Mackintosh Man\" in Ireland to ensure his participation in the film. Phillips' book asserts that Shaw was not nominated for an Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor because he demanded that his name follow those of Newman and Redford before the film's opening title.\nShaw's character's limp in the film was authentic. Shaw had injured his leg while playing handball shortly before filming began. Director Hill encouraged him to incorporate the limp into his character rather than withdraw from the project.\nPrincipal photography.\nHill wanted the film to be reminiscent of movies from the 1930s and drew inspiration from films of that decade. He noticed that most '30s gangster films had no extras. \"For instance\", Andrew Horton's book \"The Films of George Roy Hill\" quotes Hill as saying, \"no extras would be used in street scenes in those films: Jimmy Cagney would be shot down and die in an empty street. So I deliberately avoided using extras.\"\nAlong with art director Henry Bumstead and cinematographer Robert L. Surtees, Hill devised a color scheme of muted browns and maroons for the film and a lighting design that combined old-fashioned 1930s-style lighting with some modern tricks of the trade to get the visual look he wanted. Edith Head designed a wardrobe of snappy period costumes for the cast, and artist Jaroslav Gebr created inter-title cards to be used to introduce each section of the film that were reminiscent of the golden glow of old \"Saturday Evening Post\" illustrations, a popular publication of the 1930s.\nThe movie was filmed on the Universal Studios backlot, with a few small scenes shot in Wheeling, West Virginia, some scenes filmed at the Santa Monica pier's carousel, in Southern California, and in Chicago at Union Station and the former LaSalle Street Station. An antique car buff, co-producer Tony Bill helped round up several period cars to use in \"The Sting\". One of them was his own 1935 Pierce-Arrow limousine, which served as Lonnegan's private car.\nReception.\nBox office.\nThe film was a box-office smash in 1973 and early 1974, grossing $156 million in the United States and Canada. As of August 2018,[ [update]] it was the 20th highest-grossing film in the United States adjusted for ticket price inflation. Internationally, it grossed $101\u00a0million for a worldwide gross of $257\u00a0million.\nCritical response.\nRoger Ebert gave the film four out of four stars and called it \"one of the most stylish movies of the year\". Gene Siskel awarded three-and-a-half stars out of four, calling it \"a \"movie\" movie that has obviously been made with loving care each and every step of the way.\" Vincent Canby of \"The New York Times\" wrote that the film was \"so good-natured, so obviously aware of everything it's up to, even its own picturesque frauds, that I opt to go along with it. One forgives its unrelenting efforts to charm, if only because \"The Sting\" itself is a kind of con game, devoid of the poetic aspirations that weighed down \"Butch Cassidy and the Sundance Kid\".\" \"Variety\" wrote, \"George Roy Hill's outstanding direction of David S. Ward's finely-crafted story of multiple deception and surprise ending will delight both mass and class audiences. Extremely handsome production values and a great supporting cast round out the virtues.\" Kevin Thomas of the \"Los Angeles Times\" called it \"an unalloyed delight, the kind of pure entertainment film that's all the more welcome for having become such a rarity.\" John Simon wrote that \"The Sting\" as a comedy-thriller \"works endearingly without a hitch\".\nPauline Kael of \"The New Yorker\" was less enthusiastic, writing that the film \"is meant to be roguishly charming entertainment, and that's how most of the audience takes it, but I found it visually claustrophobic, and totally mechanical. It keeps cranking on, section after section, and it doesn't have a good spirit.\"\nIn 2005, the film was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as \"culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant\". The Writers Guild of America ranked the screenplay #39 on its list of 101 Greatest Screenplays ever written. On Rotten Tomatoes, \"The Sting\" holds a rating of 92% from 101 reviews, with an average rating of 8.3/10. The site's critical consensus reads: \"Paul Newman, Robert Redford, and director George Roy Hill prove that charm, humor, and a few slick twists can add up to a great film.\" On Metacritic, the film has a weighted average score of 83 out of 100, based on 17 critics, indicating \"universal acclaim\".\nSoundtrack.\nThe soundtrack album, executive produced by Gil Rodin, includes several of Scott Joplin's ragtime compositions, adapted by Marvin Hamlisch.\nAccording to Joplin scholar Edward A. Berlin, ragtime experienced a revival in the 1970s due to several events: a on the classical Nonesuch Records label, along with a collection of his music issued by the New York Public Library; the first full staging of Joplin's opera \"Treemonisha\"; and a performance of period orchestrations of Joplin's music by a student ensemble of the New England Conservatory of Music, led by Gunther Schuller. \"Inspired by Schuller's recording, [Hill] had Marvin Hamlisch score Joplin's music for the film, thereby bringing Joplin to a mass, popular public.\"\nAdaptations.\nStage.\nMark Hollmann and Greg Kotis (music and lyrics), writer Bob Martin, and director John Rando created a stage musical version of the movie. The musical premiered at the Paper Mill Playhouse in Millburn, New Jersey on March 29, 2018. Henry Gondorff was played by Harry Connick Jr., with choreography by Warren Carlyle. The stage musical incorporates Joplin's music, including \"The Entertainer\".\nNovelization.\nRobert Weverka adapted the film into a full-length novel, \"The Sting\" (1974), based on the screenplay by David S. Ward.\nHome media.\nThe movie was issued on DVD by Universal Studios Home Video in 1998. \"If Paul Newman really does retire, he can spend his rocking chair years feeling smug about this,\" enthused Bruno MacDonald for \"OK!\" \"The story's not the important thing: what makes it are the quirky soundtrack, the card-sharp dialogue and two superduperstars at their superduperstarriest.\"\nA deluxe DVD \u2013 \"The Sting: Special Edition\" (part of the Universal Legacy Series) \u2013 was released in September 2005. Its \"making of\" featurette, \"The Art of the Sting\", included interviews with the cast and crew.\nThe film was released on Blu-ray in 2012 as part of Universal's 100th anniversary releases.\n\"The Sting\" was released on Ultra HD Blu-ray on May 18, 2021.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "62442", "revid": "11521989", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62442", "title": "LATA", "text": "LATA may refer to:\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "62444", "revid": "792456", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62444", "title": "V5 interface", "text": "V5 is a family of telephone network protocols defined by ETSI which allow communications between the telephone exchange, also known in the specifications as the local exchange (LE), and the local loop. With potentially thousands of subscribers connected to the LE there is the problem of physically managing thousands of wires out to the local subscribers (and the costs associated with that). Prior to the specification of V5 the manufacturers of exchange equipment had proprietary solutions to the problem. These solutions did not inter-operate and meant being tied into a single manufacturer's method at each exchange.\nV5 provided a standard set of protocols from the subscriber to the LE. The AN (or Access Network) was defined as a reference point. Signalling between this point and the LE was standardised and therefore allowed a multiple vendor solution, provided the specifications were followed. This resulted in a single link (or in the case of V5.2 multiple links) from the AN to the LE, reducing the need for many lines along this point (or more likely no need for a proprietary solution to manage the single link). The final link to the local loop remained the same with digital signalling (ISDN) and analogue signalling for basic telephony (also known as POTS in the industry).\nThe protocols are based on the principle of common-channel signaling where message-based signalling for all subscribers uses the same signalling channel(s) rather than separate channels existing for different subscribers.\nV5 comes in two forms:\nThe layer 3 protocols.\nV5.1 only supports the Control, PSTN and ISDN protocols. V5.2 also supports BCC, Link Control and Protection protocols.\nV5 layer 3 protocols are transported on a layer 2 protocol called LAPV5, a variation of the LAP-D or Link Access Procedures, D channel ISDN transport layer. \nV5 is a protocol stack which controls circuit-switched communication paths.\nSubsequent developments.\nPortions of V5 were re-used for a new service known as Narrowband Multimedia Delivery Service (or NMDS). In particular the PSTN protocol was re-used and combined with ISDN to provide a service to the subscriber. This allowed a digital connection to the subscribers house and the re-use of analogue phones across the digital connection. The AN reference point was replaced by an ISDN-like NTE. This NTE managed an analogue service and a basic rate ISDN service to the subscribers home."}
{"id": "62445", "revid": "69412", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62445", "title": "230 BC", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 230 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Barbula and Pera (or, less frequently, year 524 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 230 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy place.\nIndia.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "62446", "revid": "50548110", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62446", "title": "Alice (Alice's Adventures in Wonderland)", "text": "Character from children's novel\nAlice is a fictional character and the titular protagonist of Lewis Carroll's children's novel \"Alice's Adventures in Wonderland\" (1865) and its sequel, \"Through the Looking-Glass\" (1871). A child in the mid-Victorian era, Alice unintentionally goes on an underground adventure after falling down a rabbit hole into Wonderland; in the sequel, she steps through a mirror into an alternative world.\nThe character originated in stories told by Carroll to entertain the Liddell sisters while rowing on the Isis with his friend Robinson Duckworth, and on subsequent rowing trips. Although she shares her given name with Alice Liddell, scholars disagree about the extent to which she was based upon Liddell. Characterized by Carroll as \"loving and gentle\", \"courteous to all\", \"trustful\", and \"wildly curious\", Alice has been variously seen as clever, well-mannered, and sceptical of authority, although some commentators find more negative aspects of her personality. Her appearance changed from \"Alice's Adventures Under Ground\", the first draft of \"Alice's Adventures in Wonderland\", to political cartoonist John Tenniel's illustrations of her in the two \"Alice\" books.\nAlice has been identified as a cultural icon. She has been described as a departure from the usual nineteenth-century child protagonist, and the success of the two \"Alice\" books inspired numerous sequels, parodies, and imitations, with protagonists similar to Alice in temperament. She has been interpreted through various critical approaches, and has appeared and been re-imagined in numerous adaptations, including Walt Disney's film (1951). Her continuing appeal has been ascribed to her ability to be continuously re-imagined.\nCharacter.\nAlice is a fictional child living during the middle of the Victorian era. In \"Alice's Adventures in Wonderland\" (1865), which takes place on 4 May, the character is widely assumed to be seven years old; Alice gives her age as seven and a half in the sequel, which takes place on 4 November. In the text of the two \"Alice\" books, author Lewis Carroll often did not remark on the physical appearance of his protagonist. Details of her fictional life can be discovered from the text of the two books. At home, she has a significantly older sister, a brother, a pet cat named Dinah, an elderly nurse, and a governess, who teaches her lessons starting at nine in the morning. Additionally, she had gone to a day school at some point in her backstory. Alice has been variously characterised as belonging to the upper class, middle class, or part of the bourgeoisie.\nWhen writing on her personality in \"Alice on the Stage\" (April 1887), Carroll described her as \"loving and gentle\", \"courteous to \"all\"\", \"trustful\", and \"wildly curious, and with the eager enjoyment of Life that comes only in the happy hours of childhood, when all is new and fair, and when Sin and Sorrow are but names \u2013 empty words signifying nothing!\" Commentators characterise her as \"innocent\", \"imaginative\", introspective, generally well-mannered, critical of authority figures, and clever. Others see less positive traits in Alice, writing that she frequently shows unkindness in her conversations with the animals in Wonderland, takes violent action against the character Bill the Lizard by kicking him into the air, and reflects her social upbringing in her lack of sensitivity and impolite replies. According to Donald Rackin, \"In spite of her class- and time-bound prejudices, her frightened fretting and childish, abject tears, her priggishness and self-assured ignorance, her sometimes blatant hypocrisy, her general powerlessness and confusion, and her rather cowardly readiness to abandon her struggles at the ends of the two adventures\u2014[...] many readers still look up to Alice as a mythic embodiment of control, perseverance, bravery, and mature good sense.\"\nThe degree to which the character of Alice can be identified as Alice Liddell is controversial. Some critics identify the character as Liddell, or write that she inspired the character. Others argue that Carroll considered his protagonist and Liddell to be separate. According to Carroll, his character was not based on any real child, but was entirely fictional.\nDevelopment.\nAlice debuted in Carroll's first draft of \"Alice's Adventures in Wonderland\", \"Alice's Adventures Under Ground\". \"Under Ground\" originated from stories told to the Liddell sisters during an afternoon on 4 July 1862 while rowing on the Isis with his friend Robinson Duckworth, and on subsequent rowing trips. At the request of ten-year-old Alice Liddell, Carroll wrote down the stories as \"Alice's Adventures Under Ground\", which he completed in February 1864. \"Under Ground\" contains thirty-seven illustrations, twenty-seven of which Alice is depicted in. As his drawings of Alice bear little physical resemblance to Alice Liddell, whose given name she shares, it has been suggested that Alice's younger sister, Edith, might have been his model.\nCarroll portrays his protagonist as wearing a tunic, in contrast to the tailored dresses that the Liddell sisters might have worn. His illustrations drew influence from the Pre-Raphaelite painters Dante Gabriel Rossetti and Arthur Hughes, whose painting \"The Lady with the Lilacs\" (1863) he visually alluded to in one drawing in \"Under Ground\". He gave the hand-written \"Alice's Adventures Under Ground\" to Alice Liddell in November 1864. \nJohn Tenniel illustrated \"Alice's Adventures in Wonderland\" (1865) for a fee of \u00a3138, which was roughly a fourth of what Carroll earned each year and which he paid for himself. Tenniel was an already successful, well-known lead illustrator for the satirical magazine \"Punch\", when Carroll employed him as an illustrator in April 1864. In contrast, Carroll did not have any literary fame at the time. Tenniel likely based the majority of his illustrations on those in \"Under Ground\", and Carroll carefully oversaw his work; among his suggestions was that Alice should have long, light-coloured hair. Alice's clothes are typical of what a girl belonging to the middle class in the mid-Victorian era might have worn at home. Her pinafore, a detail created by Tenniel and now associated with the character, \"suggests a certain readiness for action and lack of ceremony\". Tenniel's depiction of Alice has its origins in a physically similar character which appeared in at least eight cartoons in \"Punch\", during a four-year period that began in 1860. In an 1860 cartoon, this character wore clothes now associated with Alice: \"the full skirt, pale stockings, flat shoes, and a hairband over her loose hair\". In the cartoons, the character appeared as an archetype of a pleasant girl from the middle classes; she has been described as similar to Alice: \"a pacifist and noninterventionist, patient and polite, slow to return the aggression of others\".\nTenniel's fee for illustrating the sequel \"Through the Looking-Glass\" (1871) rose to \u00a3290, which Carroll again paid for out of his own pocket. Tenniel changed Alice's clothing slightly in the sequel, where she wears horizontal-striped stockings instead of plain ones and has a more ornate pinafore with a bow. Originally, Alice wore a \"crinoline-supported chessmanlike skirt\" similar to that of the Red and White Queens, as a queen; the design was rejected by Carroll. Her clothing as a queen and in the railway carriage is a polonaise-styled dress with a bustle, which would have been fashionable at the time. The clothing worn by the characters in \"My First Sermon\" (1863) by pre-Raphaelite painter John Millais and \"The Travelling Companions\" (1862) by Victorian painter Augustus Leopold Egg have some elements in common with Alice's clothing in the railway carriage. Carroll expressed unhappiness at Tenniel's refusal to use a model for illustrations of Alice, writing that this resulted in her head and feet being out of proportion.\nIn February 1881, Carroll contacted his publisher about the possibility of creating \"The Nursery \"Alice\"\", a simplified edition of \"Alice's Adventures in Wonderland\" with coloured and enlarged illustrations. Tenniel coloured twenty illustrations from \"Alice's Adventures in Wonderland\", in addition to revising some aspects of them; Alice is depicted as a blonde, and her dress is yellow, with blue stockings. Her dress became pleated with a bow at the back of it, and she wore a bow in her hair. Edmund Evans printed the illustrations in colour through chromoxylography, a process using woodblocks to produce colour prints.\nCultural impact.\nAlice has been recognised as a cultural icon. The \"Alice\" books have continued to remain in print, and the first book is available in a hundred languages. \"Alice's Adventures in Wonderland\" has continued to maintain its popularity, placing on surveys of the top children's books. Alice placed on a 2015 British survey of the top twenty favorite characters in children's literature. She also lends her name to the style of headband that she is depicted with in Tenniel's illustrations. The continued popularity of the two \"Alice\" books has resulted in numerous adaptations, re-imaginings, literary continuations, and various merchandise. The influence of the two \"Alice\" books in the literary field began as early as the mid-Victorian era, with various novels that adopted the style, acted as parodies of contemporary political issues, or reworked an element of the \"Alice\" books; they featured one or more protagonists with characteristics similar to Alice's (\"typically polite, articulate, and assertive\"), regardless of gender.\n\"Alice's Adventures in Wonderland\" and \"Through the Looking-Glass\" were critically and commercially successful in Carroll's lifetime; more than 150,000 copies of \"Alice's Adventures in Wonderland\" and 100,000 copies of \"Through the Looking-Glass\" had been printed by 1898. Victorian readers generally enjoyed the \"Alice\" books as light-hearted entertainment that omitted the stiff morals which other books for children frequently included. In its review of the first \"Alice\" book, \"The Spectator\" described Alice as \"a charming little girl, [...] with a delicious style of conversation,\" while \"The Publisher's Circular\" lauded her as \"a simple, loving child.\" Several reviewers thought that Tenniel's illustrations added to the book, with \n\"The Literary Churchman\" remarking that Tenniel's art of Alice provided \"a charming relief to the all the grotesque appearances which surround her.\" Alice's character has been highlighted by later literary critics as unusual or a departure from the typical mid-nineteenth-century child protagonists. Richard Kelly sees the character as Carroll's creation of a different protagonist through his reworking of the Victorian orphan trope. According to Kelly, Alice must rely on herself in Wonderland away from her family, but the moral and societal narrative arc of the orphan is replaced with Alice's intellectual struggle to maintain her sense of identity against the inhabitants of Wonderland. Alison Lurie argues that Alice defies the gendered, mid-Victorian conceptions of the idealized girl: Alice does not have a temperament in keeping with the ideal, and she challenges the adult figures in Wonderland.\nFrom the 1930s to 1940s, the books came under the scrutiny of psychoanalytic literary critics. Freudians believed that the events in \"Alice's Adventures in Wonderland\" reflected the personality and desires of the author, because the stories which it was based on had been told spontaneously. In 1933, Anthony Goldschmidt introduced \"the modern idea of Carroll as a repressed sexual deviant\", theorizing that Alice served as Carroll's representation in the novel; Goldschmidt's influential work, however, may have been meant as a hoax. Regardless, Freudian analysis found in the books symbols of \"classic Freudian tropes\": \"a vaginal rabbit hole and a phallic Alice, an amniotic pool of tears, hysterical mother figures and impotent father figures, threats of decapitation [castration], swift identity changes\".\nDescribed as \"the single greatest rival of Tenniel,\" Walt Disney created an influential representation of Alice in his 1951 film adaptation, which helped to mould the image of Alice within pop culture. Although Alice had previously been depicted as a blonde in a blue dress in an unauthorised American edition of the two \"Alice\" books published by Thomas Crowell (1893), possibly for the first time, Disney's portrayal has been the most influential in solidifying the popular image of Alice as such. Disney's version of Alice has its visual basis in Mary Blair's concept drawings and Tenniel's illustrations. While the film was not successful during its original run, it later became popular with college students, who interpreted the film as a drug-drenched narrative. In 1974, \"Alice in Wonderland\" was re-released in the United States, with advertisements playing off this association. The drug association persists as an \"unofficial\" interpretation, despite the film's status as family-friendly entertainment.\nIn the twenty-first century, Alice's continuing appeal has been attributed to her ability to be continuously re-imagined. In \"Men in Wonderland\", Catherine Robson writes that, \"In all her different and associated forms\u2014underground and through the looking glass, textual and visual, drawn and photographed, as Carroll's brunette or Tenniel's blonde or Disney's prim miss, as the real Alice Liddell [...] Alice is the ultimate cultural icon, available for any and every form of manipulation, and as ubiquitous today as in the era of her first appearance.\" Robert Douglass-Fairhurst compares Alice's cultural status to \"something more like a modern myth,\" suggesting her ability to act as an empty canvas for \"abstract hopes and fears\" allows for further \"meanings\" to be ascribed to the character. Zoe Jacques and Eugene Giddens suggest that the character occupies a status within pop culture where \"Alice in a blue dress is as ubiquitous as Hamlet holding a skull,\" which creates \"the strange position whereby the public 'knows' Alice without having read either \"Wonderland\" or \"Looking-Glass\".\" They argue that this allows for creative freedom in subsequent adaptations, in that faithfulness to the texts can be overlooked.\nIn Japan, Alice has a significant influence on pop culture. Tenniel's artwork and Disney's film adaptation have been credited as factors in the continuing favorable reception of the two novels. Within youth culture in Japan, she has been adopted as \"a rebellion figure in much the same way as the American and British 1960s 'hippies' did.\" She has also been a source of inspiration for Japanese fashion, in particular Lolita fashion. Her popularity has been attributed to the idea that she performs the \"sh\u014djo\" ideal, a Japanese understanding of girlhood that is \"sweet and innocent on the outside, and considerably autonomous on the inside.\"\nOther illustrators.\nThe two \"Alice\" books are frequently re-illustrated. The expiration of the copyright of \"Alice's Adventures in Wonderland\" in 1907 resulted in eight new printings, including one illustrated in an Art Nouveau style by Arthur Rackham. The illustrators for the other editions published in 1907 include Charles Robinson, Alice Ross, W. H. Walker, Thomas Maybank and Millicent Sowerby. Among the other notable illustrators are Blanche McManus (1896); Peter Newell (1901), who used monochrome; Mabel Lucie Atwell (1910); Harry Furniss (1926); and Willy Pogany (1929), who featured an Art Deco style.\nNotable illustrators from the 1930s onwards include Edgar Thurstan (1931), and his visual allusions to the Wall Street crash of 1929; D.R. Sexton (1933) and J. Morton Sale (1933), both of whom featured an older Alice; Mervyn Peake (1954); Ralph Steadman (1967), for which he received the Francis Williams Memorial award in 1972; Salvador Dal\u00ed (1969), who used Surrealism; and Peter Blake, with his watercolours (1970). By 1972, there were ninety illustrators of \"Alice's Adventures in Wonderland\" and twenty-one of \"Through the Looking-Glass\". Among the notable illustrators of Alice in the 1980s, 1990s and early 2000s are Barry Moser (1982); Greg Hildebrandt (1990); David Frankland (1996); Lisbeth Zwerger (1999), who used watercolours in her adaptation; Helen Oxenbury (1999), who won two awards, the Kurt Maschler Award in 1999 and the Kate Greenaway Medal in 2000, for her work; and DeLoss McGraw (2001), with his abstract illustrations.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "62447", "revid": "36418353", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62447", "title": "Catharina of W\u00fcrttemberg", "text": "Queen of Westphalia from 1807 to 1813\nCatharina of W\u00fcrttemberg (full name: Friederike Katharina Sophie Dorothea; 21 February 1783 \u2013 29 November 1835) was Queen of Westphalia by marriage to J\u00e9r\u00f4me Bonaparte, who reigned as King of Westphalia between 1807 and 1813.\nLife.\nCatharina was born in Saint Petersburg, Russian Empire, to the later King Frederick I of W\u00fcrttemberg and his first wife, Duchess Augusta of Brunswick-Wolfenb\u00fcttel. Her mother, who died when Catharina was five years old, was a sister of Caroline of Brunswick and a niece of King George III of the United Kingdom. After the death of Catharina's mother, her father married Charlotte, Princess Royal, eldest daughter of George III and thus a first cousin of his first wife. \nIn 1803, W\u00fcrttemberg entered into an alliance with France under Emperor Napoleon I, and one of the terms of the treaty was the marriage of Catharina with J\u00e9r\u00f4me Bonaparte, Napoleon's younger brother. The wedding was held four years later, on 22 August 1807, at the Royal Palace of Fontainebleau in France. Upon marriage, Catharina became Queen consort of the Kingdom of Westphalia. Reportedly, Catharina and J\u00e9r\u00f4me bonded strongly and had a happy marriage, remaining firmly attached to each other. King J\u00e9r\u00f4me, however, was unfaithful with multiple partners, including a three-year relationship with Diana Rabe von Pappenheim, but Catharina chose to turn a blind eye. \nWhen the kingdom of Westphalia was dissolved in 1813, she followed Jerome to France. During the war, she and D\u00e9sir\u00e9e Clary took refuge with Julie Clary at Mortefontaine, and when the allied troops took Paris, they took refuge in the home of Desir\u00e9e Clary in the capital. \nAfter the downfall of the Napoleonic Empire in 1814, her father expected her to separate from Jerome, as Empress Marie Louise had done from Napoleon, but instead she followed him into exile to Trieste in Austrian Italy. \nDuring the Hundred Days in 1815, she helped Jerome to escape and join Napoleon, and was as a consequence deported to W\u00fcrttemberg, where she was placed under house arrest. After the defeat of Napoleon, she was joined by her spouse in house arrest. \nCatharina and Jerome were eventually released from house arrest and spent their remaining life together in Trieste and Switzerland, under the name of the Princess and Prince of Montfort. In November 1835, Catharina died in Lausanne, Switzerland.\nIssue.\nCatharina and J\u00e9r\u00f4me had three children: \nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Sister-inline/styles.css\"/&gt; Media related to at Wikimedia Commons"}
{"id": "62448", "revid": "16752040", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62448", "title": "Nuclear deterrence", "text": ""}
{"id": "62449", "revid": "31031784", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62449", "title": "Justine Bartolini-Baldelli", "text": "Italian-born French princess\nJustine Bartolini-Baldelli (n\u00e9e \"Pecori-Su\u00e1rez\"; ; 27 November 1811 in Florence, Italy \u2013 30 January 1903 in Florence) was an Italian-born French princess, being the spouse of Prince J\u00e9r\u00f4me Bonaparte, heir presumptive of France during the Second French Empire.\nLife.\nGiustina [Justine] Pecori-Su\u00e1rez was the daughter of \"conte\" Bernardo Pecori- (later Pecori-), a descendant of Florentine courtier , and his wife Giulia (\"dei marchesi\" [of the Marquesses] di Ponsacco e Camugliano). She was first married in March 1829 to \"marchese\" Luigi Bartolini-Baldelli, who died in 1838. They had a son, who died young in 1844, and a daughter Giulia Bartolini-Baldelli, who married \"conte\" Arturo degli Alberti Mori Ubaldini [without issue ?]. Giustina's elder sister, Marianna Pecori-Su\u00e1rez (b. 1810), was married in 1826 to \"marchese\" Alessandro Feroni, with whom she had three surviving daughters named Elisa, Giulia, and Paolina; through their mother, Giustina and her sister Marianna descend from Leonardo da Vinci's model Lisa del Giocondo, the famous \"Mona Lisa\".\nIn her second marriage, Giustina became the third wife of J\u00e9r\u00f4me Bonaparte, the former King of Westphalia, youngest brother of Emperor Napoleon I and widower of Princess Catharina of W\u00fcrttemberg. They married first in a religious ceremony in Florence in 1840, and a second time in a secret civil ceremony on 19 February 1853 in Paris, France. Her spouse was during their marriage the heir presumptive to the throne of France of his nephew Napoleon III, placing her in a position to become the next Empress of France.\nAt the time of her second marriage, she was a rich widow and Jerome heavily indebted, and the marriage enabled him to pay his debts and continued his luxurious lifestyle in Florence. It was a morganatic marriage upon the request of Jerome, who did not wish to recognize her officially and insisted upon calling her \"Madame la Marquise\" and have her referred to as such by others. Baron du Casse described her as beautiful, distinguished, sweet and interested in charity, but also as indolent and languid in her habits. \nShe followed Jerome to France in 1847, and resided with him in Paris with his son. Despite attempts to do so, she did not succeed in being officially recognized. Her stepson, Prince Napoleon, reportedly disliked her and alienated her from her spouse, who also took a mistress. Her stepson and the Corsican steward of Jerome, Pietra-Santa, accused her of an intrigue with the illegitimate son of Jerome, J\u00e9r\u00f4me David. On this occasion, Jerome did not believe the story and had Pietra-Santa fired. \nIn 1853, Jerome was again made Imperial Prince and heir presumptive after his nephew Napoleon III had become Emperor of the French. After this, however, he exiled Giustina back to Florence by accusing her of adultery referring to the previous mentioned story. He did, however, repay her the money she had spent on him in Florence, and purchased a palazzo by the Arno for her. In 1860, Giustina was widowed with the title of \"Princesse Bonaparte\" and awarded a pension by Napoleon III.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "62450", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62450", "title": "Independence", "text": "Condition of a nation with self-governance\n \nIndependence is a condition of a nation, country, or state, in which residents and population, or some portion thereof, exercise self-government, and usually sovereignty, over its territory. The opposite of independence is the status of a dependent territory or colony. The commemoration of the independence day of a country or nation celebrates when a country is free from all forms of colonialism; free to build a country or nation without any interference from other nations.\nDefinition.\nWhether the attainment of independence is different from revolution has long been contested, and has often been debated over the question of violence as legitimate means to achieving sovereignty. In general, revolutions aim only to redistribute power with or without an element of emancipation, such as in democratization \"within\" a state, which as such may remain unaltered. For example, the Mexican Revolution (1910) chiefly refers to a multi-factional conflict that eventually led to a new constitution; it has rarely been used to refer to the armed struggle (1821) against Spain. However, some wars of independence have been described as revolutions, such as the ones in the United States (1783) and Indonesia (1949), while some revolutions that were specifically about a change in the political structure have resulted in breakaway states. Mongolia and Finland, for example, gained their independence during the revolutions occurring in China (1911) and Russia (1917) respectively. Causes for a country or province wishing to seek independence are many, but most can be summed up as a feeling of inequality compared to the dominant power. The means can extend from intended peaceful demonstrations as in the case of India (1947), to a violent war as in the case of Algeria (1962). In some cases, a country may also have declared independence, but may only be partially recognized by other countries; such as Kosovo (2008), whose independence Serbia, from which Kosovo has seceded, has not formally recognized.\nDistinction between independence and autonomy.\n\"Autonomy\" refers to a kind of independence which has been granted by an overseeing authority that itself still retains ultimate authority over that territory (see Devolution). A protectorate refers to an autonomous region that depends upon a larger government for its protection as an autonomous region.\nRight to independence.\nDuring the 20th century wave of decolonization colonies gained rights to independence through documents such as the 1960 Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, but this right remained mostly applicable only to unfree territorial entities, such as colonies.\nHow much these rights apply to all people has been a crucial point of discussion. The rights to nationality and self-determination allow clarification. The right of self-determination allows self-governance, as for example in the case of indigenous peoples, but is not a right of secession, except in extreme cases of oppression as a remedy from the oppression. Therefore, the right to secession is generally determined by the legislation of sovereign states and independence by the capacity to be a state.\nDeclarations of independence.\nSometimes, a state wishing to achieve independence from a dominating power will issue a declaration of independence; the earliest surviving example is Scotland's Declaration of Arbroath in 1320, with the most recent examples being Azawad's declaration of independence in 2012 and Catalan declaration of independence in 2017. Declaring independence and attaining it, however, are quite different. A well-known successful example is the U.S. Declaration of Independence issued in 1776. The dates of established independence (or, less commonly, the commencement of revolution), are typically celebrated as a national holiday known as an independence Day.\nHistorical overview.\nHistorically, there have been four major periods of declaring independence:\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "62451", "revid": "506179", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62451", "title": "Johnson City", "text": "Johnson City is the name of several places in the United States:\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n Topics referred to by the same termThis page lists articles about distinct geographical locations with the same name. "}
{"id": "62452", "revid": "44506937", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62452", "title": "Jerome Napoleon Bonaparte II", "text": "French-American soldier (1830\u20131893)\nJerome Napoleon Bonaparte II (November 5, 1830 \u2013 September 3, 1893) was an American military officer who served in the United States Army and later in the French Army. He was a member of the American branch of the Bonaparte family.\nEarly life.\nHe was born in Baltimore, Maryland on November 5, 1830. He was the eldest son of the French-American J\u00e9r\u00f4me Napol\u00e9on Bonaparte (1805\u20131870) and his wife, the former Susan May Williams (1812\u20131881). His younger brother was Charles Joseph Bonaparte, who served as the United States Attorney General and Secretary of the Navy under Theodore Roosevelt.\nHis paternal grandparents were J\u00e9r\u00f4me Bonaparte, who reigned as King of Westphalia from 1807 to 1813, and his first wife, the American socialite and successful businesswoman Elizabeth Patterson Bonaparte. Through his grandfather, he was the grandnephew of Emperor Napoleon, who died in 1821. His maternal grandparents were Sarah (n\u00e9e Copeland) Morton Williams and Benjamin Williams, who helped found the Baltimore and Ohio Railroad, the first railroad company in the United States.\nBonaparte entered the United States Military Academy at West Point in 1847 and graduated 11th in the Class of 1852.\nCareer.\nUpon graduation, he was commissioned as a second lieutenant and served in Texas with the Regiment of Mounted Riflemen.\nBonaparte resigned from the U.S. Army in August 1854 to serve in the army of his first cousin-once-removed, Emperor Napoleon III. A few weeks later, he was commissioned as a lieutenant of dragoons in the French Army. He fought in the Crimean War, Algeria, the Italian campaign, and the Franco-Prussian War, rising to the rank of lieutenant colonel. For his services, he was the recipient of the decoration of the Medjidie Order from Abdulmejid I, the Sultan of the Ottoman Empire, the Crimea Medal from Queen Victoria of the United Kingdom, and was made a knight of the L\u00e9gion d'honneur.\nFollowing the Siege of Paris, Bonaparte left the French Army and returned home to the United States.\nPersonal life.\nUpon his return to the United States, he married Caroline Le Roy Appleton Edgar (1840\u20131911), daughter of Samuel and Julia Appleton, and widow of Newbold Edgar. Caroline was also the granddaughter of American statesman, Daniel Webster. Together, they were the parents of two children:\nHad his family not been excluded, he would have been first in line to the Bonaparte succession from 1873 and would have succeeded in 1891.\nBonaparte died on September 3, 1893, in Prides Crossing, Massachusetts.\nLegacy.\nHis letters from Fort Inge and Fort Ewell have been preserved by the Maryland Historical Society.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "62453", "revid": "12157539", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62453", "title": "Charles Joseph Bonaparte", "text": "American lawyer and political activist (1851\u20131921)\nCharles Joseph Bonaparte ( ; June 9, 1851\u00a0\u2013 June 28, 1921) was an American lawyer and political activist of French noble descent who advocated for progressive and liberal causes. Originally from Baltimore, Maryland, he served in the cabinet of the 26th U.S. president, Theodore Roosevelt.\nHe was a descendant of the House of Bonaparte. His grandfather was J\u00e9r\u00f4me Bonaparte, brother of Emperor Napoleon I, and his grandmother was Elizabeth Patterson Bonaparte.\nBonaparte was the U.S. Secretary of the Navy and later the U.S. Attorney General. During his tenure as Attorney General, he formed the Bureau of Investigation (now the FBI).\nBonaparte was one of the founders and for a time the president, of the National Municipal League. He was also an activist for the voting rights of black residents of his native city of Baltimore.\nEarly life and education.\nBonaparte was born in Baltimore, Maryland, on June 9, 1851, the son of J\u00e9r\u00f4me (\"Bo\") Napoleon Bonaparte (1805\u20131870), and Susan May Williams (1812\u20131881), from whom the American line of the House of Bonaparte descended, and a grandson of J\u00e9r\u00f4me Bonaparte, King of Westphalia, the youngest brother of French emperor Napoleon. However, the American Bonapartes never used any titles.\nBonaparte graduated from Harvard College in Cambridge, Massachusetts in 1871 and lived in Grays Hall during his freshman year. He was also the founding president of the Signet Society, a literary and art recognition final club at Harvard. He then continued to Harvard Law School, where he later served as a university overseer. He practiced law in Baltimore and became prominent in municipal and national reform movements.\nCareer.\nIn 1899, Bonaparte was the keynote speaker for the first graduating class of the Roman Catholic women's institution run by the Order of the School Sisters of Notre Dame, the College of Notre Dame of Maryland (now Notre Dame of Maryland University). He spoke on \"The Significance of the Bachelor's Degree\".\nBonaparte lived in a townhouse in the north Baltimore neighborhood of Mount Vernon-Belvedere and had a country estate in suburban Baltimore County, Maryland, which surrounds the city on the west, north, and east. His home, Bella Vista, was designed by the architects James Bosley Noel Wyatt (1847\u20131926) and William G. Nolting (1866\u20131940), in the prominent local architectural partnership firm of Wyatt &amp; Nolting in 1896. It lies east of the Harford Road (Maryland Route 147) in an area called Glen Arm. The house was not electrified since Bonaparte refused to have electricity or telegraph lines installed due to a dislike of technology, verified by his use of a horse-drawn coach until he died in the early 1920s.\nPolitics.\nBonaparte was a founder of the Reform League of Baltimore, organized in 1885. The League gained a clean sweep of municipal elections in 1895: long-time minority progressive liberal Republicans ousted many Democratic machine politicians in heavily Democratic wards. The League men governed with clean hands for a brief time, providing a certain amount of efficient municipal government.\nBonaparte was a member of the Board of Indian Commissioners from 1902 to 1904, chairman of the National Civil Service Reform League in 1904, and appointed a trustee of Catholic University of America in Washington, D.C.\nIn the 1904 United States presidential election, Bonaparte was named one of eight Republican candidates for presidential elector. Maryland at this time chose electors individually, in an at-large election. In an unusual result, Bonaparte got the most votes of any candidate, narrowly outpolling the eight Democrat candidates, who narrowly outpolled the other seven Republicans. Thus Bonaparte was the only Republican elector from Maryland, which may have reflected his reputation.\nIn 1905, President Theodore Roosevelt appointed Bonaparte Secretary of the Navy. In 1906 Bonaparte moved to the office of Attorney General, which he held until the end of Roosevelt's term. He was active in suits brought against the trusts and initiated the suit which broke up the monopolistic American Tobacco Company. He became known as \"Charlie, the Crook Chaser\". In 1908, Bonaparte established a Bureau of Investigation (BOI) within the Department of Justice. The BOI later became the FBI.\nIn the 1912 United States presidential election, Bonaparte supported the Bull Moose party of Theodore Roosevelt.\nPersonal life.\nOn September 1, 1875, in Newport, Rhode Island, Bonaparte married Ellen Channing Day (Hartford, Connecticut, September 25, 1852 \u2013 Washington, D.C., June 23, 1924), daughter of attorney Thomas Mills Day and wife Anna Jones Dunn. They had no children.\nIn 1903, he was awarded the Laetare Medal by the University of Notre Dame, the oldest and most prestigious award for American Catholics.\nDeath.\nBonaparte died in Bella Vista at age 70 and is interred at southwest Baltimore's landmark Loudon Park Cemetery. He died of \"Saint Vitus' dance\", a nonspecific term used at the time to refer to chorea. A nearby street in Baltimore County bears the name of Bonaparte Avenue.\nAfter Bonaparte's death, the house was later owned by bootleggers Peter and Michael Kelly. After they left, it was destroyed in a fire caused by faulty wiring on January 20, 1933. The site was replaced by a poured concrete mansion, but a large carriage house, dating back to 1896, is still on the estate.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "62454", "revid": "38454553", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62454", "title": "Leesburg", "text": "Leesburg may refer to several locations in the United States of America:\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n Topics referred to by the same termThis page lists articles about distinct geographical locations with the same name. "}
{"id": "62455", "revid": "48675950", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62455", "title": "Lowell", "text": "Lowell may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "62456", "revid": "34986788", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62456", "title": "Livingston", "text": "Livingston or Livingstone may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "62457", "revid": "4069147", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62457", "title": "Lyme", "text": "Lyme or LYME may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "62458", "revid": "44062", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62458", "title": "Madison", "text": "Madison may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "62459", "revid": "10199389", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62459", "title": "Checkers", "text": "Strategy board game\nCheckers (North American English), also known as draughts (; British English), is a group of strategy board games for two players which involve forward movements of uniform game pieces and mandatory captures by jumping over opponent pieces. Checkers is developed from alquerque. The term \"checkers\" derives from the checkered board which the game is played on, whereas \"draughts\" derives from the verb \"to draw\" or \"to move\".\nThe most popular forms of checkers in Anglophone countries are American checkers (also called English draughts), which is played on an 8\u00d78 checkerboard; Russian draughts, Turkish draughts and Armenian draughts, all of them on an 8\u00d78 board; and international draughts, played on a 10\u00d710 board \u2013 with the latter widely played in many countries worldwide. There are many other variants played on 8\u00d78 boards. Canadian checkers and Malaysian/Singaporean checkers (also locally known as dam) are played on a 12\u00d712 board.\nAmerican checkers was weakly solved in 2007 by a team of Canadian computer scientists led by Jonathan Schaeffer. From the standard starting position, perfect play by each side will result in a draw.\nGeneral rules.\nCheckers is played by two opponents on opposite sides of the game board. One player has dark pieces (usually black); the other has light pieces (usually white or red). The darker color moves first, then players alternate turns. A player cannot move the opponent's pieces. A move consists of moving a piece to an adjacent unoccupied square. All pieces move forward only at the beginning of the game. At the beginning of a player's turn, if the adjacent square of a player's piece (in the player's forward direction) contains an opponent's piece, and the square immediately beyond it is vacant, the piece may be captured (must be captured in most international rules) by jumping over it. The captured piece is then removed from the board.\nOnly the dark squares of the checkerboard are used. A piece can only move into an unoccupied square. When capturing an opponent's piece is possible, capturing is mandatory in most official rules. If the player does not capture, the other player can remove the opponent's piece as a penalty (or muffin), and where there are two or more such positions the player forfeits pieces that cannot be moved (although some rule variations make capturing optional). In almost all variants, a player with no valid move remaining loses. This occurs if the player has no pieces left, or if all the player's pieces are obstructed from moving by opponent pieces.\nPieces.\nMan.\nAn uncrowned piece (\"man\") moves one step ahead and captures an adjacent opponent's piece by jumping over it and landing on the next square. Multiple enemy pieces can be captured in a single turn provided this is done by successive jumps made by a single piece; the jumps do not need to be on the same diagonal direction and may \"zigzag\" (change direction). In American checkers and Spanish draughts, men can jump only forwards; in international draughts and Russian draughts, men can jump both forwards and backwards.\nKing.\nWhen a man reaches the farthest row forward, known as the \"kings row\" or \"crown head\", it becomes a \"king\". It is marked by placing an additional piece on top of, or \"crowning\", the first man. The king has additional powers, namely the ability to move any amount of squares at a time (in international checkers), move backwards and, in variants where men cannot already do so, capture backwards. Like a man, a king can make successive jumps in a single turn, provided that each jump captures an enemy piece.\nIn international draughts, kings can move any number of squares, forward or backward. Kings with such an ability are also informally called \"flying kings\". They may capture an opposing man, regardless of distance, by jumping to any of the unoccupied squares immediately past the man. Because jumped pieces remain on the board until the turn is completed, it is possible to reach a position in a multi-jump move where the flying king is blocked from capturing further by a piece already jumped.\nFlying kings are not used in American checkers; a king's only advantage over a man is the additional ability to move and capture backwards.\nNaming.\nIn most non-English languages (except those that acquired the game from English speakers), checkers is called \"dame\", \"dames\", \"damas\", or a similar term that refers to ladies. The pieces are usually called \"men\", \"stones\", \"pe\u00f3n\" (pawn) or a similar term; men promoted to kings are called \"dames\" or ladies. In these languages, the queen in chess or in card games is usually called by the same term as the kings in checkers. A case in point includes the Greek terminology, in which checkers is called \"\u03bd\u03c4\u03ac\u03bc\u03b1\" (dama), which is also one term for the queen in chess.\nHistory.\nAncient games.\nSimilar games have been played for millennia. A board resembling a checkers board was found in Ur dating from 3000 BC. In the British Museum are specimens of ancient Egyptian checkerboards, found with their pieces in burial chambers, and the game was played by the pharaoh Hatshepsut. Plato mentioned a game, \u03c0\u03b5\u03c4\u03c4\u03b5\u03af\u03b1 or \"petteia\", as being of Egyptian origin, and Homer also mentions it. The method of capture was placing two pieces on either side of the opponent's piece. It was said to have been played during the Trojan War. The Romans played a derivation of petteia called \"latrunculi\", or the game of the Little Soldiers. The pieces, and sporadically the game itself, were called \"calculi\" (\"pebbles\"). Like the pawn in chess, alquerque was probably derived from \u03c0\u03b5\u03c4\u03c4\u03b5\u03af\u03b1 and latrunculi by removing the necessity for two pieces to cooperate to capture one, although, like Ghanaian draughts, the game could still be declared lost by a player with only one piece left.\nAlquerque.\nAn Arabic game called \"Quirkat\" or \"al-qirq\", with similar play to modern checkers, was played on a 5\u00d75 board. It is mentioned in the tenth-century work Kitab al-Aghani. Al qirq was also the name for the game that is now called nine men's morris. Al qirq was brought to Spain by the Moors, where it became known as \"Alquerque\", the Spanish derivation of the Arabic name. It was maybe a derivation of \"latrunculi\", or the game of the Little Soldiers, with a leaping capture, which could, like modern Argentine, German, Greek, Kenyan and Thai draughts, have flying kings which had to stop on the next square after the captured piece, which is just one step long of the displacement capture of backgammon and chess and its variants, but pieces could only make up to three captures at once, or seven if all directions were legal, or pieces had to change directions in the course of a multiple capture. That said, even if playing al qirq inside the cells of a square grid was not already known to the Moors who brought it, which it probably was, either via playing on a chessboard (in about 1100, probably in the south of France, this was done once again using backgammon pieces, thereby each piece was called a \"fers\", the same name as the chess queen, as the move of the two pieces was the same at the time) or adapting Seega using jumping capture. The rules are given in the 13th-century book \"Libro de los juegos\".\nCrowning.\nThe rule of crowning was used by the 13th century, as it is mentioned in the Philippe Mousk\u00e9s's \"Chronique\" in 1243 when the game was known as \"Fierges\", the name used for the chess queen (derived from the Persian \"ferz\", meaning royal counsellor or vizier). The pieces became known as \"dames\" when that name was also adopted for the chess queen. The rule forcing players to take whenever possible was introduced in France in around 1535, at which point the game became known as \"Jeu forc\u00e9\", identical to modern American checkers. The game without forced capture became known as \"Le jeu plaisant de dames\", the precursor of international checkers.\nThe 18th-century English author Samuel Johnson wrote a foreword to a 1756 book about checkers by William Payne, the earliest book in English about the game.\nComputer checkers.\nAmerican checkers has been the arena for several notable advances in game artificial intelligence. In 1951 Christopher Strachey created \"Checkers\", a simulation of the board game. The checkers game tried to run for the first time on 30 July 1951 at NPL, but was unsuccessful due to program errors. In the summer of 1952 he successfully ran the program on Ferranti Mark 1 computer and played the first computer checkers and one of the first video games according to many definitions. In the 1950s, Arthur Samuel created one of the first board game-playing programs of any kind. More recently, in 2007 scientists at the University of Alberta developed their \"Chinook\" program to the point where it is unbeatable. A brute force approach that took hundreds of computers working nearly two decades was used to solve the game, showing that a game of checkers will always end in a draw if neither player makes a mistake. The solution is for the checkers variation called go-as-you-please (GAYP) checkers and not for the variation called three-move restriction checkers; however, it is a legal three-move restriction game because only openings believed to lose are barred under the three-move restriction. As of December 2007, this makes American checkers the most complex game ever solved.\nIn November 1983, the Science Museum Oklahoma (then called the Omniplex) unveiled a new exhibit: Lefty the Checker Playing Robot. Programmed by Scott M. Savage, Lefty used an Armdroid robotic arm by Colne Robotics and was powered by a 6502 processor with a combination of Basic and Assembly code to interactively play a round of checkers with visitors to the museum. Originally, the program was deliberately simple so that the average museum visitor could potentially win, but over time was improved. The improvements, however, proved to be more frustrating for the visitors, so the original code was reimplemented.\nComputational complexity.\nGeneralized Checkers is played on an M \u00d7 N board.\nIt is PSPACE-hard to determine whether a specified player has a winning strategy. And if a polynomial bound is placed on the number of moves that are allowed in between jumps (which is a reasonable generalisation of the drawing rule in standard Checkers), then the problem is in PSPACE, thus it is PSPACE-complete. However, without this bound, Checkers is EXPTIME-complete.\nHowever, other problems have only polynomial complexity:\nNational and regional variants.\nRussian Column draughts.\nColumn draughts (Russian towers), also known as Bashni, is a kind of draughts known in Russia since the beginning of the nineteenth century nad played according to the usual rules of Russian draughts but with the difference that the captured man is not removed from the playing field but is placed under the capturing piece (man or tower).\nThe resulting towers move around the board as a whole, \"obeying\" the upper piece. When taking a tower, only the uppermost piece is removed from it: and the resulting tower belongs to the player of the color of its new uppermost piece.\nBashni has inspired the games Lasca and Emergo.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nDraughts associations and federations\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nHistory, articles, variants, rules\nOnline play"}
{"id": "62460", "revid": "40663416", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62460", "title": "Marion", "text": "Marion or MARION may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "62461", "revid": "1146910170", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62461", "title": "Mechanicsburg", "text": "Mechanicsburg may refer to:\nPlaces.\nIn the United States:\nFiction.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "62462", "revid": "8565473", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62462", "title": "Umami", "text": "One of the five basic tastes\nUmami ( from , ), or savoriness, is one of the five basic tastes. It is characteristic of broths and cooked meats.\nPeople taste umami through taste receptors that typically respond to glutamates and nucleotides, which are widely present in meat broths and fermented products. Glutamates are commonly added to some foods in the form of monosodium glutamate (MSG), and nucleotides are commonly added in the form of disodium guanylate, inosine monophosphate (IMP) or guanosine monophosphate (GMP). Since umami has its own receptors rather than arising out of a combination of the traditionally recognized taste receptors, scientists now consider umami to be a distinct taste.\nFoods that have a strong umami flavor include meats, shellfish, fish (including fish sauce and preserved fish such as Maldives fish, \"katsuobushi\", sardines, and anchovies), \"dashi\", tomatoes, mushrooms, hydrolyzed vegetable protein, meat extract, yeast extract, kimchi, cheeses, and soy sauce.\nIn 1908, Kikunae Ikeda of the University of Tokyo scientifically identified umami as a distinct taste attributed to glutamic acid. As a result, in 1909, Ikeda and Sabur\u014dsuke Suzuki founded Ajinomoto Co., Inc. which introduced the world's first umami seasoning: monosodium glutamate (MSG), marketed in Japan under the name \"Ajinomoto.\" MSG subsequently spread worldwide as a seasoning capable of enhancing umami in a wide variety of dishes.\nIn 2000, researchers at the University of Miami identified the presence of umami receptors on the tongue, and in 2006, Ajinomoto\u2019s research laboratories found similar receptors in the stomach.\nEtymology.\nA loanword from Japanese , \"umami\" can be translated as \"pleasant savory taste\". This neologism was coined in 1908 by Japanese chemist Kikunae Ikeda from a nominalization of \"umai\" () \"delicious\". There is no English equivalent to \"umami\"; however, some close descriptions are \"meaty\", \"savory\", and \"broth-like\".\n\"Umai\" can also be written as , leading to the alternative form , also pronounced \"umami\". While the forms are often used interchangeably, in the 1980s Japanese researchers suggested that should be used for the flavor while is a more general sense of a food being delicious.\nBackground.\nScientists have debated whether umami was a basic taste since Kikunae Ikeda first proposed its existence in 1908. In 1985, the term \"umami\" was recognized as the scientific term to describe the taste of glutamates and nucleotides at the first Umami International Symposium in Hawaii. Umami represents the taste of the amino acid L-glutamate and 5'-ribonucleotides such as \"inosinate and guanylate\". (guanosine monophosphate, GMP, and inosine monophosphate, IMP). It can be described as a pleasant \"brothy\" or \"meaty\" taste with a long-lasting, mouthwatering and coating sensation over the tongue. Umami enhances the palatability of a wide variety of foods.\nStudies in genetically engineered mice in which individual TAS1R genes have been deleted indicate that the TAS1R1/TAS1R3 complex is solely responsible for umami taste, whereas TAS1R2/TAS1R3 is solely responsible for sweet taste. As expected, a genetic knockout of TAS1R1 selectively abolishes umami taste, a knockout of TAS1R2 specifically abolishes sweet taste, while a knockout of TAS1R3 eliminates both sweet and umami taste. \nSpecialized taste bud cells detect the chemical species perceived as umami by humans. Glutamate in acid form (glutamic acid) imparts little umami taste, whereas the salts of glutamic acid, known as glutamates, give the characteristic umami taste due to their ionized state. GMP and IMP amplify the taste intensity of glutamate. Adding salt to the free acids also enhances the umami taste. It is disputed whether umami is truly an independent taste because standalone glutamate without table salt ions (Na+) is perceived as sour; sweet and umami tastes share a taste receptor subunit, with salty taste blockers reducing discrimination between monosodium glutamate and sucrose; and some people cannot distinguish umami from a salty taste.\nMonosodium L-aspartate has an umami taste about a quarter as intense as MSG, whereas ibotenic acid and tricholomic acid (likely as their salts or with salt) are claimed to be many times more intense. Peptides can also generate an umami taste, with 52 of them being known to do so as of 2017 (20 of them are questionable).\nDiscovery.\nGlutamate has a long history in cooking. Fermented fish sauces (garum), which are rich in glutamate, were used widely in ancient Rome, fermented barley sauces (murri) rich in glutamate were used in medieval Byzantine and Arab cuisine, and fermented fish sauces and soy sauces have histories going back to the third century in China. Cheese varieties are rich in glutamate and umami flavor. In the late 1800s, chef Auguste Escoffier, who opened restaurants in Paris and London, created meals that combined umami with salty, sour, sweet, and bitter tastes. However, he did not know the chemical source of this unique quality. \nUmami was first scientifically identified in 1908 by Kikunae Ikeda, a professor of the Tokyo Imperial University. He found that glutamate was responsible for the palatability of the broth from \"kombu\" seaweed. He noticed that the taste of \"kombu\" \"dashi\" was distinct from sweet, sour, bitter, and salty and named it \"umami\".\nShintaro Kodama, a disciple of Ikeda, discovered in 1913 that dried bonito flakes (a type of tuna) contained another umami substance. This was the ribonucleotide IMP. In 1957, Akira Kuninaka realized that the ribonucleotide GMP present in shiitake mushrooms also conferred the umami taste. One of Kuninaka's most important discoveries was the synergistic effect between ribonucleotides and glutamate. When foods rich in glutamate are combined with ingredients that have ribonucleotides, the resulting taste intensity is higher than would be expected from merely adding the intensity of the individual ingredients.\nThis synergy of umami may help explain various classical food pairings: the Japanese make \"dashi\" with \"kombu\" seaweed and dried bonito flakes; the Chinese add Chinese leek and Chinese cabbage to chicken soup, as do Scots in the similar Scottish dish of cock-a-leekie soup; and Italians grate the Parmigiano-Reggiano cheese on a variety of different dishes.\nProperties.\nUmami has a mild but lasting aftertaste associated with salivation and a sensation of furriness on the tongue, stimulating the throat, the roof and the back of the mouth. By itself, umami is not palatable, but it makes a great variety of foods pleasant, especially in the presence of a matching aroma. Like other basic tastes, umami is pleasant only within a relatively narrow concentration range.\nThe optimum umami taste also depends on the amount of salt, and at the same time, low-salt foods can maintain a satisfactory taste with the appropriate amount of umami. One study showed that ratings of pleasantness, taste intensity, and ideal saltiness of low-salt soups were greater when the soup contained umami, whereas low-salt soups without umami were less pleasant. Another study demonstrated that using fish sauce as a source of umami could reduce the need for salt by 10\u201325% to flavor such foods as chicken broth, tomato sauce, or coconut curry while maintaining overall taste intensity.\nSome population groups, such as the elderly, may benefit from umami taste because their taste and smell sensitivity may be impaired by age and medication. The loss of taste and smell can contribute to poor nutrition, increasing their risk of disease. Some evidence exists to show umami not only stimulates appetite, but also may contribute to satiety.\nFoods rich in umami components.\nMany foods are rich in the amino acids and nucleotides imparting umami. Naturally occurring glutamate can be found in meats and vegetables. Inosine (IMP) comes primarily from meats and guanosine (GMP) from vegetables. Mushrooms, especially dried shiitake, are rich sources of umami flavor from guanylate. Smoked or fermented fish are high in inosinate, and shellfish in adenylate. Protein in food is tasteless, however processes such as fermentation, curing, or heat treatment release glutamate and other amino acids. \nGenerally, umami taste is common to foods that contain high levels of L-glutamate, IMP and GMP, most notably in fish, shellfish, cured meats, meat extracts, mushrooms, vegetables (e.g., ripe tomatoes, Chinese cabbage, spinach, celery, etc.), green tea, hydrolyzed vegetable protein, and fermented and aged products involving bacterial or yeast cultures, such as cheeses, shrimp pastes, fish sauce, soy sauce, natto, nutritional yeast, and yeast extracts such as Vegemite and Marmite.\nStudies have shown that the amino acids in breast milk are often the first encounter humans have with umami. Glutamic acid makes up half of the free amino acids in breast milk.\nPerceptual independence from salty and sweet taste.\nSince all umami taste compounds are sodium salts, the perceptual differentiation of salty and umami tastes has been difficult in taste tests and studies have found as much as 27% of certain populations may be umami \"hypotasters\".\nFurthermore, single glutamate (glutamic acid) with no table salt ions (Na+) elicits sour taste and in psychophysical tests, sodium or potassium salt cations seem to be required to produce a perceptible umami taste.\nSweet and umami tastes both utilize the taste receptor subunit TAS1R3, with salt taste blockers reducing discrimination between monosodium glutamate and sucrose in rodents.\nIf umami doesn't have perceptual independence, it could be classified with other tastes like fat, carbohydrate, metallic, and calcium, which can be perceived at high concentrations but may not offer a prominent taste experience.\nTaste receptors.\nMost taste buds on the tongue and other regions of the mouth can detect umami taste, irrespective of their location. (The tongue map in which different tastes are distributed in different regions of the tongue is a common misconception.) Biochemical studies have identified the taste receptors responsible for the sense of umami as modified forms of mGluR4, mGluR1, and taste receptor type 1 (TAS1R1 + TAS1R3), all of which have been found in all regions of the tongue bearing taste buds. These receptors are also found in some regions of the duodenum. A 2009 review corroborated the acceptance of these receptors, stating, \"Recent molecular biological studies have now identified strong candidates for umami receptors, including the heterodimer TAS1R1/TAS1R3, and truncated type 1 and 4 metabotropic glutamate receptors missing most of the N-terminal extracellular domain (taste-mGluR4 and truncated-mGluR1) and brain-mGluR4.\" Receptors mGluR1 and mGluR4 are specific to glutamate whereas TAS1R1 and TAS1R3 are responsible for the synergism already described by Akira Kuninaka in 1957. However, as of this date, the specific role of each type of receptor in taste bud cells remained unclear. All three receptors work together to produce the taste sensation.\nDownstream signaling.\nTAS1R1 + TAS1R3.\nThe TAS1R1 + TAS1R3 receptor is a G protein-couple receptor, much like the sweet and bitter receptors. It uses the same downstream signaling molecules, including G proteins beta-gamma, PLCB2 and IP3, to ultimately cause a release of calcium (Ca2+) from intracellular stores. Calcium activates a so-called transient-receptor-potential cation channel TRPM5 that leads to membrane depolarization and the consequent release of ATP across a channel of CALHM1 and CALHM3.\nThe ATP released by the \"Type II\" cell is detected by P2X receptors on nearby afferent gustatory nerve fibers and P2Y receptors on adjacent taste cells. P2X appears to be indispensable for the transduction of umami, so this is probably the main route for umami signals. \"Type III\" cells, which directly connect to the nerve synapses, also respond to the released ATP by releasing neurotransmitters. One of these neurotransmitters, serotonin, regulates the release of ATP by the type II cells.\nmGluR1 and mGluR4.\nSignal from these two receptors are conveyed in a manner independent of TRPM5. Single umami-sensitive fibres in mice are mostly either \"sucrose-best\" or \"glutamate-best\". Within each type there are two subtypes: one shows synergistic activation between monopotassium glutamate and inosine monophosphate, the other does not. The TAS1R1/3 + TRPM5 route uses the \"sucrose-best\" fibers with synergy, while mGluR1 and mGluR4 use both of the \"glutamate-best\" subtypes.\nBeyond the tongue.\nThe gut has its own umami taste receptors. The ATP taste signals are conveyed to the brain, probably through afferent branches of the vagus nerve or the afferent sensory nerves in the mouth. The brain uses this information to regulate behaviors and preferences in mice. This is an example of the gut-brain axis.\nIn other animals.\nCats have mutations in Tas1r1 and Tas1r3 that cause their receptor to not perceive glutamate and aspartate as umami. However, their receptor responds to nucleotide, and some L-amino acids enhance the response to nucleotides. Cats probably perceive tuna as very umami due to it being rich in inosine monophosphate and L-histine.\nThe Tas1r1-Tas1r3 receptor of mice is activated by a wide range of free L-amino acids, but not acidic ones such as glutamate.\nThe lineage of aquatic mammals including dolphins and sea lions have no functional Tas1r1, and neither do giant pandas. They cannot generate a functional Tas1r1-Tas1r3 receptor as a result.\nConsumers and safety.\nUmami is used as a flavor by food manufacturers trying to improve the taste of low sodium offerings. Adding umami to food may reduce the need for salt because umami enhances the perception of saltiness without compromising flavor. Chefs create \"umami bombs\", which are dishes made of several umami ingredients like fish sauce. Umami may account for the long-term formulation and popularity of ketchup. \nThe United States Food and Drug Administration has designated the umami enhancer monosodium glutamate (MSG) as a safe ingredient. While some people identify themselves as sensitive to MSG, a study commissioned by the FDA was only able to identify transient, mild symptoms in a few of the subjects, and only when the MSG was consumed in unrealistically large quantities. There is also no apparent difference in sensitivity to umami when comparing Japanese and Americans.\nBackground of other taste categories.\nThe five basic tastes (saltiness, sweetness, bitterness, sourness, and savoriness) are detected by specialized taste receptors on the tongue and palate epithelium. The number of taste categories in humans remains under research, with a sixth taste possibly including spicy or pungent.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "62463", "revid": "47794171", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62463", "title": "Susan May Williams", "text": "American heiress\nSusan May Williams Bonaparte (April 2, 1812 \u2013 September 15, 1881) was an American heiress and the wife of J\u00e9r\u00f4me Napol\u00e9on Bonaparte, a French-American nephew of Napol\u00e9on I, Emperor of France and a Baltimore lawyer and landowner. \nBiography.\nSusan was the daughter of Benjamin Williams, a native of Roxbury, Massachusetts, who became a prominent Baltimore merchant; and his wife, Sarah Copeland, widow of Nathaniel Morton. In 1827, Williams helped found the Baltimore and Ohio Railroad, the first railroad company in the United States, in response to the opening of the Erie Canal and its competition with the port of Baltimore.\nIn November 1829, Susan married J\u00e9r\u00f4me Napoleon Bonaparte, the son of Elizabeth Patterson, an American socialite, and J\u00e9r\u00f4me Bonaparte; their marriage had been annulled after three years on the orders of Napol\u00e9on himself so that his brother could make a more advantageous marriage. J\u00e9r\u00f4me Napoleon, who had graduated from Harvard but found he preferred raising horses to working in law, soon became interested in Susan and the $200,000 fortune she had inherited. According to his uncle Henry Patterson, the match was purely mercenary on Bonaparte's part. The groom's maternal grandfather, William Patterson, one of the wealthiest men in Maryland, made the financial arrangements for the marriage and gave the couple Montrose Mansion as a wedding gift. Their wedding was conducted in secret behind the back of his mother, who was away in Europe at the time and hoping for an aristocratic match for her son; Susan and Elizabeth Patterson Bonaparte never successfully reconciled after this rift. \nTheir sons were the soldier Jerome Napoleon Bonaparte II (1830-1893) and the lawyer and government official Charles Joseph Bonaparte (1851-1921).\nGeneral Lew Wallace described Susan as:...staunchly Union, a tall, handsome, black-eyed, Franco-American woman, decidedly masculine in mind, but true to her woman's place\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "62464", "revid": "40993790", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62464", "title": "Medford", "text": "Medford may refer to:\nTelevision.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "62465", "revid": "44062", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62465", "title": "Milford", "text": "Milford may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "62466", "revid": "399540", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62466", "title": "New Milford", "text": "New Milford may refer to:\nWales.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n Topics referred to by the same termThis page lists articles about distinct geographical locations with the same name. "}
{"id": "62467", "revid": "11308236", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62467", "title": "Newington", "text": "Newington may refer to several places:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n Topics referred to by the same termThis page lists articles about distinct geographical locations with the same name. "}
{"id": "62468", "revid": "44920675", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62468", "title": "New Haven (disambiguation)", "text": "New Haven is a coastal city in the U.S. state of Connecticut.\nNewhaven is a port town in East Sussex, England.\nNew Haven or Newhaven may also refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "62475", "revid": "82432", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62475", "title": "Gimli", "text": "Gimli may refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "62477", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62477", "title": "Oslo accords", "text": ""}
{"id": "62478", "revid": "891752300", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62478", "title": "Francois Mitterand", "text": ""}
{"id": "62480", "revid": "17859592", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62480", "title": "Mackinac Island", "text": "Island in Michigan, United States\nMackinac Island ( , ; ; ; ) is an island and resort area, covering in land area, in the U.S. state of Michigan. The name of the island in Odawa is Michilimackinac and \"Mitchimakinak\" in Ojibwemowin, meaning \"Great Turtle\". It is located in Lake Huron, at the eastern end of the Straits of Mackinac, between the state's Upper and Lower Peninsulas. The island was long home to an Odawa settlement and previous indigenous cultures before European colonization began in the 17th century. It was a strategic center of the fur trade around the Great Lakes. Based on a former trading post, Fort Mackinac was constructed on the island by the British during the American Revolutionary War. It was the site of two battles during the War of 1812 before the northern border was settled and the US gained this island in its territory.\nIn the late 19th century, Mackinac Island became a popular tourist attraction and summer colony. Many of the structures on the island have undergone extensive historical preservation and restoration. Because of its historic significance, the entire island is listed as a National Historic Landmark. It is well known for numerous cultural events; a wide variety of architectural styles, including the Victorian-era Grand Hotel; and its ban on almost all motor vehicles, with exceptions only for city emergency vehicles (ambulance, police cars and fire trucks), city service vehicles and snowmobiles in winter. More than 80\u00a0percent of the island is preserved as Mackinac Island State Park.\nEtymology.\nLike many historic places in the Great Lakes region, Mackinac Island's name derives from a Native American language, in this case Ojibwe language. The Anishinaabe peoples in the Straits of Mackinac region likened the shape of the island to that of a turtle, so they named it \"Mitchimakinak\" () \"Big Turtle\". Andrew Blackbird, an official interpreter for the U.S. government and son of an Odawa chief, said the island was known locally after a tribe that had lived there. The French transliterated the word and spelled it as Michilimackinac. The British shortened it to the present name: \"Mackinac.\" Michillimackinac is also spelled as Mishinimakinago, M\u01d0sh\u01d0ma\u201bk\u01d0nung, Mi-shi-ne-macki naw-go, Missilimakinak, Teiodondoraghie, and in Ojibwe syllabics: \u14a5\u1511\u14a5\u146d\u14c8\u1483.\nThe Menominee traditionally lived in a large territory of extending from Wisconsin to the Upper Peninsula of Michigan. Historic references include one by Father Frederic Baraga, a Slovenian missionary priest in Michigan, who in his 1878 dictionary wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"Mishinimakinago;\" pl.\"-g.\"\u2014This name is given to some strange Indians (according to the sayings of the Otchipwes [Ojibwe]), who are rowing through the woods, and who are sometimes heard shooting, but never seen. And from this word, the name of the village of \"Mackinac\", or \"Michillimackinac\", is derived.\n\"Maehkaenah\" is the Menominee word for turtle. In his 1952 book \"The Indian Tribes of North America\", John Reed Swanton recorded under the \"Wisconsin\" section: \"Menominee,\" a band named \"Misi'nim\u00e4k Kimiko Wini'niwuk, 'Michilimackinac People,' near the old fort at Mackinac, Mich.\"\nIn an early written history of Mackinac Island (1887) by Andrew Blackbird, the Odawa historian, he describes that a small independent tribe called \"Mi-shi-ne-macki naw-go\" once occupied Mackinac Island. They became confederated with the Ottawa from Ottawa Island (now Manitoulin Island), situated north of Lake Huron. One winter the Mi-shi-ne-macki naw-go on Mackinac Island were almost entirely annihilated by the Seneca people from western New York, who were one of the Five Nations of the Iroquois Confederacy. Only two of the local natives escaped by hiding in one of the natural caves at the island. To commemorate the losses of this allied tribe, the Ottawa named what is now Mackinac Island as \"Mi-shi-ne-macki-nong.\" In 1895 John R. Bailey, the doctor at Fort Mackinac, published a history entitled \"Mackinac formerly Michilimackinac,\" describing some of the earliest French traders on Mackinac. They reportedly arrived in 1654 with a large party of Huron and Ottawa heading to Three Rivers; another visitor was an adventurer making a canoe voyage in 1665.\nHistory.\nPrehistoric.\nArchaeologists have excavated prehistoric fishing camps on Mackinac Island and in the surrounding areas. Fishhooks, pottery, and other artifacts establish a Native American presence at least 700 years before European exploration, around AD\u00a0900. The island is a sacred place in the tradition of some of its earliest known inhabitants, the Anishinaabe peoples. They consider it to be home of the Gitche Manitou, or the \"Great Spirit.\" According to legend, Mackinac Island was created by the Great Hare, Michabou, and was the first land to appear after the Great Flood receded. The island was a gathering place for the local tribes, who made offerings to Gitche Manitou. It became the burial place of tribal chiefs.\nThe first European likely to have seen Mackinac Island is Jean Nicolet, a French-Canadian coureur des bois, during his 1634 explorations. The Jesuit priest Claude Dablon founded a mission for the Native Americans on Mackinac Island in 1670, and stayed over the winter of 1670\u201371. The missionary and explorer Jacques Marquette succeeded him, moving the mission to St. Ignace soon after his arrival in the region in the fall of 1671. With the mission as a focus, the Straits of Mackinac quickly became an important French fur trading location. The British took control of the Straits after the French and Indian War and Major Patrick Sinclair chose the bluffs of the island for Fort Mackinac in 1780.\n\"The Jesuit Relations\" (1671) contains a long description of Mackinac Island:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe \"Relations\" also indicate the tremendous strategic importance of Michilimackinac/Mackinac Island as \n\"the central point for all travel on the upper Great Lakes, and for a vast extent of wilderness and half-settled country beyond\" to First Nations and Europeans (prior to the arrival of railroads). The tribes which had inhabited Mackinac Island had been driven away by the Iroquois, leaving the island practically deserted until 1670. The Huron people from Lake Superior, in fear of the Sioux, retreated to the shore north of Mackinac Island. Here Marquette continued his missionary labors with them at the site of the present St. Ignace. The 1688 memoir of Jacques-Ren\u00e9 de Brisay de Denonville, Marquis de Denonville, claimed that the French had inhabited the area since 1648. A small French garrison was sent there some time between 1679 and 1683.\nThe name of Michilimackinac (later abbreviated to Mackinac) was applied generally to the entire vicinity, as well as specifically to the post at St. Ignace. Later still it was applied to the fort and mission established on the south side of the Straits of Mackinac.\nAlthough the British built Fort Mackinac to protect their settlement from attack by French-Canadians and native tribes, the fort was never attacked during the American Revolutionary War. The entire Straits area was officially acquired by the United States through the Treaty of Paris (1783). However, Britain kept forces in the Great Lakes area until after 1794, when the Jay Treaty between the nations established U.S. sovereignty over the Northwest Territory.\nNineteenth century to present.\nDuring the War of 1812, the British captured the fort in the siege of Fort Mackinac, the first battle of the conflict. The Americans were caught by surprise, not knowing that war had been declared. The victorious British attempted to protect their prize by building Fort George on the high ground behind Fort Mackinac. In 1814, the Americans and British fought a second battle on the north side of the island. The American second-in-command, Major Andrew Holmes, was killed and the Americans failed to recapture the island. The federal fur trade station at Mackinac, which had been established by the United States government in 1808, was then taken over by the British.\nBy the Treaty of Ghent of 1815, the British returned the island and surrounding mainland to the U.S. The United States reoccupied Fort Mackinac, and renamed Fort George as \"Fort Holmes\" after Major Holmes. The fort remained under control of the United States government until 1895. It provided volunteers to defend the Union during the American Civil War, and was used as a prison for three Confederate States of America sympathizers.\nJohn Jacob Astor's American Fur Company was centered on Mackinac Island after the War of 1812 and exported beaver pelts for 30 years. By the middle of the nineteenth century, commercial fishing for common whitefish and lake trout began to replace the fur trade as the island's primary industry. As sport fishing became more popular in the 1880s, hotels and restaurants accommodated tourists coming by train or lake boat from Detroit.\nBetween 1795 and 1815, a network of M\u00e9tis settlements and trading posts was established throughout what is now the U.S. states of Michigan and Wisconsin and to a lesser extent in Illinois and Indiana. As late as 1829, the M\u00e9tis were dominant in the economy of present-day Wisconsin and Northern Michigan. Many M\u00e9tis families are recorded in the U.S. Census for the historic M\u00e9tis settlement areas along the Detroit and St. Clair rivers, Mackinac Island and Sault Ste. Marie, Michigan, as well as Green Bay in Wisconsin. Many prominent mixed-race families, such as the Mitchell family of Mackinac, were formed in the late 18th- and early 19th-century fur trading era. The M\u00e9tis have generally not organized as an ethnic or political group in the United States as they have in Canada, where they had armed confrontations in an effort to secure a homeland.\nFollowing the Civil War, the island became a popular tourist destination for residents of major cities on the Great Lakes. Much of the federal land on Mackinac Island was designated as the second national park, spearheaded by the efforts of Dr. John R. Bailey, Mackinac National Park, in 1875, three years after Yellowstone National Park was named as the first national park. This was thanks to U.S. Senator Thomas W. Ferry, who was born on the Island and lobbied for the park. To accommodate an influx of tourists in the 1880s, the boat and railroad companies built hotels, including the Grand Hotel. Island residents established souvenir shops to profit from the tourist trade. Many wealthy business magnates built summer \"cottages\" along the island's bluffs for extended stays.\nWhen the federal government left the island in 1895, it transferred all of the federal land, including Fort Mackinac, to the state of Michigan and this area was designated as Michigan's first state park. The Mackinac Island State Park Commission, appointed to oversee the island, has restricted private development in the park. Leaseholders are required to maintain the island's distinctive Victorian architecture.\nMotor vehicles were restricted at the end of the nineteenth century because of concerns for the health and safety of the island's residents and horses after local carriage drivers complained that automobiles startled their horses. This ban continues to the present, with exceptions only for city emergency vehicles (ambulance, police cars and fire trucks), city service vehicles, state park vehicles, and snowmobiles in winter. Thus, some controversy ensued in 2019 when Vice President Mike Pence was permitted to bring a motorcade to the island.\nDemographics.\nAccording to the 2020 United States census, the island has a year-round population of 583. The population grows considerably during the summer from tourists and seasonal workers. Hotels, restaurants, bars and retail shops hire hundreds of seasonal workers to accommodate the tens of thousands of visitors that visit the island between May 1st and October 31.\nGeography.\nMackinac Island is located in Lake Huron at the eastern end of the Straits of Mackinac, between the state's Upper and Lower Peninsulas. It is about in circumference and in total area. The highest point of the island is the historic Fort Holmes (originally called Fort George by the British before 1815), which is above lake level and above sea level.\nGeology.\nMackinac Island was formed as the glaciers of the last ice age began to melt around 13,000\u00a0BC. The bedrock strata that underlie the island are much older, dating to Late Silurian and Early Devonian time, about 400 to 420 million years ago. Subsurface deposits of halite (rock salt) dissolved, allowing the collapse of overlying limestones; these once-broken but now solidified rocks comprise the Mackinac Breccia. The melting glaciers formed the Great Lakes, and the receding lakewaters eroded the limestone bedrock, forming the island's steep cliffs and rock formations. At least three previous lake levels are known, two of them higher than the present shore: Algonquin-level lakeshores dating to about 13,000 years ago and the Nipissing-level shorelines formed 4,000 to 6,000 years ago. During an intermediate period of low water between these two high-water stages, the Straits of Mackinac shrank to a narrow gorge that discharged its water over Mackinac Falls, located just east of the island (beyond Arch Rock), into Lake Huron.\nAs the Great Lakes assumed their present levels, the waterfall was inundated and Mackinac Island took on its current size. The steep cliffs were one of the primary reasons for the British army's choice of the island for a fortification. Their decision differed from that of the French army, which had built Fort Michilimackinac about 1715 near present-day Mackinaw City. The limestone formations are still part of the island's appeal. One of the most popular geologic formations is Arch Rock, a natural limestone arch, 146\u00a0feet (45\u00a0m) above the ground. Other popular geologic formations include Devil's Kitchen, Skull Cave, and Sugar Loaf.\nNature.\nMackinac Island contains a wide variety of terrain, including fields, marshes, bogs, coastline, boreal forest, and limestone formations. The environment is legally preserved on the island by the State Historic Park designation. About half of the shoreline and adjacent waters off Mackinac Island, including the harbor (Haldimand Bay) and the southern and western shore from Mission Point to Pointe aux Pins, is protected as part of the Straits of Mackinac Shipwreck Preserve, a state marine park.\nAs it is separated from the mainland by 3\u00a0miles (4.8\u00a0km) of water, few large mammals inhabit the island, except those that traverse the ice during the winter months. Rabbits, fox, raccoons, otters, mink, gray and red squirrels, and chipmunks are all common, as are the occasional beaver and coyote. Bats are abundant on the island, as it has numerous caves that serve as dwellings for them and a large insect population for the bats to prey on.\nThe island is frequented by migratory birds on their trips between their summer and winter habitats, as it lies on a major migration route. Eagles and hawks are abundant in April and May, while smaller birds such as yellow warblers, American redstart, and indigo bunting are more common in early summer. Near the shoreline, gulls, herons, geese, and loons are common. Owls, including snowy owls and great grey owls, come to the island from the Arctic to hunt in the warmer climate. Other birds, such as chickadees, cardinals, blue jays, and woodpeckers, live on the island year-round. Toads have also been found.\nMackinac Island contains over 600 species of vascular plants. Flowering plants and wildflowers are abundant, including trillium, lady slippers, forget-me-nots, violets, trout lily, spring beauty, hepatica, buttercups, and hawkweeds in the forests and orchids, fringed gentian, butter-and-eggs, and jack-in-the-pulpit along the shoreline. The island's forests are home to many varieties of trees, such as maple, birch, elm, cedar, pine, and spruce.\nMedia.\nThe island's newspaper is the \"Mackinac Island Town Crier\". It has been owned and operated by Wesley H. Maurer Sr. and his family since 1957 as training for journalism. It is published weekly from May through September and monthly during the rest of the year.\nTransportation.\nThe island can be reached by private boat, by ferry, by small aircraft and, in the winter, by snowmobile over an ice bridge. The airport has a paved runway, and daily charter air service from the mainland is available. In the summer tourist season, ferry service is available from Shepler's Ferry and Mackinac Island Ferry Company (formerly Star Line) to shuttle visitors to the island from St. Ignace and Mackinaw City.\nMotorized vehicles have been prohibited on the island since 1898,\nwith the exception of city emergency vehicles (ambulance, police cars and fire trucks), city service vehicles and snowmobiles during winter. Travel on the island is either by foot, bicycle, horse or horse-drawn carriage. Roller skates and roller blades are also allowed, except in the downtown area. Bicycles, roller skates/roller blades, carriages, and saddle horses are available for rent.\nAn road follows the island's perimeter, and numerous roads, trails and paths cover the interior. M-185, the United States' only state highway without motorized vehicles, makes a circular loop around the island, closely hugging the shoreline.\nMackinac Island State Park covers approximately 80\u00a0percent of the area of the island and includes Fort Mackinac, as well as portions of the island's historic downtown and harbor. No camping is allowed on the island, but numerous hotels and bed and breakfasts are available.\nThe downtown streets are lined with many retail stores and restaurants.\nArchitecture.\nMost of the buildings on Mackinac Island are built of wood, a few are of stone, and most have clapboard siding. The architectural styles on the island span 300 years, from the earliest Native American structures to the European-American styles of the 19th century.\nThe earliest structures were built by the Anishinaabe and Ojibwe (also called Chippewa in the United States) tribes before European exploration. At least two buildings still exist from the original French settlement of the late 18th century. Mackinac Island has the only example of northern French rustic architecture in the United States, and one of few survivors in North America.\nMackinac Island also contains examples of Federalist, Colonial, and Greek Revival styles. Given its rise as a tourist destination in the late nineteenth century, many of the island's structures were built in the later style of the Victorian era, which includes Gothic Revival, Stick style, Italianate, Second Empire, Richardson Romanesque and Queen Anne styles. The most recent architectural styles date from the late 19th century to the 1930s and include the Colonial and Tudor Revival.\nPoints of interest.\nAll of Mackinac Island was listed as a National Historic Landmark in October 1960. In addition, because of the island's long history and preservation efforts starting in the 1890s, eight separate locations on the island, and a ninth site on adjacent Round Island, are listed in the United States National Register of Historic Places. In 2022 \"Travel + Leisure\" named Mackinac Island the best island in the continental U.S. to visit.\nCulture.\nEvents.\nMackinac Island is home to many cultural events, including an annual show of American art from the Masco collection of 19th-century works at the Grand Hotel. Five art galleries operate on the island.\nSince 1949, the island's residents have been celebrating the island's native lilacs with an annual spring 10-day festival. It culminates in a parade of horse-drawn vehicles, which has been recognized as a local legacy event by the Library of Congress.\nThe July 20, 2019, running of the Port Huron to Mackinac Boat Race was the 95th such annual event, with 202 sailboats registered in the 204-nautical mile-race from Port Huron to the island. The race was reported to have continued over the years in spite of wars and economic depressions. A similar sailboat race from Chicago to the island, most recently held on July 22 to 25, 2023, was the 114th event in the Chicago Yacht Club Race to Mackinac, with 266 sailboats competing.\nThe island is a destination for many regionally and nationally proclaimed conferences, including the Mackinac Policy Conference.\nAnother special event that Mackinac island is known for is the Mackinac Island Fudge Festival which takes place in August. Phil Porter wrote a book called \"Fudge: Mackinac's Sweet Souvenir\" which explains how fudge became such a popular treat in Mackinac. After the fur trade, this island became a summer vacationing spot. The visitors began to associate sweets with the island. It originally started when Native Americans began collecting maple sugar but in the 1800s the Murdick family created the first real candy store. The world faced sugar rations in the first half of the 20th century due to the Great Depression and wars that were taking place. The fudge shops in the island had very little business, but the Murdick family did not give up hope. They would use fans to send the scent of their fudge out into the community to draw in customers. In later years, major interstates were created and made Mackinac Island well known to many. Mackinac Island\u2019s visitors became known as \"fudgies\" because their main reason to travel to the island was for their famous fudge. Although fudge was not invented on the island, it is a very popular treat that people would travel from all over to devour.\nEpona, the Gallo-Roman Horse Goddess, is celebrated each June on Mackinac Island with stable tours, a blessing of the animals and the Epona and Barkus Parade. Mackinac Island does not permit personal automobiles; the primary source of transportation remains the horse, so celebrating Epona has special significance on this island. The \"Feast of Epona\" involves the blessing of horses and other animals by a local churchman.\nScout Service Camp.\nEvery summer, Mackinac Island accommodates several Michigan Boy Scouts and Girl Scouts and their leaders over alternate weeks. These scouts serve the state park as the Mackinac Island Governor's Honor Guard. The program began in 1929, when the State Park Commission invited eight Eagle Scouts, including Gerald Ford, later President of the United States, to the island.\nIn 1974, the program was expanded by Governor William Milliken to include Girl Scouts. The program is popular, selective, and a long-standing tradition. Scouts raise and lower twenty-seven flags on the island, serve as guides, and complete volunteer service projects during their stay. These Scouts live in the Scout Barracks behind Fort Mackinac.\nSailing.\nMackinac Island is the destination for two sailing races. The island has a sailing club, the Mackinac Island Yacht Club. It serves as the finish line for both the Port Huron to Mackinac Race and the Chicago Yacht Club Race to Mackinac. The races are run a week apart, in July. They are both among the longest freshwater sailing races in the world and attract over 500 boats and 3,500 sailors combined. Both races are historical events, having been run every year since the 1920s.\nFilm and television.\nThe swimming pool at the Grand Hotel is named for Esther Williams, who starred in the 1947 film \"This Time for Keeps.\" This featured many scenes filmed on Mackinac Island.\nThe majority of the 1980 film \"Somewhere in Time\" was filmed at Mission Point on Mackinac Island. Several landmarks are visible in the film, including the Grand Hotel and the lighthouse on nearby Round Island. The film's director said he needed to \"find a place that looked like it hadn't changed in eighty years.\"\nMackinac Island was featured on two episodes of the mid-2000s TV series \"Dirty Jobs.\" Host Mike Rowe interviewed a Mackinac Bridge maintenance worker, and a horse manure and garbage removal/composting collector.\nIn the Netflix show Emily in Paris season 2, episode 6, Emily says that she went on a Vespa fudge tour with her mom around Mackinac Island when she was younger; however in real life Vespas aren't allowed on Mackinac Island.\nNotable people.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "62482", "revid": "10049", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62482", "title": "Henri Philippe Petain", "text": ""}
{"id": "62484", "revid": "48036122", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62484", "title": "231 BC", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 231 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Matho and Maso (or, less frequently, year 523 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 231 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy place.\nRoman Republic.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "62485", "revid": "28920063", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62485", "title": "232 BC", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 232 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Lepidus and Melleolus (or, less frequently, year 522 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 232 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy topic.\nPhilosophy.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "62486", "revid": "48464842", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62486", "title": "233 BC", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 233 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. It was formerly known as the Year of the Consulship of Verrucosus and Matho (or, less frequently, year 521 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 233 BC has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "62487", "revid": "163732", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62487", "title": "234 BC", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 234 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Albinus and Ruga (or, less frequently, year 520 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 234 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy place.\nChina.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "62488", "revid": "4796325", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62488", "title": "235 BC", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 235 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Torquatus and Bulbus (or, less frequently, year 519 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 235 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy topic.\nLiterature.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "62489", "revid": "49294195", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62489", "title": "236 BC", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 236 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Caudinus and Varus (or, less frequently, year 518 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 236 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy place.\nSri Lanka.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "62490", "revid": "28481209", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62490", "title": "237 BC", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 237 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Caudinus and Flaccus (or, less frequently, year 517 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 237 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy place.\nChina.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "62491", "revid": "47974794", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62491", "title": "238 BC", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 238 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Gracchus and Falto (or, less frequently, year 516 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 238 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy place.\nPersia.\nAsia Minor\nChina.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "62492", "revid": "10951369", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62492", "title": "239 BC", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 239 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Turrinus and Falto (or, less frequently, year 515 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 239 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy place.\nKorea.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "62493", "revid": "3105931", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62493", "title": "240 BC", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 240 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Centho and Tuditanus (or, less frequently, year 514 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 240 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "62495", "revid": "36188177", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62495", "title": "242 BC", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 242 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Catulus and Albinus (or, less frequently, year 512 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 242 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy place.\nChina.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "62496", "revid": "42867806", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62496", "title": "243 BC", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 243 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Fundulus and Galus (or, less frequently, year 511 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 243 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy place.\nChina.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "62497", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62497", "title": "244 BC", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 244 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Atticus and Blaesus (or, less frequently, year 510 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 244 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy place.\nChina.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "62498", "revid": "6104108", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62498", "title": "245 BC", "text": "Calendar year\n \nThe year 245 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Buteo and Bulbus (or, less frequently, year 509 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 245 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "62499", "revid": "1297567119", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62499", "title": "247 BC", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 247 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Metellus and Buteo (or, less frequently, year 507 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 247 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy place.\nChina.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "62500", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62500", "title": "248 BC", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 248 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. In the Roman Republic at the time it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Cotta and Geminus (or, less frequently, year 506 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 248 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy place.\nIndia.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "62501", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62501", "title": "251 BC", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 251 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Metellus and Pacilus (or, less frequently, year 503 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 251 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy place.\nChina.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "62502", "revid": "44926615", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62502", "title": "252 BC", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 252 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Cotta and Geminus (or, less frequently, year 502 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 252 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy place.\nGreece.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "62503", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62503", "title": "253 BC", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 253 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Caepio and Blaesus (or, less frequently, year 501 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 253 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy place.\nGreece.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "62504", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62504", "title": "254 BC", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 254 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Asina and Calatinus (or, less frequently, year 500 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 254 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy place.\nRoman Republic.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "62505", "revid": "6941696", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62505", "title": "257 BC", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 257 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Regulus and Blasio (or, less frequently, year 497 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 257 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\n* The State of Chu and the State of Wei send armies to assist Zhao against the Qin, and they defeat the Qin army of Wang He outside Handan. This forces Wang He to lift the siege.\n* The Qin general Bai Qi is executed for his refusal to take command of the siege.\nBy place.\nVietnam.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "62506", "revid": "6941696", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62506", "title": "258 BC", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 258 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Calatinus and Peterculus (or, less frequently, year 496 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 258 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy place.\nVietnam.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "62507", "revid": "1073120545", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62507", "title": "259 BC", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 259 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Scipio and Florus (or, less frequently, year 495 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 259 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy place.\nChina.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "62508", "revid": "45023027", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62508", "title": "261 BC", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 261 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Flaccus and Crassus (or, less frequently, year 493 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 261 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy place.\nChina.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "62509", "revid": "615903", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62509", "title": "262 BC", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 262 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Valerius and Otacilius (or, less frequently, year 492 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 262 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy place.\nSeleucid Empire.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "62510", "revid": "6104108", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62510", "title": "263 BC", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 263 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Mesella and Crassus (or, less frequently, year 491 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 263 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "62511", "revid": "1073128383", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62511", "title": "265 BC", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 265 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Gurges and Vitulus (or, less frequently, year 489 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 265 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy topic.\nArts &amp; sciences.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "62512", "revid": "50370574", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62512", "title": "Willie Mays", "text": "American baseball player (1931\u20132024)\nWillie Howard Mays Jr. (May 6, 1931 \u2013 June 18, 2024), nicknamed \"the Say Hey Kid\", was an American professional baseball center fielder who played 23 seasons in Major League Baseball (MLB). Widely regarded as one of the greatest players of all time, Mays was a five-tool player who began his career in the Negro leagues, playing for the Birmingham Black Barons, and spent the rest of his career in the National League (NL), playing for the New York / San Francisco Giants and New York Mets.\nBorn in Westfield, Alabama, Mays was an all-around athlete. He joined the Black Barons of the Negro American League in 1948, playing with them until the Giants signed him upon his graduation from high school in 1950. He debuted in MLB with the Giants and won the Rookie of the Year Award in 1951 after hitting 20 home runs to help the Giants win their first pennant in 14 years. In 1954, he won the NL Most Valuable Player (MVP) Award, leading the Giants to their last World Series title before their move to the West Coast. His over-the-shoulder catch in Game 1 of the 1954 World Series is one of the most famous baseball plays of all time. After the Giants moved to San Francisco, Mays went on to win another MVP Award in 1965 and also led the Giants to the 1962 World Series, this time losing to the New York Yankees. He ended his career with a return to New York after an early season trade to the New York Mets in 1972, retiring after the team's trip to the 1973 World Series. He served as a coach for the Mets for the rest of the decade before rejoining the Giants as a special assistant to the president and general manager.\nMays was an All-Star 24 times, tying for the second-most appearances in history. He led the NL in home runs four times and in slugging percentage five times while batting over .300 and posting 100 runs batted in (RBI) ten times each. Mays was also at the forefront of a resurgence of speed as an offensive weapon in the 1950s, leading the league in stolen bases four times, triples three times, and runs twice; his 179 steals during the decade topped the major leagues. He was the first NL player to hit 30 home runs and steal 30 bases in the same season, the first player in history to reach both 300 home runs and 300 stolen bases, and the second player and the first right-handed hitter to hit 600 home runs. Mays also set standards for defensive brilliance, winning 12 consecutive Gold Glove Awards after their creation in 1957, still a record for outfielders; he led NL center fielders in double plays five times and assists three times.\nA classic example of a five-tool player, Mays finished his career with a .301 batting average. At the time of his retirement, he held the NL record for career runs scored (2,062), and ranked second in league history behind Stan Musial in games played (2,992), third in home runs (660), at bats (10,881), runs batted in (1,903), total bases (6,066), extra-base hits (1,323) and walks (1,464), fourth in hits (3,293), fifth in slugging percentage (.557), and eighth in doubles (523); his 140 triples ranked fourth among players active after 1945. He holds major league records for games as a center fielder (2,829), putouts as an outfielder (7,095), and ended his career behind only Ty Cobb in total games as an outfielder (2,842), ranking seventh in assists (188) and third in double plays (59) in center field. Mays was elected to the Baseball Hall of Fame in 1979 in his first year of eligibility, and was named to the Major League Baseball All-Century Team in 1999. Mays was awarded the Presidential Medal of Freedom by President Barack Obama in 2015.\nEarly life.\nWillie Howard Mays Jr. was born on May 6, 1931, in Westfield, Alabama, a primarily black company town near Fairfield. His father, Cat Mays, was a talented baseball player with the black team at the local iron plant. Annie Satterwhite, his mother, was a gifted high school basketball and track star. To his family and close friends, and later to his teammates, Mays was affectionately referred to as \"Buck.\"\nHis parents never married and separated when Mays was three. His father and two aunts, Sarah and Ernestine raised him. Sarah took young Willie to an African Methodist Episcopal Church every Sunday. Cat Mays worked as a railway porter and later at the steel mills in Westfield.\nCat exposed Willie to baseball at an early age, playing catch with him at five and allowing him to sit on the bench with his Birmingham Industrial League team at ten. His favorite baseball player growing up was Joe DiMaggio; other favorites were Ted Williams and Stan Musial. Mays played several sports at Fairfield Industrial High School. On the basketball team, he led players at all-black high schools in Jefferson County in scoring. Mays played quarterback, fullback and punter for the football team. Though he turned 18 in 1949, Mays did not graduate from Fairfield until 1950, which journalist Allen Barra calls \"a minor mystery in Willie's life\".\nProfessional career.\nNegro and minor leagues.\nMays's professional baseball career began in 1948 when he played briefly during the summer with the Chattanooga Choo-Choos, a Negro minor league team. Later that year, Mays joined the Birmingham Black Barons of the Negro American League, where he was known as \"Buck\". The Black Barons were managed by Piper Davis, a teammate of Mays's father on the industrial team. When Fairfield Industrial principal E. T. Oliver threatened to suspend Mays for playing professional ball, Davis and Mays's father worked out an agreement. Mays would only play home games for the Black Barons. In return, he could still play high school football. Mays helped Birmingham advance to the 1948 Negro World Series, which they lost 4\u20131 to the Homestead Grays. He hit .262 for the season and stood out because of his excellent fielding and base running. On May 28, 2024, Major League Baseball announced that it had integrated Negro league statistics into its records.\nSeveral major league teams were interested in signing Mays, but they had to wait until he graduated from high school to offer him a contract. The Boston Braves and the Brooklyn Dodgers both scouted him, but New York Giants scout Eddie Montague signed him to a $4,000 contract. Mays spent the rest of 1950 with the Class B Trenton Giants of the Interstate League, batting .353 with 20 doubles, eight triples, four home runs and 55 RBI in 81 games. Promoted to the Triple-A Minneapolis Millers of the American Association in 1951, he batted .477 with 18 doubles, eight home runs and 30 RBI in 35 games.\nNew York / San Francisco Giants (1951\u20131952, 1954\u20131972).\nNL Rookie of the Year.\nPlaying excellent defense, Mays was called up by the Giants on May 24, 1951. Initially, Mays was reluctant to accept the promotion because he did not believe he was ready to face major league pitchers. Stunned, Giants manager Leo Durocher called Mays directly and said, \"Quit costing the ball club money with long-distance phone calls and join the team.\" It was also around this time that Mays was given his famous moniker: \"The Say Hey Kid\".\nThe Giants hoped Mays would help them defensively in center field, as well as offensively. The Polo Grounds featured an unusual horseshoe shape, with relatively short left field () and right field () lines but the deepest center field in baseball (). Mays appeared in his first major league game on May 25 against the Philadelphia Phillies at Shibe Park, batting third. He had no hits in his first 12 at bats in the major leagues, but in his 13th on May 28, he hit a home run off Warren Spahn over the left-field roof of the Polo Grounds. Mays went hitless in his next 12 at bats, and Durocher dropped him to eighth in the batting order on June 2, suggesting that Mays stop trying to pull the ball and just make contact. Mays responded with four hits over his next two games on June 2 and 3. By the end of the month, he had pushed his batting average to over .300. He would bat close to .290 for the rest of the season. Although his .274 average, 68 RBIs, and 20 home runs (in 121 games) would rank among the lowest totals of his career, he still won the National League (NL) Rookie of the Year Award.\nOn August 11, the Giants found themselves &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;13+1\u20442 games back of the Dodgers in the NL pennant race; Brooklyn manager Charlie Dressen triumphantly predicted, \"The Giants is dead.\" However, the Giants went 40\u201318 in the season's final 58 games, winning their last seven of the year to finish the regular season tied with the Dodgers. During the pennant race, Mays's fielding and strong throwing arm were instrumental in several important Giants' victories. Mays was in the on-deck circle on October 3 when Bobby Thomson hit a three-run homer to win the three-game NL tie-breaker series 2\u20131.\nThe Giants met the New York Yankees in the 1951 World Series. In Game 1, Mays, Hank Thompson, and Monte Irvin composed the first all-black outfield in major league history. For the series, Mays hit poorly as the Giants lost the series in six games. In Game 5, he hit a consequential fly ball, which DiMaggio and Yankee rookie Mickey Mantle pursued. DiMaggio called Mantle off at the last second; as he stopped, Mantle got his cleat stuck in an open drainpipe, suffering a knee injury that would affect him the rest of his career.\nU.S. Army.\nSoon after the 1951 season ended, Mays learned the United States Army had drafted him to serve in the Korean War. Before he left to join the Army, Mays played the first few weeks of the 1952 season with the Giants. He batted .236 with four home runs and 23 RBI in 34 games. He surprised sportswriters like Red Smith when he drew cheers from fans of the Brooklyn Dodgers, the Giants' archrivals, in his last game before reporting.\nAfter his induction into the Army on May 29, Mays reported to Fort Eustis in Virginia, where he spent much of his time playing for the Fort Eustis Wheels military baseball team with (and against) other major and minor leaguers, as well as serving as an athletic instructor in the Physical Training Department. It was at Fort Eustis that Mays learned the basket catch from fellow Fort Eustis outfielder Al Fortunato. Mays, by his own estimation, played 180 games for the Wheels, and missed about 275 games for the Giants because of his military service. Mays' time playing for the Wheels ended on July 28, 1953, after he chipped a bone in his left foot while sliding into third base, necessitating a six-week stint in a cast. Discharged on March 1, 1954, he reported to Giants' spring training camp the following day.\nWorld Series champion and NL MVP.\nMays began the 1954 season on Opening Day with a home run of over against Carl Erskine. After he batted .250 in his first 20 games, Durocher moved him from third to fifth in the batting order and again encouraged him to stop attempting to pull the ball and try to get hits to right field. Mays changed his batting stance and stood straighter at the plate, keeping his feet closer together. He credited these adjustments with improving his batting average, as he batted .450 with 25 RBI in his next 20 games. On June 25, he hit an inside-the-park home run in a 6\u20132 victory over the Chicago Cubs. Mays was selected for the NL All-Star team; he would be part of 24 straight NL All-Star teams over 20 seasons. Mays became the first player in history to hit 30 home runs before the All-Star Game. He had 36 home runs through July 28. Around that time, Durocher asked him to stop trying to hit them, explaining the team wanted him to reach base more often. Mays hit only five home runs after July 28 but upped his batting average from .326 to .345 to win the team's first batting title since Bill Terry's in 1930. Hitting 41 home runs, Mays won the NL Most Valuable Player Award and the Hickok Belt.\nThe Giants won the NL pennant and the 1954 World Series, sweeping the Cleveland Indians in four games. The 1954 series is perhaps best remembered for \"The Catch\", an over-the-shoulder running grab by Mays of a long drive off the bat of Vic Wertz about from home plate at the Polo Grounds during the eighth inning of Game 1. The catch prevented two Indians runners from scoring, preserving a tie game. \"The Catch transcended baseball\", Barra wrote, and Larry Schwartz of ESPN said that of all the catches that Mays made, \"it is regarded as his greatest\". Mays did not even look at the ball for the last twenty feet as he ran, saying later he realized he had to keep running if he was going to get the ball. The Giants won the game in the 10th inning on a three-run home run by Dusty Rhodes, with Mays scoring the winning run.\nMays added base stealing to his talents, upping his total from eight in 1954 to 24 in 1955. In the middle of May, Durocher asked him to try for more home runs. Mays led the league with 51 but finished fourth in NL MVP voting. Leading the league with a .659 slugging percentage, Mays batted .319 as the Giants finished in third. During the last game of the season, Durocher, who had supported Mays since his career had begun, told him he would not be returning as the Giants manager. When Mays responded, \"But Mr. Leo, it's going to be different with you gone. You won't be here to help me,\" Durocher told his star, \"Willie Mays doesn't need help from anyone.\"\nNew manager.\nIn 1956, Mays struggled at first to get along with new manager Bill Rigney, who publicly criticized him. The center fielder grew particularly annoyed after Rigney fined him $100 for not running to first base on a pop fly that was caught by the catcher. He hit 36 homers and stole a career-high 40 bases, becoming only the second player to join the 30\u201330 club. Though his RBI (84) and batting average (.296) were his lowest for nearly a decade, Barra observed that \"Willie Mays was still the best all-around player in the National League.\"\nThe relationship between Mays and Rigney improved in 1957. Rigney stopped giving Mays as much direction, trusting his star player's ability and instinct. In his 2010 authorized biography of Mays, James S. Hirsch wrote Mays had \"one of his most exhilarating excursions\" on April 21. In the game against the Phillies, Mays reached second base on an error, stole third, and scored the winning run on a Hank Sauer single, all on plays close enough that he had to slide to make each one. He stole home in a 4\u20133 loss to the Cubs on May 21. The 1957 season was the first in which the Gold Glove Awards were presented. Mays won the first of 12 consecutive Gold Gloves for his play in center field. He finished in the NL's top-five in a variety of offensive categories: runs scored (112, third) batting average (.333, second), and home runs (35, fourth). In 1957, Mays became the fourth player in major league history to join the 20\u201320\u201320 club (doubles, triples, homers). He stole 38 bases that year, making him the second 20\u201320\u201320 club member (after Frank Schulte in 1911) to steal at least 20 bases. This gave him his second straight 30\u201330 club season.\nDwindling attendance and the desire for a new ballpark prompted the Giants to move to San Francisco following the 1957 season. In the final Giants' home game at the Polo Grounds on September 29, 1957, fans gave Mays a standing ovation in the middle of his final at bat, after Pirates' pitcher Bob Friend had already thrown a pitch to him.\nMove to San Francisco.\nIn 1958, Rigney wanted Mays to challenge Babe Ruth's record of 60 home runs in a season. Consequently, Rigney did not play Mays much in spring training hoping to use his best hitter every day of the regular season. As he had in 1954, Mays vied for the NL batting title until the final game of the season. Moved to the leadoff slot the last day to increase his at bats, Mays collected three hits in the game to finish with a career-high .347, but Philadelphia's Richie Ashburn batted .350. Mays shared the inaugural NL Player of the Month award with Stan Musial in May, batting .405 with 12 home runs and 29 runs batted in; he won a second award in September (.434, four home runs, 18 RBI). He played in 152 games, batting .347 with 29 home runs and 96 RBI.\nHorace Stoneham, the Giants' owner, made Mays the highest-paid player in baseball with a $75,000 contract for 1959. Mays had his first serious injury in 1959, a collision with Sammy White in spring training that resulted in 35 stitches in his leg, but he was ready by the start of the season. Against the Reds in August, Mays broke a finger but kept it a secret to prevent opposing pitchers from targeting it. In September 1959, the Giants led the NL pennant race by two games with only eight games to play, but a sweep by the Dodgers began a stretch of six losses in those final games, dooming them to a third-place finish. Mays had hits in three out of 10 at bats in the Dodger series but some San Francisco fans still booed him. In 1959, Mays batted .313 with 34 home runs and 104 RBI in 151 games, leading the league in stolen bases (27) for the fourth year in a row.\nAfter spending their first two years in San Francisco at Seals Stadium, the Giants moved into the new Candlestick Park in 1960. Initially, the stadium was expected to be conducive to home runs, but unpredictable winds affected Mays's power, and he hit only 12 at home in 1960. He found the stadium tricky to field but figured out how to play it as the season progressed. When a fly ball was hit, he would count to five before giving pursuit, enabling him to judge the wind's effect. He hit two home runs on June 24 and stole home in a 5\u20133 victory over the Cincinnati Reds. On September 15, he tied an NL record with three triples in an 11-inning, 8\u20136 win over the Phillies. \"I don't like to talk about 1960,\" Mays said after the final game of a season in which the Giants, pre-season favorites for the pennant, finished fifth out of eight NL teams. For the second time in three years, he hit 29 home runs while leading the NL with 190 hits. He also drove in 103 runs, batting .319 with 25 stolen bases.\nAlvin Dark was hired to manage the Giants before the start of the 1961 season, and the improving Giants finished in third place. Mays had one of his best games on April 30, 1961, hitting four home runs and driving in eight runs against the Milwaukee Braves at County Stadium. According to Mays, he had been unsure if he would even play because of food poisoning. Each of his home runs traveled over . While Mantle and Roger Maris pursued Babe Ruth's single-season home run record in the AL, Mays and Orlando Cepeda battled for the home run lead in the NL. Mays trailed Cepeda by two home runs at the end of August (34 as opposed to 36), but Cepeda outhit him 10\u20136 in September to finish with 46, while Mays finished with 40. Mays led the league with 129 runs scored and batted .308 with 123 RBI in 154 games.\n1962 pennant race.\nThough he had continued to play at a high level since coming to San Francisco, Mays endured booing from the San Francisco fans during his first four seasons in California. Barra speculates this may have been because San Francisco fans were comparing Mays unfavorably with Joe DiMaggio, the most famous center fielder ever to come from San Francisco. Hal Wood mentioned the DiMaggio theory, as well as two other explanations: 1) the fans had heard so many wonderful things about Mays's play in New York that they expected him to be a better player than he actually was, and 2) Mays tended to keep to himself. Mays said in 1959 that he did not mind the booing, but he admitted in a 1961 article that the catcalls were bothering him. Whatever the reason, the boos, which had begun to subside after Mays's four\u2013home-run game in 1961, grew even quieter in 1962, as the Giants enjoyed their best season since moving to San Francisco.\nMays led the team in eight offensive categories in 1962: runs (130), doubles (36), home runs (49), RBI (141), stolen bases (18), walks (78), on-base percentage (.384), and slugging percentage (.613). He finished second in NL MVP voting to Maury Wills, who had broken Ty Cobb's record for stolen bases in a season. On September 30, Mays hit a game-winning home run in the Giants' final regularly scheduled game of the year, forcing the team into a tie for first place with the Los Angeles Dodgers. The Giants faced the Dodgers in a three-game playoff series. With the Giants trailing 4\u20132 in the top of the ninth inning of Game 3, Mays hit an RBI single, eventually scoring as the Giants took a 6\u20134 lead. With two outs in the bottom of the inning, Lee Walls hit a fly ball to center field, which Mays caught for the final out as the Giants advanced to the World Series against the Yankees.\nIn Game 1 of the World Series, a 6\u20132 loss to New York, Mays recorded three hits. He would bat merely .250 in the series overall. The Series went all the way to a Game 7, which the Yankees led 1\u20130 in the bottom of the ninth inning. Matty Alou led off the inning with a bunt single but was still at first two outs later when Mays came up with the Giants one out from elimination. Batting against Ralph Terry, he hit a ball into the right-field corner that might have been deep enough to score Alou, but Giants third base coach Whitey Lockman opted to hold Alou at third. The next batter, McCovey, hit a line drive that was caught by Bobby Richardson, and the Yankees won the deciding game 1\u20130. It was Mays's last World Series appearance as a Giant. Mays reveled in the fact that he had finally won the support of San Francisco fans; \"It only took them five years,\" he later said.\nRecord-setting contract.\nBefore the 1963 season, Mays signed a contract worth a record-setting $105,000 per season (). On July 2, when Spahn and Juan Marichal each threw 15 scoreless innings, Mays hit a 16th-inning home run off Spahn, giving the Giants a 1\u20130 victory. He considered the home run one of his most important, along with his first and the four-home-run game. In August, he won his third NL Player of the Month Award after batting .387 with eight home runs and 27 RBI. He hit his 400th home run on August 27 against the St. Louis Cardinals, the tenth player to reach that mark. Mays finished the 1963 season batting .314 with 38 home runs and 103 RBI, stealing only eight bases, his fewest since 1954.\nNormally the third batter in the lineup, Mays was moved to fourth in 1964 before returning to third in subsequent years. On May 21, Dark named Mays the Giants' captain, making Mays the first African-American captain of an MLB team. \"You deserve it,\" Dark told Mays. \"You should have had it long before this.\" Against the Phillies on September 4, Mays made what Hirsch called \"one of the most acrobatic catches of his career\". Rub\u00e9n Amaro Sr. hit a ball to the scoreboard at Philadelphia's Connie Mack Stadium. Mays, who had been playing closer to home plate than normal, ran at top speed after the ball. He caught it in midair and had to kick his legs forward to keep his head from hitting the ballpark's fence, but he held on to the ball. While he batted under .300 (.296) for the first time since 1956, he led the NL with 47 home runs and ranked second with 121 runs scored and 111 RBI in 157 games.\nSecond NL MVP.\nA torn shoulder muscle sustained in a 1965 game against the Atlanta Braves impaired Mays's ability to throw. He kept the injury a secret from opposing players, making two or three practice throws before games to discourage them from running on him. On August 22, Mays acted as a peacemaker during a 14-minute brawl between the Giants and Dodgers after Marichal had bloodied Dodgers catcher John Roseboro with a bat. Mays grabbed Roseboro by the waist and helped him off the field, then tackled Lou Johnson to keep him from attacking an umpire. Johnson kicked him in the head and nearly knocked him out. After the brawl, Mays hit a game-winning three-run home run against Sandy Koufax, but he did not finish the game, feeling dizzy after the home run.\nMays won his fourth and final NL Player of the Month award in August 1965 (.363, 17 home runs, 29 RBI). On September 13, he hit his 500th career home run off Don Nottebart, becoming the fifth player to reach the mark. Warren Spahn, off whom Mays hit his first career home run, was now his teammate. After the home run, Spahn asked him, \"Was it anything like the same feeling?\" Mays replied, \"It was exactly the same feeling. Same pitch, too.\" The next night, Mays hit one that he considered his most dramatic. With the Giants trailing the Houston Astros by two runs with two outs in the ninth, Mays swung and missed at Claude Raymond's first two pitches, took three balls to load the count, and fouled off three pitches before homering on the ninth pitch. The Giants won 6\u20135 in 10 innings. Mays won his second MVP award in 1965 behind a career-high 52 home runs, in what Barra said \"may very well have [been] his best year\". He batted .317, leading the NL in on-base percentage (.400) and slugging percentage (.645). The span of 11 years between his MVP awards was the longest gap of any major leaguer who attained the distinction more than once, as were the 10 years between his 50 home run seasons. He scored 118 runs, the 12th year in a row he had scored at least 100 runs in a season.\nMays tied Mel Ott's NL record of 511 home runs on April 24, 1966, against the Astros. After that, he went for nine days without a home run. \"I started thinking home run every time I got up,\" Mays explained the slump. He finally set the record May 4. Despite nursing an injured thigh muscle on September 7, Mays reached base in the 11th inning of a game against the Dodgers with two outs, then attempted to score from first base on a Frank Johnson single. On a close play, umpire Tony Venzon initially ruled him out, then changed the call when he saw Roseboro had dropped the ball after Mays collided with him. San Francisco won 3\u20132. Mays finished third in the NL MVP voting, the ninth and final time he finished in the top five in the voting for the award. He batted .288 with 99 runs scored, 37 home runs, and 103 RBI in 152 games; by season's end, only Babe Ruth had hit more home runs (714 to 542).\nPlayer of the Decade.\nMays had 13 home runs and 44 RBI through his first 75 games of 1967 but then went into a slump. On June 7, Gary Nolan of the Cincinnati Reds struck him out four times; this was the first time in his career this had happened, though the Giants still won the game 4\u20133. Afflicted by a fever on July 14, Mays left that day's game after the sixth inning because of fatigue and spent five days in a hospital. \"After I got back into the lineup, I never felt strong again for the rest of the season,\" he recalled. In 141 games, Mays hit .263 with 83 runs scored, 128 hits, and 22 home runs. He only drove in 70 runs for the year, the first time since 1958 he had failed to reach 100.\nBefore a game in Houston on May 6, 1968, Astros owner Roy Hofheinz presented Mays with a 569-pound birthday cake for his 37th birthday\u2014the pounds represented every home run Mays had hit in his career. After sharing some of it with his teammates, Mays sent the rest to the Texas Children's Hospital. He played 148 games and upped his batting average to .289, accumulating 84 runs scored, 144 hits, 23 home runs, and 79 runs batted in. In 1969, new Giants' manager Clyde King moved Mays to the leadoff position in the batting lineup because Mays was hitting fewer home runs. Mays privately chafed at the move, later comparing it to \"O. J. Simpson blocking for the fullback\". He injured his knee in a collision with catcher Randy Hundley on July 29, forcing him to miss several games. On September 22, he hit his 600th home run, saying later, \"Winning the game was more important to me than any individual achievements.\" In 117 games, he batted .283 with 13 home runs and 58 RBI.\nThe \"Sporting News\" named Mays the 1960s \"Player of the Decade\" in January 1970. In an April game, Mays collided with Bobby Bonds while reaching his glove over the wall but made a catch to rob Bobby Tolan of a home run. Mays picked up his 3,000th hit against the Montreal Expos on July 18. \"I don't feel excitement about this now,\" he told reporters afterwards. \"The main thing I wanted to do was help Gaylord Perry win a game.\" In 139 games, Mays batted .291 with 94 runs scored, 28 home runs, and 83 RBI. He scheduled his off days that season to avoid facing strikeout pitchers such as Bob Gibson or Tom Seaver.\nLater years with the Giants.\nThough center field remained his primary position in 1971, Mays played 48 games at first base. He got off to a fast start in 1971, the year he turned 40. Against the Mets on May 31, he hit a game-tying eighth-inning home run, saved multiple runs with his defense at first base, and performed a strategic base-running maneuver with one out in the 11th inning, running slowly from second to third base to draw a throw from Tim Foli and allow Al Gallagher to reach first safely. Evading Foli's tag on the return throw to third, Mays scored the winning run on a sacrifice fly. He had 15 home runs and a .290 average at the All-Star break but faded down the stretch, only hitting three home runs and batting .241 for the rest of the year. One reason he hit so few home runs was that Mays walked 112 times, 30 more times than he had at any point in his career. This was partly because Willie McCovey, who often batted behind Mays in the lineup, missed several games with injuries, causing pitchers to pitch carefully to Mays so they could concentrate on getting less-skilled hitters out. Subsequently, Mays led the league in on-base percentage (.425) for only the second time, though his 123 strikeouts were a career-high. He finished the season batting .271 with 18 home runs, 61 RBI, and 23 stolen bases in 136 games.\nThe Giants won the NL West in 1971, returning Mays to the playoffs for the first time since 1962. In the NL Championship Series (NLCS) against the Pirates, Mays had a home run and three RBI in the first two games. In Game 3, Mays attempted an unsuccessful sacrifice bunt in a 1\u20131 tie in the sixth with no outs and Tito Fuentes on second base, a move that surprised reporters covering the game. The Giants lost 2\u20131. \"I was thinking of the best way to get the run in,\" Mays explained the bunt, pointing out that McCovey and Bonds were due up next. The Giants lost the series in four games. After the season, Mays was honored as the winner of the inaugural Roberto Clemente Award, known at that time as the Commissioner's Award.\nMays got off to a tortuous start to the 1972 season, batting .184 with 3 RBI through his first 19 games. Before the season began, he had asked Stoneham for a 10-year contract with the Giants organization, intending to serve in an off-the-field capacity with them once his playing career was over. The Giants organization was having financial troubles, and Mays had to settle for a two-year, $330,000 contract. Mays quibbled with manager Charlie Fox, leaving the stadium before the start of a doubleheader on April 30 without telling him.\nNew York Mets (1972\u20131973).\nOn May 11, 1972, Mays was traded to the New York Mets for pitcher Charlie Williams and an undisclosed amount rumored to be $100,000. The Mets agreed to keep his salary at $165,000 a year for 1972 and 1973, promising to pay Mays $50,000 a year for 10 years after he retired.\nMays had remained popular in New York, and owner Joan Payson had long wanted to bring him back to his major league roots. In his Mets debut against the Giants on May 14, Mays put New York ahead to stay with a fifth-inning home run, receiving ecstatic applause from the fans at Shea Stadium. Mays appeared in 69 games for the Mets in 1972, batting .267 with eight home runs and 19 RBI.\nIn 1973, Mays showed up a day late to spring training, then left in the middle of it without notifying manager Yogi Berra beforehand. He was fined $1,000 upon returning; a sportswriter joked half the fine was for leaving, half was for returning. Things did not improve as the season began; Mays spent time on the disabled list early in the year and left the park before a game when he found out Berra had not put his name in the starting lineup. His speed and powerful arm in the outfield, assets throughout his career, were diminished in 1973, and he only made the All-Star team because of a special intervention by NL President Chub Feeney. However, the Mets won the NL East.\nOn August 17, 1973, Mays hit his final (660th) home run against the Reds' Don Gullett. Having considered retirement all year, Mays finally told the Mets officially on September 9 that 1973 would be his last season. He made the announcement to the public on September 20. \"I thought I'd be crying by now,\" he told reporters and Mets' executives at a press conference that day, \"but I see so many people here who are my friends, I can't...Baseball and me, we had what you might call a love affair.\" Five days later, the Mets honored him on Willie Mays Night, proclaimed by New York City mayor John Lindsay, where he thanked the New York fans and said goodbye to baseball. In 66 games, Mays batted a career-low .211 with six home runs and 25 RBI.\nAgainst the Reds in the NLCS, Mays helped restore order in Game 3 after Mets fans began throwing trash at Pete Rose following a brawl Rose had started with Bud Harrelson. Game 5 was the only one Mays played; he had a pinch-hit RBI single as the Mets won 7\u20132, clinching a trip to the 1973 World Series against the Oakland Athletics, October 13\u201321. A shoulder injury to Rusty Staub prompted the Mets to shift Don Hahn to right field and start Mays in center at the start of the Series. He stumbled four times in the first two games, including a fielding error in Game 2 that allowed the Athletics to tie the game and force extra innings. Mays's last hit came later in the same game, an RBI single against Rollie Fingers that snapped a 7\u20137 tie in the 12th inning of a 10\u20137 victory. The final game of his career was Game 3, on October 16, 1973, in which he pinch-hit for Tug McGraw in the 10th inning of a tied game and grounded into a force play in his final major league at-bat. The Mets went on to lose the game in 11 innings and ultimately lost the series in seven games.\nAll-Star Games.\nMays's 24 appearances on an All-Star Game roster are tied with Musial for second all-time, behind only Hank Aaron's 25. He \"strove for All-Star glory\" according to Hirsch, taking the game seriously in his desire to support his NL teammates. In the first All-Star Game of 1959, Mays hit a game-winning triple against Whitey Ford; Bob Stevens of the \"San Francisco Chronicle\" wrote that \"Harvey Kuenn gave it honest pursuit, but the only center fielder in baseball who could have caught it hit it.\"\nMays scored the winning run in the bottom of the 10th inning of the first All-Star Game of 1961 on a Clemente single in a 5\u20134 win for the NL. At Cleveland Stadium in the 1963 All-Star Game, he made the finest catch, snagging his foot under a wire fence in center field as he grasped a long fly ball hit by Joe Pepitone that might have given the AL the lead. The NL won 5\u20133, and Mays was named the All-Star Game MVP.\nWith a leadoff home run against Milt Pappas in the 1965 All-Star Game, Mays set a record for most hits in his All-Star Games (21). Mays led off the 1968 All-Star Game with a single, moved to second on an error, advanced to third base on a wild pitch, and scored the only run of the game when McCovey hit into a double play; for his contributions, Mays won the All-Star Game MVP Award for the second time.\nMays individually holds the records for most at bats (75), hits (23), runs scored (20), and stolen bases (six) by an All-Star; additionally, he is tied with Musial for the most extra-base hits (eight) and total bases (40), and he is tied with Brooks Robinson for the most triples (three) in All-Star Game history. In appreciation of his All-Star records, Ted Williams said, \"They invented the All-Star Game for Willie Mays.\"\nCareer overall.\nNote: Includes statistics for the 1948 Birmingham Black Barons season.\nStatistics and achievements.\nSource:\nIn 33 postseason games, including the 1948 Negro World Series, 4 World Series (1951, '54, '62, and '73) and the 1971 and 1973 NLCS, Mays batted .248 (29-for-117) with 17 runs scored, six doubles, one home run, 15 RBI, three stolen bases, and 17 walks.\nBarnstorming.\nDuring the first part of his career, Mays often participated in barnstorming tours after his regular season with the Giants ended. Teams of star players would travel from city to city playing exhibition games for local fans. Following his rookie year, Mays went on a barnstorming tour with an All-Star team assembled by Campanella, playing in Negro League stadiums around the southern United States. From 1955 through 1958, Mays led Willie Mays' All-Stars, a team composed of such stars as Irvin, Thompson, Hank Aaron, Frank Robinson, Junior Gilliam, Brooks Lawrence, Sam Jones, and Joe Black. The team traveled around the southern United States the first two years, attaining crowds of about 5,000 in 1955 but drawing less than 1,000 in 1956, partly because of the advent of television. In 1957, the team went to Mexico, Puerto Rico, and the Dominican Republic, drawing 117,766 fans in 15 games, 14 of which were won by Mays's team. They played 20 games in Mexico in 1958.\nMays did not lead a team in 1959; Stoneham wanted him to rest because he was suffering from a broken finger. In 1960, Mays also did not barnstorm, but he and the Giants did go to Tokyo, playing an exhibition series of 16 games against the Yomiuri Giants. Though teams of black All-Stars assembled those two seasons, they drew fewer fans and opted not to assemble in 1961, when Mays again decided not to barnstorm. The tradition soon died out, as the expansion of the major leagues, the increased televising of major league games, and the emergence of professional football had siphoned interest away from the offseason exhibition games.\nPlayer profile.\nThe batting stance Mays employed showed the influence of one of his childhood favorites, Joe DiMaggio. Like his hero, Mays would stand with his legs spread apart, placing the same amount of weight on both while holding the bat high. His right thumb would stick out in the air as he waited for pitches, but he wrapped it around the bat as he swung. Mays believed this late motion added power when he swung. Mays channeled his energies into the swing by abstaining from extra motion and opening his hips. \"If there was a machine to measure each swing of a bat,\" Branch Rickey suggested, \"it would be proven that Mays swings with more power and bat speed, pitch for pitch, than any other player.\" His focus extended to his antics, or lack thereof, at the plate; Mays did not rub dirt on his hands or stroll around the batter's box like some hitters did. Naturally more of a pull hitter, Mays adjusted his style in 1954 to hit more to right and center field in a quest for a higher batting average at his manager's request, but the change was not permanent. When the Giants moved to Candlestick Park, Mays found that pulling the ball worked better at home but hitting to right and center worked better on the road; he tried to adjust his style depending on where he was playing.\nDefensively, Mays was one of the best outfielders of all time, as evidenced by his record 12 Gold Gloves as an outfielder. His signature play was his \"basket catch,\" the technique that displayed Mays's stylistic flash as opposed to the pure raw skill that was on display when he made \"The Catch\" in the 1954 World Series. Holding his glove around his belly, he would keep his palm turned up, enabling the ball to fall right into his glove. Sportswriters have argued about whether the technique made him a better fielder or just made him more exciting to watch, but the basket catch did not prevent Mays from setting a record with 7,095 outfield putouts. Koppett observes, \"His range was limitless, and his arm so strong that he could make effective throws from the most unlikely locations and from the most unlikely body positions.\" That range allowed him to play a shallow center and prevent shallow singles, while still being able to get back and not let extra-base hits get over his head.\nMays's flashy style of play stemmed partly from his days in the Negro leagues. \"We were all entertainers,\" he said, \"and my job was to give the fans something to talk about each game.\" Sometimes he would deliberately slip to the ground for catches to make them look tougher than they really were. Though he was a powerful hitter, he had a knack for stealing bases. He ran the bases daringly, becoming the only modern player to score from first base on a single to left field, and another time scoring from first base on a McCovey bunt (without an error).\nAssessment and legacy.\nOn January 23, 1979, Mays was elected to the National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum in his first year of eligibility. He garnered 409 of the 432 ballots cast (94.68%). Referring to the other 23 voters, \"New York Daily News\" columnist Dick Young wrote, \"If Jesus Christ were to show up with his old baseball glove, some guys wouldn't vote for him. He dropped the cross three times, didn't he?\" In his induction speech, Mays said:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;What can I say? This country is made up of a great many things. You can grow up to be what you want. I chose baseball, and I loved every minute of it. I give you one word\u2014love. It means dedication. You have to sacrifice many things to play baseball. I sacrificed a bad marriage and I sacrificed a good marriage. But I'm here today because baseball is my number one love.\nIn 1999, Mays placed second on \"The Sporting News\"'s \"List of the 100 Greatest Baseball Players\", trailing only Babe Ruth. Later that year, fans elected him to the Major League Baseball All-Century Team. In 2020, \"The Athletic\" ranked Mays at number 1 on its \"Baseball 100\" list, compiled by sportswriter Joe Posnanski. In 2022, MLB.com writers voted Mays as being the greatest player in Giants franchise history.\nFellow players and coaches recognized his talent. Roberto Clemente said of Mays: \"To me, Willie Mays is the greatest who ever played.\" Willie Stargell learned the hard way how good Mays's arm was when the center fielder threw him out in a game in 1965. \"I couldn't believe Mays could throw that far. I figured there had to be a relay. Then I found out there wasn't. He's too good for this world.\" \"If somebody came up and hit .450, stole 100 bases and performed a miracle in the field every day, I'd still look you in the eye and say Willie was better,\" Durocher said. \"All I can say is that he is the greatest player I ever saw, bar none,\" was Rigney's assessment. When Mays was the only player elected to the Hall of Fame in 1979, Duke Snider, who finished second in voting that year, said, \"Willie really more or less deserves to be in by himself.\" Don Zimmer remarked, \"In the National League in the 1950s, there were two opposing players who stood out over all the others \u2014 Stan Musial and Willie Mays. ... I've always said that Willie Mays was the best player I ever saw. ... [H]e could have been an All-Star at any position.\" Teammate Felipe Alou said, \"[Mays] is number one, without a doubt. ... [A]nyone who played with him or against him would agree that he is the best.\" Al Rosen remembered \"...you had the feeling you were playing against someone who was going to be the greatest of all time.\"\nThroughout his career, Mays maintained he did not specifically try to set records, but he ranks among baseball's leaders in many categories. Third in home runs with 660 when he retired, he still ranks sixth as of December 2024. His 2,068 runs scored rank seventh, and his 1,909 runs batted in rank 12th as of December 2024.\nMays batted .301 in his career and his 3,293 hits are the 12th-most of any player as of December 2024. His 2,992 games played are the ninth-highest total of any major leaguer as of June 2021. He stole 338 bases in his career. By the end of his career, Mays had won a Gold Glove Award 12 times, a record for outfielders today (shared by Roberto Clemente). He is baseball's all-time leader in outfield putouts (7,095), and he played 2,842 games as an outfielder, a total exceeded only by Cobb (2,934) and Barry Bonds (2,874). Mays's 24 appearances on an All-Star Game roster are tied with Musial for second all-time, behind only Aaron's 25. He holds individually the All-Star Game records for most at bats (75), hits (23), runs scored (20), and stolen bases (six); additionally, he is tied with Musial for the most extra-base hits (eight) and total bases (40), and he is tied with Brooks Robinson for the most triples (three) in All-Star Game history.\nMays's 156.2 Wins Above Replacement (WAR) ranks fifth all-time, and third among position players (trailing Barry Bonds' 162.8 and Ruth's 162.1). He led NL position players in WAR for 10 seasons, and led the league in on-base plus slugging (OPS) five times, ranking 26th all time with a .941 mark. Sabermetrician Bill James thinks Mays was the best centerfielder of all time, naming him the best in the major leagues in the 1950s and the 1960s. David Schoenfield of ESPN, James and Barra all think he should have won the NL MVP Award at least seven times. \"He was one of the best fielders of all time,\" Schoenfield wrote, noting Mays has the eighth-most fielding runs saved (a sabermetric stat) of all time. Barra claimed in 2004, \"Most modern fans would pick Willie Mays as the best all-around player in the second half of the twentieth century.\" Sportscaster Curt Gowdy said of Mays, \"Willie Mays was the best player I ever saw. He did everything well.\"\nSudden collapses plagued Mays sporadically throughout his career, which occasionally led to hospital stays. He attributed them to his style of play. \"My style was always to go all out, whether I played four innings or nine. That's how I played all my life, and I think that's the reason I would suddenly collapse from exhaustion or nervous energy or whatever it was called.\"\nAt the Pittsburgh drug trials in 1985, former Mets teammate John Milner testified Mays kept a bottle of liquid amphetamine in his locker at Shea Stadium. Milner had never seen Mays use amphetamines, and Mays denied having taken drugs during his career. \"I really didn't need anything,\" Mays said. \"My problem was if I could stay on the field. I would go to the doctor and would say to the doctor, 'Hey, I need something to keep me going. Could you give me some sort of vitamin?' I don't know what they put in there, and I never asked him a question about anything.\" Hirsch wrote \"It would be na\u00efve to think Mays never took amphetamines\" but admits that Mays's amphetamine use has never been proven, calling Mays \"the most famous player who supposedly took amphetamines\".\nCultural effect.\nAlong with Mantle (of the Yankees) and Snider (of the Dodgers), Mays was part of a triumvirate of center fielders from the New York teams of the 1950s who would be elected to the Hall of Fame. The three were often the subject of debates among the New York fans as to who was the best center fielder in the city.\nMays was a popular figure in Harlem, New York's predominantly black neighborhood and the home of the Polo Grounds. Magazine photographers were fond of chronicling his participation in local stickball games with kids, which he played two to three nights a week during homestands until his first marriage in 1956. In the urban game of hitting a rubber ball with an adapted broomstick handle, Mays could hit a shot that measured \"five sewers\" (the distance of six consecutive New York City manhole covers), nearly .\nUnlike other black athletes such as Jackie Robinson, Mays tended to remain silent on racial issues, refraining from public complaints about discriminatory practices that affected him. Robinson once accused him and some of his teammates of not doing enough for the civil rights movement. Hank Aaron wished Mays had spoken out more on racial issues. Mays believed his job was to play baseball, not talk about social issues. \"I'm a ballplayer. I am not a politician or a writer or a historian. I can do best for my people by doing what I do best.\"\nPost-playing career.\nAfter Mays retired as a player, he remained in the New York Mets organization as their hitting instructor until the end of the 1979 season. Mays missed several appointments during these years and was often absent from Mets games. Joe McDonald became the new Mets' general manager in 1975, and at the start of 1976, he terminated the 10-year contract stating the contract with Mays was vague. Mays had six years to go at $50,000 a year for various duties that had recently led to friction and the threat of a lawsuit. Mays irritated by the notification, he then hired a lawyer and appealed to Baseball Commissioner Bowie Kuhn to arbitrate the situation. Kuhn and Mays's lawyer reviewed, and the Mets agreed to keep him, as long as he stayed at home games for at least four innings. During his time with the Mets, Lee Mazzilli learned the basket catch from him.\nIn October 1979, Mays took a job at the Bally's Park Place casino in Atlantic City, New Jersey. While there, he served as a special assistant to the casino's president and as a greeter. After being told by Kuhn that he could not be part of both baseball and a casino, Mays terminated his contract with the Mets, and he was banned from baseball. Kuhn was concerned about gambling infiltrating baseball, but Hirsch points out that Mays's role was merely as a greeter, he was not allowed to place bets at the casino as part of his contract, and the casino did not engage in sports betting. In 1985, less than a year after replacing Kuhn as commissioner, Peter Ueberroth decided to allow Mays to return to baseball. At a press conference with Mays and Mickey Mantle (reinstated from a similar suspension), Ueberroth said, \"I am bringing back two players who are more a part of baseball than perhaps anyone else.\"\nMays was named special assistant to the president and general manager of the Giants in 1986. He signed a lifetime contract with the team in 1993 and helped to muster public enthusiasm for building Pac Bell Park, which opened in 2000. Mays founded a charity, the Say Hey Foundation, which promotes youth baseball. The Giants retired Mays's number 24 in May 1972. Oracle Park, their stadium, is at 24 Willie Mays Plaza. In front of the main entrance is a nine-foot-tall (2.74\u00a0m) statue of Mays, who had a private box at the stadium. When the Giants dedicated a Wall of Fame to their greatest players in 2008, Mays became part of its inaugural class.\nAt a special ceremony during the Mets' 60th anniversary Old-Timer's Game on August 27, 2022, the team announced that, pursuant to a promise Mets' owner Joan Payson had made to Mays when she traded for him in 1972, they were following the Giants in retiring Mays's number 24. Mays became the 14th person (player or manager) to have their number retired by two teams.\nSpecial honors, media appearances.\nMays met with several United States presidents. During Gerald Ford's administration in 1976, he was invited to the White House state dinner honoring Queen Elizabeth II. He was the Tee Ball Commissioner at the 2006 White House Tee Ball Initiative on July 30, 2006, during George W. Bush's presidency. On July 14, 2009, he accompanied Barack Obama to St. Louis aboard Air Force One for that year's All-Star Game. Six years later, Obama honored Mays with the Presidential Medal of Freedom.\nIn September 2017, Major League Baseball renamed the World Series MVP Award the Willie Mays World Series MVP Award. Though Mays never went to college, he was awarded honorary degrees by Yale University, Dartmouth College, and San Francisco State University.\nMays made many appearances on film and television. He made multiple appearances as the mystery guest on the long-running game show \"What's My Line?\" Through a friendship with Tony Owen and Donna Reed, he was able to appear in three episodes of \"The Donna Reed Show\". During the 1960s, he appeared on shows including \"The Dating Game\" and \"Bewitched\". NBC-TV aired an hour-long documentary titled \"A Man Named Mays\" in 1963, telling the story of the ballplayer's life. In 1972, Mays voiced himself in the animated fictional special \"Willie Mays and the Say-Hey Kid\", produced by Rankin/Bass Productions. Charles M. Schulz's comic strip \"Peanuts\" mentioned Mays numerous times. The plot of the \"\" episode \"In the Cards\" (aired 1997, story set in 2373) centers on the son of Captain Sisko (a noted baseball aficionado) attempting to obtain as a gift for his father a vintage 1951 Willie Mays rookie card.\nMany popular songs reference Mays. In 1954, The Treniers recorded their famous song \"Say Hey (The Willie Mays Song)\" in whose recording Mays himself participated. \"Centerfield\" by John Fogerty, which is often played at major and minor league stadiums, mentions Mays, Cobb, and DiMaggio. Another well-known song which mentions Mays is \"Talkin' Baseball (Willie, Mickey &amp; The Duke)\" by Terry Cashman (1981), which refers to the three great New York City center fielders of the 1950s. Furthermore, Mays is mentioned in \u201cI Shall Be Free\u201d by Bob Dylan, released on The Freewheelin\u2019 Bob Dylan in 1963.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"Say Hey (The Willie Mays Song)\"\n\"Say who? Say Willie\"\"Say hey, say who?\"\"Swinging at the plate\"\"Say hey, say who?\"\"Say Willie\"\"That Giants kid is great\"\n \u2014 The Treniers (July 1954)\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"I Shall Be Free\"\n\"Oh, set me down on a television floor\"\"I\u2019ll flip the channel to number four\"\"Out of the shower comes a football man\"\"With a bottle of oil in his hand\"\"Greasy kid stuff\"\"What I want to know, Mr. Football Man, is\"\"What do you do about Willie Mays\"\"Martin Luther King\"\"Olatunji\"\"Whoa-ho\"\n \u2014 Bob Dylan, \"I Shall Be Free\" (May 27, 1963)\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"Centerfield\"\n\"Well, I spent some time in the Mudville Nine\"\"Watchin' it from the bench\"\"You know I took some lumps when the Mighty Casey struck out\"\"So say hey, Willie\"\"Tell Ty Cobb and Joe DiMaggio\"\"Don't say it ain't so\"\"You know the time is now\"\n \u2014 John Fogerty, \"Centerfield\" (January 14, 1985)\nPersonal life.\nMays became the third husband of Marghuerite Wendell Chapman (1926\u20132010) in 1956. The couple adopted a five-day-old baby named Michael in 1959. They separated in 1962 and divorced in 1963, with Marghuerite taking Michael for the majority of the time.\nEight years later, Mays married Mae Louise Allen, a child-welfare worker in San Francisco. Wilt Chamberlain had given Mays her phone number in 1961, and they dated off and on the next several years. In 1997, she was diagnosed with Alzheimer's disease; Mays cared for her until her death on April 19, 2013.\nMays was the godfather of Barry Bonds, whose father, Bobby Bonds, was a friend of his when they were Giants teammates.\nGlaucoma forced Mays to stop driving a car and playing golf after 2005. In 2018, blind sportswriter Ed Lucas wrote that Mays had told him a \"few years ago\" that he had actually gone blind. However, James S. Hirsch wrote in \"The New York Times\" in 2021, on the occasion of his 90th birthday, that his vision was merely \"compromised\" by glaucoma and that he was still able to watch games on television, albeit with difficulty.\nIn 1957, when the New York Giants moved to San Francisco, Mays placed an offer on a home in the exclusive Sherwood Forest neighborhood. The seller refused his offer after neighbors complained about a Black family moving to the area.\nNear the end of his life, Mays resided in Atherton, California, with his personal assistant and a caretaker.\nDeath.\nMays died of heart failure at a care home in Palo Alto, California, on June 18, 2024, at the age of 93. The day before, he had released his final public statement when he said he chose to stay in California and not attend the MLB at Rickwood Field game between the Giants and Cardinals later that week on June 20.\nSeveral politicians and professional athletes paid tribute to Mays, including President Joe Biden and former president Barack Obama, as well as San Francisco mayor London Breed, and California governor Gavin Newsom. Fans also left tributes and paid their respects at Mays' statue outside Oracle Park.\nOn June 20, 2024, during the game at Rickwood Field, the San Francisco Giants wore a patch with \"24\" on it in Mays' honor and his Hall of Fame plaque was brought over to the place where Mays began his career. Michael Mays, his son, spoke before the game and tribute video was played on the video board before the first pitch by Bill Greason, Mays' former teammate in the Negro leagues. The Mets wore a patch for the remainder of the season honoring Mays.\nA public memorial ceremony, led by Giants broadcaster Jon Miller, was held on July 8 at Oracle Park. A number of Mays' former teammates attended the ceremony, and among the speakers were baseball commissioner Rob Manfred, former presidents Bill Clinton and Barack Obama, and former San Francisco mayor Willie Brown. In addition to the tributes, Mays was given final military honors for his service during the Korean War, with two service members playing \"Taps\" before presenting his son, Michael, with an American flag.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBook sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "62513", "revid": "51044206", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62513", "title": "Model United Nations", "text": "Educational simulation of the UN\nModel United Nations (MUN), also known as Model UN, is an educational simulation of the United Nations (UN), in which students represent a country, organization, or individual to analyze and examine diplomatic and international relations processes. During a model UN conference, participants (referred to as \"delegates\") collaborate to simulate decision-making of global issues.\nMUN delegates may engage in research, public speaking, debating, writing, critical thinking, teamwork, and leadership. While MUN is primarily offered as an extracurricular activity, some schools include it in their curriculum as a class. Its objectives include developing an understanding of global issues and encouraging civic engagement.\nStudent delegates usually prepare for conferences by conducting research, drafting position papers, and formulating policy proposals. These documents are discussed and amended during sessions, then lead to the creation of written policies, often called \"resolution papers,\" which are voted on. Awards are often presented to recognize exceptional participants or delegations.\nParticipation in MUN can vary from level to level, with conferences organized to each age group. Students generally attend conferences as part of a delegation from their school or university, though some participate independently.\nHistory.\nModel United Nations began as a series of League of Nations simulations. The first simulation was held at the University of Oxford in November 1921.\nIn 1922, Mir Mahmood, president of the Oxford International Assembly, visited Harvard University and inspired the establishment of the first American International Assembly on January 10, 1923. The Harvard event included fifteen nations and debated issues such as the status of the Island of Rhodes and the international opium trade.\nAfter World War II and the founding of the United Nations in 1945, the simulation of the United Nations replaced the simulation of the League of Nations. The first recorded conference names \"Model United Nations\" took places at Swarthmore college on April 5, 1947, with more than 150 students from 41 colleges simulating a General Assembly discussing topics about atomic-energy control, disarmament, refugee citizenship, and reconstruction of devastated areas. \nAnother early MUN event was held at St. Lawrence University from February 11 to 13, 1949, organized by Dr. Harry Reiff and Otto L. George. Delegates represented regional colleges including Adelphi University, Alfred University, Champlain College, Clarkson University, McGill University, Middlebury College, Potsdam College, Saint Michael's College, and The University of Vermont. The conference continued annually for years, and has since been revived on campus.\nThree of the oldest active conferences in the world were established in the early 1950s. They are Berkeley Model United Nations (BMUN) at Berkeley (1952), Harvard Model United Nations (HMUN) at Harvard (1953), and Model United Nations of the Far West (MUNFW), which has held college-level conferences since 1951. The first was held at Stanford University, where diplomat Ralph Bunche spoke.\nAcademic aspects.\nParticipation in Model UN is intended to develop skills in negotiation, speaking, and communication. Material issues of diplomacy and policy are approached through a quasi-academic process. In addition, crisis committees, which deal with crisis scenarios which can be contemporary or historical, can develop leadership skills and the ability to adapt and deal with unexpected situations. In preparation for a conference, topics are chosen for each committee. Typically, research and background guides are made available by the organizers of a conference. Based on these guides, delegates of each committee are often expected to research and formulate a position for the country or group they represent, and submit a position paper. The purpose of writing a position paper is to familiarize delegates with the substantial topics of debate, encourage academic research and writing, and to enable substantial preparation for conferences.\nProcedures.\nIn order to maintain decorum, Model UN committees use parliamentary procedures derived from Robert's Rules of Order. In addition, the United Nations has spearheaded efforts to introduce new Model UN rules of procedure that are more closely aligned with those used by the actual UN. Since there is no governing body for Model UN, each conference differs in their rules of procedure.\nThe following rules of procedure apply to general MUNs but may not apply to every MUN:\nPoints and motions.\nPoints and motions outline how topics are prioritized, the way resolutions are voted on, and how they facilitate the general flow of debate. Points are used to discuss topics that are outside of substantive debate. They are more personal and do not require a vote. There are several types of points, including a point of information (POI), which is asked after a speech, a point of order, a point of parliamentary inquiry, and a point of personal privilege.\nMotions are used to discuss procedural matters, and they help to further the discussion on a committee topic. A delegate may request the committee as a whole to perform a particular action, such as moving to voting procedure. If a motion is objected to, it may not be entertained at the discretion of the chair. Most motions will require a vote in order to pass; the number of votes required to pass these motions works according to a Quorum \u2013 this is the minimum number of delegates required to make decisions in a committee. The motions used at any given time in a Model UN committee change, according to where the committee is in the flow of debate.\nFlow of debate.\nMost MUN committees follow a flow of debate. This starts with a speakers list, followed by formal/informal debate and then voting procedure. A dais will maintain a list of speakers, and the delegates follow the order written on the 'speaker list'. Delegates may be added to the speaker list by raising their placards or sending a note to the chair. During this time, delegates talk to the entire committee. They make speeches, answer questions, and debate on resolutions and amendments. If there are no other motions, the committee goes back to the speaker list by default.\nFormal/Informal debate includes both moderated and unmoderated caucuses. Caucus is an opportunity to discuss policy ideas. A moderated caucus is more formal and is run by the committee chair; an unmoderated caucus is a time where delegates move around the room and have a more informal discussion on the topic. In both moderated and unmoderated caucuses, the committee enters a recess and suspends its formal rules of procedure. During a moderated caucus, delegates may speak once recognized by the chair, and speeches are typically limited to a shorter duration. Entering a moderated caucus requires a motion followed by a vote. In contrast, an unmoderated caucus allows delegates to engage in informal discussions with other delegates and staff without needing recognition from the chair.\nResolutions.\nA resolution is a legal document that expresses the general opinion of the committee. Once passed, it can be seen as a list of actions that one's committee recommends.\nResolutions are the written compilation of the ideas discussed during debate. They are considered the final results of conversations, writings, and negotiations. Resolutions must go through a draft, approval by the dais, and consequent debate and modification.\nMUN Resolutions are composed of both preambulatory and operative clauses. Preambulatory clauses help to outline the general problems that a resolution will fix, whereas operative clauses suggest possible solutions and help to display solutions in an organized and easily understandable way.\nConference management.\nMUN societies and conferences are run by a group of administrators known as the secretariat. A secretariat is headed by a Secretary-General. Other members of the secretariat could include the Director-General, Under-Secretaries-General and President of General Assembly.\nCommittee dais.\nEach committee usually has a dais that is composed of a chair (also known as moderator or director), one or more vice-chairs and a team of note-passers (also known as pages, runners, security, admins, or similar).\nIn crisis committees, there can also be a crisis staff composed of a crisis director, assistant director, and crisis staffers. These members are responsible for facilitating the back-room portion of a committee.\nLanguages.\nTraditionally, English has been the official and working language of most conferences. However, as Model UN has become more popular around the world, and as conferences in countries such as the United States have sought to appeal to underrepresented minorities (such as the Spanish-speaking community), committees using languages other than English, or which are bilingual, have become common. However, this is still not a mainstream phenomenon, especially in the United States, where most bilingual or Spanish language committees are found only at conferences hosted in Puerto Rico or the Southwest.\nAttire.\nNearly all Model United Nations conferences require delegates to wear Western business attire. Dressing professionally is considered an important way to show respect for the nation, organization, or individual one is representing, as well as for the rest of one's committee. Whilst formal western business attire is standard, there are still many MUNs where it is common for delegates to wear the traditional clothes of the nation they represent, in order to maintain cultural diversity and inclusion. Ultimately, dress code is fully dependent on what the specific conference has listed out in its rules and regulations.\nCommittees.\nModel United Nations conferences regularly simulate the bodies of the United Nations, the European Union, government cabinets, regional bodies such as ASEAN, PNA, as well as corporate boards, NGOs or so-called Press Corps. Idiosyncrasies and fictional committees also exist. Some examples for fantasy and fictional committees include Ministry of Magic and Lord of the Rings. An example for such a special committee that does not have a parallel in the actual United Nations which deals with a crisis is known as a 'crisis committee.' In this committee, a crisis is given to a team of students and the teams must come up with solutions. Crisis committees traditionally focus on a single historical event, but recently, current and future events have been used as well. The event may be fictional or non-fictional.\nCrisis committees.\nCrisis is a specialized form of Model UN where participants emulate a variety of entities, from a board of directors to historical figures. Crisis committees tend to be much smaller in size than their classic counterparts, and revolve around a quickly developing series of events known as a \"crisis.\" Delegates are assigned positions, and must create directives consisting purely of operative actions. This means that rather than solving problems with resolutions, delegates pass directives. While delegates are working to solve the crisis at hand through directives, they are also often tasked with individual objectives that can be achieved with the submission of crisis notes. Delegates may sometimes find out what other committee members have been doing through crisis updates.\nUnlike regular committees, crisis committees have two distinct forums: the in-room and the out-room (also known as the front-room and the back-room, respectively). The in-room consists of delegate activity in the committee, including the usual speaking, while the out-room refers to directives sent to staffers (also known as directors), communication with other crisis committees. Directives can either be written by an individual, several individuals working together, or the whole committee.\nStaffers can update crisis events based partly on a preset direction and partly on interaction from delegates and committees. Crisis committees are also subject to more variation in rules and experimentation than regular committees. One relatively common variant is the \"midnight crisis,\" where delegates attend a committee session at night to respond to an emergency situation. There also may be crisis committees that interact with each other, where resolutions that are written impact debate in other committees.\nOrganization.\nModel United Nations conferences are usually organized by high school clubs or college clubs. Some other model united nations conferences are organized by a group of youth, and not affiliated with any educational institutions, such as EquityMUN.\nModel UN by region and country.\nAlthough Model United Nations originated in the United States, it has since spread across the globe. Because Model UN is decentralized and has grown autonomously around the world, there are significant differences in how MUN is done between regions.\nAfrica.\nBotswana.\nThe majority of MUN conferences held in Botswana are centered around the capital city, Gaborone. Model United Nations events have also happened online, with Youth International Conclave hosting an event to encourage more of the youth to take part. \nNigeria.\nLagos Model United Nations is one of Africa's pioneer MUN Conferences. Set in Lagos, it is the largest MUN Conference in West Africa and attracts over 400 delegates each year. The Conference is hosted by the Faculty of Law, University of Lagos, and simulates up to 10 committees of the United Nations annually. The Conference began in 2016, due to the desire of the founders to organize a conference in Nigeria, after participating in several Model United Nations conferences worldwide, including National Model United Nations and Rome Model United Nations.\nBeyond the simulation of committees, the Conference offers other activities for delegates such as the Sustainable Development Goals (SDG) Workshop and the Idea Fair. The SDG Workshop is promoted as a platform for SDG experts to share their experiences with the delegates, while the Idea Fair is an opportunity for young innovators working on different SDGs to win a cash grant.\nOther countries.\nThe other conferences in Africa include NAIMUN in Marrakesh. Established in August 2012 by a coalition of North African youths, NAIMUN is the largest student-run Model United Nations conference in Africa and the Middle East, with 4 sub-branches in Morocco, Tunisia, Algeria and Egypt.\nAsia-Pacific.\nAfghanistan.\nThe Kabul Model United Nations was established in Kabul in 2012 The objectives are to bring young female and male individuals together to discuss global issues and promote diplomacy, human rights, peace building, and social welfare. Participants include university students up to the age of 30. They come from four or five Afghanistan provinces to develop critical thinking and public speaking skills.\nAustralia.\nModel United Nations conferences in Australia are typically separated into tertiary and high school levels. At the high school level, the large majority of model United Nations events are organized by the various state and territory branches of UN Youth Australia through the Evatt competition or UN Youth various conferences and summits, or by the many branches of Rotary Australia.\nBahrain.\nThe Bahrain Universities Model United Nations occurs yearly. It draws more than 200 delegates from local universities and from across the Middle East.\nBangladesh.\nModel United Nations has been practiced in Bangladesh since 2002, when the Model United Nations on Combating Terrorism \u2013 Bangladesh Model United Nations first took place. Since then, plenty of Model United Nations conferences have been held in the country. Model United Nations became a popular simulation in Bangladesh around 2013.\nMUN in Bangladesh grew rapidly after the formation of the first university-based MUN club of the country, Dhaka University Model United Nations Association, in 2011. Dhaka University National Model United Nations (DUNMUN) started in 2012.\nMainland China.\nModel United Nations first came to mainland China in 1995, when the China Foreign Affairs University held the country's first collegiate model United Nations conferences. Arriving in mainland Chinese high schools in 2005, Model UN expanded rapidly. Peking University (PKU) students, after attending Harvard's HMUN, organized the first national model UN conference for high school students in mainland China. PKU's conference was initially backed by UNA-USA, however support was curtailed in 2010 due to the Great Recession.\nBetween 2005 and 2010, national Model United Nations conferences such as those organized by PKU and the rivaling Fudan University in Shanghai drew the best high school students from around the country, who competed for limited spaces. Over time, lesser-known national conferences, as well as regional and even local conferences for high school students, began to develop and gradually spread to cities beyond Beijing and Shanghai.\nMost Model United Nations conferences in mainland China are organized through private or academic enterprises; however, some government-affiliated MUNs have also flourished, and recently, unofficial student-run grassroots conferences have begun to dominate the Chinese MUN scene.\nIndia.\nDelegates from across India attend the Doon School Model United Nations. The Harvard MUN India hosted over 1700 attendees in 2019. Delegates also participate in the I.I.M.U.N. \nIsrael.\nIn 2008, Reichman University established the first United Nations Model Club at the academic level in Israel. Since then, university-level MUN in Israel has grown to include over 10 universities and colleges and is led by the Israeli Model United Nations Association. Some universities hold a yearly conference of their own, such as Tel Aviv University's TLVMUN.\nKuwait.\nThe American Creative Academy Model United Nations (ACAMUN), the American School of Kuwait Model United Nations (ASKMUN), and the Bayan Bilingual School Model United Nations (BBSMUN) are the most popular Model United Nations organizations in the State of Kuwait amongst high schoolers. Comparatively, the American University of Kuwait Model United Nations (AUKMUN) is the leading Model United Nations organization amongst university and collegiate leveled people, with AUKMUN being recognized and well-respected by the United Nations in Kuwait due to the highly regarded submission of a proposal based on climate finance and cap-trade policies written by executive members.\nLebanon.\nModel United Nations has gained significant popularity in Lebanon, particularly through conferences organized by major universities. The Global Classrooms LAU Model United Nations (GCLAUMUN), hosted by the Lebanese American University since 2005, is one of the largest MUN programs in the world, engaging more than 3500 high school and middle school students annually. It includes months of training in diplomacy, negotiation, and public speaking, culminating in a final conference simulating the United Nations. \nAnother notable conference is the American University of Beirut Model UN Conference (Previously known as BEYMUN). AUBMUNC is known for its international outreach, attracting university students from across Lebanon and abroad to discuss global issues through a dynamic and academically rigorous simulation.\nNew Zealand.\nA high number of New Zealand high schools operate their own MUN events, with UN Youth New Zealand functioning as a managing organization. UN Youth NZ also organizes regional and national events, along with Aotearoa Youth Declaration, the Pacific Project, and New Zealand's THIMUN delegation.\nOman.\nIn Oman, a variety of Model United Nations (MUN) conferences are organized annually, both in online and offline formats, providing students with numerous opportunities to engage in debating, diplomacy, and international relations. Among these, the Indian School Muscat Model United Nations (ISMMUN) holds particular significance as the largest school-run MUN conference in the Gulf region.\nPakistan.\nThe first MUN in Pakistan was held in 2006 and since then, the number of MUN conferences in the country has grown, attracting participants from schools, colleges, and universities across the country. Some notable MUNs in Pakistan include the Aitchison College Model United Nations (ACMUN), Youth International Conclave Model United Nations, and Karachi Grammar School Model United Nations (KGSMUN). The Aitchison College Model United Nations Society was established in 2009. Most notably, they won the overall Best Delegation at HMUN China for two years in a row, and for a record third time.\nAnother major conference in Pakistan is the \"Lahore University of Management Sciences Model United Nations\" in Lahore, Pakistan which hosts more than 400 delegates.\nUnited Arab Emirates.\nThe United Arab Emirates Universities Model United Nations occurs yearly. It draws more than 300 delegates from local universities and from across the Middle East. Many schools also have their own MUN conferences, including GMAMUN at Gems Modern Academy, DIAMUN at Dubai International Academy and GFSMUN at GEMS Founders School Dubai.\nDubai International Academy Model United Nations is the largest student led Model United Nations conference in the MENA region, hosting more than 700 delegates from across the world at its annual conference.\nVietnam.\nThere has been an increasing number of conferences, including invitational ones such as UNISMUN, SAMSUN, and many other non-invitational ones. These conferences are often organized by schools or student-led organizations with varying scales and exclusivity. One of the most inclusive Model United Nations conferences in the country is the Vietnam National Model United Nations (VNMUN), open to not only Vietnamese in all parts of the country but also international students studying around the world.\nEurope.\nDenmark.\nMUN is relatively popular in Denmark, with BIGMUN being the largest conference in Scandinavia.\nGermany.\nMUN is popular amongst university and high school students in Germany. Examples include the Model United Nations of Munich (MunoM) since 2004 and the country's largest conference, Oldenburg Model United Nations (OLMUN). Most model United Nations Conferences in Germany debate in the English language. Exceptions to that are high school conferences including the ones organized by (DMUN e.V.) in Stuttgart (MUNBW), Kiel (MUNSH), and Potsdam (MUNBB), as well as the ones organized by (SvEN, Simulation Vereinte Nationen). At the college level, BIMUN/SINUB in Bonn takes place as a multi-lingual conference with live interpretation. The Technical University of Munich's MUNTUM e.V., alongside MUNAM e.V. from Ludvig Maximilian University, organizes IsarMUN, a large annual conference targeted towards University and high-school students across the world.\nEvery year, usually at the end of February, the MUN conference BayernMUN (Engl. BavariaMUN) takes place at the Nuremberg Castle in Nuremberg. Organised by the United Nations Society Nuremberg (UNSN) e. V., BayernMUN welcomes about 150 to 200 pupils and students not only from Bavaria and Germany, but even from abroad, including students from overseas universities.\nThe Netherlands.\nThe largest MUN conference in the Netherlands is The Hague International Model United Nations (THIMUN) conference, which includes over 3500 participants, coming from around 200 schools and 100 countries. Although it is not located near the United Nations Headquarters in New York, it is one of the pioneer model United Nations conferences in the world, since it has been founded in 1968 and located in the International Court of Justice's (ICJ) world city of the Hague. A whole network of conferences is marked by its THIMUN affiliation, a label which describes the universality of the procedures that rule the conference, and make it part of the UN recognized foundation. In 1995, the THIMUN Foundation was accredited as a Non-Governmental Organisation (NGO) associated with the United Nations Department of Public Information. Additionally, THIMUN has established its own conferences' network throughout time: THIMUN Qatar, THIMUN Singapore, THIMUN Online MUN (O-MUN) and THIMUN Latin America conferences have been set up from 2005. \nPortugal.\nThe Iberian Model United Nations (IMUN), held in Lisbon, is the largest MUN in Portugal and one of the largest high school MUN conferences in Europe. IMUN's keynote speakers have included prominent politicians, diplomats, United Nations officials, and rights activists, such as internationally awarded author Richard Zimler, U.S. Ambassador Robert A. Sherman, and President of Portugal Marcelo Rebelo de Sousa.\nSpain.\nMUN first arrived in Spain in 2006 with the organization of the Catalonia Model United Nations (C'MUN) in Barcelona. In 2019 Madrid hosted the Harvard World Model United Nations (WorldMUN), and among the 2,300 participants were 500 Spanish students belonging to 20 different universities. Madrid's bid for WorldMUN was led by the Spanish Alliance for Model United Nations (SAMUN), which reunited the students of the four public universities of Madrid: Complutense University of Madrid, Autonomous University of Madrid, Charles III University of Madrid and King Juan Carlos University.\nNorth America.\nUnited States.\nModel United Nations is popular across the United States, with MUN clubs and conferences being found in every region. However, because Model UN is decentralized and has grown autonomously, there are significant differences in how MUN is done between regions.\nDifferent formats and rules of procedure (ROPs) are followed by different conferences, with prominent formats including THIMUN, HMUN, and UNA-USA.\nSouth America.\nBrazil.\nThe Americas Model United Nations (AMUN) was the first MUN Conference to be held in Latin America, accomplishing 21 years of history in 2018 with the edition \"Bring Walls Down, Build Up Connections\".\nPeru.\nAt the university level, Model United Nations started in Peru in 2006 with the United Nations Studies Circle (CENU), a college team from the University of Lima founded to compete at Harvard National Model United Nations. This team would evolve into a full-scale organization, the Peruvian Association for the Study of the United Nations (AENU Peru for its Spanish acronym), a non-for-profit NGO charged with task of promoting MUN in Peru and creating Peru's first \"National Delegation\", thus creating the Peruvian Universities Debate Team (PU). Starting their new trademark since 2011, PU's has garnered the Best Large Delegation award at Harvard World Model United Nations 2014 held in Brussels, Belgium, and the Best Large Delegation award at Harvard National Model United Nations - Latin America 2017, held in Lima, Peru.\nIn 2014, the Peruvian Debate Society (PDS) was founded by experienced MUN delegates as a new alternative towards competing in Harvard International Relations Council conferences. PDS has achieved the Best Large Delegation award at Harvard National Model United Nations Latin America in 2018. The team won the Best Large Delegation award at the 2018 edition of WorldMUN, held in Panama City. A year later, at WorldMUN 2019 in Madrid, they won an Outstanding Large Delegation award.\nAt high school level, MUN has been a popular extracurricular activity since 2012, with the first high school conference Lima Model United Nations (LiMUN) 2012, followed by Villa Maria Model United Nations (VMMUN) 2015, Newton Model United Nations (NewMUN) 2015, and Carmelitas Model United Nations 2015, being the latter school the host for the first Ivy League Model United Nations Conference Peru (ILMUNC 2016). Each school delegation hosts its own conference, including Lima, Cusco, Arequipa and Piura.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "62516", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62516", "title": "List of French Monarchs", "text": ""}
{"id": "62517", "revid": "43249038", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62517", "title": "Governor of California", "text": "Head of government of the U.S. state of California\nThe governor of California is the head of government of the U.S. state of California. The governor is the commander-in-chief of the California National Guard and the California State Guard.\nEstablished in the Constitution of California, the governor's responsibilities also include submitting the budget, ensuring that state laws are enforced, and making the annual State of the State address to the California State Legislature. The position was created in 1849, the year before California became a state.\nThe governor is now limited to two terms, regardless of whether they are consecutive. The current governor of California is Democrat Gavin Newsom, who was inaugurated on January 7, 2019. Jerry Brown was the longest serving governor in California history, serving from 1975 until 1983, and again from 2011 until 2019.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nResponsibilities.\nAccording to Article 5 of the State Constitution it lists out the Powers &amp; Responsibilities of Office of Governor of California\nGubernatorial elections, oath, and term of office.\nQualifications.\nA candidate for governor must be a U.S. citizen and a registered voter within the state, must not have been convicted of a felony involving bribery, embezzlement, or extortion, and must not have served two terms since November 6, 1990.\nElection and oath of office.\nGovernors are elected by popular ballot and serve terms of four years, with a limit of two terms, if served after November 6, 1990. Governors take the following oath:\nI (Governor) do solemnly swear that I will support and defend the Constitution of the United States and the Constitution of the State of California against all enemies foreign and domestic, that I will bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of the United States and the Constitution of the State of California, that I take this obligation freely without any mental reservation or purpose of evasion and that I will well and faithfully discharge the duties upon which I am about to enter.Governors take office on the first Monday after January 1 after their election.\nGubernatorial removal.\nTwo methods exist to remove a governor.\nImpeachment and removal by the legislature.\nThe governor can be impeached for \"misconduct in office\" by a majority vote of the State Assembly and removed by a two-thirds supermajority vote of the State Senate.\nRecall by the voters.\nPetitions signed by California state voters equal to 12% of the last vote for the office of governor (with signatures from each of five counties equal to 1% of the last vote for governor in the county) can launch a gubernatorial recall election. The voters can then vote on whether or not to recall the incumbent governor, and on the same ballot can vote for a potential replacement. If a majority of the voters in the election vote to recall the governor, then the person who gains a plurality of the votes in the replacement race will become governor.\nOnly two governor recall attempts have ever gained enough signatures to make the ballot in California. The 2003 recall election began with a petition drive that forced Democratic governor Gray Davis into a recall election, which he lost. He was replaced by Republican Arnold Schwarzenegger. It was the first time that a California governor was voted out of office by Recall.\nIn addition to the successful 2003 recall, current governor Gavin Newsom faced a recall election in 2021, which he defeated.\nRelationship with the lieutenant governor.\nThe lieutenant governor of California is separately elected during the same election, not jointly as the running mate of the gubernatorial candidate. As such, California had governors and lieutenant governors of different parties for nearly 27 of the 33 years between 1978 and 2011, whereas previously, this had only occurred in 1875, 1887, 1895 and 1916\u20131917 due to the resignation or death of an incumbent governor or lieutenant governor.\nThis occasionally becomes significant, since the California Constitution provides that all the powers of the governor fall to the lieutenant governor whenever the governor is not in the state of California, with the lieutenant governor sometimes signing or vetoing legislation or making political appointments whenever the governor leaves the state.\nIn practice, there is a gentlemen's agreement for the lieutenant governor not to perform more than perfunctory duties while the governor is away from the state: this agreement was violated when Mike Curb was in office, as he signed several executive orders at odds with the Brown administration when Brown was out of the state. Court rulings have upheld the lieutenant governor's right to perform the duties and assume all of the prerogatives of governor while the governor is out of the state.\nThe lieutenant governor is also the president of the California State Senate.\nOfficial residence and workplace.\nThe official residence of the California governor is the California Governor's Mansion, in Sacramento. The mansion has served as the residence of 14 governors, while others have declined to reside in the mansion, preferring to arrange for private residential arrangements. It is also one of the official workplaces for the governor.\nThe governor's primary official workplace is located within the California State Capitol in Sacramento.\nThe Stanford Mansion, in Sacramento, serves as one of the official workplaces for the governor, as well as the official reception center for the California government.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "62519", "revid": "50592914", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62519", "title": "List of French monarchs", "text": "France was ruled by monarchs from the establishment of the kingdom of West Francia in 843 until the end of the Second French Empire in 1870, with several interruptions.\nClassical French historiography usually regards Clovis I, king of the Franks (r.\u2009507\u00a0\u2013\u00a0511), as the first king of France. However, most historians today consider that such a kingdom did not begin until the establishment of West Francia, after the fragmentation of the Carolingian Empire in the 9th century.\nTitles.\nThe kings used the title \"King of the Franks\" () until the late twelfth century; the first to adopt the title of \"King of France\" (Latin: \"Rex Franciae\"; French: \"roi de France\") was Philip II in 1190 (r. 1180\u20131223), after which the title \"King of the Franks\" gradually lost ground. However, \"Francorum Rex\" continued to be sometimes used, for example by Louis XII in 1499, by Francis I in 1515, and by Henry II in about 1550; it was also used on coins up to the eighteenth century.\nDuring the brief period when the French Constitution of 1791 was in effect (1791\u20131792) and after the July Revolution in 1830, the style \"King of the French\" (\"roi des Fran\u00e7ais\") was used instead of \"King of France (and Navarre)\". It was a constitutional innovation known as popular monarchy which linked the monarch's title to the French people rather than to the possession of the territory of France.\nWith the House of Bonaparte, the title \"Emperor of the French\" (\"Empereur des Fran\u00e7ais\") was used in 19th-century France, during the first and second French Empires, between 1804 and 1814, again in 1815, and between 1852 and 1870.\nFrom the 14th century down to 1801, the English (and later British) monarch claimed the throne of France, though such claim was purely nominal excepting a short period during the Hundred Years' War when Henry VI of England had control over most of Northern France, including Paris. By 1453, the English had been mostly expelled from France and Henry's claim has since been considered illegitimate; French historiography commonly does not recognize Henry VI of England among the kings of France.\nFrankish kings (843\u2013987).\nCarolingian dynasty (843\u2013887).\nThe Carolingians were a Frankish noble family with origins in the Arnulfing and Pippinid clans of the 7th century AD. The family consolidated its power in the 8th century, eventually making the offices of mayor of the palace and \"dux et princeps Francorum\" hereditary and becoming the real powers behind the Merovingian kings. The dynasty is named after one of these mayors of the palace, Charles Martel, whose son Pepin the Short dethroned the Merovingians in 751 and, with the consent of the Papacy and the aristocracy, was crowned King of the Franks. Under Charles the Great (r. 768\u2013814), better known as \"Charlemagne\", the Frankish kingdom expanded deep into Central Europe, conquering Italy and most of modern Germany. He was also crowned \"Emperor of the Romans\" by the Pope, a title that was eventually carried on by the German rulers of the Holy Roman Empire.\nCharlemagne was succeeded by his son Louis the Pious (r. 814\u2013840), who eventually divided the kingdom between his sons. His death, however, was followed by a three-year-long civil war that ended with the Treaty of Verdun, which divided Francia into three kingdoms, one of which (Middle Francia) was short-lived. Modern France developed from West Francia, while East Francia became the Holy Roman Empire and later Germany. By this time, the eastern and western parts of the land had already developed different languages and cultures.\nCapetian dynasty (987\u20131792).\nThe Capetian dynasty is named for Hugh Capet, a Robertian who served as Duke of the Franks and was elected King in 987. Except for the Bonaparte-led Empires, every monarch of France was a male-line descendant of Hugh Capet. The kingship passed through patrilineally from father to son until the 14th century, a period known as Direct Capetian rule. Afterwards, it passed to the House of Valois, a cadet branch that descended from Philip III. The Valois claim was disputed by Edward III, the Plantagenet king of England who claimed himself as the rightful king of France through his French mother Isabella. The two houses fought the Hundred Years' War over the issue, and with Henry VI of England being for a time partially recognized as King of France.\nThe Valois line died out in the late 16th century, during the French Wars of Religion, to be replaced by the distantly related House of Bourbon, which descended through the Direct Capetian Louis IX. The Bourbons ruled France until deposed in the French Revolution, though they were restored to the throne after the fall of Napoleon. The last Capetian to rule was Louis Philippe I, king of the July Monarchy (1830\u20131848), a member of the cadet House of Bourbon-Orl\u00e9ans.\nHouse of Capet (987\u20131328).\nThe House of Capet are also commonly known as the \"Direct Capetians\".\nHouse of Valois (1328\u20131589).\nThe death of Charles IV started the Hundred Years' War between the House of Valois and the House of Plantagenet, whose claim was taken up by the cadet branch known as the House of Lancaster, over control of the French throne. The Valois claimed the right to the succession by male-only primogeniture through the ancient Salic Law, having the closest all-male line of descent from a recent French king. They were descended from the third son of Philip III, Charles, Count of Valois. The Plantagenets based their claim on being closer to a more recent French king, Edward III of England being a grandson of Philip IV through his mother, Isabella.\nThe two houses fought the Hundred Years War to enforce their claims. The Valois were ultimately successful, and French historiography counts their leaders as rightful kings. One Plantagenet, Henry VI of England, enjoyed \"de jure\" control of the French throne following the Treaty of Troyes, which formed the basis for continued English claims to the throne of France until 1801. The Valois line ruled France until the line became extinct in 1589, in the backdrop of the French Wars of Religion. As Navarre did not have a tradition of male-only primogeniture, the Navarrese monarchy became distinct from the French with Joan II, a daughter of Louis X.\nHouse of Bourbon (1589\u20131792).\nThe Valois line looked strong on the death of Henry II, who left four male heirs. His first son, Francis II, died in his minority. His second son, Charles IX, had no legitimate sons to inherit. Following the premature death of his fourth son Hercule Fran\u00e7ois and the assassination of his third son, the childless Henry III, France was plunged into a succession crisis over which distant cousin of the king would inherit the throne. The best claimant, King Henry III of Navarre, was a Protestant, and thus unacceptable to much of the French nobility.\nUltimately, after winning numerous battles in defence of his claim, Henry converted to Catholicism and was crowned as King Henry IV, founding the House of Bourbon. This marked the second time the thrones of Navarre and France were united under one monarch, as different inheritance laws had caused them to become separated during the events of the Hundred Years Wars. The House of Bourbon was overthrown during the French Revolution and replaced by a short-lived republic.\nLong 19th-century (1792\u20131870).\nThe period known as the \"long nineteenth century\" was a tumultuous time in French politics. The period is generally considered to have begun with the French Revolution, which deposed and then executed Louis XVI. Royalists continued to recognize his son, the putative king Louis XVII, as ruler of France. Louis was under arrest by the government of the Revolution and died in captivity having never ruled. The republican government went through several changes in form and constitution until France was declared an empire, following the ascension of the First Consul Napoleon Bonaparte as Emperor Napoleon I. Napoleon was overthrown twice following military defeats during the Napoleonic Wars.\nAfter the Napoleonic period followed two different royal governments, the Bourbon Restoration, which was ruled successively by two younger brothers of Louis XVI, and the July Monarchy, ruled by Louis Philippe I, a distant cousin who claimed descent from Philippe I, Duke of Orl\u00e9ans, younger brother of Louis XIV. The French Revolution of 1848 brought an end to the monarchy again, instituting a brief Second Republic that lasted four years, before its president declared himself Emperor Napoleon III, who was deposed and replaced by the Third Republic, and ending monarchic rule in France for good.\nHouse of Bourbon-Orl\u00e9ans, July Monarchy (1830\u20131848).\nThe Bourbon Restoration came to an end with the July Revolution of 1830, which deposed Charles X and replaced him with Louis Philippe I, a distant cousin with more liberal politics. Charles X's son Louis signed a document renouncing his own right to the throne only after a 20-minute argument with his father. Because he was never crowned he is disputed as a genuine king of France. Louis's nephew Henry was likewise considered by some to be Henry V, but the new regime did not recognise his claim and he never ruled.\nCharles X named Louis Philippe as \"Lieutenant g\u00e9n\u00e9ral du royaume\", a regent to the young Henry V, and charged him to announce his desire to have his grandson succeed him to the Chamber of Deputies, the lower house of the French Parliament at the time, the French equivalent at the time of the UK House of Commons. Louis Philippe did not do this, in order to increase his own chances of succession. As a consequence, and because the French parliamentarians were aware of his liberal policies and of his popularity at the time with the French population, they proclaimed Louis Philippe as the new French king, displacing the senior branch of the House of Bourbon.\nHouse of Bonaparte, Second French Empire (1852\u20131870).\nThe French Second Republic lasted from 1848 to 1852, when its president, Charles-Louis-Napol\u00e9on Bonaparte, was declared Emperor of the French under the regnal name of Napoleon III. He would later be overthrown during the events of the Franco-Prussian War, becoming the last monarch to rule France.\nLater pretenders.\nVarious pretenders descended from the preceding monarchs have claimed to be the legitimate monarch of France, rejecting the claims of the president of France and of one another. These groups are:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCoronations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nMain bibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSecondary bibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "62520", "revid": "18130370", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62520", "title": "Southern California", "text": "Geographic and cultural region of the US\nSouthern California (commonly shortened to SoCal) is a geographic and cultural region that generally comprises the southern portion of the U.S. state of California. Its densely populated coastal region includes Greater Los Angeles (the second-most populous urban agglomeration in the United States) and San Diego County (the second-most populous county in California). The region generally contains ten of California's 58 counties: Los Angeles, San Diego, Orange, Riverside, San Bernardino, Kern, Ventura, Santa Barbara, San Luis Obispo, and Imperial counties.\nAlthough geographically smaller than Northern California in land area, Southern California has a higher population, with 23.76 million residents as of the 2020 census. The sparsely populated desert region of California occupies a significant portion of the area: the Colorado Desert, along with the Colorado River, is located on Southern California's eastern border with Arizona, and the Mojave Desert shares a border with Nevada to the northeast. Southern California's southern border with Baja California is part of the Mexico\u2013United States border.\nConstituent metropolitan areas.\nSouthern California encompasses eight metropolitan areas (MSAs), three of which together form the Greater Los Angeles Combined Statistical Area (CSA) with over 18 million people, the second-biggest CSA after the New York CSA. These three MSAs are the Los Angeles metropolitan area (Los Angeles and Orange counties, with 13.3 million people), the Inland Empire (Riverside and San Bernardino counties, including the Coachella Valley cities, with 4.3 million people), and the Oxnard\u2013Thousand Oaks\u2013Ventura metropolitan area (0.8 million people). In addition, Southern California contains the San Diego metropolitan area with 3.3 million people, Bakersfield metro area with 0.9 million, and the Santa Barbara, San Luis Obispo, and El Centro (Imperial County) metropolitan areas.\nThe Southern California Megaregion (or megalopolis) is larger still, extending northeast into Las Vegas, Nevada and south across the Mexican border into Tijuana.\nSignificance.\nWithin Southern California are two major cities, Los Angeles and San Diego, as well as three of the country's largest metropolitan areas. With a population of approximately 4 million, Los Angeles is the most populous city in California and the second most populous in the United States. South of Los Angeles and with a population of approximately 1.4 million is San Diego, the second most populous city in the state and the eighth most populous in the nation.\nThe counties of Los Angeles, San Diego, Orange, Riverside, and San Bernardino are the five most populous in the state, and are among the top 15 most populous counties in the United States.\nThe motion picture, television and music industry are centered in the Los Angeles area in Southern California. Hollywood, a district of Los Angeles, gives its name to the American motion picture industry, which is synonymous with the neighborhood name. Headquartered in Southern California are The Walt Disney Company (which owns ABC), Sony Pictures, Universal Pictures, MGM, Paramount Pictures, and Warner Bros. Universal, Warner Bros., and Sony also run major record companies.\nSouthern California is also home to a large surf and skateboard culture. Companies such as Vans, Volcom, Quiksilver, No Fear, St\u00fcssy, and Body Glove are all headquartered there. Skateboarder Tony Hawk; surfers Rob Machado, Timmy Curran, Bobby Martinez, Pat O'Connell, Dane Reynolds, and Chris Ward live in Southern California. Some of the most famous surf locations are in Southern California as well, including Trestles, Rincon, The Wedge, Huntington Beach, and Malibu. Some of the world's largest action sports events, including the X Games, Boost Mobile Pro, and the U.S. Open of Surfing, are held in Southern California. The region is also important to the world of yachting with premier events including the annual Transpacific Yacht Race, or \"Transpac\", from Los Angeles to Hawaii. San Diego Yacht Club hosted the three America's Cup races from 1988 to 1995. The first modern-era triathlon was held in San Diego's Mission Bay in 1974. Since then, Southern California, and San Diego in particular, have become a mecca for triathlon and multi-sport racing, products, and culture.\nSouthern California has multiple sports franchises and networks, such as Fox Sports Net.\nMany of these locals and tourists frequent the Southern California coast for its beaches. Some of Southern California's most popular beaches are Malibu, Laguna Beach, La Jolla, Manhattan Beach, and Hermosa Beach. Southern California is also known for its mountain resort communities, such as Big Bear Lake, Lake Arrowhead, and Wrightwood, and their ski resorts, like Bear Mountain, Snow Summit, Snow Valley Mountain Resort, and Mountain High. The inland desert city of Palm Springs is also popular.\nNorthern boundary.\nSouthern California is generally considered the area of California south of the latitude 35\u00b045'N, approximately one-third of the state, formed by the northern boundaries of San Luis Obispo, Kern, and San Bernardino counties, which are not exactly a straight line. Another definition for Southern California uses Point Conception and the Tehachapi Mountains as the northern geographical barriers, especially when defining California's bioregions. In this definition, Owens Valley and Death Valley are part of the Southern California desert system. Because of the barrier formed by the Tehachapi and Sierra Nevada ranges, cartographer George Wheeler observed in 1876 that Northern California was better connected to Oregon and Nevada than it was to Southern California.\nFollowing the acquisition of the territory of California by the United States, several pro-slavery politicians attempted to arrange the division of Alta California at 36 degrees, 30 minutes, the line of the Missouri Compromise. Instead, the passing of the Compromise of 1850 enabled California to be admitted to the Union as a free state, preventing the southern half of California from becoming its own separate slave state.\nSubsequently, southern Californians dissatisfied with inequitable taxes and land laws attempted several times in the 1850s to achieve a separate statehood or territorial status separate from northern California. The only successful proposal, the Pico Act of 1859, was passed by the California State Legislature and signed by State Governor John B. Weller. It was approved overwhelmingly by nearly 75 percent of southern California voters to form the proposed Territory of Colorado. The Pico Act bisected California starting at a latitude of six standard parallels south of the Mount Diablo meridian, then ducking southward around part of the Central Valley before cutting northeast to the California border. Six standard parallels is 144 miles south of Mount Diablo\u2014which corresponds to the current northern border of San Luis Obispo County, at the latitude 35\u00b045'N. The proposal was sent to Washington, D.C., with a strong advocate in Senator Milton Latham. However, the secession crisis following the election of Abraham Lincoln in 1860 and the subsequent American Civil War led to the proposal never coming to a vote.\nIn 1900, the \"Los Angeles Times\" defined Southern California as including \"the seven counties of Los Angeles, San Bernardino, Orange, Riverside, San Diego, Ventura, and Santa Barbara.\" This definition left out San Luis Obispo and Kern counties.\nSouthern California was the name of a proposed new state which failed to get on the 2018 California ballot. The ballot measure proposed splitting the existing state into three parts.\nIn December 2020, during the COVID-19 pandemic, the state government led by Governor Gavin Newsom divided the state into five regions for the purpose of issuing stay-at-home orders. The Southern California region consisted of the following counties: Imperial, Inyo, Los Angeles, Mono, Orange, Riverside, San Bernardino, San Diego, San Luis Obispo, Santa Barbara, and Ventura. However, Kern County was grouped with other counties of the San Joaquin Valley, California's central agricultural valley.\nUrban landscape.\nSouthern California consists of a heavily developed urban environment, home to some of the largest urban areas in the state, along with the Deserts of California (part of which was even proposed to become a new county due to cultural, economic and geographic differences relative to the rest of the more urban region) that have been left undeveloped. It is the third most populated megalopolis in the United States, after the Great Lakes megalopolis and the Northeast megalopolis. Much of Southern California is famous for its large, spread-out, suburban communities and use of automobiles and highways. The dominant areas are Los Angeles, Orange County, San Diego, and Riverside\u2013San Bernardino, each of which are the centers of their respective metropolitan areas, composed of numerous smaller cities and communities. The urban area is also host to an international San Diego\u2013Tijuana metropolitan region, created by the urban area spilling over into Baja California.\nThe main barrier to urbanization along the Interstate 5 corridor is Camp Pendleton. The cities and communities along Interstate 15 and Interstate 215 are so interrelated that Temecula and Murrieta have as much connection with the San Diego metropolitan area as they do with the Inland Empire. To the east, the United States Census Bureau considers the San Bernardino and Riverside County areas, Riverside-San Bernardino area as a separate metropolitan area from Los Angeles County. Newly developed exurbs formed in the Antelope Valley, north of Los Angeles, the Victor Valley, and the Coachella Valley with the Imperial Valley. Also, population growth was high in the Bakersfield-Kern County, Santa Maria, and San Luis Obispo areas.\nClimate.\nMost of Southern California has a Mediterranean-like climate, with warm and dry summers, mild and wet winters, where cool weather and freezing temperatures are rare. Southern California contains other types of climates, including semi-arid, desert and mountain, with infrequent rain and many sunny days. Summers are hot or warm, and dry, while winters are mild, and rainfall is low to moderate depending on the area. Rain is infrequent, but is often heavy when it does occur, making flash floods an aspect of living in Southern California. This climatic pattern was alluded to in the hit song \"It Never Rains in Southern California\". While snow is very rare in lower elevations, mountains above receive plentiful snowfall in the winter.\nSince the first decade of the 21st century, droughts and wildfires have increased in frequency as a result of climate change.\nNatural landscape.\nSouthern California consists of one of the more varied collections of geologic, topographic, and natural ecosystem landscapes in a diversity outnumbering other major regions in the state and country. The region spans from Pacific Ocean islands, shorelines, beaches, and coastal plains, through the Transverse and Peninsular Ranges with their peaks, and into the large and small interior valleys, to the vast deserts of California.\nIntroductory categories include:\nGeography.\nGeology.\nList of major fault zones.\nNote: Plate boundary faults are indicated with a (#) symbol.\nEarthquakes.\nEach year, Southern California has about 10,000 earthquakes. Nearly all of them are too small to be felt. Only several hundred have been greater than magnitude () 3.0, and only about 15\u201320 have been greater than 4.0. California as a whole enacted the Alquist Priolo Special Studies Zone Act in the wake of the 1971 San Fernando earthquake. The act prohibits new construction of residential buildings closer than from a surface rupturing active fault zone. In addition, the act improved safety by requiring new structures (both residential and commercial) to be seismically retrofitted. It also required existing infrastructure to comply.\nSince 1972, numerous large magnitude earthquakes have struck Southern California with little widespread damage in part due to the act. However, exceptions can be noted for epicenters that lie directly on top of densely populated regions such as the 6.7 1994 Northridge Earthquake and, to a lesser extent, the smaller 5.5 2008 Chino Hills earthquake. The Northridge earthquake occurred on a blind-thrust fault directly underneath the San Fernando Valley, which until the earthquake was previously undiscovered. Seismic retrofitting of existing and new construction is aimed to prevent damage and save lives in the aftermath of a major quake, but it cannot guarantee that buildings will be unscathed if the epicenter is relatively close by.\nThe 1994 Northridge earthquake was particularly destructive, causing a substantial number of deaths, injuries, and structural collapses. The quake caused the most property damage of any earthquake in U.S. history at an estimated $20 billion.\nMany Southern California faults are able to produce a 6.7 earthquake or greater, such as the San Andreas Fault, which can produce 8.0 or greater. The largest known earthquake in California was the 1857 Fort Tejon earthquake that ruptured 200+ miles (320+ kilometers) of the San Andreas Fault from Parkfield to Wrightwood. With a recurrence interval of roughly 150 years, this part of the San Andreas fault is well within its window to produce another large earthquake. Along with the southern section of the San Andreas (in the Palm Springs region, which has not ruptured in ~400 years), the entire Southern California portion of the San Andreas Fault is ready to produce a powerful earthquake in the near future.\nNotable faults capable of large magnitude events include the San Jacinto Fault (a splay of the San Andreas that runs directly under the I-10 &amp; I-215 interchange), the Newport\u2013Inglewood-Rose Canyon Fault (located adjacent to SoFi Stadium and responsible for Signal Hill), the Elsinore Fault (created Lake Elsinore), the Garlock Fault (which marks boundary between of the Sierra Nevada and the Mojave Desert), and the Hollywood fault (which is within feet of Capitol Records and is roughly parallel to Hollywood Boulevard).\nThe United States Geological Survey (USGS) has released a California earthquake forecast, which models earthquake occurrence in California.\nList of earthquakes.\nThis is a partial list of earthquakes in Southern California. For a full list, see List of earthquakes in California.\nNote: Earthquakes with epicenters in the Los Angeles Metro Area are marked with the (#) symbol. Other earthquakes mentioned indicates shaking was felt in the region.\nPopulation.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAs of the 2020 United States census, Southern California has a population of 23,762,904. Despite a reputation for high growth rates, Southern California's population has grown slower than the state average since the 2000s. This is due to California's growth becoming concentrated in the northern part of the state as result of a stronger, tech-oriented economy in the Bay Area and an emerging Greater Sacramento region.\nSouthern California consists of one Combined Statistical Area, eight Metropolitan Statistical Areas, one international metropolitan area, and multiple metropolitan divisions. The region is home to two extended metropolitan areas that exceed five million in population. These are the Greater Los Angeles Area at 17,786,419, and San Diego\u2013Tijuana at 5,105,768. Of these metropolitan areas, the Los Angeles-Long Beach-Santa Ana metropolitan area, Riverside-San Bernardino-Ontario metropolitan area, and Oxnard-Thousand Oaks-Ventura metropolitan area form Greater Los Angeles; while the El Centro metropolitan area and San Diego-Carlsbad-San Marcos metropolitan area form the Southern Border Region. North of Greater Los Angeles are the Santa Barbara, San Luis Obispo, and Bakersfield metropolitan areas.\nCities.\nLos Angeles (with a population of approximately 3.9 million people) and San Diego (at nearly 1.4 million people) are the two largest cities in all of California, and are among the top eight largest cities in the United States. In Southern California, there are also 14 cities with more than 200,000 residents and 48 cities over 100,000 residents. Many of Southern California's most developed cities lie along or in close proximity to the coast, with the exception of San Bernardino and Riverside.\nEconomy.\nIndustries.\nSouthern California is one of the largest economies in the United States. It is dominated by, and heavily dependent upon, the abundance of petroleum, as opposed to other regions where automobiles are not nearly as dominant, due to the vast majority of transport that runs on this fuel. Southern California is famous for tourism and the entertainment industry. Other industries include software, automotive, aerospace, finance, biomedical, ports and regional logistics. The region was a leader in the housing bubble from 2001 to 2007, and has been heavily impacted by the housing crash.\nSince the 1920s, motion pictures, petroleum, and aircraft manufacturing have been major industries. In one of the richest agricultural regions in the U.S., cattle and citrus were major industries until farmlands were turned into suburbs. Although military spending cutbacks have had an impact, aerospace continues to be a major factor.\nMajor central business districts.\nSouthern California is home to many major business districts. Central business districts (CBD) include Downtown Los Angeles, Downtown Riverside, Downtown San Bernardino, downtown San Diego, and the South Coast Metro. Within the Los Angeles Area are the major business districts of Downtown Pasadena, Downtown Burbank, Downtown Santa Monica, Downtown Glendale and Downtown Long Beach. Los Angeles proper has many business districts, such as Downtown LA and those lining Wilshire Boulevard, including Mid-Wilshire, the Miracle Mile, Downtown Beverly Hills, and Westwood; others include Century City and Warner Center in the San Fernando Valley. The area of Santa Monica and Venice (and perhaps some of Culver City) is informally referred to as \"Silicon Beach\" because of the concentration of financial and marketing technology-centric firms located in the region.\nThe San Bernardino-Riverside Area maintains the business districts of Downtown San Bernardino, Hospitality Business/Financial Centre, University District which are in the cities of San Bernardino and Riverside.\nIn Orange County, has highly developed suburban business centers (also known as edge cities) including the Anaheim\u2013Santa Ana edge city along I-5; and another, the South Coast Plaza\u2013John Wayne Airport edge city that stretches from the South Coast Metro to the Irvine Business Complex; Newport Center; and Irvine Spectrum. Downtown Santa Ana is an important government, arts and entertainment, and retail district.\nDowntown San Diego is the CBD of San Diego, though the city is filled with business districts. These include Carmel Valley, Del Mar Heights, Mission Valley, Rancho Bernardo, Sorrento Mesa, and University City. Most of these districts are located in Northern San Diego and some within North County regions.\nTheme parks and Water parks.\nLos Angeles\nOrange County \nRiverside &amp; San Bernardino\nSan Diego\nCalifornia wine AVA-American Viticultural Areas in southern California:\nVineyard-Winery American Viticultural Area (AVA) districts.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nTransportation.\nSouthern California is home to Los Angeles International Airport, the second-busiest airport in the United States by passenger volume (see World's busiest airports by passenger traffic) and the third-busiest by international passenger volume (see Busiest airports in the United States by international passenger traffic); San Diego International Airport, the busiest single-runway airport in the United States; Van Nuys Airport, the world's busiest general aviation airport; major commercial airports at San Bernardino, Orange County, Bakersfield, Ontario, Burbank, and Long Beach; and numerous smaller commercial and general aviation airports.\nSix of the seven lines of the commuter rail system, Metrolink, run out of downtown Los Angeles, connecting Los Angeles, Ventura, San Bernardino, Riverside, Orange, and San Diego counties with the other line connecting San Bernardino, Riverside, and Orange counties directly.\nSouthern California is also home to the Port of Los Angeles, the country's busiest commercial port; the adjacent Port of Long Beach, the country's second busiest container port; and the Port of San Diego.\nAirports.\nThe following table shows all airports listed by the Federal Aviation Association (FAA) as a hub airport:\nFreeways and highways.\nSections of the Southern California freeway system are often referred to by names rather than by the official numbers.\nColleges and universities.\nPublic institutions in the region include:\nUniversity of California (10 campuses total; 5 within the SoCal region)\nCalifornia State University (23 campuses total; 12 within the SoCal region)\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nPrivate institutions include:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nParks and recreation areas.\nNumerous parks provide recreation opportunities and open space. Locations include:\nSports.\nMajor professional sports teams in Southern California include:\nSouthern California also is home to a number of popular NCAA sports programs such as the UCLA Bruins, the USC Trojans, and the San Diego State Aztecs. The Bruins and the Trojans both field football teams in NCAA Division I in the Big Ten Conference, and there is a longtime rivalry between the schools.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "62525", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62525", "title": "Mimosoideae", "text": "Subfamily of legumes\nThe Mimosoideae are a traditional subfamily of trees, herbs, lianas, and shrubs in the pea family (Fabaceae) that mostly grow in tropical and subtropical climates. They are typically characterized by having radially symmetric flowers, with petals that are twice divided (valvate) in bud and with numerous showy, prominent stamens.\nRecent work on phylogenetic relationships has found that the Mimosoideae form a clade nested with subfamily Caesalpinioideae and the most recent classification by \"The Legume Phylogeny Working Group\" refer to them as the Mimosoid clade within subfamily Caesalpinioideae. The group includes about 40 genera and 2,500 species.\nTaxonomy.\nSome classification systems, for example the Cronquist system, treat the Fabaceae in a narrow sense, raising the Mimisoideae to the rank of family as Mimosaceae. The Angiosperm Phylogeny Group treats Fabaceae in the broad sense. The Mimosoideae were historically subdivided into four tribes (Acacieae, Ingeae, Mimoseae, and Mimozygantheae). However, modern molecular phylogenetics has shown that these groupings were artificial. Several informal subgroups have been proposed, but not yet described formally as tribes. Additionally, the genus \"Acacia\" was recently segregated into five genera (\"Acacia sensu stricto\", \"Acaciella\", \"Mariosousa\", \"Senegalia\", and \"Vachellia\").\nBasal Mimosoideae.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\n\"Acacia Clade (Core Mimosoideae)\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nFossils.\nThe following fossil wood morphogenera have been described:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSystematics.\nModern molecular phylogenetics suggests the following relationships:\nAcacieae.\nAcacieae (Dumort., 1829) is a wide-ranging, polyphyletic tribe of legumes in the Mimosoideae that is native to the tropics, subtropics, and warm-temperate regions. It includes five or six genera and some 1,450 species.\nRelationships.\nIn Bentham's 1842 circumscription of the subfamily Mimosoideae, Acacieae was one of its three constituent tribes, the others being Ingeae Benth. &amp; Hook.f. and Mimoseae Bornn. His Acacieae tribe of 1842 included many genera that were subsequently assigned to tribe Ingeae Benth. In 1875, however, Bentham narrowed his definition of Acacieae so as to include only \"Acacia\" Mill.\nThe only morphological character of Acacieae used to distinguish it from the Ingeae is the presence of free stamens (as in tribe Mimoseae). In the Ingeae they are fused in the form of a tube, whereas in the Acacieae only a few species have the stamens fused at the base. Several characters of the foliage, seeds, seed pods, pollen, and stipules are shared by the two tribes. The flower morphology of \"Acacia s.l.\" has characteristics in common with the genera \"Leucaena\", \"Piptadenia\", and \"Mimosa\" (tribe Mimoseae) and \"Enterolobium\" and \"Lysiloma\" (tribe Ingeae).\nThe tribal position of monotypic genus \"Faidherbia\" is equivocal. It was included in the Acacieae by Vassal (1981) and Maslin et al. (2003), but Lewis &amp; Rico Arce placed it in tribe Ingeae following Polhill (1994) and Luckow et al. (2003). In the latter case, tribe Acacieae may conform to genus \"Acacia s.l.\", pending the latter's relationship to other mimosoid genera. \"Faidherbia\" is troublesome as its stamens are shortly united at their base and its pollen is similar to some taxa in the Ingeae.\nDescription.\nThey are trees, shrubs or lianas, which may be armed or unarmed. Where they have spines, these are modified stipules. In some, prickles arise from the stem's cortex and epidermis. The leaves are bipinnate or are modified to vertically oriented phyllodes. A few have cladodes rather than leaves. Extrafloral nectaries may be present on the petiole and rachis, and the pinnule tips may carry protein-lipid Beltian bodies. The leaflets are usually opposite, and are carried on shortly stalks or are sessile. The heartwood is typically red and hard, and the sap of various species hardens into gum.\nThe inflorescences are dense pedunculate heads or spikes borne in axillary clusters, or are aggregated in terminal panicles. The tetra- or pentamerous flowers are uniformly bisexual, or male and bisexual. Sepals are connate (i.e. fused) and valvate (i.e. not overlapping). The reduced petals are valvate, or rarely absent. The flowers have numerous exserted (i.e. protruding) stamens (&gt;2\u00d7 as many as the corolla lobes), and their filaments are sometimes connate at their base (forming a short stemonozone). Male flowers of some Neotropical species have a reduced staminal tube (cf. \"A. albicorticata\", \"A. hindsii\", \"A. farnesiana\", and \"S. picachensis\"). Flowers are usually yellow or cream-coloured, but may be white, red, or purple.\nThe ovary is sessile or stipitate (i.e. supported by a stipe), with many ovules or ovules arranged in two rows. The ovary is attached by a filiform style to a small, capitate stigma. The legume's endocarp is attached to the exocarp, but is otherwise very variable, and may be dehiscent or indehiscent. Seeds are usually elliptic to oblong and flattened to varying degrees. Seeds have a hard black-brown testa (i.e. seed coat) with a pleurogram, visible as a closed or almost closed O-shaped line. Some phyllodinous species have a colourful aril or elaiosome on the seed.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "62529", "revid": "10202399", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62529", "title": "Sea level", "text": "Geographical reference point from which various heights are measured\nMean sea level (MSL, often shortened to sea level) is an average surface level of one or more among Earth's coastal bodies of water from which heights such as elevation may be measured. The global MSL is a type of vertical datum\u00a0\u2013 a standardised geodetic datum\u00a0\u2013 that is used, for example, as a chart datum in cartography and marine navigation, or, in aviation, as the standard sea level at which atmospheric pressure is measured to calibrate altitude and, consequently, aircraft flight levels. A common and relatively straightforward mean sea-level standard is instead a long-term average of tide gauge readings at a particular reference location.\nThe term \"above sea level\" generally refers to the height above mean sea level (AMSL). The term APSL means above present sea level, comparing sea levels in the past with the level today.\nEarth's radius at sea level is 6,378.137\u00a0km (3,963.191\u00a0mi) at the equator. It is 6,356.752\u00a0km (3,949.903\u00a0mi) at the poles and 6,371.001\u00a0km (3,958.756\u00a0mi) on average. This flattened spheroid, combined with local gravity anomalies, defines the geoid of the Earth, which approximates the local mean sea level for locations in the open ocean. The geoid includes a significant depression in the Indian Ocean, whose surface dips as much as below the global mean sea level (excluding minor effects such as tides and currents).\nMeasurement.\nPrecise determination of a \"mean sea level\" is difficult because of the many factors that affect sea level. Instantaneous sea level varies substantially on several scales of time and space. This is because the sea is in constant motion, affected by the tides, tsunamis, wind, atmospheric pressure, local gravitational differences, temperature, salinity, and so forth. The mean sea level at a particular location may be calculated over an extended time period and used as a datum. For example, hourly measurements may be averaged over a full Metonic 19-year lunar cycle to determine the mean sea level at an official tide gauge.\n\"Still-water level\" or \"still-water sea level\" (SWL) is the level of the sea with motions such as wind waves averaged out.\nThen MSL implies the SWL further averaged over a period of time such that changes due to, e.g., the tides, also have zero mean. \n\"Global MSL\" refers to a spatial average over the entire ocean area, typically using large sets of tide gauges and/or satellite measurements.\nOne often measures the values of MSL with respect to the land; hence a change in \"relative MSL\" or (relative sea level) can result from a real change in sea level, or from a change in the height of the land on which the tide gauge operates, or both.\nIn the UK, the ordnance datum (the 0 metres height on UK maps) is the mean sea level measured at Newlyn in Cornwall between 1915 and 1921. Before 1921, the vertical datum was MSL at the Victoria Dock, Liverpool.\nSince the times of the Russian Empire, in Russia and its other former parts, now independent states, the sea level is measured from the zero level of Kronstadt Sea-Gauge. \nIn Hong Kong, \"mPD\" is a surveying term meaning \"metres above Principal Datum\" and refers to height of above chart datum and below the average sea level.\nIn France, the Mar\u00e9graphe in Marseille measures continuously the sea level since 1883 and offers the longest collated data about the sea level. It is used for a part of continental Europe and the main part of Africa as the official sea level. Spain uses the reference to measure heights below or above sea level at Alicante, while the European Vertical Reference System is calibrated to the Amsterdam Peil elevation, which dates back to the 1690s.\nSatellite altimeters have been making precise measurements of sea level since the launch of TOPEX/Poseidon in 1992. A joint mission of NASA and CNES, TOPEX/Poseidon was followed by Jason-1 in 2001 and the Ocean Surface Topography Mission on the Jason-2 satellite in 2008.\nHeight above mean sea level.\n\"Height above mean sea level\" (\"AMSL\") is the elevation (on the ground) or altitude (in the air) of an object, relative to a reference datum for mean sea level (MSL). It is also used in aviation, where some heights are recorded and reported with respect to mean sea level (contrast with flight level), and in the atmospheric sciences, and in land surveying. An alternative is to base height measurements on a reference ellipsoid approximating the entire Earth, which is what systems such as GPS do. In aviation, the reference ellipsoid known as WGS84 is increasingly used to define heights; however, differences up to exist between this ellipsoid height and local mean sea level. Another alternative is to use a geoid-based vertical datum such as NAVD88 and the global EGM96 (part of WGS84). Details vary in different countries.\nWhen referring to geographic features such as mountains, on a topographic map variations in elevation are shown by contour lines. A mountain's highest point or summit is typically illustrated with the AMSL height in metres, feet or both. In unusual cases where a land location is below sea level, such as Death Valley, California, the elevation AMSL is negative.\nDifficulties in use.\nIt is often necessary to compare the local height of the mean sea surface with a \"level\" reference surface, or geodetic datum, called the geoid. In the absence of external forces, the local mean sea level would coincide with this geoid surface, being an equipotential surface of the Earth's gravitational field which, in itself, does not conform to a simple sphere or ellipsoid and exhibits gravity anomalies such as those measured by NASA's GRACE satellites. In reality, the geoid surface is not directly observed, even as a long-term average, due to ocean currents, air pressure variations, temperature and salinity variations, etc. The location-dependent but time-persistent separation between local mean sea level and the geoid is referred to as (mean) ocean surface topography. It varies globally in a typical range of \u00b1.\nDry land.\nSeveral terms are used to describe the changing relationships between sea level and dry land. \nThe melting of glaciers at the end of ice ages results in isostatic post-glacial rebound, when land rises after the weight of ice is removed. Conversely, older volcanic islands experience relative sea level rise, due to isostatic subsidence from the weight of cooling volcanos. The subsidence of land due to the withdrawal of groundwater is another isostatic cause of relative sea level rise.\nOn planets that lack a liquid ocean, planetologists can calculate a \"mean altitude\" by averaging the heights of all points on the surface. This altitude, sometimes referred to as a \"sea level\" or zero-level elevation, serves equivalently as a reference for the height of planetary features.\nChange.\nLocal and eustatic.\nLocal mean sea level (LMSL) is defined as the height of the sea with respect to a land benchmark, averaged over a period of time long enough that fluctuations caused by waves and tides are smoothed out, typically a year or more. One must adjust perceived changes in LMSL to account for vertical movements of the land, which can occur at rates similar to sea level changes (millimetres per year).\nSome land movements occur because of isostatic adjustment to the melting of ice sheets at the end of the last ice age. The weight of the ice sheet depresses the underlying land, and when the ice melts away the land slowly rebounds. Changes in ground-based ice volume also affect local and regional sea levels by the readjustment of the geoid and true polar wander. Atmospheric pressure, ocean currents and local ocean temperature changes can affect LMSL as well.\nEustatic sea level change (global as opposed to local change) is due to change in either the volume of water in the world's oceans or the volume of the oceanic basins. Two major mechanisms are currently causing eustatic sea level rise. First, shrinking land ice, such as mountain glaciers and polar ice sheets, is releasing water into the oceans. Second, as ocean temperatures rise, the warmer water expands.\nShort-term and periodic changes.\nMany factors can produce short-term changes in sea level, typically within a few metres, in timeframes ranging from minutes to months:\nAviation.\nPilots can estimate height above sea level with an altimeter set to a defined barometric pressure. Generally, the pressure used to set the altimeter is the barometric pressure that would exist at MSL in the region being flown over. This pressure is referred to as either QNH or \"altimeter\" and is transmitted to the pilot by radio from air traffic control (ATC) or an automatic terminal information service (ATIS). Since the terrain elevation is also referenced to MSL, the pilot can estimate height above ground by subtracting the terrain altitude from the altimeter reading. Aviation charts are divided into boxes and the maximum terrain altitude from MSL in each box is clearly indicated. Once above the transition altitude, the altimeter is set to the international standard atmosphere (ISA) pressure at MSL which is 1013.25 hPa or 29.92 inHg.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "62530", "revid": "9021902", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62530", "title": "266 BC", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 266 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Pera and Pictor (or, less frequently, year 488 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 266 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy place.\nIndia.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "62531", "revid": "2387872", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62531", "title": "Charles X of France", "text": "King of France from 1824 to 1830\nCharles X (Charles Philippe; 9 October 1757 \u2013 6 November 1836) was King of France from 16 September 1824 until 2 August 1830. An uncle of the uncrowned Louis XVII and younger brother of reigning kings Louis XVI and Louis XVIII, he supported the latter in exile. After the Bourbon Restoration in 1814, Charles (as heir-presumptive) became the leader of the ultra-royalists, a radical monarchist faction within the French court that affirmed absolute monarchy by divine right and opposed the constitutional monarchy concessions towards liberals and the guarantees of civil liberties granted by the Charter of 1814. Charles gained influence within the French court after the assassination of his son Charles Ferdinand, Duke of Berry, in 1820 and succeeded his brother Louis XVIII in 1824.\nAt his coronation in 1825 he tried to revive the practice of the royal touch. The governments appointed under his reign reimbursed former landowners for the abolition of feudalism at the expense of bondholders, increased the power of the Catholic Church, and reimposed capital punishment for sacrilege, leading to conflict with the liberal-majority Chamber of Deputies.\nCharles approved the French conquest of Algeria as a way to distract his citizens from domestic problems, and forced Haiti to pay a hefty indemnity in return for lifting a blockade and recognizing Haiti's independence. He eventually appointed a conservative government under the premiership of Prince Jules de Polignac, who was defeated in the 1830 French legislative election. He responded with the July Ordinances disbanding the Chamber of Deputies, limiting franchise, and reimposing press censorship.\nWithin a week, Paris faced urban riots which led to the July Revolution of 1830, which resulted in his abdication and the election of Louis Philippe I as King of the French. He was the last of the French rulers from the senior branch of the House of Bourbon. Exiled once again, Charles died in 1836 in Gorizia, then part of the Austrian Empire.\nChildhood and adolescence.\nCharles Philippe of France was born in 1757, the youngest son of the Dauphin Louis and his wife, the Dauphine Marie Jos\u00e8phe, at the Palace of Versailles. Charles was created Count of Artois at birth by his grandfather, the reigning King Louis XV. As the youngest male in the family, Charles seemed unlikely ever to become king. His eldest brother, Louis, Duke of Burgundy, died unexpectedly in 1761, which moved Charles up one place in the line of succession. He was raised in early childhood by Madame de Marsan, the Governess of the Children of France. \nAt the death of his father in 1765, Charles's oldest surviving brother, Louis Auguste, became the new Dauphin (the heir apparent to the French throne). Their mother Marie Jos\u00e8phe, who never recovered from the loss of her husband, died in March 1767 from tuberculosis. This left Charles an orphan at the age of nine, along with his siblings Louis Auguste, Louis Stanislas, Count of Provence, Clotilde (\"Madame Clotilde\"), and \u00c9lisabeth (\"Madame \u00c9lisabeth\"). Louis XV fell ill on 27 April 1774 and died on 10 May of smallpox at the age of 64. His grandson Louis-Auguste succeeded him as King Louis XVI.\nMarriage and private life.\nIn November 1773, Charles married Marie Th\u00e9r\u00e8se of Savoy. In 1775, Marie Th\u00e9r\u00e8se gave birth to a boy, Louis Antoine, who was created Duke of Angoul\u00eame by Louis XVI. Louis-Antoine was the first of the next generation of Bourbons, as the king and the Count of Provence had not fathered any children yet, causing the Parisian \"libellistes\" (pamphleteers who published scandalous leaflets about important figures in court and politics) to lampoon Louis XVI's alleged impotence. Three years later, in 1778, Charles' second son, Charles Ferdinand, was born and given the title of Duke of Berry.\nAlso in 1778, Queen Marie Antoinette gave birth to her first child, Marie Th\u00e9r\u00e8se, quelling all rumours that she could not bear children. Charles was thought of as the most attractive member of his family, bearing a strong resemblance to his grandfather Louis XV. His wife was considered quite ugly by most contemporaries, and he looked for company in numerous extramarital affairs. According to the Count of H\u00e9zecques, \"few beauties were cruel to him\". Among his lovers was notably Anne Victoire Dervieux. Later, he embarked upon a lifelong love affair with the beautiful Louise de Polastron, the sister-in-law of Marie Antoinette's closest companion, the Duchess of Polignac.\nCharles struck up a firm friendship with Marie Antoinette herself, whom he had first met upon her arrival in France in April 1770 when he was twelve. The closeness of the relationship was such that he was falsely accused by Parisian rumour mongers of having seduced her. As part of Marie Antoinette's social set, Charles often appeared opposite her in the private theatre of her favourite royal retreat, the Petit Trianon. They were both said to be very talented amateur actors. Marie Antoinette played milkmaids, shepherdesses, and country ladies, whereas Charles played lovers, valets, and farmers.\nA famous story concerning the two involves the construction of the Ch\u00e2teau de Bagatelle. In 1775, Charles purchased a small hunting lodge in the Bois de Boulogne. He soon had the existing house torn down with plans to rebuild. Marie Antoinette wagered her brother-in-law that the new ch\u00e2teau could not be completed within three months. Charles engaged the neoclassical architect Fran\u00e7ois-Joseph B\u00e9langer to design the building. He won his bet, with B\u00e9langer completing the house in sixty-three days. It is estimated that the project, which came to include manicured gardens, cost over two million livres. Throughout the 1770s, Charles spent lavishly. He accumulated enormous debts, totalling 21 million livres. In the 1780s, King Louis XVI paid off the debts of both his brothers, the Counts of Provence and Artois.\nIn March 1778, Charles caused a scandal when he assaulted the Duchess of Bourbon, Bathilde d'Orl\u00e9ans, at a masked ball, while \"escorting [Madame] Canillac, a lady of the town ... After exchanging a few words, the irritated Duchess reached up and snatched off his mask whereupon he pulled her nose so hard and painfully that she wept.\" Her husband, Louis Henri, Prince of Cond\u00e9, challenged him to a duel, during which Charles was wounded in the hand. When the Bourbons later attended a play, they were received with \"enthusiastic cheers\", although the two men were reconciled the next year. This affair became known as: An Incident at the Opera Ball on Mardi Gras in 1778. In 1781, Charles acted as a proxy for Holy Roman Emperor Joseph II at the christening of his godson, the Dauphin Louis Joseph.\nCrisis and French Revolution.\nCharles's political awakening started with the first great crisis of the monarchy in 1786, when it became apparent that the kingdom was bankrupt from previous military endeavours (in particular the Seven Years' War and the American War of Independence) and needed fiscal reform to survive. Charles supported the removal of the aristocracy's financial privileges, but was opposed to any reduction in the social privileges enjoyed by either the Catholic Church or the nobility. He believed that France's finances should be reformed without the monarchy being overthrown. In his own words, it was \"time for repair, not demolition.\"\nKing Louis XVI eventually convened the Estates General, which had not been assembled for over 150 years, to meet in May 1789 to ratify financial reforms. Along with his sister \u00c9lisabeth, Charles was the most conservative member of the family and opposed the demands of the Third Estate (representing the commoners) to increase their voting power. This prompted criticism from his brother, who accused him of being \"plus royaliste que le roi\" (\"more royalist than the king\"). In June 1789, the representatives of the Third Estate declared themselves a National Assembly intent on providing France with a new constitution.\nIn conjunction with the Baron de Breteuil, Charles had political alliances arranged to depose the liberal minister of finance Jacques Necker. These plans backfired when Charles attempted to secure Necker's dismissal on 11 July without Breteuil's knowledge, much earlier than they had originally intended. It was the beginning of a decline in his political alliance with Breteuil, which ended in mutual loathing.\nNecker's dismissal provoked the storming of the Bastille on 14 July. With the concurrence of Louis XVI and Marie Antoinette, Charles and his family left France three days later, on 17 July, along with several other courtiers. These included the Duchess of Polignac, the queen's favourite. His flight was historically attributed to personal fears for his own safety. However recent research indicates that the King had approved his brother's departure in advance, seeing it as a means of ensuring that one close relative would be free to act as a spokesman for the monarchy, after Louis himself had been moved from Versailles to Paris.\nLife in exile.\nCharles and his family decided to seek refuge in Savoy, his wife's native country, where they were joined by some members of the Cond\u00e9 family. Meanwhile, in Paris, Louis XVI was struggling with the National Assembly, which was committed to radical reforms and had enacted the Constitution of 1791. In March 1791, the Assembly also enacted a regency bill that provided for the case of the king's premature death. While his heir Louis-Charles was still a minor, the Count of Provence, the Duke of Orl\u00e9ans or, if either was unavailable, someone chosen by election should become regent, completely passing over the rights of Charles who, in the royal lineage, stood between the Count of Provence and the Duke of Orl\u00e9ans.\nCharles meanwhile left Turin (in Italy) and moved to Trier in Germany, where his uncle, Clemens Wenceslaus of Saxony, was the incumbent Archbishop-Elector. Charles prepared for a counter-revolutionary invasion of France, but a letter by Marie Antoinette postponed it until after the royal family had escaped from Paris and joined a concentration of regular troops under Fran\u00e7ois Claude Amour, marquis de Bouill\u00e9 at Montm\u00e9dy.\nAfter the attempted flight was stopped at Varennes, Charles moved on to Koblenz, where he, the recently escaped Count of Provence and the Princes of Cond\u00e9 jointly declared their intention to invade France. The Count of Provence was sending dispatches to various European sovereigns for assistance, while Charles set up a court-in-exile in the Electorate of Trier. On 25 August, the rulers of the Holy Roman Empire and Prussia issued the Declaration of Pillnitz, which called on other European powers to intervene in France.\nOn New Year's Day 1792, the National Assembly declared all emigrants traitors, repudiated their titles and confiscated their lands. This measure was followed by the suspension and eventually the abolition of the monarchy in September 1792. The royal family was imprisoned, and the former king and former queen were eventually executed in 1793. The young former dauphin died of illnesses and neglect in 1795.\nWhen the French Revolutionary Wars broke out in 1792, Charles escaped to Great Britain, where King George III gave him a generous allowance. Charles lived in Edinburgh and London with his mistress Louise de Polastron. His older brother, dubbed Louis XVIII after the death of his nephew in June 1795, relocated to Verona and then to Jelgava Palace, Mitau, where Charles' son Louis Antoine married Louis XVI's only surviving child, Marie Th\u00e9r\u00e8se, on 10 June 1799. In 1802, Charles supported his brother with several thousand pounds. In 1807, Louis XVIII moved to the United Kingdom.\nBourbon Restoration.\nIn January 1814, Charles covertly left his home in London to join the Coalition forces in southern France. Louis XVIII, by then reliant on a wheelchair, supplied Charles with letters patent creating him Lieutenant General of the Kingdom of France. On 31 March, the Allies captured Paris. A week later, Napoleon abdicated. The Senate declared the restoration of the Bourbon monarchy, with Louis XVIII as King of France. Charles (now heir-presumptive) arrived in the capital on 12 April and acted as Lieutenant General of the realm until Louis XVIII arrived from the United Kingdom. During his brief tenure as regent, Charles created an ultra-royalist secret police that reported directly back to him without Louis XVIII's knowledge. It operated for over five years.\nLouis XVIII was greeted with great rejoicing from the Parisians and proceeded to occupy the Tuileries Palace. The Count of Artois lived in the \"Pavillon de Mars\", and the Duke of Angoul\u00eame in the \"Pavillon de Flore\", which overlooked the River Seine. The Duchess of Angoul\u00eame fainted upon arriving at the palace, as it brought back terrible memories of her family's incarceration there, and of the storming of the palace and the massacre of the Swiss Guards on 10 August 1792.\nFollowing the advice of the occupying allied army, Louis XVIII promulgated a liberal constitution, the Charter of 1814, which provided for a bicameral legislature, an electorate of 90,000 men and freedom of religion. After the Hundred Days, Napoleon's brief return to power in 1815, the White Terror focused mainly on the purging of a civilian administration which had almost completely turned against the Bourbon monarchy. About 70,000 officials were dismissed from their positions. The remnants of the Napoleonic army were disbanded after the Battle of Waterloo and its senior officers cashiered. Marshal Ney was executed for treason, and Marshal Brune was murdered by a crowd. Approximately 6,000 individuals who had rallied to Napoleon were brought to trial. There were about 300 mob lynchings in southern France, notably in Marseille where a number of Napoleon's Mamluks preparing to return to Egypt, were massacred in their barracks.\nKing's brother and heir presumptive.\nWhile the king retained the liberal charter, Charles patronised members of the ultra-royalists in parliament, such as Jules de Polignac, the writer Fran\u00e7ois-Ren\u00e9 de Chateaubriand and Jean-Baptiste de Vill\u00e8le. On several occasions, Charles voiced his disapproval of his brother's liberal ministers and threatened to leave the country unless Louis XVIII dismissed them. Louis, in turn, feared that his brother's and heir presumptive's ultra-royalist tendencies would send the family into exile once more (which they eventually did).\nOn 14 February 1820, Charles's younger son, the Duke of Berry, was assassinated at the Paris Opera. This loss not only plunged the family into grief but also put the succession in jeopardy, as Charles's elder son, the Duke of Angoul\u00eame, was childless. The lack of male heirs in the Bourbon main line raised the prospect of the throne passing to the Duke of Orl\u00e9ans and his heirs, which horrified the more conservative ultras. Parliament debated the abolition of the Salic law, which excluded females from the succession and was long held inviolable. However, the Duke of Berry's widow, Caroline of Naples and Sicily, was found to be pregnant and on 29 September 1820 gave birth to a son, Henry, Duke of Bordeaux. His birth was hailed as \"God-given\", and the people of France purchased for him the Ch\u00e2teau de Chambord in celebration of his birth. As a result, his granduncle, Louis XVIII, added the title Count of Chambord, hence Henri, Count of Chambord, the name by which he is usually known.\nReign.\nAscension and coronation.\nCharles' brother King Louis XVIII's health had been worsening since the beginning of 1824. Having both dry and wet gangrene in his legs and spine, he died on 16 September of that year, aged almost 69. Charles, by now aged 66, succeeded him to the throne as King Charles X. On 29 May 1825, King Charles was anointed at the cathedral of Reims, the traditional site of consecration of French kings; it had been unused since 1775, as Louis XVIII had forgone the ceremony to avoid controversy and because his health was too precarious. It was in the venerable cathedral of Notre-Dame at Paris that Napoleon had consecrated his revolutionary empire; but in ascending the throne of his ancestors, Charles reverted to the old place of coronation used by the kings of France from the early ages of the monarchy. The last coronation to be held there was the Coronation of Louis XVI in 1775. \nLike the regime of the Restoration itself, the coronation was conceived as a compromise between the monarchical tradition and the Charter of 1814: it took up the main phases of traditional ceremonial such as the seven anointings or the oaths on the Gospels, all by associating with it the oath of fidelity taken by the King to the Charter of 1814 or the participation of the great princes in the ceremonial as assistants of the Archbishop of Reims.\nA commission was charged with simplifying and modernizing the ceremony and making it compatible with the principles of the monarchy according to the Charter (deletion of the promises of struggle against heretics and infidels, of the twelve peers, of references to Hebrew royalty, etc.) \u2013 it lasted three and a half hours.\nIn fact, the choice of the coronation was applauded by the royalists in favor of a constitutional and parliamentary monarchy and not only by those nostalgic for the ancien r\u00e9gime; the fact that the ceremony was modernized and adapted to new times encouraged Chateaubriand, a non-absolutist royalist and enthusiastic supporter of the Charter of 1814, to invite the king to be crowned. In the brochure \"The King is Dead! Long live the king!\"\u00a0Chateaubriand explains that a coronation would have being the \"link in the chain which united the oath of the new monarchy to the oath of the old monarchy\"; it is continuity with the Ancien R\u00e9gime more than its return that the royalists extol, Charles X having inherited the qualities of his ancestors: \"pious like Saint Louis, affable, compassionate and vigilant like Louis XII, courteous like Francis I, frank as Henry IV\".\nThe coronation showed that dynastic continuity went hand in hand with political continuity; for Chateaubriand: \"The current constitution is only the rejuvenated text of the code of our old franchises\". This coronation took several days: the 28 May, vespers ceremony;\u00a0 29 May, ceremony of the coronation itself, chaired by the Archbishop of Reims, Jean-Baptiste de Latil, in the presence in particular of Chateaubriand, Lamartine, Victor Hugo, and a large audience; 30 May, award ceremony for the Knights of the Order of the Holy Spirit and finally, 31 May, the Royal touch of scrofula.\nThe coronation of Charles X therefore appeared to be a compromise between the tradition of the ancien r\u00e9gime and the political changes that had taken place since the Revolution. The coronation nevertheless had a limited influence on the population. It was Luigi Cherubini who composed the music for the Coronation Mass. For the occasion, the composer Gioachino Rossini composed the Opera \"Il Viaggio a Reims.\"\nDomestic policies.\nLike Napoleon and then Louis XVIII before him, Charles X resided mainly at the Tuileries Palace and, in summer, at the Ch\u00e2teau de Saint-Cloud, two buildings that no longer exist today. Occasionally he stayed at the Ch\u00e2teau de Compi\u00e8gne and the Ch\u00e2teau de Fontainebleau, while the Palace of Versailles, where he was born, remained uninhabited. The reign of Charles X began with some liberal measures such as the abolition of press censorship, but the king renewed the term of Joseph de Vill\u00e8lle, president of the council since 1822, and gave the reins of government to the ultraroyalists.\nCharles got closer to the population by the trip he made to the north of France in September 1827, then to the east of France in September 1828. He was accompanied by his eldest son and heir-apparent, the Duke of Angoul\u00eame, now Dauphin of France. In his first act as king, Charles attempted to bring comity to the House of Bourbon by granting the style of Royal Highness to his cousins of the House of Orl\u00e9ans, a title denied by Louis XVIII because of the former Duke of Orl\u00e9ans' vote for the death of Louis XVI.\nCharles gave his prime minister, Vill\u00e8lle lists of laws to be ratified in each parliament. In April 1825, the government approved legislation originally proposed by Louis XVIII to pay an indemnity (the \"biens nationaux\") to nobles whose estates had been confiscated during the Revolution. The law gave approximately 988 million francs worth of government bonds to those who had lost their lands, in exchange for their renunciation of their ownership. In the same month, the Anti-Sacrilege Act was passed. Charles's government attempted to re-establish male-only primogeniture for families paying over 300 francs in tax, but this was voted down in the Chamber of Deputies.\nCharles's unpopularity in the mostly-liberal minded urban Paris became apparent in April 1827, when chaos ensued during the king's review of the National Guard in Paris after several guardsmen chanted \"down with Vill\u00e8le!\" and \"down with the Jesuits!\". In retaliation, the National Guard was disbanded but, as its members were not disarmed, it remained a potential threat. After losing his parliamentary majority in a general election in November 1827, Charles dismissed Prime Minister Vill\u00e8le on 5 January 1828 and appointed Jean-Baptise de Martignac, a man the king disliked and thought of only as provisional. On 5 August 1829, Charles dismissed Martignac and appointed Jules de Polignac, who, however, lost his majority in parliament at the end of August, when the Chateaubriand faction defected. Regardless, Polignac retained power and refused to recall the Chambers until March 1830.\nConquest of Algeria.\nOn 31 January 1830, the Polignac government decided to send a military expedition to Algeria to end the threat of Algerian pirates to Mediterranean trade, hoping also to increase his government's popularity through a military victory. The pretext for the war was an outrage by the Viceroy of Algeria, who had struck the French consul with the handle of his fly swat in a rage over French failure to pay debts from Napoleon's invasion of Egypt. French troops occupied Algiers on 5 July.\nJuly Revolution.\nThe Chambers convened on 2 March 1830, but Charles's opening speech was greeted by negative reactions from many deputies. Some introduced a bill requiring the King's minister to obtain the support of the Chambers, and on 18 March,\u00a0221 deputies, a majority of 30, voted in favor. However, the King had already decided to hold general elections, and the chamber was suspended on 19 March.\nThe elections of 23 June did not produce a majority favorable to the government. On 6 July, the king and his ministers decided to suspend the constitution, as provided for in Article 14 of the Charter in case of emergency. On 25 July, at the royal residence in Saint-Cloud, Charles issued four ordinances that censored the press, dissolved the newly elected chamber, altered the electoral system, and called for elections under the new system in September.\nThe Ordinances were intended to quell the popular discontent but had the opposite effect. Journalists gathered in protest at the headquarters of the \"National\" daily, founded in January 1830 by Adolphe Thiers, Armand Carrel, and others. On Monday, 26 July, the government newspaper \"Le Moniteur Universel\" published the ordinances, and Thiers published a call to revolt signed by forty-three journalists:\n\"The legal regime has been interrupted: that of force has begun... Obedience ceases to be a duty!\" In the evening, crowds assembled in the gardens of the Palais-Royal, shouting \"Down with the Bourbons!\" and \"Long live the Charter!\". As the police closed off the gardens, the crowd regrouped in a nearby street where they shattered streetlamps.\nThe next morning of 27 July, police raided and shut down newspapers including \"Le National\". When the protesters, who had re-entered the Palais-Royal gardens, heard of this, they threw stones at the soldiers, prompting them to shoot. By evening, the city was in chaos and shops were looted. On 28 July, the rioters began to erect barricades in the streets. Marshal Marmont, who had been called in the day before to remedy the situation, took the offensive, but some of his men defected to the rioters, and by afternoon he had to retreat to the Tuileries Palace.\nThe members of the Chamber of Deputies sent a five-man delegation to Marmont, urging him to advise the king to assuage the protesters by revoking the four Ordinances. On Marmont's request, the prime minister applied to the king, but Charles refused all compromise and dismissed his ministers that afternoon, realizing the precariousness of the situation. That evening, the members of the Chamber assembled at Jacques Laffitte's house and elected Louis Philippe d'Orl\u00e9ans to take the throne from King Charles, proclaiming their decision on posters throughout the city. By the end of the day, the authority of Charles' government had evaporated.\nA few minutes after midnight on 31 July, warned by General Gresseau that Parisians were planning to attack the Saint-Cloud residence, Charles X decided to seek refuge in Versailles with his family and the court, with the exception of the Duke of Angoul\u00eame, who stayed behind with the troops, and the Duchess of Angoul\u00eame, who was taking the waters at Vichy. Meanwhile, in Paris, Louis Philippe assumed the post of Lieutenant General of the Kingdom. Charles' road to Versailles was filled with disorganized troops and deserters. The Marquis de V\u00e9rac, governor of the Palace of Versailles, came to meet the king before the royal cort\u00e8ge entered the town, to tell him that the palace was not safe, as the Versailles national guards wearing the revolutionary tricolor were occupying the \"Place d'Armes\". Charles then set out for the Trianon at five in the morning. Later that day, after the arrival of the Duke of Angoul\u00eame from Saint-Cloud with his troops, Charles ordered a departure for Rambouillet, where they arrived shortly before midnight. On the morning of 1 August, the Duchess of Angoul\u00eame, who had rushed from Vichy after learning of events, arrived at Rambouillet.\nThe following day, 2 August, King Charles X abdicated, bypassing his son the Dauphin in favor of his grandson Henry, Duke of Bordeaux, who was not yet ten years old. At first, the Duke of Angoul\u00eame (the Dauphin) refused to countersign the document renouncing his rights to the throne of France. According to the Duchess of Maill\u00e9, \"there was a strong altercation between the father and the son. We could hear their voices in the next room.\" Finally, after twenty minutes, the Duke of Angoul\u00eame reluctantly countersigned his father's declaration:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"My cousin, I am too deeply pained by the ills that afflict or could threaten my people, not to seek means of avoiding them. Therefore, I have made the resolution to abdicate the crown in favor of my grandson, the Duke of Bordeaux. The Dauphin, who shares my feelings, also renounces his rights in favor of his nephew. It will thus fall to you, in your capacity as Lieutenant General of the Kingdom, to proclaim the accession of Henri V to the throne. Furthermore, you will take all pertinent measures to regulate the forms of government during the new king's minority. Here, I limit myself to stating these arrangements, as a means of avoiding further evils. You will communicate my intentions to the diplomatic corps, and you will let me know as soon as possible the proclamation by which my grandson will be recognized as king under the name of Henri V.\"\nLouis Philippe ignored the document and on 9 August had himself proclaimed King of the French by the members of the Chamber.\nSecond exile and death.\nWhen it became apparent that a mob 14,000 strong was preparing to attack, the royal family left Rambouillet and, on 16 August, embarked for the United Kingdom on packet steamers provided by Louis Philippe. Informed by the British prime minister, the Duke of Wellington, that they needed to arrive in Britain as private citizens, all family members adopted pseudonyms; Charles X styled himself \"Count of Ponthieu\". The Bourbons were greeted coldly by the British, who upon their arrival mockingly waved the newly adopted tricolour flags at them. Charles X was quickly followed to Britain by his creditors, who had lent him vast sums during his first exile and were yet to be repaid in full. However, the family was able to use money Charles's wife had deposited in London. The Bourbons were allowed to reside in Lulworth Castle in Dorset, but quickly moved to Holyrood Palace in Edinburgh, near the Duchess of Berry at Regent Terrace.\nCharles' relationship with his daughter-in-law proved uneasy, as the Duchess declared herself regent for her son Henry, Duke of Bordeaux, who was now the legitimist pretender to the French throne. Charles at first denied her this role, but in December agreed to support her claim once she had landed in France. In 1831, the Duchess made her way from Britain by way of the Netherlands, Prussia and Austria to her family in Naples. Having gained little support, she arrived in Marseille in April 1832, and made her way to the Vend\u00e9e, where she tried to instigate an uprising against the new regime. There she was imprisoned, much to the embarrassment of her father-in-law Charles. He was further dismayed when after her release the Duchess married the Count of Lucchesi Palli, a minor Neapolitan noble. In response to this morganatic match, Charles banned her from seeing her children.\nAt the invitation of Emperor Francis I of Austria, the Bourbons moved to Prague in winter 1832/33 and were given lodging at the Hradschin Palace. In September 1833, Bourbon legitimists gathered in Prague to celebrate the Duke of Bordeaux's thirteenth birthday. They expected grand celebrations, but Charles X merely proclaimed his grandson's majority. On the same day, after much cajoling by Chateaubriand, Charles agreed to a meeting with his daughter-in-law, which took place in Leoben on 13 October 1833. The children of the Duchess refused to meet her after they learned of her second marriage. Charles refused the Duchess' demands, but after protests from his other daughter-in-law, the Duchess of Angoul\u00eame, he acquiesced. In the summer of 1834, he again allowed the Duchess of Berry to see her children.\nUpon the death of the Austrian emperor Francis in March 1835, the Bourbons left Prague Castle, as the new emperor Ferdinand wished to use it for coronation ceremonies. The Bourbons moved initially to Teplitz. Then, as Ferdinand continued his use of Prague Castle, Kirchberg Castle was purchased for them. Moving there was postponed due to an outbreak of cholera in the locality. In the meantime, Charles left for the warmer climate on Austria's Mediterranean coast in October 1835. Upon his arrival at G\u00f6rz (Gorizia) in the Kingdom of Illyria, he caught cholera and died on 6 November 1836. The townspeople draped their windows in black mourning. Charles was interred in the Church of the Annunciation of Our Lady, in the Franciscan Kostanjevica Monastery (now in Nova Gorica, Slovenia), where his remains lie in a crypt with those of his family. He is the only King of France to be buried outside the country. A movement reportedly began in 2016 advocating for Charles X's remains to be buried along with other French monarchs in the Basilica of St Denis, although Louis Alphonse, current head of the House of Bourbon, stated in 2017 that he wished the remains of his ancestors to lie undisturbed.\nLegacy.\nThe King Charles Pub in Poole was renamed after Charles in 1830.\nMarriage and issue.\nCharles X married Princess Maria Teresa of Savoy, the daughter of King Victor Amadeus III of Sardinia, and Maria Antonietta of Spain, on 16 November 1773.\nThe couple had four children \u2013 two sons and two daughters \u2013 but the daughters did not survive childhood. Only the oldest son survived his father. The children were:\nIn fiction and film.\nThe Count of Artois is portrayed by Al Weaver in Sofia Coppola's motion picture \"Marie Antoinette\".\nThe Count of Artois is also portrayed by Max Libert in the 2024 miniseries \"Franklin.\" \nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "62532", "revid": "1754504", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62532", "title": "History of board games", "text": ""}
{"id": "62534", "revid": "125972", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62534", "title": "Pepin I", "text": "Pepin I or Pippin I may refer to:\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n Topics referred to by the same termThis page lists articles about people with the same name. "}
{"id": "62535", "revid": "10951369", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62535", "title": "Pepin II", "text": "Pepin II or Pippin II may refer to:\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n Topics referred to by the same termThis page lists articles about people with the same name. "}
{"id": "62536", "revid": "13051", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62536", "title": "History of Board Games", "text": ""}
{"id": "62538", "revid": "3525933", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62538", "title": "Carloman", "text": "Carloman () may refer to:\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n Topics referred to by the same termThis page lists articles about people with the same name. "}
{"id": "62539", "revid": "48336161", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62539", "title": "Pepin of Landen", "text": "Mayor of the Palace of Austrasia under King Dagobert I (623-629)\nPepin I (also Peppin, Pipin, or Pippin) of Landen (c. 580 \u2013 27 February 640), also called the Elder or the Old, was the Mayor of the palace of Austrasia under the Merovingian King Dagobert I from 623 to 629. He was also the Mayor for Sigebert III from 639 until his death.\nLife.\nPepin's father was named Carloman by the \"Chronicle of Fredegar,\" the chief source for his life. His byname comes from his probable birthplace: Landen, modern Belgium. However, according to Godefroid Kurth, it was only in the twelfth century that the chroniclers of Brabant began to associate him with that locality. He is sometimes called Pepin I and his other nicknames (Elder and Old) come from his position at the head of the family called the Pippinids after him.\nHe was lord of a great part of Brabant, and governor of Austrasia, when their king, Theodebert II, was defeated by Theodoric II, king of Burgundy. In 613, several leading magnates of Austrasia and Burgundy abandoned Brunhilda, the great-grandmother and regent of their king, Sigebert II, and turned to Chlothar II of Neustria for support, promising not to rise in defense of the queen-regent and recognizing Chlothar as rightful regent and guardian of the young king. Chief among these leading men were Warnachar II, Rado, Arnulf, and Pepin. The latter two were described by Fredegar as the \"two most powerful barons of Austrasia\" and they made some agreement with Chlothar at Andernach. However, while Rado was confirmed as mayor in Austrasia and Warnachar in Burgundy, Pepin did not receive his reward until 623, when he was appointed mayor in Austrasia after Chlothar made his young son Dagobert king there. Arnulf, his lifelong friend, was appointed adviser to the new king alongside him.\nPepin was praised by his contemporaries for his good government and wise counsel. Though some enemies tried to turn the king against him, their plots were foiled and Pepin remained on good terms with the king until 629, when, for reasons unknown, he retired (or was retired) to his estates, where he remained for the next decade, until Dagobert's death.\nOn Dagobert's death, Pepin came out of retirement to take on the mayoralty in Austrasia for the heir Sigebert III and to oversee the distribution of the treasury between Sigebert and his brother, Clovis II, and his stepmother Nanthild, who was ruling on Clovis' behalf in Neustria and Burgundy. Sigebert's share of the inheritance was amicably surrendered, partly because of the friendship between Pepin and the Burgundian mayor of the palace, Aega. Pepin and Arnulf's successor as chief counselor to the king, Cunibert, Bishop of Cologne, received the treasure at Compi\u00e8gne and brought it back to Metz. Pepin died in 640. He was so popular in Austrasia that, though he was never canonized, he was listed as a saint in some martyrologies. Butler lists him as \"blessed\". His feast day was 21 February.\nMarriage and children.\nMarried Itta of Metz and had four children:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "62544", "revid": "35028171", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62544", "title": "Shannon\u2013Fano coding", "text": "Data compression algorithms\nIn the field of data compression, Shannon\u2013Fano coding, named after Claude Shannon and Robert Fano, is one of two related techniques for constructing a prefix code based on a set of symbols and their probabilities (estimated or measured).\nShannon\u2013Fano codes are suboptimal in the sense that they do not always achieve the lowest possible expected codeword length, as Huffman coding does. However, Shannon\u2013Fano codes have an expected codeword length within 1 bit of optimal. Fano's method usually produces encoding with shorter expected lengths than Shannon's method. However, Shannon's method is easier to analyse theoretically.\nShannon\u2013Fano coding should not be confused with Shannon\u2013Fano\u2013Elias coding (also known as Elias coding), the precursor to arithmetic coding.\nNaming.\nRegarding the confusion in the two different codes being referred to by the same name, Kraj\u010di et al. write:\nAround 1948, both Claude E. Shannon (1948) and Robert M. Fano (1949) independently proposed two different source coding algorithms for an efficient description of a discrete memoryless source. Unfortunately, in spite of being different, both schemes became known under the same name \"Shannon\u2013Fano coding\".\nThere are several reasons for this mixup. For one thing, in the discussion of his coding scheme, Shannon mentions Fano\u2019s scheme and calls it \u201csubstantially the same\u201d (Shannon, 1948, p. 17 [reprint]). For another, both Shannon\u2019s and Fano\u2019s coding schemes are similar in the sense that they both are efficient, but \"suboptimal\" prefix-free coding schemes with a similar performance.\nShannon's (1948) method, using predefined word lengths, is called Shannon\u2013Fano coding by Cover and Thomas, Goldie and Pinch, Jones and Jones, and Han and Kobayashi. It is called Shannon coding by Yeung.\nFano's (1949) method, using binary division of probabilities, is called Shannon\u2013Fano coding by Salomon and Gupta. It is called Fano coding by Kraj\u010di et al.\nShannon's code: predefined word lengths.\nShannon's algorithm.\nShannon's method starts by deciding on the lengths of all the codewords, then picks a prefix code with those word lengths.\nGiven a source with probabilities formula_3 the desired codeword lengths are formula_4. Here, formula_5 is the ceiling function, meaning the smallest integer greater than or equal to formula_6.\nOnce the codeword lengths have been determined, we must choose the codewords themselves. One method is to pick codewords in order from most probable to least probable symbols, picking each codeword to be the lexicographically first word of the correct length that maintains the prefix-free property.\nA second method makes use of cumulative probabilities. First, the probabilities are written in decreasing order formula_7. Then, the cumulative probabilities are defined as\nformula_8\nso formula_9 and so on.\nThe codeword for symbol formula_1 is chosen to be the first formula_11 binary digits in the binary expansion of formula_12.\nExample.\nThis example shows the construction of a Shannon\u2013Fano code for a small alphabet. There are 5 different source symbols. Suppose 39 total symbols have been observed with the following frequencies, from which we can estimate the symbol probabilities.\nThis source has entropy formula_13 bits.\nFor the Shannon\u2013Fano code, we need to calculate the desired word lengths formula_4.\nWe can pick codewords in order, choosing the lexicographically first word of the correct length that maintains the prefix-free property. Clearly A gets the codeword 00. To maintain the prefix-free property, B's codeword may not start 00, so the lexicographically first available word of length 3 is 010. Continuing like this, we get the following code:\nAlternatively, we can use the cumulative probability method.\nNote that although the codewords under the two methods are different, the word lengths are the same. We have lengths of 2 bits for A, and 3 bits for B, C, D and E, giving an average length of\nformula_15\nwhich is within one bit of the entropy.\nExpected word length.\nFor Shannon's method, the word lengths satisfy\nformula_16\nHence the expected word length satisfies\nformula_17\nHere, formula_18 is the entropy, and Shannon's source coding theorem says that any code must have an average length of at least formula_19. Hence we see that the Shannon\u2013Fano code is always within one bit of the optimal expected word length.\nFano's code: binary splitting.\nOutline of Fano's code.\nIn Fano's method, the symbols are arranged in order from most probable to least probable, and then divided into two sets whose total probabilities are as close as possible to being equal. All symbols then have the first digits of their codes assigned; symbols in the first set receive \"0\" and symbols in the second set receive \"1\". As long as any sets with more than one member remain, the same process is repeated on those sets, to determine successive digits of their codes. When a set has been reduced to one symbol this means the symbol's code is complete and will not form the prefix of any other symbol's code.\nThe algorithm produces fairly efficient variable-length encodings; when the two smaller sets produced by a partitioning are in fact of equal probability, the one bit of information used to distinguish them is used most efficiently. Unfortunately, Shannon\u2013Fano coding does not always produce optimal prefix codes; the set of probabilities {0.35, 0.17, 0.17, 0.16, 0.15} is an example of one that will be assigned non-optimal codes by Shannon\u2013Fano coding.\nFano's version of Shannon\u2013Fano coding is used in the codice_1 compression method, which is part of the codice_2 file format.\nThe Shannon\u2013Fano tree.\nA Shannon\u2013Fano tree is built according to a specification designed to define an effective code table. The actual algorithm is simple:\nExample.\nWe continue with the previous example.\nAll symbols are sorted by frequency, from left to right (shown in Figure a). Putting the dividing line between symbols B and C results in a total of 22 in the left group and a total of 17 in the right group. This minimizes the difference in totals between the two groups.\nWith this division, A and B will each have a code that starts with a 0 bit, and the C, D, and E codes will all start with a 1, as shown in Figure b. Subsequently, the left half of the tree gets a new division between A and B, which puts A on a leaf with code 00 and B on a leaf with code 01.\nAfter four division procedures, a tree of codes results. In the final tree, the three symbols with the highest frequencies have all been assigned 2-bit codes, and two symbols with lower counts have 3-bit codes as shown table below:\nThis results in lengths of 2 bits for A, B and C and per 3 bits for D and E, giving an average length of\nformula_20\nWe see that Fano's method, with an average length of 2.28, has outperformed Shannon's method, with an average length of 2.62.\nExpected word length.\nIt is shown by Kraj\u010di et al that the expected length of Fano's method has expected length bounded above by formula_21, where formula_22 is the probability of the least common symbol.\nComparison with other coding methods.\nNeither Shannon\u2013Fano algorithm is guaranteed to generate an optimal code. For this reason, Shannon\u2013Fano codes are almost never used; Huffman coding is almost as computationally simple and produces prefix codes that always achieve the lowest possible expected code word length, under the constraints that each symbol is represented by a code formed of an integral number of bits. This is a constraint that is often unneeded, since the codes will be packed end-to-end in long sequences. If we consider groups of codes at a time, symbol-by-symbol Huffman coding is only optimal if the probabilities of the symbols are independent and are some power of a half, i.e., formula_23. In most situations, arithmetic coding can produce greater overall compression than either Huffman or Shannon\u2013Fano, since it can encode in fractional numbers of bits which more closely approximate the actual information content of the symbol. However, arithmetic coding has not superseded Huffman the way that Huffman supersedes Shannon\u2013Fano, both because arithmetic coding is more computationally expensive and because it is covered by multiple patents.\nHuffman coding.\nA few years later, David A. Huffman (1952) gave a different algorithm that always produces an optimal tree for any given symbol probabilities. While Fano's Shannon\u2013Fano tree is created by dividing from the root to the leaves, the Huffman algorithm works in the opposite direction, merging from the leaves to the root. \nExample with Huffman coding.\nWe use the same frequencies as for the Shannon\u2013Fano example above, viz:\nIn this case D &amp; E have the lowest frequencies and so are allocated 0 and 1 respectively and grouped together with a combined probability of 0.282. The lowest pair now are B and C so they're allocated 0 and 1 and grouped together with a combined probability of 0.333. This leaves BC and DE now with the lowest probabilities so 0 and 1 are prepended to their codes and they are combined. This then leaves just A and BCDE, which have 0 and 1 prepended respectively and are then combined. This leaves us with a single node and our algorithm is complete.\nThe code lengths for the different characters this time are 1 bit for A and 3 bits for all other characters.\nThis results in the lengths of 1 bit for A and per 3 bits for B, C, D and E, giving an average length of\nformula_24\nWe see that the Huffman code has outperformed both types of Shannon\u2013Fano code, which had expected lengths of 2.62 and 2.28.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "62545", "revid": "653042", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62545", "title": "Arithmetic coding", "text": "Form of entropy encoding used in data compression\nArithmetic coding (AC) is a form of entropy encoding used in lossless data compression. Normally, a string of characters is represented using a fixed number of bits per character, as in the ASCII code. When a string is converted to arithmetic encoding, frequently used characters will be stored with fewer bits and not-so-frequently occurring characters will be stored with more bits, resulting in fewer bits used in total. Arithmetic coding differs from other forms of entropy encoding, such as Huffman coding, in that rather than separating the input into component symbols and replacing each with a code, arithmetic coding encodes the entire message into a single number, an arbitrary-precision fraction \"q\", where 0.0 \u2264 \"q\" &lt; 1.0.\nImplementation details and examples.\nEqual probabilities.\nIn the simplest case, the probability of each symbol occurring is equal. For example, consider a set of three symbols, A, B, and C, each equally likely to occur. Encoding the symbols one by one would require 2 bits per symbol, which is wasteful: one of the bit variations is never used. That is to say, symbols A, B and C might be encoded respectively as 00, 01 and 10, with 11 unused.\nA more efficient solution is to represent a sequence of these three symbols as a rational number in base 3 where each digit represents a symbol. For example, the sequence \"ABBCAB\" could become 0.0112013, in arithmetic coding as a value in the interval [0,\u00a01). The next step is to encode this ternary number using a fixed-point binary number of sufficient precision to recover it, such as 0.00101100012 \u2013 this is only 10 bits; 2 bits are saved in comparison with na\u00efve block encoding. This is feasible for long sequences because there are efficient, in-place algorithms for converting the base of arbitrarily precise numbers.\nTo decode the value, knowing the original string had length\u00a06, one can simply convert back to base\u00a03, round to 6 digits, and recover the string.\nDefining a model.\nIn general, arithmetic coders can produce near-optimal output for any given set of symbols and probabilities. (The optimal value is \u2212log2\"P\" bits for each symbol of probability \"P\"; see \"Source coding theorem\".) Compression algorithms that use arithmetic coding start by determining a model of the data \u2013 basically a prediction of what patterns will be found in the symbols of the message. The more accurate this prediction is, the closer to optimal the output will be.\nExample: a simple, static model for describing the output of a particular monitoring instrument over time might be:\nModels can also handle alphabets other than the simple four-symbol set chosen for this example. More sophisticated models are also possible: \"higher-order\" modelling changes its estimation of the current probability of a symbol based on the symbols that precede it (the \"context\"), so that in a model for English text, for example, the percentage chance of \"u\" would be much higher when it follows a \"Q\" or a \"q\". Models can even be \"adaptive\", so that they continually change their prediction of the data based on what the stream actually contains. The decoder must have the same model as the encoder.\nEncoding and decoding: overview.\nIn general, each step of the encoding process, except for the last, is the same; the encoder has basically just three pieces of data to consider:\nThe encoder divides the current interval into sub-intervals, each representing a fraction of the current interval proportional to the probability of that symbol in the current context. Whichever interval corresponds to the actual symbol that is next to be encoded becomes the interval used in the next step.\nExample: for the four-symbol model above:\nWhen all symbols have been encoded, the resulting interval unambiguously identifies the sequence of symbols that produced it. Anyone who has the same final interval and model that is being used can reconstruct the symbol sequence that must have entered the encoder to result in that final interval.\nIt is not necessary to transmit the final interval, however; it is only necessary to transmit \"one fraction\" that lies within that interval. In particular, it is only necessary to transmit enough digits (in whatever base) of the fraction so that all fractions that begin with those digits fall into the final interval; this will guarantee that the resulting code is a prefix code.\nEncoding and decoding: example.\nConsider the process for decoding a message encoded with the given four-symbol model. The message is encoded in the fraction 0.538 (using decimal for clarity, instead of binary; also assuming that there are only as many digits as needed to decode the message.)\nThe process starts with the same interval used by the encoder: [0,1), and using the same model, dividing it into the same four sub-intervals that the encoder must have. The fraction 0.538 falls into the sub-interval for NEUTRAL, [0, 0.6); this indicates that the first symbol the encoder read must have been NEUTRAL, so this is the first symbol of the message.\nNext divide the interval [0, 0.6) into sub-intervals:\nSince 0.538 is within the interval [0.48, 0.54), the second symbol of the message must have been NEGATIVE.\nAgain divide our current interval into sub-intervals:\nNow 0.538 falls within the interval of the END-OF-DATA symbol; therefore, this must be the next symbol. Since it is also the internal termination symbol, it means the decoding is complete. If the stream is not internally terminated, there needs to be some other way to indicate where the stream stops. Otherwise, the decoding process could continue forever, mistakenly reading more symbols from the fraction than were in fact encoded into it.\nSources of inefficiency.\nThe message 0.538 in the previous example could have been encoded by the equally short fractions 0.534, 0.535, 0.536, 0.537 or 0.539. This suggests that the use of decimal instead of binary introduced some inefficiency. This is correct; the information content of a three-digit decimal is formula_1 bits; the same message could have been encoded in the binary fraction 0.10001001 (equivalent to 0.53515625 decimal) at a cost of only 8 bits.\nThis 8 bit output is larger than the information content, or entropy, of the message, which is\nformula_2\nBut an integer number of bits must be used in the binary encoding, so an encoder for this message would use at least 8 bits, resulting in a message 8.4% larger than the entropy contents. This inefficiency of at most 1 bit results in relatively less overhead as the message size grows.\nMoreover, the claimed symbol probabilities were [0.6,\u00a00.2,\u00a00.1,\u00a00.1), but the actual frequencies in this example are [0.33,\u00a00,\u00a00.33,\u00a00.33). If the intervals are readjusted for these frequencies, the entropy of the message would be 4.755 bits and the same NEUTRAL NEGATIVE END-OF-DATA message could be encoded as intervals [0,\u00a01/3); [1/9,\u00a02/9); [5/27,\u00a06/27); and a binary interval of [0.00101111011, 0.00111000111). This is also an example of how statistical coding methods like arithmetic encoding can produce an output message that is larger than the input message, especially if the probability model is off.\nAdaptive arithmetic coding.\nOne advantage of arithmetic coding over other similar methods of data compression is the convenience of adaptation. \"Adaptation\" is the changing of the frequency (or probability) tables while processing the data. The decoded data matches the original data as long as the frequency table in decoding is replaced in the same way and in the same step as in encoding. The synchronization is, usually, based on a combination of symbols occurring during the encoding and decoding process.\nPrecision and renormalization.\nThe above explanations of arithmetic coding contain some simplification. In particular, they are written as if the encoder first calculated the fractions representing the endpoints of the interval in full, using infinite precision, and only converted the fraction to its final form at the end of encoding. Rather than try to simulate infinite precision, most arithmetic coders instead operate at a fixed limit of precision which they know the decoder will be able to match, and round the calculated fractions to their nearest equivalents at that precision. An example shows how this would work if the model called for the interval [0,1) to be divided into thirds, and this was approximated with 8 bit precision. Note that since now the precision is known, so are the binary ranges we'll be able to use.\nA process called \"renormalization\" keeps the finite precision from becoming a limit on the total number of symbols that can be encoded. Whenever the range is reduced to the point where all values in the range share certain beginning digits, those digits are sent to the output. For however many digits of precision the computer \"can\" handle, it is now handling fewer than that, so the existing digits are shifted left, and at the right, new digits are added to expand the range as widely as possible. Note that this result occurs in two of the three cases from our previous example.\nArithmetic coding as a generalized change of radix.\nRecall that in the case where the symbols had equal probabilities, arithmetic coding could be implemented by a simple change of base, or radix. In general, arithmetic (and range) coding may be interpreted as a \"generalized\" change of radix. For example, we may look at any sequence of symbols:\nformula_3\nas a number in a certain base presuming that the involved symbols form an ordered set and each symbol in the ordered set denotes a sequential integer A\u00a0=\u00a00, B\u00a0=\u00a01, C\u00a0=\u00a02, D\u00a0=\u00a03, and so on. This results in the following frequencies and cumulative frequencies:\nThe \"cumulative frequency\" for an item is the sum of all frequencies preceding the item. In other words, cumulative frequency is a running total of frequencies.\nIn a positional numeral system the radix, or base, is numerically equal to a number of different symbols used to express the number. For example, in the decimal system the number of symbols is 10, namely 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, and 9. The radix is used to express any finite integer in a presumed multiplier in polynomial form. For example, the number 457 is actually 4\u00d7102\u00a0+\u00a05\u00d7101\u00a0+\u00a07\u00d7100, where base 10 is presumed but not shown explicitly.\nInitially, we will convert DABDDB into a base-6 numeral, because 6 is the length of the string. The string is first mapped into the digit string 301331, which then maps to an integer by the polynomial:\nformula_4\nThe result 23671 has a length of 15 bits, which is not very close to the theoretical limit (the entropy of the message), which is approximately 9 bits.\nTo encode a message with a length closer to the theoretical limit imposed by information theory we need to slightly generalize the classic formula for changing the radix. We will compute lower and upper bounds \"L\" and \"U\" and choose a number between them. For the computation of \"L\" we multiply each term in the above expression by the product of the frequencies of all previously occurred symbols:\nformula_5\nThe difference between this polynomial and the polynomial above is that each term is multiplied by the product of the frequencies of all previously occurring symbols. More generally, \"L\" may be computed as:\nformula_6\nwhere formula_7 are the cumulative frequencies and formula_8 are the frequencies of occurrences. Indexes denote the position of the symbol in a message. In the special case where all frequencies formula_8 are 1, this is the change-of-base formula.\nThe upper bound \"U\" will be \"L\" plus the product of all frequencies; in this case \"U\" = \"L\" + (3 \u00d7 1 \u00d7 2 \u00d7 3 \u00d7 3 \u00d7 2) = 25002 + 108 = 25110. In general, \"U\" is given by:\nformula_10\nNow we can choose any number from the interval [\"L\", \"U\") to represent the message; one convenient choice is the value with the longest possible trail of zeroes, 25100, since it allows us to achieve compression by representing the result as 251\u00d7102. The zeroes can also be truncated, giving 251, if the length of the message is stored separately. Longer messages will tend to have longer trails of zeroes.\nTo decode the integer 25100, the polynomial computation can be reversed as shown in the table below. At each stage the current symbol is identified, then the corresponding term is subtracted from the result.\nDuring decoding we take the floor after dividing by the corresponding power of 6. The result is then matched against the cumulative intervals and the appropriate symbol is selected from look up table. When the symbol is identified the result is corrected. The process is continued for the known length of the message or while the remaining result is positive. The only difference compared to the classical change-of-base is that there may be a range of values associated with each symbol. In this example, A is always 0, B is either 1 or 2, and D is any of 3, 4, 5. This is in exact accordance with our intervals that are determined by the frequencies. When all intervals are equal to 1 we have a special case of the classic base change.\nTheoretical limit of compressed message.\nThe lower bound \"L\" never exceeds \"n\"\"n\", where \"n\" is the size of the message, and so can be represented in formula_11 bits. After the computation of the upper bound \"U\" and the reduction of the message by selecting a number from the interval [\"L\",\u00a0\"U\") with the longest trail of zeros we can presume that this length can be reduced by formula_12 bits. Since each frequency in a product occurs exactly the same number of times as the value of this frequency, we can use the size of the alphabet \"A\" for the computation of the product\nformula_13\nApplying log2 for the estimated number of bits in the message, the final message (not counting a logarithmic overhead for the message length and frequency tables) will match the number of bits given by entropy, which for long messages is very close to optimal:\nformula_14\nIn other words, the efficiency of arithmetic encoding approaches the theoretical limit of formula_15 bits per symbol, as the message length approaches infinity.\nAsymptotic equipartition.\nWe can understand this intuitively. Suppose the source is ergodic, then it has the asymptotic equipartition property (AEP). By the AEP, after a long stream of formula_16 symbols, the interval of formula_17 is almost partitioned into almost equally-sized intervals.\nTechnically, for any small formula_18, for all large enough formula_16, there exists formula_20 strings formula_21, such that each string has almost equal probability formula_22, and their total probability is formula_23.\nFor any such string, it is arithmetically encoded by a binary string of length formula_24, where formula_24 is the smallest formula_24 such that there exists a fraction of form formula_27 in the interval for formula_21. Since the interval for formula_21 has size formula_30, we should expect it to contain one fraction of form formula_27 when formula_32.\nThus, with high probability, formula_21 can be arithmetically encoded with a binary string of length formula_34.\nConnections with other compression methods.\nHuffman coding.\nBecause arithmetic coding doesn't compress one datum at a time, it can get arbitrarily close to entropy when compressing IID strings. By contrast, using the extension of Huffman coding (to strings) does not reach entropy unless all probabilities of alphabet symbols are powers of two, in which case both Huffman and arithmetic coding achieve entropy.\nWhen naively Huffman coding binary strings, no compression is possible, even if entropy is low (e.g. ({0, 1}) has probabilities {0.95, 0.05}). Huffman encoding assigns 1 bit to each value, resulting in a code of the same length as the input. By contrast, arithmetic coding compresses bits well, approaching the optimal compression ratio of\nformula_35\nOne simple way to address Huffman coding's suboptimality is to concatenate symbols (\"blocking\") to form a new alphabet in which each new symbol represents a sequence of original symbols \u2013 in this case bits \u2013 from the original alphabet. In the above example, grouping sequences of three symbols before encoding would produce new \"super-symbols\" with the following frequencies:\nWith this grouping, Huffman coding averages 1.3 bits for every three symbols, or 0.433 bits per symbol, compared with one bit per symbol in the original encoding, i.e., formula_36 compression. Allowing arbitrarily large sequences gets arbitrarily close to entropy \u2013 just like arithmetic coding \u2013 but requires huge codes to do so, so is not as practical as arithmetic coding for this purpose.\nAn alternative is encoding run lengths via Huffman-based Golomb-Rice codes. Such an approach allows simpler and faster encoding/decoding than arithmetic coding or even Huffman coding, since the latter requires a table lookups. In the {0.95, 0.05} example, a Golomb-Rice code with a four-bit remainder achieves a compression ratio of formula_37, far closer to optimum than using three-bit blocks. Golomb-Rice codes only apply to Bernoulli inputs such as the one in this example, however, so it is not a substitute for blocking in all cases.\nHistory and patents.\nBasic algorithms for arithmetic coding were developed independently by Jorma J. Rissanen, at IBM Research, and by Richard C. Pasco, a Ph.D. student at Stanford University; both were published in May 1976. Pasco cites a pre-publication draft of Rissanen's article and comments on the relationship between their works:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;One algorithm of the family was developed independently by Rissanen [1976]. It shifts the code element to the most significant end of the accumulator, using a pointer obtained by addition and exponentiation. We shall now compare the alternatives in the three choices, and see that it is preferable to shift the code element rather than the accumulator, and to add code elements to the least significant end of the accumulator.\nLess than a year after publication, IBM filed for a US patent on Rissanen's work. Pasco's work was not patented.\nA variety of specific techniques for arithmetic coding have historically been covered by US patents, although various well-known methods have since passed into the public domain as the patents have expired. Techniques covered by patents may be essential for implementing the algorithms for arithmetic coding that are specified in some formal international standards. When this is the case, such patents are generally available for licensing under what is called \"reasonable and non-discriminatory\" (RAND) licensing terms (at least as a matter of standards-committee policy). In some well-known instances, (including some involving IBM patents that have since expired), such licenses were available for free, and in other instances, licensing fees have been required. The availability of licenses under RAND terms does not necessarily satisfy everyone who might want to use the technology, as what may seem \"reasonable\" for a company preparing a proprietary commercial software product may seem much less reasonable for a free software or open source project.\nAt least one significant compression software program, bzip2, deliberately discontinued the use of arithmetic coding in favor of Huffman coding due to the perceived patent situation at the time. Also, encoders and decoders of the JPEG file format, which has options for both Huffman encoding and arithmetic coding, typically only support the Huffman encoding option, which was originally because of patent concerns; the result is that nearly all JPEG images in use today use Huffman encoding although JPEG's arithmetic coding patents have expired due to the age of the JPEG standard (the design of which was approximately completed by 1990). JPEG XL, as well as archivers like PackJPG, Brunsli and Lepton, that can losslessly convert Huffman encoded files to ones with arithmetic coding (or asymmetric numeral systems in case of JPEG XL), show up to 25% size saving.\nThe JPEG image compression format's arithmetic coding algorithm is based on the following cited patents (since expired).\nOther patents (mostly also expired) related to arithmetic coding include the following.\nNote: This list is not exhaustive. See the following links for a list of more US patents. The Dirac codec uses arithmetic coding and is not patent pending.\nPatents on arithmetic coding may exist in other jurisdictions; see software patents for a discussion of the patentability of software around the world.\nBenchmarks and other technical characteristics.\nEvery programmatic implementation of arithmetic encoding has a different compression ratio and performance. While compression ratios vary only a little (usually under 1%), the code execution time can vary by a factor of 10. Choosing the right encoder from a list of publicly available encoders is not a simple task because performance and compression ratio depend also on the type of data, particularly on the size of the alphabet (number of different symbols). One of two particular encoders may have better performance for small alphabets while the other may show better performance for large alphabets. Most encoders have limitations on the size of the alphabet and many of them are specialized for alphabets of exactly two symbols (0 and 1)."}
{"id": "62546", "revid": "1314319890", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62546", "title": "Pepin of Herstal", "text": "Duke and Prince of the Franks (635\u2013714)\nPepin II (c.\u2009635\u00a0\u2013 16December 714), commonly known as Pepin of Herstal, was a Frankish statesman and military leader who was the de facto ruler of Francia as the Mayor of the Palace from 680 until his death. He took the title Duke and Prince of the Franks upon his conquest of all the Frankish realms.\nThe son of the powerful Frankish statesman Ansegisel, Pepin worked to establish his family, the Pippinids, as the strongest in Francia. He became Mayor of the Palace in Austrasia in 680. Pepin subsequently embarked on several wars to expand his power. He united all the Frankish realms by the conquests of Neustria and Burgundy in 687. In foreign conflicts, Pepin increased the power of the Franks by his subjugation of the Alemanni, the Frisians, and the Franconians. He also began the process of evangelisation in Germany.\nPepin's statesmanship was notable for the further decrease of Merovingian royal authority, and for the acceptance of his family's undisputed right to rule. Therefore, Pepin was able to name as heir his grandson Theudoald. But this was not accepted by his powerful son Charles Martel, leading to a civil war after his death in which the latter emerged victorious.\nBackground.\nPepin, sometimes called Pepin II and Pepin the Middle, was the grandson and namesake of Pepin I the Elder through the marriage of Pepin I's daughter Begga to Ansegisel. He was also the grandfather of Pepin the Short and great-grandfather of Charlemagne. That marriage united the two houses of the Pippinids and the Arnulfings which created what would be called the Carolingian dynasty. Pepin II was probably born in Herstal (H\u00e9ristal), modern Belgium (where his centre of power lay), whence his byname (sometimes \"of Heristal\").\nRise to power.\nAs mayor of Austrasia, Pepin and Martin, the duke of Laon, fought the Neustrian mayor Ebroin, who had designs on all Francia. Neustria, unlike Austrasia, had a tradition of a stronger central government. Ebroin defeated the Austrasians in the Battle of Lucofao and came close to uniting all the Franks under his rule; however, he was assassinated in 681, the victim of a combined attack by his numerous enemies Pepin immediately made peace with his successor, Waratton.\nHowever, Waratton's successor, Berchar, and the Neustrian king Theuderic III, who, since 679, was nominal king of all the Franks, made war on Austrasia. The king and his mayor were decisively defeated at the Battle of Tertry (Textrice) in the Vermandois in 687. Berchar and Theuderic withdrew themselves to Paris, where Pepin followed and eventually forced on them a peace treaty with the condition that Berchar leave his office. Pepin was created mayor in all three Frankish kingdoms (Austrasia, Neustria, and Burgundy) and began calling himself Duke and Prince of the Franks (\"dux et princeps Francorum\"). In the ensuing quarrels, Berchar killed his mother-in-law Ansfled and fled. His wife Anstrude married Pepin's eldest son Drogo, Duke of Champagne, and Pepin's place in Neustria was secured.\nDuke and Prince of the Franks.\nThe Neustrians barely tolerated an Austrasian overlord, but Pepin preferred to put these local resistances aside to deal with Germany.\nOver the next several years, Pepin subdued the Alemanni, Frisians, and Franconians, bringing them within the Frankish sphere of influence. Between 690 and 692, Utrecht fell. This gave the Franks control of important trade routes on the Rhine to the North Sea. He also supported the missionary work of Willibrord. In 695, he placed Drogo in the Burgundian mayorship and his other son, Grimoald, in the Neustrian one.\nAround 670, Pepin had married Plectrude, who had inherited substantial estates in the Moselle region. She was the mother of Drogo of Champagne and Grimoald II, both of whom died before their father. However, Pepin also had a mistress (or possibly, a second wife) named Alpaida (or Chalpaida) who bore him two more sons: Charles Martel and Childebrand.\nMarriage and children.\nPepin married Plectrude and had two children: \nPepin had one son by an unnamed mistress:\nPepin had one son by Alpaida:\nDeath and succession.\nJust before Pepin's death, Plectrude convinced him to disinherit the sons he had with his mistress Alpaida in favour of his grandson, Theudoald (the son of Pepin and Plectrude's son Grimoald), who was still a young child (and amenable to Plectrude's control). Pepin died suddenly at the age of 79 on 16 December 714, at Jupille (in modern Belgium). His grandchildren through Plectrude claimed themselves to be Pepin's true successors and, with the help of Plectrude, tried to maintain the position of mayor of the palace after Pepin's death. However, Charles (son of Pepin and Alpaida) had gained favour among the Austrasians, primarily for his military prowess and ability to keep them well supplied with booty from his conquests. Despite the efforts of Plectrude to silence her child's rival by imprisoning him, he became the sole mayor of the palace\u2014and \"de facto\" ruler of Francia\u2014after a civil war which lasted for more than three years after Pepin's death.\nCultural uses.\nIn 2018, the Dutch production company Farmhouse released a movie called \"Redbad\", based on the historical Radbod of Frisia and directed by Roel Rein\u00e9. Jonathan Banks played Pepin of Herstal, who is the main villain in this movie.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "62547", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62547", "title": "Postmodern/Music", "text": ""}
{"id": "62548", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62548", "title": "Q Codes", "text": ""}
{"id": "62549", "revid": "2886", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62549", "title": "Piotr Kroptokin", "text": ""}
{"id": "62550", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62550", "title": "Q Code", "text": ""}
{"id": "62556", "revid": "48643156", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62556", "title": "Joseph Bonaparte", "text": "King of Naples (1806\u201308) and Spain (1808\u201313)\nJoseph Bonaparte (born Giuseppe di Buonaparte, ; ; ; 7 January 1768\u00a0\u2013 28 July 1844), regnal name Joseph I, was a French statesman, lawyer, diplomat and older brother of Napoleon Bonaparte. In 1806, Napoleon made him King of Naples, and then King of Spain and the Indies in 1808. After the fall of Napoleon, Joseph styled himself \"Comte de Survilliers\" and emigrated to the United States, where he lived in the Point Breeze estate at Bordentown, New Jersey.\nEarly life and career.\nJoseph was born in 1768 as Giuseppe Buonaparte to Carlo Buonaparte and Maria Letizia Ramolino at Corte, the capital of the Corsican Republic. In the year of his birth, Corsica was invaded by France and conquered the following year. His father was originally a follower of the Corsican patriot leader Pasquale Paoli, but later became a supporter of French rule.\nBonaparte trained as a lawyer. In that role and as a politician and diplomat, he served in the Council of Five Hundred and as the French ambassador to the Papal States. In 1799, he used his position as member of the Council of Five Hundred to help his brother Napoleon to overthrow the Directory. On 30 September 1800, as Minister Plenipotentiary, he signed the Treaty of Mortefontaine, treaty of friendship and commerce between France and the United States, alongside Charles Pierre Claret de Fleurieu, and Pierre Louis Roederer.\nKing of Naples.\nUpon the outbreak of war between France and Austria in 1805, Ferdinand IV of Naples had agreed to a treaty of neutrality with Napoleon I but, a few days later, declared his support for Austria. He permitted a large Anglo-Russian force to land in his kingdom. Napoleon, however, was soon victorious. After the War of the Third Coalition was shattered on 5 December at the Battle of Austerlitz, Ferdinand was subject to Napoleon's wrath.\nOn 27 December 1805, Napoleon issued a proclamation from the Sch\u00f6nbrunn declaring Ferdinand to have forfeited his kingdom. He said that a French invasion would soon follow to ensure that \"the finest of countries is relieved from the yoke of the most faithless of men\".\nOn 31 December Napoleon commanded Joseph Bonaparte to move to Rome, where he would be assigned to command the army sent to dispossess Ferdinand of his throne. Although Bonaparte was the nominal commander-in-chief of the expedition, Marshal Mass\u00e9na was in effective command of operations, with General St. Cyr second. But, St. Cyr, who had previously held the senior command of French troops in the region, soon resigned in protest at being made subordinate to Mass\u00e9na and left for Paris. An outraged Napoleon ordered St. Cyr to return to his post at once.\nOn 8 February 1806 the French invasion force of forty-thousand men crossed into Naples. The centre and right of the army under Mass\u00e9na and General Reynier advanced south from Rome, while Giuseppe Lechi led a force down the Adriatic coast from Ancona. On his brother's recommendation, Bonaparte attached himself to Reynier. The French advance faced little resistance. Even before any French troops had crossed the border, the Anglo-Russian forces had beaten a prudent retreat, the British withdrawing to Sicily, and the Russians to Corfu. Abandoned by his allies, King Ferdinand had also already set sail for Palermo on 23 January. Queen Maria-Carolina lingered a little longer in the capital but, on 11 February, fled to join her husband.\nThe first obstacle the French encountered was the fortress of Gaeta; its governor, Prince Louis of Hesse-Philippsthal, refused to surrender his charge. There was no meaningful delay of the invaders, as Mass\u00e9na detached a small force to besiege the garrison before continuing south. Capua opened its gates after only token resistance. On 14 February Mass\u00e9na took possession of Naples and, the following day, Bonaparte staged a triumphant entrance into the city. Reynier was quickly dispatched to seize control of the Strait of Messina and, on 9 March, inflicted a crushing defeat of the Neapolitan Royal Army at the Battle of Campo Tenese, effectively destroying it as a fighting force and securing the entire mainland for the French.\nOn 30 March 1806 Napoleon issued a decree installing Joseph Bonaparte as King of Naples and Sicily; the decree said as follows:\n\"Napoleon, by the Grace of God and the constitutions. Emperor of the French and King of Italy, to all those to whom these presents come, greetings. The interests of our people, the honor of our Crown, and the tranquility of the Continent of Europe requiring that we should assure, in a stable and definite manner, the lot of the people of Naples and of Sicily, who have fallen into our power by the right of conquest, and who constitute a part of the Grand Empire, we declare that we recognize, as King of Naples and of Sicily, our well-beloved brother, Joseph Napoleon, Grand Elector of France. This Crown will be hereditary, by order of primogeniture, in his descendants male, legitimate, and natural, etc.\"\nJoseph's arrival in Naples was warmly greeted with cheers and he was eager to be a monarch well liked by his subjects. Seeking to win the favour of the local elites, he maintained in their posts the vast majority of those who had held office and position under the Bourbons and was anxious to not in any way appear a foreign oppressor. With a provisional government set up in the capital, Joseph then immediately set off, accompanied by General Lamarque, on a tour of his new realm. The principal object of the tour was to assess the feasibility of an immediate invasion of Sicily and the expulsion of Ferdinand and Maria-Carolina from their refuge in Palermo. But, upon reviewing the situation at the Strait of Messina, Joseph was forced to admit the impossibility of such an enterprise, the Bourbons having carried off all boats and transports from along the coast and concentrated their remaining forces, alongside the British, on the opposite side. Unable to possess himself of Sicily, Joseph was nevertheless master of the mainland and he continued his progress through Calabria and on to Lucania and Apulia, visiting the main villages and meeting the local notables, clergy and people, allowing his people to grow accustomed to their new king and enabling himself to form first-hand a picture of the condition of his kingdom.\nUpon returning to Naples, Bonaparte received a deputation from the French Senate congratulating him upon his accession. The King formed a ministry staffed by many competent and talented men; he was determined to follow a reforming agenda and bring Naples the benefits of the French Revolution, without its excesses. Saliceti was appointed Minister of Police, Roederer Minister of Finance, Miot Minister of the Interior and General Dumas Minister of War. Marshal Jourdan was also confirmed as Governor of Naples, an appointment made by Napoleon, and served as Bonaparte's foremost military adviser.\nBonaparte embarked on an ambitious programme of reform and regeneration, in order to raise Naples to the level of a modern state in the mould of Napoleonic France. Monastic orders were suppressed, their property nationalised, and their funds confiscated to steady the royal finances. Feudal privileges and taxes were abolished; however, the nobility was compensated by an indemnity in the form of a certificate that could be exchanged in return for lands nationalised from the Church. Provincial intendants were instructed to engage those dispossessed former monks who were willing to work in public education, and to ensure that elderly monks no longer able to support themselves could move into communal establishments founded for their care. A college for the education of young girls was established in each province. A central college was founded at Aversa for the daughters of public functionaries, and the ablest from the provincial schools, to be admitted under the personal patronage of Queen Julie.\nThe practice of forcibly recruiting prisoners into the army was abolished. To suppress and control robbers in the mountains, military commissions were established with the power to judge and execute, without appeal, all those brigands arrested with arms in their possession. Public works programmes were begun to provide employment to the poor and invest in improvements to the kingdom. Highways were built to Reggio. The project of a Calabrian road was completed under Bonaparte within the year after decades of delay. In the second year of his reign, Bonaparte installed the first system of public street-lighting in Naples, modelled on that operating in Paris.\nAlthough the kingdom was not at that time furnished with a constitution, and thus Joseph's will as monarch reigned supreme, there is yet no instance of him ever adopting a measure of policy without prior discussion of the matter in the Council of State and the passing of a majority vote in favour his course of action by the counsellors. Joseph thus presided over Naples in the best traditions of Enlightened absolutism, doubling the revenue of the crown from seven to fourteen million ducats in his brief two-year reign while all the time seeking to lighten the burdens of his people rather than increase them.\nJoseph ruled Naples for two years before being replaced by his sister's husband, Joachim Murat. Joseph was then made King of Spain in August 1808, soon after the French invasion.\nKing of Spain and the Indies.\nJoseph somewhat reluctantly left Naples, where he was popular, and arrived in Spain, where he was extremely unpopular. Joseph came under heavy fire from his opponents in Spain, who tried to smear his reputation by calling him (Joe Bottle) for his alleged heavy drinking, an accusation echoed by later Spanish historiography, despite the fact that Joseph was abstemious. His arrival as a foreign sovereign sparked a massive Spanish revolt against French rule, and the beginning of the Peninsular War. Thompson says the Spanish revolt was, \"a reaction against new institutions and ideas, a movement for loyalty to the old order: to the hereditary crown of the Most Catholic kings, which Napoleon, an excommunicated enemy of the Pope, had put on the head of a Frenchman; to the Catholic Church persecuted by republicans who had desecrated churches, murdered priests, and enforced a (law of religion); and to local and provincial rights and privileges threatened by an efficiently centralized government.\nJoseph temporarily retreated with much of the French Army to northern Spain. Feeling himself in an ignominious position, Joseph then proposed his own abdication from the Spanish throne, hoping that Napoleon would sanction his return to the Neapolitan Throne he had formerly occupied. Napoleon dismissed Joseph's misgivings out of hand, and to back up the raw and ill-trained levies he had initially allocated to Spain, the Emperor sent heavy French reinforcements to assist Joseph in maintaining his position as King of Spain. Despite the easy recapture of Madrid, and nominal control by Joseph's government over many cities and provinces, Joseph's reign over Spain was always tenuous at best, and was plagued with near-constant conflict with pro-Bourbon guerrillas. Joseph and his supporters never established complete control over the country, and after a series of failed military campaigns, he would eventually abdicate the throne.\nKing Joseph's Spanish supporters were called or (frenchified). During his reign, he ended the Spanish Inquisition, partly because Napoleon was at odds with Pope Pius VII at the time. Despite such efforts to win popularity, Joseph's foreign birth and support, plus his membership of a Masonic lodge, virtually guaranteed he would never be accepted as legitimate by the bulk of the Spanish people. During Joseph's rule of Spain, Venezuela declared independence from Spain. The king had virtually no influence over the course of the ongoing Peninsular War: Joseph's nominal command of French forces in Spain was mostly illusory, as the French commanders theoretically subordinate to King Joseph insisted on checking with Napoleon before carrying out Joseph's instructions.\nKing Joseph abdicated the Spanish throne and returned to France after the main French forces were defeated by a British-led coalition at the Battle of Vitoria in 1813. During the closing campaign of the War of the Sixth Coalition, Napoleon I left his brother to govern Paris with the title Lieutenant General of the Empire. As a result, he was again in nominal command of the French Imperial Army that was defeated at the Battle of Paris.\nHe was seen by some Bonapartists as the rightful Emperor of the French after the death of Napoleon's own son Napoleon II in 1832, although he did little to advance his claim.\nLater life in the United States and Europe.\nBonaparte travelled to the United States onboard the \"Commerce\" under the name of M. Bouchard. British naval officers had searched the vessel three times but never found Bonaparte on board and the ship arrived on 15 July 1815. In the period 1817\u20131832, Bonaparte lived primarily in the United States (where he sold the jewels he had taken from Spain). He first settled in New York City and Philadelphia, where his house became the centre of activity for French emigres. In 1823, he was elected as a member to the American Philosophical Society. Later he purchased an estate, called Point Breeze, formerly owned by Stephen Sayre; it was in Bordentown, New Jersey, on the east side of the Delaware River. He considerably expanded Sayre's home and created extensive gardens in the picturesque style. When his first home was destroyed by fire in January 1820, he constructed a second, grander, house. On completion, it was viewed as the \"second-finest house in America\" after the White House. At Point Breeze, Bonaparte entertained many of the leading intellectuals and politicians of his day.\nIn the summer of 1825, the Quaker scientist Reuben Haines III described Bonaparte's estate at Point Breeze, in a letter to his cousin:\nI partook of royal fare on solid silver and attended by six waiters who supplied me with 9 courses of the most delicious viands, many of which I could not possibly tell what they were composed of; spending the intermediate time in Charles' private rooms looking over the Herbarium and Portfolios of the Princess, or riding with her and the Prince drawn by two Elegant Horses along the ever varying roads of the park amidst splendid Rhododendrons on the margin of the artificial lake on whose smooth surface gently glided the majestic European swans. Stopping to visit the Aviary enlivened by the most beautiful English pheasants, passing by alcoves ornamented with statues and busts of Parian marble, our course enlivened by the footsteps of the tame deer and the flight of the Woodcock, and when alighting stopping to admire the graceful form of two splendid Etruscan vases of Porphyry 3 ft. high &amp; 2 in diameter presented by the Queen of Sweden [Joseph's sister-in-law Desiree Clary Bernadotte] or ranging [?] through the different appartments of the mansion through a suite of rooms 15 ft. in [height] decorated with the finest productions of the pencils of Coregeo [sic]! Titian! Rubens! Vandyke! Vernet! Tenniers [sic] and Paul Potter and a library of the most splended books I ever beheld.Another visitor a few years later, British writer Thomas Hamilton, described Bonaparte himself:Joseph Bonaparte, in person, is about the middle height, but round and corpulent. In the form of his head and features there certainly exists a resemblance to Napoleon, but in the expression of the countenance there is none. I remember, at the Pergola Theatre of Florence, discovering Louis Bonaparte from his likeness to the Emperor, which is very striking, but I am by no means confident that I should have been equally successful with Joseph. There is nothing about him indicative of high intellect. His eye is dull and heavy; his manner ungraceful and deficient in that ease and dignity which we vulgar people are apt to number among the necessary attributes of majesty. **** I am told he converses without any appearance of reserve on the circumstances of his short and troubled reign \u2014 if reign, indeed, it can be called \u2014 in Spain. He attributes more than half his misfortunes, to the jealousies and intrigues of the unruly marshals, over whom he could exercise no authority. He admits the full extent of his unpopularity, but claims credit for a sincere desire to benefit the people.Reputedly some Mexican revolutionaries offered to crown Bonaparte as Emperor of Mexico in 1820, but he declined. Mexico gained its independence from Spain in 1821.\nIn 1832, Bonaparte moved to London, returning to his estate in the United States only intermittently. In 1844, he died in Florence, Italy. His body was returned to France and buried in Les Invalides, in Paris.\nFamily.\nBonaparte married Marie Julie Clary, daughter of Fran\u00e7ois Clary and his wife, on 1 August 1794 in Cuges-les-Pins, France. They had three daughters: \nHe identified the two surviving daughters as his heirs.\nHe also fathered two children with Maria Giulia Colonna, the Countess of Atri:\nBonaparte had two American daughters born at Point Breeze, his estate in Bordentown, New Jersey, by his mistress, Annette Savage of Philadelphia, Pennsylvania (\"Madame de la Folie\"): \nBonaparte had two more sons by \u00c9milie (H\u00e9mart) Lacoste, wife of F\u00e9lix Lacoste, founder of the Courrier des \u00c9tats-Unis: \nFreemasonry.\nJoseph Bonaparte was admitted to Marseille's lodge \"la Parfaite Sinc\u00e9rit\u00e9\" in 1793. He was asked by his brother Napoleon to monitor freemasonry as Grand Master of the Grand Orient of France (1804\u20131815). He founded the Grand Lodge National of Spain (1809). With Cambac\u00e9r\u00e8s, he encouraged the post-Revolution rebirth of the Freemasonry Order in France.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "62557", "revid": "2824367", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62557", "title": "Displacement", "text": "Displacement may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "62558", "revid": "49969974", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62558", "title": "Merovech", "text": "Salian Frankish king (c. 450\u2013458)\nMerovech (; ; c. 411 \u2013457) was the ancestor of the Merovingian dynasty, and the grandfather of its founder Clovis I. He was reportedly a king of the Salian Franks, but records of his existence are mixed with legend and myth. The most important written source, Gregory of Tours, recorded that Merovech was said to be descended from Chlodio, a roughly contemporary Frankish warlord who pushed from the Silva Carbonaria in modern central Belgium as far south as the Somme, north of Paris in modern-day France. His supposed descendants, the kings Childeric I and Clovis I, are the first well-attested Merovingians.\nHe may have been one of several barbarian warlords and kings that joined forces with the Roman general Aetius against the Huns under Attila at the Battle of the Catalaunian Plains in Gaul in 451.\nName.\nThe name \"Merovech\" is related to \"Marwig\", lit.\u2009'famed fight' (compare modern Dutch \"news, rumour\", \"famous\" as well as \"fight\" with -\"vech\").\nHistorical accounts.\nThere is little information about him in the later histories of the Franks. Gregory of Tours only names him once as the father of Childeric I but remained vague about his relationship to Chlodio. The Chronicle of Fredegar recounts that Merovech was born after Chlodio's wife encountered a sea creature while bathing in the sea; according to Fredegar it remained unclear whether Merovech's father was the creature or Chlodio. Another theory considers this legend to be the creation of a mythological past needed to back up the fast-rising Frankish rule in Western Europe.\nChlodio is said to have been defeated by Flavius A\u00ebtius at Vicus Helena in Artois in 448. Ian S. Wood would therefore place his son somewhere in the second half of the fifth century.\nA contemporary Roman historian, Priscus writes of having witnessed in Rome a \u201clad without down on his cheeks as yet and with fair hair so long that it poured down his shoulders, Aetius had made him his adopted son\u201d. Priscus writes that the excuse Attila used for waging war on the Franks was the death of their king and the disagreement of his children over the succession, the elder being allied with Attila and the younger with Aetius. As Chlodio died just before Attila's invasion, this seems to suggest that Merovech was in fact Chlodio's son. Historians are divided on whether Merovee is one of the protagonists in Priscus' account:\nWhether he is one of the Frankish princes mentioned by Priscus or not, Merovee would have settled in Gallia Belgica, in the region of Brabant and would have established his residence in Tournai.\nSome historians, such as Georg Waitz, suggest that Merovech might be a mythological figure, theorized to be a son of the sea (\"mari\" in Frankish), implying a god or demigod revered by the Franks before their conversion to Christianity.\nAnother proposition is that Merovech is a reference to the Merwede, a Dutch river, whose initial course matched the area where the Salian Franks lived, as per some Roman historians. However, etymological studies seem to refute this theory.\nHistorian \u00c9tienne Renard, based on a new interpretation of two royal genealogies from the 9th and 10th centuries, suggests that Merovech could be an eponymous ancestor founder of the lineage rather than being a grandfather of Genildis. According to him, Merovech is an evanescent character, whose name is not associated with any act of war or any historical event.\nThe existence of Merovee should not be excluded. An Austrasian genealogy carried out between 629 and 639 mentions that &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Chloio is the first king of the Franks. Chloio begot Glodobode. Ghlodobedus begot Mereveo. Mereveus begot Hilbricco. Hildebricus begot Genniodo. Genniodus begot Hilderico. Childericus begot Chlodoveo... For the genealogist Christian Settipani, this would be a list of Salian kings in which the lineages were established after its constitution. The genealogy should thus be corrected as follows: Chlodion begot Chlodebaude and Merovee. Merovee begot Childeric.\nHowever the historian Jean-Pierre Poly believes that if Merovee (Merow'ih) is the son of Chlodebaude (Hl'udbead), married in 435, he could hardly have had Childeric (Hildrih), himself king around 456, as a son. He deduces that Merovee (Merow'ih) is the nickname of Chlodebaude (Hl'udbead), son of Chlodion (Hl'udio).\nWhile it seems accepted that bound by a foedus with the Roman Empire, the Salian Franks fought alongside the Roman general Aetius at the Battle of the Catalaunian Fields, (a plain near Ch\u00e2lons-en-Champagne and Troyes), in 451. The sources do not, however, specify who led them into battle. The Franks suffered heavy losses in a preliminary engagement against the Gepids, however history does not say anything more, while it has recorded the death of Theodoric I, king of the Visigoths, killed the next day in the battle.\nReferences in popular culture.\nThe legend about Merovech's conception was adapted in 1982 by Michael Baigent, Richard Leigh and Henry Lincoln in their book \"The Holy Blood and the Holy Grail\", as the seed of a new idea. They hypothesized that this \"descended from a fish\" legend was actually referring to the concept that the Merovingian line had married into the bloodline of Jesus Christ, since the symbol for early Christians had also been a fish. This theory, with no other basis than the authors' hypothesis, was further popularized in 2003 via Dan Brown's bestselling novel, \"The Da Vinci Code\". However, there was no evidence for this claim that Merovech is descended from Jesus.\nThe identity and historicity of Merovech is one of the driving mysteries in \"The Widow\u2019s Son\", second book of Robert Anton Wilson\u2019s \"The Historical Illuminatus Chronicles,\" first introducing the fish legend to the reader by having the early Merovingians appear in a vision as a hideous fish creature. Wilson then goes a step further by identifying Jesus and Mary Magdalene as the bridegroom and bride in \"The Alchemical Marriage of Christian Rosycross\" and Merovech as the titular Widow's Son from Masonic lore, positing that the entire bloodline is descended from alien-human hybrids.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "62559", "revid": "14548726", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62559", "title": "Theuderic I", "text": "King of Metz (c. 487\u2013534)\nTheuderic I (c. 487 \u2013 534) was the Merovingian king of Metz, Rheims, or Austrasia\u2014as it is variously called\u2014from 511 to 534.\nHe was the son of Clovis I and one of his earlier wives or concubines (possibly a Franco-Rhenish Princess, Evochildis of Cologne). In accordance with Salian tradition, the kingdom was divided between Clovis's four surviving sons: Childebert I in Paris, Chlodomer in Orl\u00e9ans, and Chlothar I in Soissons. Theuderic inherited Metz in 511 at his father's death. Early in his reign, he sent his son Theudebert to kill the Scandinavian King Chlochilaich (Hygelac of \"Beowulf\" fame) who had invaded his realm.\nTheuderic got involved in the war between the Thuringian King Hermanfrid and his brother Baderic. Theuderic was promised half of Thuringia for his help; Baderic was defeated, but the land promised was not given up. In 531, Theuderic then, with his brother Chlothar and his son, attacked Thuringia to avenge himself on Hermanfrid. With the assistance of the Saxons under Duke Hadugato, Thuringia was conquered, and Chlothar received Radegund, daughter of King Berthar (Hermanfrid's late brother). Hermanfrid was killed in battle at Unstrut and his kingdom was annexed.\nThe four sons of Clovis then all fought the Burgundian kings Sigismund and Godomar; Godomar fled and Sigismund was taken prisoner by Chlodomer. Theuderic married Sigismund's daughter Suavegotha. Godomar rallied the Burgundian army and won back his kingdom. Chlodomer, aided by Theuderic, defeated Godomar, but died in the fighting at V\u00e9zeronce.\nAfter making a treaty with his brother Childebert, Theuderic died in 534. Upon his death the throne of Metz, passed (without hindrance, unexpectedly) to his son Theudebert. Theuderic also left a daughter Theodechild (by his wife Suavegotha, daughter of the defeated Sigismund of Burgundy). Theodechild founded the Abbey of St-Pierre le Vif at Sens.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "62560", "revid": "40781349", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62560", "title": "Lucien Bonaparte", "text": "French politician and diplomat (1775\u20131840)\nLucien Bonaparte, 1st Prince of Canino and Musignano (; born Luciano Buonaparte; 21 May 1775 \u2013 29 June 1840), was a French politician and diplomat of the French Revolution and the Consulate. He served as Minister of the Interior from 1799 to 1800 and as the president of the Council of Five Hundred in 1799.\nThe third surviving son of Carlo Bonaparte and his wife Letizia Ramolino, Lucien was the younger brother of Napoleon Bonaparte. As president of the Council of Five Hundred, he was one of the participants of the Coup of 18 Brumaire that brought Napoleon to power in France.\nEarly life.\nLucien was born in Ajaccio, Corsica, on 21 May 1775. He was educated in mainland France, initially studying at the military schools of Autun and Brienne. After his father's death, he attended the seminary of Aix-en-Provence, from which he dropped out in 1789.\nRevolutionary activities.\nLucien became a staunch supporter of the French Revolution upon its outbreak in 1789, when he was 14 years old. He returned to Corsica at the start of the Revolution, and became an outspoken orator at the Corsican chapter of the Jacobin Club in Ajaccio, where he adopted the alias \"Brutus Bonaparte\". In 1791, he became a secretary to Corsican patriot Pasquale Paoli, but broke with him in May 1793 (along with his brother Napoleon).\nAfter returning to mainland France, Lucien held a number of minor administrative posts from 1793 until 1795, when he was briefly jailed for his Jacobin activity, during the Thermidorian Reaction. He was released thanks to Napoleon's intervention, who then found him an administrative assignment in the Army of the North.\nPolitical career.\nIn 1798, Lucien was elected member of the Council of Five Hundred for Corsica's Liamone department (although he was not old enough to run for election). In the legislature, he mostly voted with the Neo-Jacobins, and participated in the Coup of 30 Prairial VII. However, Emmanuel Joseph Siey\u00e8s' influence and news of the events in Egypt led to a shift in his political stance, and Lucien became one of the main plotters of \"coup d'\u00e9tat\" of 18 Brumaire, in which Napoleon overthrew the government of the Directory to replace it by the Consulate.\nOn 23 October 1799, Lucien was elected president of the Council of Five Hundred. On 9 November 1799 (18 Brumaire Year VIII on the French Republican Calendar), he had pamphlets distributed in Paris that detailed a fake Jacobin plot, which he used to justify the relocation of the Council to the suburban security of Saint-Cloud. The next day, while presiding over a heated council session, Lucien managed to buy time until Napoleon's sudden entrance into the chamber surrounded by grenadiers. During the coup, Lucien swore he would stab his brother in the chest if he ever betrayed the principles of \"Libert\u00e9, \u00e9galit\u00e9, fraternit\u00e9\". The following day, Lucien arranged for Napoleon's formal election as First Consul.\nUnder the Consulate, Lucien was appointed Minister of the Interior on 25 December 1799. In this capacity, Lucien oversaw the appointment of the first prefects and falsified the results of the constitutional referendum of February 1800. He clashed over the right to oversee Paris police matters with Joseph Fouch\u00e9, the Minister of Police, who showed Napoleon a subversive pamphlet possibly written by Lucien and effected a breach between the brothers. Some evidence exists that Napoleon himself wrote the pamphlet and scapegoated his brother when it was received poorly. He resigned as minister in November 1800.\nFollowing his resignation, on 7 November 1800 Lucien was sent as ambassador to the court of King Charles IV of Spain, where his diplomatic talents won over the Bourbon royal family and, perhaps as importantly, the minister Manuel de Godoy. In March 1801, Lucien and Godoy signed the Treaty of Aranjuez, establishing the French client kingdom of Etruria. On 4 August 1801 he was created a Grand-Officer of the National Order of the Legion of Honour.\nDisputes with Napoleon.\nThough he was a member of the \"Tribunat\" and on 4 August 1801 was made a senator of the First French Empire, Lucien came to oppose many of Napoleon's ideas. In 1804, with Lucien disliking Napoleon's intention to declare himself as Emperor of the French and to marry Lucien off to a Bourbon Spanish princess, the Queen of Etruria, Lucien spurned all imperial honours and went into self-imposed exile by living initially in Rome, where he bought the Villa Rufinella in Frascati.\nLater years.\nIn 1809, Napoleon increased pressure on Lucien to divorce his wife and return to France, even having their mother write a letter encouraging him to abandon her and return. With the whole of the Papal States annexed to France and the Pope imprisoned, Lucien was a virtual prisoner in his Italian estates, requiring permission of the Military Governor to venture off his property. He ceased to be a senator on 27 September 1810. He attempted to sail to the United States to escape his situation but was captured by the British frigate HMS \"Pomone\". When Lucien disembarked in England, he was greeted with cheers and applause by a local crowd, many of whom saw him as opposed to Napoleon.\nThe British government permitted Lucien to settle comfortably with his family at Ludlow, and later at Thorngrove House in Grimley, Worcestershire, where he worked on a heroic poem on Charlemagne. Napoleon, believing Lucien had defected to Britain and thus a traitor, had Lucien omitted from the Imperial almanacs of the Bonapartes from 1811 until his 1814 abdication. Lucien returned to France following his brother's abdication in April 1814. He continued to Rome, where on 18 August 1814 he was made Prince of Canino, Count of Apollino, and Lord of Nemori by Pope Pius VII.\nIn the Hundred Days after Napoleon's return to France from exile in Elba, Lucien rallied to his brother's cause, and they joined forces once again during Napoleon's brief return to power. His brother made him a French Prince and included his children into the Imperial Family, but this was not recognized by the Bourbons after Napoleon's second abdication. Subsequently, Lucien was proscribed at the Restoration and deprived of his \"fauteuil\" at the Acad\u00e9mie Fran\u00e7aise. He was made Prince of Musignano on 21 March 1824 by Pope Leo XII. In 1836 he wrote his \"M\u00e9moires\". He was created Prince Buonaparte on 16 April 1837 by Pope Gregory XVI. He died in Viterbo, Papal States, on 29 June 1840, of stomach cancer, the same disease that claimed his father and, reportedly, his brother Napoleon.\nAcademic activities.\nLucien Bonaparte was the inspiration behind the Napoleonic reconstitution of the dispersed Acad\u00e9mie Fran\u00e7aise in 1803, where he took a seat. He collected paintings in \"la maison de campagne\" at Brienne, was a member of Jeanne Fran\u00e7oise Julie Ad\u00e9la\u00efde R\u00e9camier's salon and wrote a novel, \"La Tribu indienne.\" He was an amateur archeologist, establishing excavations at his property in Frascati which produced a complete statue of Tiberius, and at Musignano which rendered a bust of Juno. Bonaparte owned a parcel which had once formed part of Cicero's estate called Tusculum, and was much given to commenting on the fact. In 1825, Bonaparte excavated the so-called Tusculum portrait of Julius Caesar at the Tusculum's forum.\nIn 1823, Bonaparte was elected as a member of the American Philosophical Society.\nMarriages and children.\nHis first wife was his landlord's daughter, Christine Boyer (3 July 1771 \u2013 14 May 1800), the illiterate sister of an innkeeper of Saint-Maximin-la-Sainte-Baume, whom he married on 4 May 1794 at Saint-Maximin-la-Sainte-Baume, and by her he had four children: \nHis second wife was Alexandrine de Bleschamp (23 February 1778 \u2013 12 July 1855), widow of Hippolyte Jouberthon, known as \"Madame Jouberthon\", whom he married in a religious ceremony on 25 May 1803 at Paris and in a civil marriage on 26 October 1803 at Chamant, Plessis, and by her he had ten children: \nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "62561", "revid": "49023218", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62561", "title": "Theudebert I", "text": "Merovingian king of Austrasia (c. 500\u2013547)\nTheudebert I () (c.\u2009500\u2013548) was the Merovingian king of Austrasia from 534 to his death in 548. He was the son of Theuderic I and the father of Theudebald.\nSources.\nMost of what we know about Theudebert comes from the \"Histories\" or \"History of the Franks\" written by Gregory of Tours in the second half of the sixth century. In addition, we have diplomatic correspondence composed at the Austrasian court (known as the \"Austrasian Letters\"), the poems of Venantius Fortunatus, an account from Procopius' work and a small number of other sources.\nHistory.\nDuring his father's reign, the young Theudebert had shown himself to be an able warrior. In 516 he defeated a Danish army under King Chlochilaich (Hygelac of \"Beowulf\") after it had raided northern Gaul. His reputation was further enhanced by a series of military campaigns in Septimania against the Visigoths.\nUpon his father's death, Theudebert had to fight both his uncles Childebert and Chlothar I to inherit his father's kingdom. In the end, his military prowess persuaded Childebert to abandon the dispute and adopt Theudebert as his heir. Together they campaigned against Chlothar but sued for peace after their armies were hit by a storm.\nAfter relations between the Frankish kings had settled down, Theudebert found himself embroiled in the Gothic War started when the Byzantine Emperor Justinian I attempted to subdue the Ostrogoths in Italy. Justinian saw Theudebert as an ideal ally: Austrasian lands flanked the Ostrogoths in northern Italy. The emperor paid Theudebert handsomely for his assistance, but Theudebert proved an untrustworthy ally. The Frankish armies saw the Italian conflict as an opportunity for plunder and a chance to exert their own claims to northern Italy. In the event the Byzantines were forced to fight the Franks as much as the Ostrogoths.\nTheudebert seems to have revelled in his power growing on the European stage. His letters show him laying claim to a vast array of lands around Austrasia, including Byzantine lands. Since the fall of the Roman Empire, the Frankish kings had always shown a certain deference to the Byzantine Emperor, but Theudebert rejected his status as an inferior leader: for example, he broke imperial custom by minting gold coins containing his own image. Hitherto former Frankish kings had respected imperial convention and circulated gold coins with the image of the emperor. Not surprisingly, perhaps, the Byzantine chronicler Agathias recorded the rumour in Constantinople that the Byzantines suspected Theudebert of planning an invasion of Thrace.\nIn common with other Frankish rulers at the time, Theudebert took several wives as and when he wanted. As heir to his father's kingdom, he was betrothed to Wisigard, daughter of Wacho, king of the Lombards. This sort of political match was rare for the Merovingian kings. Theudebert abandoned her for Deuteria, a Gallo-Roman he had met while on campaign in southern Gaul. However, his supporters were not best pleased by his treatment of Wisigard, perhaps because of the political dimension, and persuaded Theudebert to take her back. Wisigard, though, soon died, and Theudebert married again.\nAs well as being renowned for his military prowess, Theudebert was lauded by contemporaries for his patronage of the Gallic (French) Church. Gregory of Tours reserves special praise for him in this regard, but his piety is also mentioned by Fortunatus.\nTheudebert died in the 14th year of his reign (at the end of 547 or the beginning of 548). He was killed by a bison during a hunting party. Theudebald, his son by Deuteria, succeeded him. In contrast to that experienced by many Merovingian kings, Theudebald's accession was peaceful.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "62562", "revid": "494861", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62562", "title": "Theodebald", "text": ""}
{"id": "62563", "revid": "8524693", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62563", "title": "Pierre Napol\u00e9on Bonaparte", "text": "French nobleman, revolutionary, and politician\nPrince Pierre-Napol\u00e9on Bonaparte (11 October 1815 \u2013 7 April 1881) was a French nobleman, revolutionary and politician, the son of Lucien Bonaparte and his second wife Alexandrine de Bleschamp. He was a nephew of Napoleon I, Joseph Bonaparte, Elisa Bonaparte, Louis Bonaparte, Pauline Bonaparte, Caroline Bonaparte and J\u00e9r\u00f4me Bonaparte.\nBiography.\nBonaparte was born in Rome, Italy.\nHe joined the insurrectionary bands in Romagna (1830\u20131831); later he moved to the United States, where he went to join his uncle Joseph, and in Colombia with Francisco de Paula Santander (1832). Returning to Rome he was taken prisoner by order of Pope Gregory XVI (1835\u20131836). He finally took refuge in the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland.\nAt the revolution of 1848 he returned to France and was elected deputy for Corsica to the Constituent Assembly. He declared himself an out-and-out republican and even voted with the socialists. He pronounced himself in favour of the national workshops and against the loi Falloux. His attitude contributed greatly to give popular confidence to his cousin Louis Napoleon (Napoleon III of France), of whose coup d'\u00e9tat on 2 December 1851 he disapproved; but he was soon reconciled to the emperor, and accepted the title of prince. The republicans at once abandoned him.\nFrom that time on he led a debauched life, and lost all political importance.\nBackground to shooting.\nIn December 1869, a dispute broke out between two Corsican newspapers, the leftist \"La Revanche\" and the loyalist \"L'Avenir de la Corse\", edited by Jean de la Rocca (1832 \u2013 1883). The invective of \"La Revanche\" concentrated on Napoleon I. \nOn 30 December, \"L'Avenir\" published a letter sent to its editor by Prince Pierre Bonaparte, the nephew of Napoleon I, and cousin of the then-ruling Emperor Napoleon III. Prince Bonaparte castigated the staff of \"La Revanche\" as beggars and traitors. Paschal Grousset, the editor of both \"La Revanche\" and \"La Marseillaise\", a Parisian radical socialist newspaper, took offence and demanded satisfaction.\nOn 9 January 1870, Prince Bonaparte wrote a letter to Henri Rochefort, the founder of \"La Marseillaise\", claiming to uphold the good name of his family:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;After having outraged each of my relatives, you insult me through the pen of one of your menials. My turn had to come. Only I have an advantage over others of my name, of being a private individual, while being a Bonaparte... I therefore ask you whether your inkpot is guaranteed by your breast... I live, not in a palace, but at 59, rue d'Auteuil. I promise to you that if you present yourself, you will not be told that I left.\nShooting.\nOn the following day, Grousset sent Victor Noir and Ulric de Fonvielle as his seconds to fix the terms of a duel with Pierre Bonaparte. Contrary to custom, they presented themselves to Bonaparte instead of contacting his seconds. Each of them carried a revolver in his pocket. Noir and de Fonvieille presented Bonaparte with a letter signed by Grousset. But the prince declined the challenge, asserting his willingness to fight Rochefort, but not his \"menials\" (\"ses man\u0153uvres\"). In response, Noir asserted his solidarity with his friends. According to Fonvieille, Bonaparte then slapped his face and shot Noir dead. According to Bonaparte, it was Noir who took umbrage at the epithet and struck him first, whereupon he drew his revolver and fired at his aggressor. That was the version eventually accepted by the court.\nIn the trial of Bonaparte for homicide on 21 May 1871 Th\u00e9odore Grandperret served as Attorney General at the High Court convened in Tours. His evident bias towards the Bonaparte family caused the lawyers of the Noir family to be called the \"defense lawyers\".\nFamily.\nOn 22 March 1853, Pierre married \u00c9l\u00e9onore-Justine Ruflin, the daughter of a Paris plumber working as a doorman. Altogether, the couple had five children, but only two of them survived and reached adulthood:\nDeath.\nPierre Bonaparte died on 7 April 1881, at the age of 65, in obscurity at Versailles. He is interred in the Cimeti\u00e8re des Gonards in Versailles, France. His widow, Princess \u00c9l\u00e9onore-Justine Bonaparte, nicknamed \"Nina\", outlived him by 24 years, raising their granddaughter, Princess Marie. In 1905, when she died, she was buried alongside him in the Cimeti\u00e8re des Gonards, Versailles.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources"}
{"id": "62564", "revid": "28481209", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62564", "title": "Louis Lucien Bonaparte", "text": "French philologist and politician (1813\u20131891)\nLouis Lucien Bonaparte (4 January 1813 \u2013 3 November 1891) was a French philologist. The third son of Napoleon's second surviving brother, Lucien Bonaparte, he spent much of his life outside France for political reasons. After a brief political career, he focused on his academic work, which particularly centered on the Basque language and the Celtic languages.\nEarly life.\nIn 1809, Lucien Bonaparte came under pressure from his brother Napoleon to divorce his wife, Alexandrine de Bleschamp, and return to France from his Italian estates, where he was a virtual prisoner, needing permission to leave his own land. He took ship to sail to the United States, but in 1810, on the way there, he and his wife were captured by the Royal Navy. The British government allowed Lucien and his wife to settle at Ludlow, and later at Thorngrove House, Grimley, Worcestershire, where Louis Lucien Bonaparte was born in 1813. Napoleon believed Lucien had gone to Britain as a traitor.\nFollowing his brother's abdication in April 1814, Louis Lucien's father returned to France and then to Rome, where on 18 August 1814 he was made Prince of Canino, Count of Apollino, and Lord of Nemori by Pope Pius VII. In 1824 he was created Prince of Musignano by Pope Leo XII.\nIn the Hundred Days after Napoleon's return to France from exile in Elba, Lucien rallied to his brother's cause. Napoleon made him a French prince and included his children in the Imperial Family. However, this was not recognized by the restored Bourbon government after Napoleon's second abdication. In 1815, Lucien was proscribed and deprived of his seat in the Acad\u00e9mie fran\u00e7aise.\nLouis-Lucien Bonaparte grew up in Italy and was educated at the Jesuit college at Urbino, before studying chemistry and mineralogy. \nCareer.\nA philologist and briefly a politician, Bonaparte spent most of his early life in Italy. He attended the first \"Riunione degli Scienziati Italiani\", a conference of scholars of natural sciences, at Pisa, and published some early work on scientific subjects in Italy. On 29 June 1840, by his father's death, he inherited various papal titles. His first work on languages, called \"Specimen lexici comparativi\", was published at Florence in 1847. \nHe did not go to France until 1848, when he served two one-year terms in the National Assembly as representative for Corsica (1848) and for the Seine department (1849). In 1852, he was appointed as a Senator, but not long after moved to London, where he spent most of the rest of his life. \nHe had a printing press in his home printing 10 volumes in 1857 and five in 1858. Being \"a passionate collector of bible translations for philological interest,\" in 1861 he published a Galician and Asturian translation of the Gospel of Matthew in London. In 1866 he was elected member of the Athenaeum Club and at that time presented the Club with 137 of his publications bound in 24 volumes. \nHe worked on the classification of dialects of the Basque language, and his work is still used. He also worked on Cornish and denounced William Pryce for having plagiarized the research of Edward Lhuyd into Cornish and other Celtic languages. He owned the only surviving copy of \"Athravaeth Gristnogavl\" and gave permission to the Cymmrodorion society to publish a facsimile in 1880.\nPrivate life.\nOn 4 October 1833, in Florence, Louis Lucien Bonaparte married Maria Anna Cecchi, the daughter of a Florentine sculptor. In 1850, he separated from his wife and later began to live with Cl\u00e9mence Richard, with whom he had a son, Louis Clovis Bonaparte (1859\u20131894). \nIn 1891, after Maria Anna's death on 17 March 1891, Louis Lucien and Cl\u00e9mence Richard were married in Kensington. \nThe Bonapartes\u2019 son Louis Clovis became a civil engineer, and on 14 October 1891, at Reigate, he married Laura Elizabeth Scott, the daughter of F. W. Scott of Redhill, another engineer.\nLouis Lucien Bonaparte died at Fano, Italy. His widow, Cl\u00e9mence Bonaparte, lived on until 1915. He is buried at St. Mary's Roman Catholic Cemetery, Kensal Green next to his son and second wife. His collection of chemical elements was bequeathed to the Science Museum, London where it subsequently was on display during the UNESCO \"International Year of the Periodic Table\" in 2019.\nHis library was bought by the Newberry Library in Chicago.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "62565", "revid": "39191556", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62565", "title": "Clotilde", "text": "Queen of the Franks (c. 474 \u2013 545)\nClotilde (c. 474 \u2013 3 June 545 in Burgundy, France) (also known as Clotilda (Fr.), Chlothilde (Ger.) Chlothieldis, Chlotichilda, Clodechildis, Croctild, Crote-hild, Hlotild, Rhotild, and many other forms), is a saint and was a Queen of the Franks. \nClotilde is the patron saint of the lame in Normandy and the patron saint of Les Andelys and has been \"invoked against sudden death and iniquitous husbands\". She married Clovis I, the first king of the Franks, in 492 or 493. Their marriage, from the 6th century on, \"was made the theme of epic narratives, in which the original facts were materially altered\". Clotilde's story fascinated later generations because it was \"the centerpiece of a struggle between the old Catholic, Roman population against the Arianism of the Germanic tribes\". She was able to convince Clovis to convert to Christianity; the Franks, due to her influence, were Catholics for centuries. Political and violent intrigue surrounded her family for most of her life. After the death of Clovis, she spent the rest of her life near the tomb of Saint Martin of Tours, \"led a devout life\", became \"totally detached from politics and power-struggles except through prayer\", and gave everything she had to the poor.\nClotilde is represented as a praying queen and as a nun. She built churches, monasteries, and convents, including the Basilica of the Holy Apostles, which later became the Church of Sainte-Genevi\u00e8ve, which she and Clovis built as a mausoleum honouring Saint Genevieve, the patron saint of Paris. Clotilde's feast day is June 3.\nBiography.\nEarly life.\nClotilde, born around 474, was from Burgundy. According to hagiographer Alban Butler, the only source for Clotilde's biography, which was edited by Bruno Krusch before the 10th century, is mostly dependent upon a document written by a monk from Saint-Denis a couple of centuries earlier. Her history has also been pieced together by Gregory of Tours and Fredegarius, and in certain hagiographies. Butler states that the most reliable source about her life is by Belgian historian Godefroid Kurth, but David Hugh Farmer calls Gregory of Tours' hagiography about Clotilde \"the principal source for her life\" and said that a later hagiography \"celebrated her as the saintly ancestor of the French kings\". Her history also appears in French hagiographies, but most of them were written before Kurth's.\nIt seems Clotilde's grandfather was Gondioc, who had four sons, Gundobad, Clotilde's father Chilperic II of Burgundy, Gondemar, and Godegisel. After Gondioc's death, Burgundy was divided up among them, but Gundobad gained power over Burgundy when he murdered his brothers. Gundobad also killed Clotide's brothers and her mother Caretena, who might have converted her husband to Christianity and was called \"a remarkable woman\" by Sidonius Apollinaris and Venantius Fortunatus. Clotilde and her sister, Sedeleuba (or Chrona), who became a nun and founded the church of Saint-Victor in Geneva, were raised at the court of Gundobad. They were educated as Catholics, even though Gundobad, like most of the Burgundian kings, were Arians. According to hagiographer Sabine Baring-Gould, Clotilde \"grew up full of piety and tenderness to sufferers\".\nLater life and marriage.\nShortly after Caretena's death, Clotilde and Clovis I, the first king of the Franks, were married, in 492 or 493. As Farmer put it, Clovis was \"impressed by her beauty and wisdom\". Their marriage, from the 6th century on, \"was made the theme of epic narratives, in which the original facts were materially altered\". Clotilde's story fascinated later generations because it was \"the centerpiece of a struggle between the old Catholic, Roman population against the Arianism of the Germanic tribes\", although there is no evidence that Clovis was an Arian sympathizer before his marriage and conversion to Catholicism. Clotilde had influence over Clovis and actively encouraged him to convert to Catholicism. He allowed the baptism of their oldest son, Ingomir, who died in infancy, and of their next son, Clodomir, but he blamed their oldest child's death on Clotilde's faith and resisted her attempts to convert him. Clodomir also became ill, but recovered and they had five children in all: four sons, Ingomir; and Clodomir, Childebert, and Clotaire, who all became kings; and one daughter, named Clotilde after her mother. Clotilde's \"vita\" describes her daughter's life, who married a Visigothic man named Amalaric, who she unsuccessfully tried to convert to Catholicism and who \"cruelly treated\". Little is known about her mother during Clovis' lifetime and about their marriage, but she might have been involved with his intervention of the quarrel between the Burgundian kings at the time and Clovis' support of Gondobad. Historian Godefroid Kurth said, about Clotilde, that she was \"saddened by cruel trials\".\nClovis was baptized by St. Remigius at Reims in 496, along with 3,000 of the Frankish people, after a battle with the Alemanni. His army was losing, but he appealed to his wife's God for help, promising that if he won, he would accept the Christian faith. According to tradition, while Clotilde was in prayer and as Clovis began to win the battle, an angel brought her three white lilies; Clovis later substituted lilies for the three frogs on the insignia on his battle shield. Sabine Baring-Gould considers Clovis' conversion sincere and that it was not due to political considerations. Baring-Gould also did not believe that Clotilde did not influence Clovis to fight this war or others in order to revenge her family's death. Clovis' subsequent military achievements against the Burgundians and Visigoths also do not seem to have been associated with Clotilde. The Franks, due to Clotilde's influence, were Catholics for centuries.\nClovis died in 511; Clotilde buried him at the Basilica of the Holy Apostles, which later became the Church of Sainte-Genevi\u00e8ve, which they built together as a mausoleum honouring Saint Genevieve, the patron saint of Paris. Genevieve might have been the first to suggest that Clovis build a church honouring Saint Peter and Saint Paul, which he built in deference to Clotilde's wishes; she completed the church after his death.\nPost-marriage and death.\nAccording to Kurth Godefriod in \"The Catholic Encyclopedia\", an epic about the Franks states that Clotilde incited her son Chlodomer to start a war with his cousin, Sigismund of Burgundy, in order to avenge the death of her parents. Godefroid doubts the story is true, considers it a defamation against Clotilde, and states that she arranged a truce between Clovis and Gondebad, Sigismund's father. Butler agrees, stating that sources such as the writings of Gregory of Tours have been disproven, which has \"vindicated the queen from charges of ferocity and vindictiveness, little in keeping with her saintly character\". According to Butler, Chlodomer captured and killed Sigismund, as well as his wife and children, but Chlodomer was killed by Sigismund's brother. Clotilde adopted her son's three young boys, but was induced to send the children to her other sons, who had the two oldest killed. The youngest boy, Clodoald, was saved and later became a monk in Paris, at the monastery in Nogent-sur-Marne, which was later renamed in his honour. According to Dunbar, the husband of Clotilde's daughter at one point sent a blood-stained veil to her brothers; her brother Childebert retaliated against him, pillaging his towns, and brought his sister away from her husband, but she died on the way to Paris.\nAfter the death of Clovis and her grandchildren, Clotilde left Paris and moved to Tours, where spent most of her time near the tomb of Saint Martin of Tours and became closely associated with the diocese of Tours; according to Dunbar she and Clovis had a devotion to Saint Martin. As Farmer reports, \"Thenceforward she led a devout life\". According to Farmer, she became \"totally detached from politics and power-struggles except through prayer\". Dunbar states that she \"prayed and fasted and wept, and gave all she had to the poor\". \nFarmer states that Clotilde continued to have a political role in \"the violent Merovingian world\", mostly through her sons. Gregory of Tours wrote that her prayers delayed a war between her two surviving sons; as Butler put it, \"The very next day, as the armies were about to engage, there arose a tempest that all military operations had to be abandoned\". A month later, Clotilde died in Tours on 3 June 545 and was buried at the feet of St. Genevieve and beside Clovis and her older children, at the Basilica of the Holy Apostles. She was a widow for 34 years. Her daughter died at about the same time.\nLegacy.\nClotilde is represented as a praying queen and as a nun, with a crown on her head or beside her. She is patron saint of the lame in Normandy and the patron saint of ; according to Farmer, she has been \"invoked against sudden death and iniquitous husbands\".\nShe founded the monastery of St. Mary of les Audelya in Touraine and a monastery in Chelles, and built churches, reportedly at Rouen, Lyon, and Les Andelys; The monastery in Chelles was built for nuns, in honour of Saint George; Saint Bathilde of Chelles, the wife of Clovis II, restored it 100 years later. The monastery was wealthy until modern times and was, for many years, \"a great place of resort and education for English princesses\", who were the descendants of Clovis and Clotilde. In 511, Clotilde founded a convent for young noble girls in Les Andelys, where the collegiate church now stands. According to a story related on the Les Andelys tourist office website, a miracle occurred there during the convent's construction. One day, the workers complained about the heat and their thirst; in response, Clotilde prayed and water from a nearby fountain \"had the power and the taste of wine for the workers\". The space in front of the fountain was larger than it currently is, so there was enough room for pilgrims who came for healing, which reinforced people's belief in its power. The spring has become known for healing skin diseases. \nClotilde has been depicted in art over several centuries presiding over the baptism of Clovis or as a suppliant at St. Martin's shrine. The church dedicated to her in Andelys contains a \"fine 16th-century stained-glass window devoted to her life\". There is a painting of Clotilde in the Bedford Missal, probably by Jan Van Eyck, which Dunbar describes as \"a beautiful and brilliant representation of the granting of the lilies to Clovis\". Her relics survived the French Revolution and as of 1997, are stored at the Church of Saint Louis of France in Paris. In 1857, a \"grand new church\" was founded in her honour in Paris. Clotilde's feast day is June 3.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "62568", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62568", "title": "Chlodion of Franks", "text": ""}
{"id": "62570", "revid": "29", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62570", "title": "Childeric I of Franks", "text": ""}
{"id": "62571", "revid": "29", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62571", "title": "Clovis I of France", "text": ""}
{"id": "62574", "revid": "477460", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62574", "title": "Theodebald of Franks", "text": ""}
{"id": "62577", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62577", "title": "Guinea pigs", "text": ""}
{"id": "62578", "revid": "38050944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62578", "title": "Bendigo", "text": "&lt;templatestyles src=\"Infobox_Australian_place/styles.css\"/&gt;\nBendigo ( ) is an Australian city in north-central Victoria. The city is located in the Bendigo Valley near the geographical centre of the state and approximately north-west of Melbourne, the state capital.\nAs of 2022, Bendigo has a population of 103,818 making it Australia's 19th-largest city by population. Bendigo is the fourth-largest inland city in Australia and the fourth-most populous city in Victoria.\nBendigo is administered by the City of Greater Bendigo, formerly the City of Bendigo. The council area encompasses roughly 3,000 square kilometres. The city is surrounded by smaller towns such as Castlemaine, Heathcote, Kyneton, Maryborough, Elmore, Rochester, Goornong and Axedale.\nThe traditional owners of the area are the Dja Dja Wurrung (Djaara) people. The discovery of gold on Bendigo Creek in 1851 transformed the area from a sheep station into one of colonial Australia's largest boomtowns. News of the finds intensified the Victorian gold rush, bringing an influx of migrants from around the world, particularly Europe and China. Bendigo became eastern Australia's largest 19th-century gold-mining economy, and the wealth generated during this period is reflected today in the city's Victorian architectural heritage. From 1853 until 1891, Bendigo was officially named Sandhurst.\nBendigo's boom period lasted until the early 20th century and after a temporary decline in population and employment, renewed growth occurred from the 1930s as the city consolidated as a manufacturing and regional service centre. Although gold mining continues, recent population growth has been most heavily concentrated in suburban areas. With the completion of the Calder Freeway linking Melbourne and Bendigo in 2009, and the region's proximity to Melbourne, Bendigo has become one of the fastest-growing regional centres in Victoria.\nHistory.\nIndigenous history and European settlement.\nThe traditional owners of the Mount Alexander area, traditionally named Leanganook, that includes Greater Bendigo, are the Dja Dja Wurrung (Djaara) people. They exploited the rich local hunting grounds from which they were displaced by the arrival by white settlers, who established the first of many vast sheep runs in 1837. The Dja Dja Wurrung peoples experienced two waves of settlement and dispossession: from the south from 1837 and from the north from 1845. The marked decrease in Dja Dja Wurrung population was also due to the arrival of non-indigenous animals; they use their noses to \"root up\" the nutritious moon-nar tuber (yam daisy); after just a year it was noticed the plant was becoming scarce.\nSquatters in the area included: Donald Campbell at Bullock Creek in Ravenswood; J. and R. Bakewell to the north of Bendigo; Heap and Gryce to the north-west; Archibald McDougall to the west; Joseph Raleigh and James Robinson along the Campaspe River to the south; and Thomas, Jones and William Barnett to the east. The Ravenswood \"Mount Alexander North run\", occupied from c. 1840 by Donald Campbell, was acquired by brothers Stewart and Robert Gibson in 1848, with Frederick Fenton later replacing one of the Gibson brothers. After the discovery of gold in 1851, Fenton sold provisions to the miners and agisted their horses. Becoming the sole owner of the Ravenswood run in 1857, Fenton built its substantial homestead.\nGold was officially discovered on Bendigo Creek at the north-eastern boundary of the Ravenswood run, earlier known as the Mount Alexander North run, in October 1851. The creek had been named \"Bendigo Creek\" after a local shepherd and employee of the Mount Alexander North run nicknamed for the English bare-knuckle prizefighter William Abednego \"Bendigo\" Thompson. The area was transformed in less than a year as tens of thousands of people arrived during the great gold rush in 1852.\nIt was called Castleton for a period of four months.\nWidespread gold mining caused environmental devastation and permanent damage in the district, decimating and displacing the Dja Dja Wurrung and destroying the infrastructure they created over generations to maximise seasonal drainage patterns; the channels and weirs they built out of timber stakes, to slow receding summer flows, were wrecked; water holes where the people gathered in smaller groups during periods of scarce rainfall and from which they transported water in skin bags when moving, were muddied, polluted and drained; the soaks they had dug between banks into sandy sediment to tap into the water table were likewise obliterated. Some of their waterholes in rock platforms of creeks that they found or enlarged, then covered with slabs to protect them from animals, may still remain, unidentified.\nGold mining boom.\nGold was officially discovered in the area in October 1851, just after the other significant goldfields in neighbouring Castlemaine, from where a number of diggers migrated, bringing the total population to 40,000 in less than a year. A number of these diggers were Chinese and their descendants still live in the region.\nDuring 1852, under the direction of the Surveyor General of Victoria, Robert Hoddle, William Swan Urquhart was making a general survey of Mount Alexander and the surrounding ranges and the goldfields. He fixed the site of the township as \"Sandhurst\". On 13 July 1852, Hoddle passed on to Urquhart the request of Lieutenant-Governor La Trobe for a plan of the Mount Alexander gold workings, and his order that he mark out a reserve at the junction of Golden Gully with Bendigo Creek, and the camp on the west side of the creek below the junction. In late August La Trobe wanted him to report urgently on the best reserves for agriculture in the district. By 26 November he had mapped Bendigo Creek and Myers Creek and his survey of the Bendigo Valley and environs marked township reserves at Bullock Creek, Ravenswood and Happy Jack where settlement was already taking place. His plan \"General Survey of the Bendigo Goldfields showing the proposed reserves for townships. Drawn by W. S. Urquhart, Melbourne, November 1852\" recommended sites for national schools, churches, markets and other public purposes reserved from sale.\nIn 1853, a large protest called the Red Ribbon Rebellion was held over the cost of the licence fee for prospectors, though it passed peacefully due to good diplomacy by police and miners' leaders. From being a tent city, the boomtown grew rapidly into a major urban centre with grand public buildings. The municipality became a borough in 1863, officially known as Sandhurst until 1891, but always unofficially as Bendigo.\nDuring this period, miner Henry Bain was noted in local accounts as a cultural patron who hosted informal gatherings of writers, artists and prospectors, later described as the \"Golden Circle.\"\nThe railway had reached Bendigo by 1862, stimulating rapid growth, with flour mills, woollen mills, tanneries, quarries, foundries, eucalyptus oil production, food production industries and timber cutting. When the alluvial gold ran out, extraction of quartz-based gold continued in deep shafts using industrial systems.\nSelection in the future county of Bendigo (created in 1869) commenced under the Land Act of 1865, with most settlement occurring around Sandhurst and Eaglehawk.\nDecline and regeneration.\nBendigo was declared a city in 1871. Rapid population growth brought a water shortage, partially solved with a new viaduct that harnessed the Coliban River.\nThe architect William Charles Vahland (1828\u20131915) left an important mark on Bendigo during this period. He is credited with the popular cottage design known as a Vahland House. The cottage design that has vastly been customised shares a common theme of a central door, a sash window either side, a central hallway that runs the entire length of the house and verandahs ordained in iron lace, a style that was soon adopted across the state of Victoria. Vahland also designed more than 80 buildings, including the Alexandra Fountain, arguably the most prominent monument in Bendigo, with its granite dolphins, unicorns, nymphs and allegorical figures. A tram network was established by 1890, some of which is still in operation as a tourism service currently.\nAfter a temporary drop in population, renewed growth occurred from the 1930s as the city consolidated as a manufacturing and regional service centre, though gold mining continues. Recent growth has been most heavily concentrated in areas such as Epsom, Kangaroo Flat, Strathdale and Strathfieldsaye.\nOn 28 March 2013, the Dja Dja Wurrung people were formally recognised as the traditional owners for part of Central Victoria, including the land on which the City of Greater Bendigo sits.\nIn 1994, under municipal reforms of Victoria's Kennett government, the City of Bendigo was abolished and merged with the Borough of Eaglehawk, the Huntly and Strathfieldsaye shires, and the Rural City of Marong to form the larger City of Greater Bendigo. The population of the city increased from around 78,000 in 1991 to about 100,617 in 2012. Bendigo is currently one of the fastest-growing regional centres in Victoria.\nGeography.\nThe city is surrounded by components of the Greater Bendigo National Park, as well as the Bendigo Box-Ironbark Region Important Bird Area, identified as such by BirdLife International because of its importance for swift parrots and other woodland birds. A dozen species of insect-eating bats and the pollinating grey-headed flying fox inhabit the area.\nClimate.\nBendigo has a dry temperate climate with warm, variable summers and cool, cloudy winters. Under the K\u00f6ppen-Geiger classification, it lies on a humid subtropical/cold semi-arid transitional climate zone (\"Cfa/BSk\"), due to its location being on the boundary of the hot, dry inland areas to the north and the cool, damp Southern Ocean to the south. Bendigo gets 109.9 clear days annually.\nThe mean minimum temperature in January is and the maximum , although temperatures above are commonly reached. The highest temperature officially recorded was , during the 2009 southeastern Australia heat wave. There is also a disputed recording of (on 14 January 1862). Summers are also subject to cold weather: on 2 February 2005, the maximum temperature did not exceed all day.\nThe mean minimum temperature in July is and winter minima below are recorded on 26.1 days per year on average. Mean maximum temperature in July is . Most of the city's annual rainfall of falls between June and September as cold fronts. Snowfalls are rare; however, sleet occurs and rain commonly falls at temperatures below on account of the city's exposed location. Frosts are a common occurrence during the winter and spring, though hampered by the frequent cloud cover.\nExtreme weather events.\nA series of great floods occurred in Bendigo in 1859. Substantial flooding also occurred in 1903.\nTornadoes have been seen around the area of Bendigo and, although rare, the 2003 Bendigo tornado passed through Eaglehawk and other parts of the city causing major damage to homes and businesses.\nBendigo was in severe drought from 2006 to 2010 and, during this time, the city had some of the harshest water restrictions in Australia with no watering outside the household. Heavy rains from the middle to later months of 2010 filled most reservoirs to capacity and only wasteful water use (e.g. hosing down footpaths) is currently banned.\nBendigo was affected by the Black Saturday bushfires in 2009. A fire to the west of the city burned out . The fire broke out at about 4.30\u00a0pm on the afternoon of 7 February and burned through Long Gully and Eaglehawk, coming within of central Bendigo, before it was brought under control late on 8 February. It destroyed about 58 houses in Bendigo's western suburbs and damaged an electricity transmission line, resulting in blackouts to substantial parts of the city. One fatality from the fire occurred.\nFlash floods occurred across Bendigo during 2010, the first in March and the most severe at the beginning of September. The region also had flooding events in October 2022 and January 2024.\nDemographics.\nAccording to the 2016 census of population, 92,379 people were in the Bendigo Urban Centre.\nAccording to the City of Greater Bendigo Community Profile, the population estimate for 2019 for this area was 118,093 (0.39 persons per hectare).\nReligion.\nIn the 19th century, Catholicism was the predominant Christian tradition in Bendigo. Catholic priest and pioneer George Henry Backhaus established a site in 1852 for the first Masses at Golden Square and, by the end of the year, he was camping at the site of Bendigo's first church, St Kilian's Church, completed in 1858. A wealthy man, Backhaus left his estate for the benefit of the church which, in 1897, enabled the construction of Sacred Heart Cathedral. Completed in 1977, it is the largest church building in provincial Australia. As of 2016, Catholicism is still practised by 22% of the population. In the 2016 census, 36.2% reported having \"no religion\".\nThe Sandhurst Methodist Circuit (1854) serviced five Wesleyan churches which had been built in previous years. There were several church schools, but they were attended by one-fifteenth of Bendigo's school children.\nThe Chinese, who in the mid-19th century constituted 20% of Bendigo's population, built the heritage-listed Bendigo Joss House Temple dedicated to Kwan Tai or Lord Guan, where they practised syncretic beliefs involving ancestor worship and the three main religions of China: Buddhism, Taoism and Confucianism. Bendigo is also home to the largest st\u016bpa in the Western world, the Great Stupa of Universal Compassion, which houses the Jade Buddha for Universal Peace, the world's largest gem-quality jade Buddha statue. As of 2016[ [update]], Buddhism was followed by 1.4% of Bendigo people, and Islam by about 0.5%. In 2019, despite protests by several far-right and anti-Islam organisations, construction began on Bendigo's first mosque and Islamic community centre.\nUrban structure.\nCity centre.\nThe central area (CBD) of Bendigo consists of around 20 blocks of mixed-use area. The main street is the Midland Highway, the section running through the CBD is also known as Pall Mall. Hargeaves Mall, named after the gold prospector Edward Hargraves, is one of the city centre's main shopping areas.\nSuburbs.\nThe contiguous urban area of Bendigo covers roughly 82\u00a0km2 of the local government area's 3048\u00a0km2. Generally the suburbs occupy the catchment of the Bendigo Creek and its tributaries. Some suburbs, such as Eaglehawk, were once independent satellite townships. Some of the outer suburbs extend into the surrounding bushland.\nArchitectural heritage.\nAs a legacy of the gold boom, Bendigo has buildings built in a late Victorian colonial style. A number of buildings are on the Victorian Heritage Register and registered by the National Trust of Australia. Prominent buildings include the Bendigo Town Hall (1859, 1883\u201385), the Old Post Office, the Bendigo Law Courts (1892\u201396), the Shamrock Hotel (1897), the Institute of Technology, and the Memorial Military Museum (1921), all in the Second Empire style.\nThe architect William Vahland encouraged European artisans to emigrate to the Sandhurst goldfields and so create a \"Vienna of the South\". Bendigo's Sacred Heart Cathedral, a large sandstone church, is the third-largest cathedral in Australia and one of the largest cathedrals in the Southern Hemisphere. The main building was completed between 1896 and 1908 and the spire between 1954 and 1977.\nFortuna Villa is a large surviving Victorian mansion, built for Christopher Ballerstedt and later owned by George Lansell. Other examples of Bendigo's classical architecture include the Colonial Bank building (1887) and the former Masonic Hall (1873\u201374), which is now a performing-arts centre. Bendigo's Joss House, a historic temple, was built in the 1860s by Chinese miners and is the only surviving building of its kind in regional Victoria, which continues to be used as a place of worship. The historic Bendigo Tram Sheds and Power Station (1903) now house Bendigo's tramway museum. The Queen Elizabeth Oval still retains its ornate 1901 grandstand.\nParks and gardens.\nThe central city is skirted by Rosalind Park, a Victorian-style garden featuring statuary and a large blue stone viaduct. The main entrance corner of the park is on the intersection known as Charing Cross, formerly the intersection of two main tram lines (now only one). It features a large statue of Queen Victoria.\nThe Charing Cross junction features the large and ornate Alexandra Fountain (1881) and is built on top of a wide bridge that spans the viaduct. The park elevates toward Camp Hill, which features a historic school and a lookout \u2013 a former mine poppet head.\nFurther from the city is Lake Weeroona, a large, ornamental lake adjacent to the Bendigo Creek. The Bendigo Botanic Gardens, which opened in 1869, are further downstream. Major redevelopment of the gardens has taken place in recent years.\nThe gardens are home to native species of animals, including brushtailed and ring-tailed possums, ducks, coots, purple swamp hens, microbats (small insect-eating bats), several species of lizards, owls, the tawny frogmouth, and though not native to the area, a colony of endangered grey-headed flying foxes (Pteropus poliocephalus).\nCulture and events.\nThe Bendigo Art Gallery is one of Australia's oldest and largest regional art galleries. In March 2012, it hosted a royal visit from Princess Charlene of Monaco at the opening of an exhibition about Grace Kelly.\nThe Capital Theatre, originally the Masonic temple, is located next to the art gallery in View Street and hosts performing arts and live music. It also hosts the annual Bendigo Writers Festival which was founded in 2012. The Bendigo Writers Festival was boycotted in 2025 due to concerns over a code of conduct, said to have stifled freedom of expression in relation to anti-Zionism.\nThe Ulumbarra Theatre was opened on 16 April 2015. It was originally the Sandhurst/Old Bendigo Gaol. The new theatre which seats nearly 1,000 people sits within the walls and structure of the jail and retains some original architectural features of the jail. The venue hosts performing arts and live music. It also acts as a ceremonial and teaching space for local secondary schools and universities.\nThe city hosts the Bendigo National Swap Meet for car parts every year in early November. It is regarded as the biggest in the Southern Hemisphere and attracts people from all over Australia and the world.\nThe city hosts the Victorian leg of the annual Groovin' the Moo music festival. It is held at the Bendigo Showgrounds and is usually held in late April or early May. The festival regularly sells out and brings Australian and international acts to the city. It also attracts thousands of people from around Victoria to the city for the weekend.\nThe Bendigo Blues and Roots Music Festival has been taking place each November since 2011. With over 80 artists from all over Australia, the not-for-profit festival is hosted in a number of the venues around Bendigo, and is headlined by a large, family-friendly, free concert held in Rosalind Park.\nThe Bendigo Easter Festival is held each year and attracts tens of thousands of tourists to the city over the Easter long weekend. Attractions include parades, exhibitions, and a street carnival.\nThe Bendigo Queer Film Festival (BQFF) is one of Australia's few regional annual festivals celebrating the Queer film genre. The BQFF started in 2004 and takes place in the second half of April.\nThe Festival of Light is a multicultural celebration of peace and harmony inspired by the Buddha's birthday held in May each year since 2013 at the Great Stupa. The festival's program includes dancing and musical acts followed by a fireworks display at night.\nIn November 2019 Bendigo was recognised as a United Nations' City of Gastronomy.\nBendigo is home to a number of amateur theatre groups including the Bendigo Theatre Company, Tribe Youth Theatre and Nexus Youth Theatre.\nMedia.\nBendigo is served by two newspapers, the \"Bendigo Advertiser\" and the \"Bendigo Weekly\", although in October 2019 the \"Bendigo Weekly\" was incorporated into the \"Bendigo Advertiser\" and now features as an insert in the Saturday edition of the \"Advertiser\".\nEight locally based radio stations are active; 105.1 Life FM, Gold 1071am and 98.3FM, Hit 91.9, 3BO FM (broadcasting as Triple M) and ABC Central Victoria located on Napier Street, as well as the community radio stations Radio KLFM 96.5, Phoenix FM, Fresh FM and Vision Australia Radio 3BPH Bendigo 88.7 FM.\nNetwork television is broadcast in the Bendigo region by the Seven Network, WIN Television (affiliated with the Nine Network), Network 10, the Australian Broadcasting Corporation (ABC) and the Special Broadcasting Service (SBS).\nOf the three commercial networks, WIN Television airs a half-hour \"WIN News\" bulletin each weeknight at 5.30 pm, produced from a newsroom in the city and broadcast from studios in Wollongong.\nShort local news updates and weather updates are broadcast by Network 10 throughout the day, produced and broadcast from its Hobart studios. The Seven Network airs short local news and weather updates throughout the day, produced and broadcast from its Canberra studios.\nOn 5 May 2011, analogue television transmissions ceased in most areas of regional Victoria and some border regions including Bendigo and surrounding areas. All local free-to-air television services are now being broadcast in digital transmission only. This was done as part of the federal government's plan for digital terrestrial television in Australia, where all analogue television transmission were being gradually switched off and replaced with DVB-T transmission.\nMusic.\nA number of live music venues offer local independent bands and artists performing on a regular basis. The Bendigo Town Hall also hosts music concerts and is a primary venue for the Bendigo Chamber Music Festival. Several adult choirs and the Bendigo Youth Choir often perform overseas; the Bendigo Symphony Orchestra, the Bendigo Symphonic Band, the Bendigo and District Concert Band, several brass bands and three pipe bands perform as well.\nMusicians originally from Bendigo include Patrick Savage \u2013 film composer and former principal first violin of the Royal Philharmonic Orchestra in London. \"Australian Idol\" winner Kate DeAraugo grew up in Bendigo where her family still live.\nSport.\nCricket.\nCricket and Australian rules football are the most popular sports in Bendigo. The Queen Elizabeth Oval (referred to locally as the QEO) hosts both sports. The Bendigo and District Cricket Association is the controlling body for 10 senior cricket clubs within the Bendigo area. The Emu Valley Cricket Association organises matches for 13 clubs around the Bendigo district, from Marong in the north to Heathcote in the south. Bendigo is a regional hub for state level sport, hosting football, cricket and other sports competitions annually.\nFootball.\nIn terms of Australian rules football, Bendigo Gold were a semi-professional team which competed in the Victorian Football League until 2014. The Bendigo region is also home to the historic Bendigo Football League, a strong Australian rules competition featuring 10 teams from throughout the region. One of the league's founding member clubs, the Bendigo-based Sandhurst Football Club, was founded in 1861, making it one of the world's oldest football clubs.\nOther sport.\nThe Bendigo Cup is a prominent horse-racing event.\nThe Bendigo Stadium hosted basketball games during the 2006 Commonwealth Games. Bendigo's men's team is called the Bendigo Braves and the women's team is called Bendigo Spirit. In both 2013 and 2014, the women's team won the Women's National Basketball League championship. The city co-hosted the 2003 FIBA Oceania Championship.\nBendigo was the host to the second Commonwealth Youth Games, held from 30 November to 3 December 2004.\nBendigo International Raceway, which existed on the showgrounds, opened as the Golden City International Raceway in 1971 and held racing for classes including saloons and stock cars. The venue also hosted motorcycle speedway and hosted the Victorian Individual Speedway Championship in 1995.\nEconomy.\nBendigo is a large and growing service economy. The major industries are health, finance (headquarters of the Bendigo and Adelaide Bank \u2013 Australia's fifth largest bank), tourism, commerce, education, food processing and primary industries, with some significant engineering industries (see below under \"Manufacturing\").\nBendigo's growth has stimulated growth in small surrounding rural towns (such as Elmore, Heathcote, Rochester, Inglewood, Dunolly and Bridgewater).\nTourism.\nTourism is a major component of the Bendigo economy, generating over A$364\u00a0million in 2008/09. Bendigo is popular with heritage tourists and cultural tourists with the focus of tourism on the city's gold rush history. Prominent attractions include the Central Deborah Gold Mine, the Bendigo Tramways (both of which are managed by the Bendigo Trust, a council-intertwined organisation dedicated to preserving Bendigo's heritage), the Golden Dragon Museum, the Bendigo Pottery, and the Great Stupa.\nCommerce.\nThe main retail centre of Bendigo is the central business district, with the suburbs of Eaglehawk, Kangaroo Flat, Golden Square, Strathdale, and Epsom also having shopping districts.\nThe city was home to one of Australia's few provincial stock exchanges, the Bendigo Stock Exchange, founded in the 1860s.\nThe city is the home of the headquarters of the Bendigo Bank, established in 1858 as a building society. It is now a large retail bank with community bank branches throughout Australia. The bank is headquartered in Bendigo and is a major employer in the city (it also has a regional office at Melbourne Docklands).\nManufacturing.\nThe City of Greater Bendigo Community Profile indicated that about 10.2% of the workforce were employed in manufacturing in 2011. After the Victorian gold rush, the introduction of deep quartz mining in Bendigo caused the development of a heavy manufacturing industry. Little of that now remains, but a large foundry (Keech Castings) makes mining, train, and other steel parts and a rubber factory remains (Motherson Elastomers, formerly Empire Rubber). Thales Australia (formerly ADI Limited) is an important heavy engineering company. Australia Defence Apparel is another key defence industry participant making military and police uniforms and bulletproof vests. Intervet (formerly Ausvac) is an important biotechnology company, producing vaccines for animals.\nEducation.\nThe Bendigo Senior Secondary College is the largest VCE provider in the state. Catherine McAuley College follows close after, which ranges from years 7\u20139 at the Coolock campus and 10\u201312 at the St Mary's campus. Girton Grammar School, an independent school, provides education to students from years Prep-12. The Bendigo campus of La Trobe University is also a large and growing educational institution with nearly 5,000 undergraduates and postgraduates.\nFarming and agriculture.\nThe surrounding area, or \"gold country\", is quite harsh, rocky land with scrubby regrowth vegetation. The box-ironbark forest is used for timber (mainly sleepers and firewood) and beekeeping.\nSheep and cattle are grazed in the cleared areas. There are some large poultry and pig farms. Some relatively fertile areas are present along the rivers and creeks, where wheat and other crops such as canola are grown. The area produces premium wines, including Shiraz, from a growing viticulture industry. Salinity is a problem in some valleys, but is under control. A relatively small eucalyptus oil industry operates there.\nBendigo provides services (including a large livestock exchange) to a large agricultural and grazing area on the Murray plains to its north.\nGold mining.\nOne of the major revolutions in gold mining (during the Victorian gold rush) came when fields such as Bendigo, but also Ballarat, Ararat and the goldfields close to Mount Alexander, turned out to have large gold deposits below the superficial alluvial deposits that had been (partially) mined out. Gold at Bendigo was found in quartz reef systems, hosted within highly deformed mudstones and sandstones or were washed away into channels of ancient rivers. Tunnels as deep as (Stawell) were possible.\nUntil overtaken in the 1890s by the Western Australia goldfields, Bendigo was the most productive Australian gold area, with a total production over 622 tonnes (20 million ounces).\nOver the 100-odd year period from 1851 to 1954, the 3,600-hectare area that made up the Bendigo gold field yielded 777 tonnes (25 million ounces) of gold.\nA large amount of gold remains in the Bendigo goldfields, estimated to be at least as much again as what has been removed. The decline in mining was partly due to the depth of mines and the presence of water in the deep mines.\nInfrastructure.\nTransport.\nBendigo is connected via the Calder Freeway to Melbourne, which is fewer than two hours by car. The remaining section of highway nearest Bendigo has been upgraded to dual carriageway standard ensuring that motorists can travel up to speeds of for most of the journey. Other regional centres are also connected to Melbourne via Bendigo, making it a gateway city in the transport of produce and materials from northern Victoria and the Murray to the Port of Melbourne and beyond.\nBendigo acts as a major rail hub for northern Victoria, being at the junction of several lines including the Bendigo line which runs south to Melbourne and lines running north including the Swan Hill, Echuca and Eaglehawk\u2013Inglewood lines. V/Line operates regular VLocity passenger rail services to Melbourne with the shortest peak journeys taking approximately 91 minutes from Bendigo railway station, generally however services take two hours or longer. While there are several rail stations in the urban area, only three other stations currently operated for passengers: Kangaroo Flat railway station on the Bendigo Line, Epsom Railway Station on the Echuca railway line, and Eaglehawk railway station on the Swan Hill railway line. There are also additional train services to and from Swan Hill and Echuca. The Regional rail revival project will upgrade the Swan Hill and Echuca lines and build three new stations. On the Echuca line, Huntly station (for the outer suburb of Huntly), Goornong Station (A town in greater Bendigo) and on the Swan Hill line Raywood station (A town in greater Bendigo) All set to open between 2021 and 2022. Residents celebrated the opening of the new Goornong Railway Station at a community event on the weekend of 11\u201312 December 2021.\nVictoria's electronic ticketing system, Myki, was implemented on rail services between Eaglehawk and Melbourne on 17 July 2013.\nBendigo is also served by an extensive bus network that radiates mostly from the CBD with the main terminus at the railway station towards the suburbs. The city is also served by several taxi services.\nTrams in Bendigo have historically operated an extensive network as a form of public transport, but the remains of the network were reduced to a tourist service in 1972. Short trials of commuter tram services were held in 2008 and 2009 with little ridership. The second, \"Take a Tram\", proved more successful, running twice as long as the previous trial. By the end of the \"Take a Tram\" program, ridership had increased and was increasing. However, due to lack of government subsidy or backing, the program ended.\nBendigo is served by the Bendigo Airport, which is located to the north of the city on the Midland Highway. The Bendigo Airport Strategic Plan was approved in 2010 for proposed infrastructure upgrades including runway extension and buildings to facilitate larger planes and the possibility of regular passenger services from major cities in other states. In 2016, Bendigo Airport was upgraded with a new taxiway system, new lighting, and a new 1.6-km north\u2013south runway. On 10 December 2018, Qantas announced that they would fly between Sydney and Bendigo six times a week, the first of which commenced on 31 March 2019.\nHealth.\nThe Bendigo Base Hospital, now known as Bendigo Health, is the city's largest hospital, only public hospital and a major regional hospital. St John of God is the largest private hospital. Bendigo is also served by a privately owned smaller surgical facility, the Bendigo Day Surgery.\nUtilities.\nBendigo is entitled to a portion of the water in Lake Eppalock, an irrigation reservoir on the Campaspe River. Developments have led to the building of a pipeline from Waranga to Lake Eppalock and thence to Bendigo in 2007. In 1858 Bendigo water works hired Joseph Brady as an engineer and he designed nine reservoirs and a channel system called the Coliban main channel which provides water from the Malmsbury reservoir to customers in central Victoria.\nNotable residents.\nArts and entertainment\nBusiness\nMilitary\nPolitics\nReligion\nScience\nSport\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "62579", "revid": "1302889537", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62579", "title": "Blue Mountains (New South Wales)", "text": "Mountain range in Australia\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Infobox_Australian_place/styles.css\"/&gt;\n \nThe Blue Mountains (Gundungurra/Dharug: Colomatta or Gulumada) are a mountainous region and a mountain range located in New South Wales, Australia. The region is considered to be part of the western outskirts of the Greater Sydney area. The region borders on Sydney's main metropolitan area, its foothills starting about west of centre of the state capital, close to Penrith. The public's understanding of the extent of the Blue Mountains is varied, as it forms only part of an extensive mountainous area associated with the Great Dividing Range. As defined in 1970, the Blue Mountains region is bounded by the Nepean and Hawkesbury rivers in the east, the Coxs River and Lake Burragorang to the west and south, and the Wolgan and Colo rivers to the north. Geologically, it is situated in the central parts of the Sydney Basin.\nThe \"Blue Mountains Range\" comprises a range of mountains, plateau escarpments extending off the Great Dividing Range about northwest of Wolgan Gap in a generally southeasterly direction for about , terminating at Emu Plains. For about two-thirds of its length it is traversed by the Great Western Highway, the Main Western railway line and the proposed Blue Mountains tunnel. Several established towns are situated on its heights, including Katoomba, Blackheath, Mount Victoria, and Springwood. The range forms the watershed between Coxs River to the south and the Grose and Wolgan rivers to the north. The range contains the Explorer Range and the Bell Range.\nOnce considered impassable by settlers, the 1813 expedition by Blaxland, Wentworth and Lawson opened up the interior to British settlement. Today, the Blue Mountains area includes the local government area of the City of Blue Mountains. Since the early 2010s, the region's biodiversity and infrastructure has been severely affected by massive bushfires of unprecedented size and impact. In 2018, 8.4 million people visited the Blue Mountains. The Blue Mountains and Southern Highlands Basalt Forests is a prominent forest community within the ecoregion.\nEtymology.\nThe original name for the Blue Mountains in the language of the Dharug and Gundungurra peoples is Colomatta (more accurately pronounced Gulu-mada). The meaning of the name is \"koala place\" from colo + matta.\nFollowing European settlement of the Sydney area, the area was named the \"Carmarthen and Lansdowne Hills\" by Arthur Phillip in 1788. The Carmarthen Hills were in the north of the region and the Lansdowne Hills were in the south. The name \"Blue Mountains\", however, was preferred and is derived from the blue tinge the range takes on when viewed from a distance. The tinge is believed to be caused by Mie scattering which occurs when incoming light with shorter wavelengths is preferentially scattered by particles within the atmosphere imparting a blue-greyish colour to any distant objects, including mountains and clouds. Volatile terpenoids emitted in large quantities by the abundant eucalyptus trees in the Blue Mountains may cause Mie scattering and thus the blue haze for which the mountains were named.\nHistory.\nGeological history.\nA sandstone plateau dominated by a landscape of eucalyptus forests, the Blue Mountains are located at the top of a 470-million-year-old quartzite. In the Permian period, a shallow sea covered the region, when rivers brought shales, siltstones and mudstones. Then during the Mesozoic period, rivers dumped vast amounts of sand, burying the other sedimentary rocks. By about 1 million years ago during the Pliocene era, the Blue Mountains began to form, carving out deep valleys and steep cliffs, with an elevation of 3,900 feet.\nAboriginal inhabitants.\nThe Blue Mountains have been inhabited for millennia by the Gundungurra people, now represented by the Gundungurra Tribal Council Aboriginal Corporation based in Katoomba, and, in the lower Blue Mountains, by the Darug people, now represented by the Darug Tribal Aboriginal Corporation.\nThe Gundungurra creation story of the Blue Mountains tells that Dreaming creatures Mirigan and Garangatch, half fish and half reptile, fought an epic battle which scarred the landscape into the Jamison Valley.\nThe Gundungurra Tribal Council is a nonprofit organisation representing the Gundungurra traditional owners, promoting heritage and culture and providing a support for Gundungurra people connecting back to Country.\nGundungurra Tribal Council Aboriginal Corporation has a registered Native Title Claim since 1995 over their traditional lands, which include the Blue Mountains and surrounding areas.\nExamples of Aboriginal habitation can be found in many places. In the Red Hands Cave, a rock shelter near Glenbrook, the walls contain hand stencils from adults and children. On the southern side of Queen Elizabeth Drive, at Wentworth Falls, a rocky knoll has a large number of grinding grooves created by rubbing stone implements on the rock to shape and sharpen them. There are also carved images of animal tracks and an occupation cave. The site is known as Kings Tableland Aboriginal Place and dates back 22,000 years.\nAustralian colonial history.\nArthur Phillip, the first governor of New South Wales, first glimpsed the extent of the Blue Mountains from a ridge at the site of today's Oakhill College, Castle Hill. He named them the Carmarthen Hills, \"some forty to sixty miles distant...\" and he reckoned that the ground was \"most suitable for government stock\". This is the location where Gidley King in 1799 established a prison town for political prisoners from Ireland and Scotland.\nThe first documented use of the name \"Blue Mountains\" appears in Captain John Hunter's account of Phillip's 1789 expedition up the Hawkesbury River. Describing the events of about 5 July, Hunter wrote: \"We frequently, in some of the reaches which we passed through this day, saw very near us the hills, which we suppose as seen from Port Jackson, and called by the governor the Blue Mountains.\" During the nineteenth century the name was commonly applied to the portion of the Great Dividing Range from about Goulburn in the south to the Hunter Valley in the north, but in time it came to be associated with a more limited area.\nThe native Aborigines knew two routes across the mountains: Bilpin Ridge, which is now the location of Bells Line of Road between Richmond and Bell, and the Coxs River, a tributary of the Nepean River. It could be followed upstream to the open plains of the Kanimbla Valley, the type of country that farmers prize.\nBritish settlers initially considered that fertile lands lay beyond the mountains; while in the belief of many convicts China lay beyond. However, there was little fear that the mountains might provide a means of escape since they were considered impassable. This idea was, to some extent, convenient for local authorities. An \"insurmountable\" barrier would deter convicts from trying to escape in that direction.\nA former convict, John Wilson, may have been the first colonist to cross the Blue Mountains. It is also believed that Matthew Everingham, 1795, may have also been partly successful based on letters he wrote at the time which came to light in the late 1980s. Wilson arrived with the First Fleet in 1788 and was freed in 1792. He settled in the bush, living with the Aborigines and even functioning as an intermediary between them and the settlers. In 1797 he returned to Sydney, claiming to have explored up to a hundred miles in all directions around Sydney, including across the mountains. His descriptions and observations were generally accurate, and it is possible that he had crossed the mountains via the southern aspect at the Coxs River corridor, guided by the Aborigines.\nGovernor Hunter was impressed by Wilson's skills and sent him on an expedition with John Price and others in January 1798. The party crossed the Nepean River and moved southwest towards the present site of Mittagong. There they turned west and found a route along the ridge where today the Wombeyan Caves Road is located. In the process they found a way to go west of the mountains, by going around them instead of across them. In March of the same year, Wilson and Price ventured to the Camden area, and then continued further south until they encountered Thirlmere Lakes, finally almost reaching the present site of Goulburn.\nIt is possible that the accomplishments of this expedition were suppressed by Hunter, who may not have wanted convicts to know that there was a relatively easy way out of Sydney. Wilson was killed by Aborigines after abducting an Aboriginal woman \"for his personal use\", but he had accomplished much as an explorer. He was never recognised as the first person to cross the mountains, possibly because his Coxs River journey could not be verified, while his route west of Mittagong may have been the \"long way around\" for a colony that had its eyes fixed on the sandstone fortress west of the Nepean.\nBetween 1798 and 1813, many people explored various parts of the mountains, from the Bilpin Ridge to the southern regions, today the site of the Kanangra-Boyd National Park. Still, they did not find a definite route across the mountains.\nThe 1813 crossing of the Blue Mountains by Gregory Blaxland, William Lawson and William Charles Wentworth is officially credited as the first successful European crossing. Blaxland set out with Lawson and Wentworth on 11 May 1813 and succeeded in crossing the mountains by 31 May. They ventured as far as to what is now Mount Blaxland, just west of Coxs River.\nIn November 1813, Macquarie sent the surveyor George Evans on an expedition to confirm the apparent discoveries made by Blaxland and his party. He was also told to see if there existed enough arable land to justify settlement. The issue had become more urgent because the colony was in the grips of a drought.\nEvans and his party reached the Fish and Macquarie rivers, and the site of Bathurst. On 7 July 1814, construction of a road across the mountains was begun by William Cox. The work was at the behest of Governor Macquarie. 30 convict labourers and 8 guards completed the road on 14 January 1815 after 27 weeks of hard work.\nSince the Blue Mountains are rich in coal and shale, mining for these resources began in Hartley Vale in 1865. J.B. North ran a shale mine in the Jamison Valley in the 19th century, and other operations were set up in several places. Locations for mining activities included the Jamison Valley, the upper Grose Valley, Newnes, Glen Davis and the Asgard Swamp area outside Mount Victoria. Shale mining failed in the long run because it was not profitable.\nIn 2000, the Greater Blue Mountains Area, a vast area of wilderness in the Blue Mountains for its exceptional biodiversity, was enlisted by UNESCO and categorized itself as a natural World Heritage Site.\nOn 18 July 2023, a proposal for a naming board in a dual Aboriginal name was discussed by the Geographical Names Board of New South Wales whether the Blue Mountains would be officially named Gulumada.\nClimate.\nThe climate varies with elevation. At Katoomba, () the summer average maximum temperature is around 22\u00a0\u00b0C with a few days extending into the 30s (80s\u201390s \u00b0F) although it is quite common to see maximum temperatures stay in the teens when east coast troughs persist. Night-time temperatures are usually in the teens but can drop to single figures at times.\nDuring winter, the temperature is typically around 10 to 11\u00a0\u00b0C in the daytime with \u22121\u00a0\u00b0C or so on clear nights and 3 to 4\u00a0\u00b0C on cloudy nights. Very occasionally it will get down to \u22123\u00a0\u00b0C or slightly lower but usually the coldest air drains into the valleys during calm, clear nights. However, the passing of cold fronts can significantly lower the average temperature during the night and the day. The Blue Mountains is not known for particularly cold mornings compared to other areas on the Central Tablelands, such as Oberon, Bathurst and Orange. There are two to three snowfalls per year.\nAnnual rainfall is about in the Upper Blue Mountains with many misty days.\nGeography.\nThe predominant natural vegetation of the higher ridges is eucalyptus forest. Heath-like vegetation is present on plateau edges above cliffs. The sheltered gorges often contain temperate rainforests. There are also many hanging swamps with button grass reeds and thick, deep black soil. \"Wollemia nobilis\", the \"Wollemi pine\", a relict of earlier vegetation of Gondwana, is found in remote and isolated valleys of the Wollemi National Park.\nMountain peaks.\nThe Blue Mountains Range contains smaller mountain ranges: the Bell Range near The Bells Line of Road and north of the Grose River; the Explorer Range, south of the Grose River extending west towards Mount Victoria; the Caley Range, Erskine Range, Mount Hay Range, Paterson Range, and the Woodford Range. The major recorded peaks are:\nThe Blue Mountains are a dissected plateau carved in sandstone bedrock. They are now a series of ridge lines separated by gorges up to deep. The highest point in the Blue Mountains, as it is now defined, is an unnamed point with an elevation of AHD, located north-east of Lithgow. However, the highest point in the broader region that was once considered to be the Blue Mountains is Mount Bindo, with an elevation AHD. \nA large part of the Blue Mountains is incorporated into the Greater Blue Mountains Area World Heritage Site, consisting of seven national park areas and a conservation reserve.\nThe Blue Mountains area is a distinct physiographic section of the larger Hunter-Hawkesbury Sunkland province. This is in turn a part of the larger East Australian Cordillera physiographic division.\nBushfires.\nThe main natural disasters to afflict the area are bushfires and severe storms. In recent years the lower mountains have been subjected to a series of bushfires which have caused great loss of property but relatively little loss of life. The upper mountains had not had a major fire for some decades until December 2002 (the Blackheath Glen Fire) and November 2006 when an extensive blaze in the Grose Valley threatened several communities including Bell and Blackheath (the Lawsons Long Alley Fire). This latest fire burned for almost a month but was extinguished, mainly due to a change in the weather, without loss of human life or property. A program of winter burning seemed to have been successful in reducing fires in the upper mountains.\nIn recent years, the bushfires have become far more destructive and expansive than before. The region was severely damaged in the 2013 New South Wales bushfires. However, even this was dwarfed by the 2019\u201320 Australian bushfire season, during which the entire mountain range was devastated at a scale never seen before. According to preliminary reports, up to 80% of the World Heritage Area has burned as of January 2020, many of these being areas that had never burned in any previously observed bushfires. These destructive blazes have been linked to accelerating climate change. There have been fears that the blazes may severely reduce the biodiversity of the area and even wipe out some of the threatened species in the area, such as the regent honeyeater.\nWorld Heritage listing.\nThe Greater Blue Mountains Area was unanimously listed as a World Heritage Area by UNESCO on 29 November 2000, becoming the fourth area in New South Wales to be listed. The area totals roughly , including the Blue Mountains, Kanangra-Boyd, Wollemi, Gardens of Stone, Yengo, Nattai and Thirlmere Lakes National Parks, plus the Jenolan Caves Karst Conservation Reserve.\nThis site was chosen to be included on the World Heritage list because:\nFauna.\nThe Greater Blue Mountains Area is inhabited by over 400 different forms of animals. Among them are rare mammal species like spotted-tailed quoll, the koala, the yellow-bellied glider, and long-nosed potoroo. There are also some rare reptiles, like the Blue Mountain water skink. There are also some dingoes in the area, which form the top predators and hunt for grey kangaroos.\nRecreational activity.\nThe Blue Mountains are a popular destination for rock climbers, mountain bikers and hikers as well as canyoning and other adventure sports. These sports are well catered for by guiding companies and equipment stores located mainly in Katoomba.\nPopular climbing destinations include the Centennial Glen cliffs near Blackheath and Mount Piddington near the town of Mount Victoria. Climbing is currently banned on The Three Sisters.\nMountain biking takes place mainly on the many fire trails that branch away from the main spine of the Great Western Highway, such as Narrow Neck, Anderson's Fire Trail and others.\nLikewise many of the fire trails are popular with day hikers, though many dedicated walking trails exist away from the fire roads.\nCanyoning in the Blue Mountains is a popular sport and caters for various skill levels. It carries inherent dangers, yet for those with the appropriate skills or those looking to take a guided trip there are many great opportunities to experience a different view of the Blue Mountains.\nThere are numerous abseiling options available in the Blue Mountains including single and multipitch routes. There are some restrictions though with certain areas being closed for abseiling.\nCricket is a popular sport in the Blue Mountains, with the Blue Mountains Cattle Dogs representing the district in the Western Zone Premier League, Country Plate and Presidents Cup competitions.\nCollapse of the Dog Face Rock cliff face.\nAt 4\u00a0am on 28 January 1931 a cliff face known as \"the Dog Face Rock\" collapsed into the Jamison Valley in the Blue Mountains. A second collapse from the same cliff face occurred on 2 May 1931.\nInjuries and deaths.\nIt was reported that \"More than 450 incidents resulting in greater than 200 deaths between 1875 and 2021...\" have occurred. Every year there are up to 200 people who are lost or injured in the Blue Mountains.\nIn 2022, two people died and two were injured when they were on a walking track in Wentworth Falls, and were hit by debris from a landslide.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Stack/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "62580", "revid": "49588921", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62580", "title": "Motion sickness", "text": "Nausea caused by motion or perceived motion\nMedical condition&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nMotion sickness occurs due to a difference between actual and expected motion. Symptoms commonly include nausea, vomiting, cold sweat, headache, dizziness, tiredness, loss of appetite, and increased salivation. Complications may rarely include dehydration, electrolyte problems, or a lower esophageal tear.\nThe cause of motion sickness is either real or perceived motion. This may include car travel, air travel, sea travel, space travel, or reality simulation. Risk factors include pregnancy, migraines, and M\u00e9ni\u00e8re's disease. The diagnosis is based on symptoms.\nTreatment may include behavioral measures or medications. Behavioral measures include keeping the head still and focusing on the horizon. Three types of medications are useful: antimuscarinics such as scopolamine, H1 antihistamines such as dimenhydrinate, and amphetamines such as dexamphetamine. Side effects, however, may limit the use of medications. A number of medications used for nausea such as ondansetron are not effective for motion sickness.\nMany people can be affected with sufficient motion and some people will experience motion sickness at least once in their lifetime. Susceptibility, however, is variable, with about one-third of the population being susceptible while other people can be affected only under very extreme conditions. Women can be more easily affected than men. Motion sickness has been described since at least the time of Homer (c. eighth century BC).\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSigns and symptoms.\nSymptoms commonly include nausea, vomiting, cold sweat, headache, dizziness, tiredness, loss of appetite, and increased salivation. Occasionally, tiredness can last for hours to days after an episode of motion sickness, known as \"sopite syndrome\". Rarely severe symptoms such as the inability to walk, ongoing vomiting, or social isolation may occur while rare complications may include dehydration, electrolyte problems, or a lower esophageal tear from severe vomiting.\nCause.\nMotion sickness can be divided into three categories:\nMotion felt but not seen.\nIn these cases, motion is sensed by the vestibular system and hence the motion is felt, but no motion or little motion is detected by the visual system, as in terrestrial motion sickness.\nCarsickness.\nA specific form of terrestrial motion sickness, being carsick is quite common and evidenced by disorientation while reading a map, a book, or a small screen during travel. Carsickness results from the sensory conflict arising in the brain from differing sensory inputs. Motion sickness is caused by a conflict between signals arriving in the brain from the inner ear, which forms the base of the vestibular system, the sensory apparatus that deals with movement and balance, and which detects motion mechanically. If someone is looking at a stationary object within a vehicle, such as a magazine, their eyes will inform their brain that what they are viewing is not moving. Their inner ears, however, will contradict this by sensing the motion of the vehicle.\nVarying theories exist as to cause. The sensory conflict theory notes that the eyes view motion while riding in the moving vehicle while other body sensors sense stillness, creating conflict between the eyes and inner ear. Another suggests the eyes mostly see the interior of the car which is motionless while the vestibular system of the inner ear senses motion as the vehicle goes around corners or over hills and even small bumps. Therefore, the effect is worse when looking down but may be lessened by looking outside of the vehicle.\nIn the early 20th century, Austro-Hungarian scientist R\u00f3bert B\u00e1r\u00e1ny observed the back and forth movement of the eyes of railroad passengers as they looked out the side windows at the scenery whipping by. He called this \"railway nystagmus\", also known as \"optokinetic nystagmus\". His findings were published in the journal \"Laeger\", 83:1516, Nov.17, 1921.\nAirsickness.\nAir sickness is a kind of terrestrial motion sickness induced by certain sensations of air travel. It is a specific form of motion sickness and is considered a normal response in healthy individuals. It is essentially the same as carsickness but occurs in an airplane. An airplane may bank and tilt sharply, and unless passengers are sitting by a window, they are likely to see only the stationary interior of the plane due to the small window sizes and during flights at night. Another factor is that while in flight, the view out of windows may be blocked by clouds, preventing passengers from seeing the moving ground or passing clouds.\nSeasickness.\nSeasickness is a form of terrestrial motion sickness characterized by a feeling of nausea and, in extreme cases, vertigo experienced after spending time on a boat. It is essentially the same as carsickness, though the motion of a watercraft tends to be more regular. It is typically brought on by the rocking motion of the craft or movement while the craft is immersed in water. As with airsickness, it can be difficult to visually detect motion even if one looks outside the boat since water does not offer fixed points with which to visually judge motion. Poor visibility conditions, such as fog, may worsen seasickness. The greatest contributor to seasickness is the tendency for people being affected by the rolling or surging motions of the craft to seek refuge below decks, where they are unable to relate themselves to the boat's surroundings and consequent motion. Some people with carsickness are resistant to seasickness and vice versa. Adjusting to the craft's motion at sea is called \"gaining one's sea legs\"; it can take a significant portion of the time spent at sea after disembarking to regain a sense of stability \"post-sea legs\".\nCentrifuge motion sickness.\nRotating devices such as centrifuges used in astronaut training and amusement park rides such as the Rotor, and the Gravitron can cause motion sickness in many people. While the interior of the centrifuge does not appear to move, one will experience a sense of motion. In addition, centrifugal force can cause the vestibular system to give one the sense that downward is in the direction away from the center of the centrifuge rather than the true downward direction.\nDizziness due to spinning.\nWhen one spins and stops suddenly, fluid in the inner ear continues to rotate causing a sense of continued spinning while one's visual system no longer detects motion.\nVirtual reality.\nUsually, VR programs would detect the motion of the user's head and adjust the rotation of vision to avoid dizziness. However, some cases such as system lagging or software crashing could cause lags in the screen updates. In such cases, even some small head motions could trigger the motion sickness by the defense mechanism mentioned below: the inner ear transmits to the brain that it senses motion, but the eyes tell the brain that everything is still.\nVirtual reality to reverse motion sickness.\nRecent research has shown that virtual reality can also be used therapeutically to reverse seasickness by reintroducing visual cues that align more closely with the body's sense of motion. One effective approach involves simulating a stable artificial horizon within the headset while simultaneously introducing low-amplitude visual motion that matches the real movement of the vessel, such as pitch, roll, and heave. By restoring coherence between visual and vestibular input, this method can help the brain reestablish sensory integration, thereby reducing or even eliminating symptoms of motion sickness within minutes. Systems that synchronize VR environments with vessel dynamics have demonstrated significant promise in field trials.\nMotion seen but not felt.\nIn these cases, motion is detected by the visual system and hence the motion is seen, but no motion or little motion is sensed by the vestibular system. Motion sickness arising from such situations has been referred to as \"visually induced motion sickness\" (VIMS).\nSpace motion sickness.\nZero gravity interferes with the vestibular system's gravity-dependent operations, so that the two systems, vestibular and visual, no longer provide a unified and coherent sensory representation. This causes unpleasant disorientation sensations often quite distinct from terrestrial motion sickness, but with similar symptoms. The symptoms may be more intense because a condition caused by prolonged weightlessness is usually quite unfamiliar.\nSpace motion sickness was effectively unknown during the earliest spaceflights because the very cramped conditions of the spacecraft allowed for only minimal bodily motion, especially head motion. Space motion sickness seems to be aggravated by being able to freely move around, and so is more common in larger spacecraft. Around 60% of Space Shuttle astronauts experienced it on their first flight; the first case of space motion sickness is now thought to be the Soviet cosmonaut Gherman Titov, in August 1961 onboard \"Vostok 2\", who reported dizziness, nausea, and vomiting. The first severe cases were in early Apollo flights; Frank Borman on \"Apollo 8\" and Rusty Schweickart on \"Apollo 9\". Both experienced identifiable and quite unpleasant symptoms\u2014in the latter case causing the mission plan to be modified.\nScreen images.\nThis type of terrestrial motion sickness is particularly prevalent when susceptible people are watching films presented on very large screens such as IMAX, but may also occur in regular format theaters or even when watching TV or playing games. For the sake of novelty, IMAX and other panoramic type theaters often show dramatic motions such as flying over a landscape or riding a roller coaster.\nIn regular-format theaters, an example of a movie that caused motion sickness in many people is \"The Blair Witch Project\". Theaters warned patrons of its possible nauseating effects, cautioning pregnant women in particular. \"Blair Witch\" was filmed with a handheld camcorder, which was subjected to considerably more motion than the average movie camera, and lacks the stabilization mechanisms of steadicams.\nHome movies, often filmed with a cell phone camera, also tend to cause motion sickness in those who view them. The person holding the cell phone or other camera usually is unaware of this as the recording is being made since the sense of motion seems to match the motion seen through the camera's viewfinder. Those who view the film afterward only see the movement, which may be considerable, without any sense of motion. Using the zoom function seems to contribute to motion sickness as well since zooming is not a normal function of the eye. The use of a tripod or a camera or cell phone with image stabilization while filming can reduce this effect.\nVirtual reality.\nMotion sickness due to virtual reality is very similar to simulation sickness and motion sickness due to films. In virtual reality the effect is made more acute as all external reference points are blocked from vision, the simulated images are three-dimensional and in some cases stereo sound that may also give a sense of motion. The NADS-1, a simulator located at the National Advanced Driving Simulator, is capable of accurately stimulating the vestibular system with a 360-degree horizontal field of view and 13 degrees of freedom motion base. Studies have shown that exposure to rotational motions in a virtual environment can cause significant increases in nausea and other symptoms of motion sickness.\nIn a study conducted by the U.S. Army Research Institute for the Behavioral and Social Sciences in a report published May 1995 titled \"Technical Report 1027 \u2013 Simulator Sickness in Virtual Environments\", out of 742 pilot exposures from 11 military flight simulators, \"approximately half of the pilots (334) reported post-effects of some kind: 250 (34%) reported that symptoms dissipated in less than one hour, 44 (6%) reported that symptoms lasted longer than four hours, and 28 (4%) reported that symptoms lasted longer than six hours. There were also four (1%) reported cases of spontaneously occurring flashbacks.\"\nMotion that is seen and felt.\nWhen moving within a rotating reference frame such as in a centrifuge or environment where gravity is simulated with centrifugal force, the coriolis effect causes a sense of motion in the vestibular system that does not match the motion that is seen.\nPathophysiology.\nThere are various hypotheses that attempt to explain the cause of the condition.\nSensory conflict theory.\nContemporary sensory conflict theory, referring to \"a discontinuity between either visual, proprioceptive, and somatosensory input, or semicircular canal and otolith input\", is probably the most thoroughly studied. According to this theory, when the brain presents the mind with two incongruous states of motion, the result is often nausea and other symptoms of disorientation known as motion sickness. Such conditions happen when the vestibular system and the visual system do not present a synchronized and unified representation of one's body and surroundings.\nAccording to sensory conflict theory, the cause of terrestrial motion sickness is the opposite of the cause of space motion sickness. The former occurs when one perceives visually that one's surroundings are relatively immobile while the vestibular system reports that one's body is in motion relative to its surroundings. The latter can occur when the visual system perceives that one's surroundings are in motion while the vestibular system reports relative bodily immobility (as in zero gravity.)\nNeural mismatch.\nA variation of the sensory conflict theory is known as neural mismatch, implying a mismatch occurring between ongoing sensory experience and long-term memory rather than between components of the vestibular and visual systems. This theory emphasizes \"the limbic system in the integration of sensory information and long-term memory, in the expression of the symptoms of motion sickness, and the impact of anti-motion-sickness drugs and stress hormones on limbic system function. The limbic system may be the neural mismatch center of the brain.\"\nDefense against poisoning.\nIt has also been proposed that motion sickness could function as a defense mechanism against neurotoxins. The area postrema in the brain is responsible for inducing vomiting when poisons are detected, and for resolving conflicts between vision and balance. When feeling motion but not seeing it (for example, in the cabin of a ship with no portholes), the inner ear transmits to the brain that it senses motion, but the eyes tell the brain that everything is still. As a result of the incongruity, the brain concludes that the individual is hallucinating and further concludes that the hallucination is due to poison ingestion. The brain responds by inducing vomiting, to clear the supposed toxin. Treisman's indirect argument has recently been questioned via an alternative direct evolutionary hypothesis, as well as modified and extended via a direct poison hypothesis. The direct evolutionary hypothesis essentially argues that there are plausible means by which ancient real or apparent motion could have contributed directly to the evolution of aversive reactions, without the need for the co-opting of a poison response as posited by Treisman. Nevertheless, the direct poison hypothesis argues that there still are plausible ways in which the body's poison response system may have played a role in shaping the evolution of some of the signature symptoms that characterize motion sickness.\nNystagmus hypothesis.\nYet another theory, known as the nystagmus hypothesis, has been proposed based on stimulation of the vagus nerve resulting from the stretching or traction of extra-ocular muscles co-occurring with eye movements caused by vestibular stimulation. There are three critical aspects to the theory: first is the close linkage between activity in the vestibular system, i.e., semicircular canals and otolith organs, and a change in tonus among various of each eye's six extra-ocular muscles. Thus, with the exception of voluntary eye movements, the vestibular and oculomotor systems are thoroughly linked. Second is the operation of Sherrington's Law describing reciprocal inhibition between agonist-antagonist muscle pairs, and by implication the stretching of extraocular muscle that must occur whenever Sherrington's Law is made to fail, thereby causing an unrelaxed (contracted) muscle to be stretched. Finally, there is the critical presence of afferent output to the Vagus nerves as a direct result of eye muscle stretch or traction. Thus, tenth nerve stimulation resulting from eye muscle stretch is proposed as the cause of motion sickness. The theory explains why labyrinthine-defective individuals are immune to motion sickness; why symptoms emerge when undergoing various body-head accelerations; why combinations of voluntary and reflexive eye movements may challenge the proper operation of Sherrington's Law, and why many drugs that suppress eye movements also serve to suppress motion sickness symptoms.\nA recent theory argues that the main reason motion sickness occurs is due to an imbalance in vestibular outputs favoring the semicircular canals (nauseogenic) vs. otolith organs (anti-nauseogenic). This theory attempts to integrate previous theories of motion sickness. For example, there are many sensory conflicts that are associated with motion sickness and many that are not, but those in which canal stimulation occurs in the absence of normal otolith function (e.g., in free fall) are the most provocative. The vestibular imbalance theory is also tied to the different roles of the otoliths and canals in autonomic arousal (otolith output more sympathetic).\nExhausted Brain Theory.\nThe Exhausted Brain Theory (EBT) proposes that motion sickness and cybersickness originate from the metabolic cost of neural adaptation when the brain is forced to reconcile conflicting or unfamiliar sensory inputs. Instead of describing sickness purely as a sensory mismatch, EBT interprets it as a state of neural energy exhaustion in multisensory cortical networks responsible for perceptual coherence.\nAccording to the theory, continuous re-adaptation to inconsistent sensory information\u2014such as visual\u2013vestibular discordance in virtual or real motion\u2014requires substantial metabolic energy to update predictive internal models. When the energetic demand of this process exceeds available resources, functional fatigue develops, leading to nausea, dizziness, and other sickness symptoms.\nEBT builds on predictive-coding and information-theoretic perspectives, viewing the brain as an energy-limited inference system. Under strong sensory conflicts, prediction-error minimization becomes metabolically unsustainable, resulting in temporary neural exhaustion. Physiological studies of cybersickness show changes consistent with this framework, including altered cerebral oxygenation, pupil dilation, and autonomic regulation during symptom onset.\nEBT complements earlier frameworks such as the sensory-conflict and postural-instability theories, framing them as behavioral outcomes of an underlying energetic limitation in the brain's adaptive processes.\nDiagnosis.\nThe diagnosis is based on symptoms. Other conditions that may present similarly include vestibular disorders such as benign paroxysmal positional vertigo and vestibular migraine and stroke.\nTreatment.\nTreatment may include behavioral measures or medications.\nBehavioral measures.\nBehavioral measures to decrease motion sickness include holding the head still and lying on the back. Focusing on the horizon may also be useful. Listening to music, mindful breathing, being the driver, and not reading while moving are other techniques.\nHabituation is the most effective technique but requires significant time. It is often used by the military for pilots. These techniques must be carried out at least every week to retain effectiveness.\nA head-worn, computer device with a transparent display can be used to mitigate the effects of motion sickness (and spatial disorientation) if visual indicators of the wearer's head position are shown. Such a device functions by providing the wearer with digital reference lines in their field of vision that indicate the horizon's position relative to the user's head. This is accomplished by combining readings from accelerometers and gyroscopes mounted in the device. This technology has been implemented in both standalone devices and Google Glass. One promising looking treatment is to wear LCD shutter glasses that create a stroboscopic vision of 4\u00a0Hz with a dwell of 10 milliseconds.\nMedication.\nThree types of medications are sometimes prescribed to improve symptoms of motion sickness: antimuscarinics such as scopolamine, H1 antihistamines such as dimenhydrinate, and amphetamines such as dexamphetamine. Benefits are greater if used before the onset of symptoms or shortly after symptoms begin. Side effects, however, may limit the use of medications. A number of medications used for nausea such as ondansetron and metoclopramide are not effective in motion sickness.\nScopolamine (antimuscarinic).\nScopolamine is the most effective medication. Evidence is best for when it is used preventatively. It is available as a skin patch. Side effects may include blurry vision.\nAntihistamines.\nFirst generation H1 antihistamine medications are sometimes given to prevent or treat motion sickness. This class of medication is often effective at reducing the risk of getting motion sickness while in motion, however, the effectiveness of antihistamines at treating or stopping motion sickness once a person is already experiencing it has not been well studied. Effective first generation antihistamines include doxylamine, diphenhydramine, promethazine, meclizine, cyclizine, and cinnarizine. In pregnancy meclizine, dimenhydrinate and doxylamine are generally felt to be safe. Side effects include sleepiness. Second generation antihistamines have not been found to be useful.\nSome, but not all, antihistamines used for motion sickness are also antimuscarinics.\nAmphetamines.\nDextroamphetamine may be used together with an antihistamine or an antimuscarinic with synergistic effects. Concerns include their addictive potential.\nThose involved in high-risk activities, such as SCUBA diving, should evaluate the risks versus the benefits of medications. Promethazine combined with ephedrine to counteract the sedation is known as \"the Coast Guard cocktail\".\nAlternative medicine.\nAlternative treatments include acupuncture and ginger, although their effectiveness against motion sickness is variable. Providing smells does not appear to have a significant effect on the rate of motion sickness.\nEpidemiology.\nRoughly one-third of people are highly susceptible to motion sickness, and most of the rest get motion sick under extreme conditions. Around 80% of the general population is susceptible to cases of medium to high motion sickness. The rates of space motion sickness have been estimated at between forty and eighty percent of those who enter weightless orbit. Several factors influence susceptibility to motion sickness, including sleep deprivation and the cubic footage allocated to each space traveler. Studies indicate that women are more likely to be affected than men, and that the risk decreases with advancing age. There is some evidence that people with Asian ancestry may develop motion sickness more frequently than people of European ancestry, and there are situational and behavioral factors, such as whether a passenger has a view of the road ahead, and diet and eating behaviors.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "62581", "revid": "46563066", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62581", "title": "Napoleon III", "text": "Emperor of the French from 1852 to 1870\nNapoleon III (born Charles-Louis Napol\u00e9on Bonaparte; 20 April 1808 \u2013 9 January 1873) was President of France from 1848 to 1852 and then Emperor of the French from 1852 until his deposition in 1870. He was the first president, second emperor, and last monarch of France.\nNapoleon III was born at the height of the First French Empire in the Tuileries Palace in Paris, the son of Louis Bonaparte, King of Holland (r. 1806\u20131810), and Hortense de Beauharnais, and paternal nephew of the reigning Emperor Napoleon I. It would only be two months following his birth that he, in accordance with Napoleon I's dynastic naming policy, would be bestowed the name of Charles-Louis Napoleon, however, shortly thereafter, Charles was removed from his name. Louis Napoleon Bonaparte was the first and only president of the French Second Republic, elected in 1848. He seized power by force in 1851 when he could not constitutionally be re-elected. He later proclaimed himself Emperor of the French and founded the Second Empire, reigning until the defeat of the French Army and his capture by Prussia and its allies at the Battle of Sedan in 1870.\nNapoleon III was a popular monarch who oversaw the modernization of the French economy and filled Paris with new boulevards and parks. He expanded the French colonial empire, made the French merchant navy the second largest in the world, and personally engaged in two wars. Maintaining leadership for 22 years, he was the longest-reigning French head of state since the fall of the \"Ancien R\u00e9gime\", although his reign would ultimately end upon his surrender to Otto von Bismarck and Wilhelm I on 2 September 1870.\nNapoleon III commissioned a grand reconstruction of Paris carried out by prefect of the Seine, Georges-Eug\u00e8ne Haussmann. He expanded and consolidated the railway system throughout the nation and modernized the banking system. Napoleon promoted the building of the Suez Canal and established modern agriculture, which ended famines in France and made the country an agricultural exporter. He negotiated the 1860 Cobden\u2013Chevalier Treaty with Britain and similar agreements with France's other European trading partners. Social reforms included giving French workers the right to strike and the right to organize, and the right for women to be admitted to a French university.\nIn foreign policy, Napoleon III aimed to reassert French influence in Europe and around the world. In Europe, he allied with Britain and defeated Russia in the Crimean War (1853\u20131856). His regime assisted Italian unification by defeating the Austrian Empire in the Second Italian War of Independence and later annexed Savoy and Nice through the Treaty of Turin as its deferred reward. At the same time, his forces defended the Papal States against annexation by Italy. He was also favourable towards the 1859 union of the Danubian Principalities, which resulted in the establishment of the United Principalities of Moldavia and Wallachia. Napoleon doubled the area of the French colonial empire with expansions in Asia, the Pacific, and Africa. On the other hand, the intervention in Mexico, which aimed to create a Second Mexican Empire under French protection, ended in total failure.\nFrom 1866, Napoleon had to face the mounting power of Prussia as its minister president Otto von Bismarck sought German unification under Prussian leadership. In July 1870, Napoleon reluctantly declared war on Prussia after pressure from the general public. The French Army was rapidly defeated, and Napoleon was captured at Sedan. He was swiftly dethroned and the Third Republic was proclaimed in Paris. After he was released from German custody, he went into exile in England, where he died in 1873.\nChildhood and family.\nEarly life.\nCharles-Louis Napoleon Bonaparte, later known as Louis Napoleon and then Napoleon III, was born in Paris on the night of 19\u201320 April 1808. His father was Louis Bonaparte, the younger brother of Napoleon Bonaparte, who made Louis the King of Holland from 1806 until 1810. His mother was Hortense de Beauharnais, the only daughter of Napoleon's wife Jos\u00e9phine de Beauharnais by her first marriage to Alexandre de Beauharnais. He was the first Bonaparte prince born after the proclamation of the First French Empire.\nAs empress, Jos\u00e9phine had proposed the marriage of Louis and Hortense as a way to produce an heir for the Emperor, who agreed, as Jos\u00e9phine was by then infertile. Louis and Hortense had a difficult relationship and only lived together for brief periods. Their first son, Napol\u00e9on-Charles Bonaparte, died in 1807 and\u2014though separated and parents of a healthy second son, Napol\u00e9on Louis\u2014they decided to have a third child. They resumed their marriage for a brief time in Toulouse starting from 12 August 1807 and Louis Napoleon was born prematurely, (at least) three weeks short of nine months. Hortense was known to have lovers and Louis Napoleon's enemies, including Victor Hugo, spread the gossip that he was the child of a different man, but most historians agree today that he was the legitimate son of Louis Bonaparte.\nLouis Napoleon was baptized at the Palace of Fontainebleau on 5 November 1810, with Emperor Napoleon serving as his godfather and Empress Marie-Louise as his godmother. His father stayed away, once again separated from Hortense. At the age of seven, Louis Napoleon visited his uncle at the Tuileries Palace in Paris. Napoleon held him up to the window to see the soldiers parading in the Place du Carrousel below. Louis Napoleon last saw his uncle with the family at the Ch\u00e2teau de Malmaison, shortly before Napoleon departed for the Battle of Waterloo.\nAll members of the House of Bonaparte were forced into exile after the defeat of Napoleon at the Battle of Waterloo and the Bourbon Restoration of monarchy in France. Hortense and Louis Napoleon moved from Aix-les-Bains to Bern to Baden-Baden, and finally to a lakeside house at Arenenberg in the Swiss canton of Thurgau. He received some of his education in Germany at the gymnasium school at Augsburg, Bavaria. As a result, for the rest of his life, his French had a slight but noticeable German accent. His tutor at home was Philippe Le Bas, an ardent republican and the son of a revolutionary and close friend of Robespierre. Le Bas taught him French history and radical politics.\nRomantic revolutionary (1823\u20131835).\nWhen Louis Napoleon was 15, his mother Hortense moved to Rome, where the Bonapartes had a villa. He passed his time learning Italian, exploring the ancient ruins and learning the arts of seduction and romantic affairs, which he used often in his later life. He became friends with the French Ambassador, Fran\u00e7ois-Ren\u00e9 de Chateaubriand, the father of romanticism in French literature, with whom he remained in contact for many years. He was reunited with his older brother Napol\u00e9on-Louis; together they became involved with the Carbonari, secret revolutionary societies fighting Austria's domination of Northern Italy. In the spring of 1831, when Louis Napoleon was 23, the Austrian and Papal governments launched an offensive against the Carbonari. The two brothers, wanted by the police, were forced to flee. During their flight, Napol\u00e9on-Louis contracted measles. He died in his brother's arms on 17 March 1831. Hortense joined Louis Napoleon and together they evaded the police and Austrian Army and finally reached the French border.\nHortense and Louis Napoleon traveled incognito to Paris, where the old regime of King Charles X had just fallen after the July Revolution and been replaced by the more liberal regime of Louis Philippe I, the sole monarch of the July Monarchy. They arrived in Paris on 23 April 1831, and took up residence under the name \"Hamilton\" in the Hotel du Holland on Place Vend\u00f4me. Hortense wrote an appeal to the King of the French, asking to stay in France, and Louis Napoleon offered to volunteer as an ordinary soldier in the French Army. The new king agreed to meet secretly with Hortense; Louis Napoleon had a fever and did not join them. The King finally agreed that Hortense and Louis Napoleon could stay in Paris as long as their stay was brief and incognito. Louis Napoleon was told that he could join the French Army if he would simply change his name, something he indignantly refused to do. Hortense and Louis Napoleon remained in Paris until 5 May, the tenth anniversary of the death of Napoleon. The presence of Hortense and Louis Napoleon in the hotel had become known, and a public demonstration of mourning for the Emperor took place on Place Vend\u00f4me in front of their hotel. The same day, Hortense and Louis Napoleon were ordered to leave Paris. During their brief stay in Paris Louis Napoleon had become convinced that Bonapartist sentiment was still strong among the French people and the army. They went to Britain briefly, and then back into exile in Switzerland.\nEarly adult years.\nBonapartist succession and philosophy of Bonapartism.\nEver since the fall of Napoleon in 1815, a Bonapartist movement had existed in France, hoping to return a Bonaparte to the throne. According to the law of succession established by Napoleon I, the claim passed first to his own son, declared \"King of Rome\" at birth by his father. This heir, known by Bonapartists as Napoleon II, was living in virtual imprisonment at the court of Vienna under the title Duke of Reichstadt. Next in line was Louis Napoleon's eldest uncle, Joseph Bonaparte, followed by Louis Bonaparte, but neither Joseph nor Louis had any interest in re-entering public life. When the Duke of Reichstadt died in 1832, Louis Napoleon became the \"de facto\" heir of the dynasty and the leader of the Bonapartist cause.\nIn exile with his mother in Switzerland, Louis Napoleon enrolled in the Swiss Army, trained to become an officer, and wrote a manual of artillery (his uncle Napoleon had become famous as an artillery officer). Louis Napoleon also began writing about his political philosophy\u2014for as the early twentieth century English historian H. A. L. Fisher suggested, \"the programme of the Empire was not the improvisation of a vulgar adventurer\" but the result of deep reflection on the Napoleonic political philosophy and on how to adjust it to the changed domestic and international scenes. As early as 1832 he presented a reconciliation between Bonapartism and republicanism through the principle of popular sovereignty. He believed a strong emperor existed to execute the will of the people. He published his \"R\u00eaveries politiques\" or \"political dreams\" in 1833 at the age of 25, followed in 1834 by \"Consid\u00e9rations politiques et militaires sur la Suisse\" (\"Political and military considerations about Switzerland\"), followed in 1839 by \"Les Id\u00e9es napol\u00e9oniennes\" (\"Napoleonic Ideas\"), a compendium of his political ideas which was published in three editions and eventually translated into six languages. He based his doctrine upon two ideas: universal suffrage and the primacy of the national interest. He called for a \"monarchy which procures the advantages of the Republic without the inconveniences\", a regime \"strong without despotism, free without anarchy, independent without conquest\". He also intended to build a wider European community of nations.\nFailed coup, exile in London (1836\u20131840).\n\"I believe\", wrote Louis Napoleon, \"that from time to time, men are created whom I call volunteers of providence, in whose hands are placed the destiny of their countries. I believe I am one of those men. If I am wrong, I can perish uselessly. If I am right, then providence will put me into a position to fulfill my mission.\" He had seen the popular enthusiasm for Napoleon Bonaparte when he was in Paris, and he was convinced that, if he marched to Paris, as Napoleon Bonaparte had done in 1815 during the Hundred Days, France would rise up and join him. He began to plan a coup against King Louis-Philippe.\nHe planned for his uprising to begin in Strasbourg. The colonel of a regiment was brought over to the cause. On 29 October 1836, Louis Napoleon arrived in Strasbourg, in the uniform of an artillery officer; he rallied the regiment to his side. The prefecture was seized, and the prefect arrested. Unfortunately for Louis-Napoleon, the general commanding the garrison escaped and called in a loyal regiment, which surrounded the mutineers. The mutineers surrendered and Louis-Napoleon fled back to Switzerland.\nLouis Napoleon was widely popular in exile and his popularity in France continuously grew after his failed coup in 1836 as it established him as heir to the Bonaparte legend and increased his publicity.\nKing Louis Philippe had demanded that the Swiss government return Louis Napoleon to France, but the Swiss pointed out that he was a Swiss soldier and citizen and refused to hand him over. The King responded by sending an army to the Swiss border. Louis Napoleon thanked his Swiss hosts, and voluntarily left the country. The other mutineers were put on trial in Alsace, and were all acquitted.\nLouis Napoleon traveled first to London, then to Brazil, and then to New York City. He met the elite of New York society and the writer Washington Irving. While he was traveling to see more of the United States, he received word that his mother was very ill. He hurried as quickly as he could back to Switzerland. He reached Arenenberg in time to be with his mother on 5 August 1837, when she died. She was finally buried in Rueil, in France, next to her mother, on 11 January 1838, but Louis Napoleon could not attend, because he was not allowed into France.\nLouis Napoleon returned to London for a new period of exile in October 1838. He had inherited a large fortune from his mother and took a house with 17 servants and several of his old friends and fellow conspirators. He was received by London society and met the political and scientific leaders of the day, including Benjamin Disraeli and Michael Faraday. He also did considerable research into the economy of Britain. He strolled in Hyde Park, which he later used as a model when he created the Bois de Boulogne in Paris. He spent the winter of 1838\u201339 in Royal Leamington Spa in Warwickshire.\nSecond coup, prison, escape and exile (1840\u20131848).\nLiving in the comfort of London, he had not given up the dream of returning to France to seize power. In the summer of 1840 he bought weapons and uniforms and had proclamations printed, gathered a contingent of about sixty armed men, hired a ship called the \"Edinburgh-Castle\", and on 6 August 1840, sailed across the Channel to the port of Boulogne. The attempted coup turned into an even greater fiasco than the Strasbourg mutiny. The mutineers were stopped by the customs agents, the soldiers of the garrison refused to join, the mutineers were surrounded on the beach, one was killed and the others arrested. Both the British and French press heaped ridicule on Louis-Napoleon and his plot. The newspaper \"Le Journal des D\u00e9bats\" wrote, \"this surpasses comedy. One doesn't kill crazy people, one just locks them up.\" He was put on trial, where, despite an eloquent defense of his cause, he was sentenced to life in prison in the fortress of Ham in the Somme department of Northern France.\nActivities.\nThe register of the fortress Ham for 7 October 1840 contained a concise description of the new prisoner: \"Age: thirty-two years. Height: one meter sixty-six. Hair and eyebrows: chestnut. Eyes: Gray and small. Nose: large. Mouth: ordinary. Beard: brown. Moustache: blond. Chin: pointed. Face: oval. Complexion: pale. Head: sunken in his shoulders, and large shoulders. Back: bent. Lips: thick.\" He had a mistress named El\u00e9onore Vergeot, a young woman from the town of Ham, who gave birth to two of his children.\nWhile in prison, Louis Napoleon wrote poems, political essays, and articles on diverse topics. He contributed articles to regional newspapers and magazines in towns all over France, becoming quite well known as a writer. His most famous book was \"L'extinction du pauperisme\" (1844), a study of the causes of poverty in the French industrial working class, with proposals to eliminate it. His conclusion: \"The working class has nothing, it is necessary to give them ownership. They have no other wealth than their own labor, it is necessary to give them work that will benefit all...they are without organization and without connections, without rights and without a future; it is necessary to give them rights and a future and to raise them in their own eyes by association, education, and discipline.\" He proposed various practical ideas for creating a banking and savings system that would provide credit to the working class, and to establish agricultural colonies similar to the \"kibbutzim\" later founded in Israel. This book was widely reprinted and circulated in France, and played an important part in his future electoral success.\nLouis Napoleon was busy in prison, but also unhappy and impatient. He was aware that the popularity of his uncle was steadily increasing in France; Napoleon I was the subject of heroic poems, books and plays. Huge crowds had gathered in Paris on 15 December 1840 when the remains of Napoleon were returned with great ceremony to Paris and handed over to King Louis Philippe, while Louis Napoleon could only read about it in prison. On 25 May 1846, with the assistance of his doctor and other friends on the outside, he disguised himself as a laborer carrying lumber, and walked out of the prison. His enemies later derisively called him \"Badinguet\", the name of the laborer whose identity he had assumed. A carriage was waiting to take him to the coast and then by boat to England. A month after his escape, his father Louis died, making Charles Napoleon the clear heir to the Bonaparte dynasty.\nReturn and early affairs.\nLouis Napoleon quickly resumed his place in British society. He lived on King Street, St James's, London, went to the theatre and hunted, renewed his acquaintance with Benjamin Disraeli, and met Charles Dickens. He went back to his studies at the British Museum. He had an affair with the actress Rachel, the most famous French actress of the period, during her tours to Britain. More important for his future career, he had an affair with the wealthy heiress Harriet Howard (1823\u20131865). They met in 1846, soon after his return to Britain. They began to live together, and she took in his two illegitimate children and raised them with her own son, and she provided financing for his political plans so that, when the moment came, he could return to France.\nEarly political career.\n1848 Revolution and birth of the Second Republic.\nIn February 1848, Louis Napoleon learned that the French Revolution of 1848 had broken out; as Louis Philippe I, faced with opposition within his government and army, abdicated. Believing that his time had finally come, he set out for Paris on 27 February, departing England on the same day that Louis-Philippe left France for his own exile in England. When he arrived in Paris, he found that the Second Republic had been declared, led by a Provisional Government headed by a Commission led by Alphonse de Lamartine, and that different factions of republicans, from conservatives to those on the far left, were competing for power. He wrote to Lamartine announcing his arrival, saying that he \"was without any other ambition than that of serving my country\". Lamartine wrote back politely but firmly, asking Louis-Napoleon to leave Paris \"until the city is more calm, and not before the elections for the National Assembly\". His close advisors urged him to stay and try to take power, but he wanted to show his prudence and loyalty to the Republic; while his advisors remained in Paris, he returned to London on 2 March 1848 and watched events from there.\nLouis Napoleon did not run in the first elections for the National Assembly, held in April 1848, but three members of the Bonaparte family, Napol\u00e9on-J\u00e9r\u00f4me Bonaparte, Pierre Napol\u00e9on Bonaparte, and Lucien Murat were elected; the name Bonaparte still had political power. In the next elections, on 4 June, where candidates could run in multiple departments, he was elected in four different departments; in Paris, he was among the top five candidates, just after the conservative leader Adolphe Thiers and Victor Hugo. His followers were mostly on the left, from the peasantry and working class. His pamphlet on \"The Extinction of Pauperism\" was widely circulated in Paris, and his name was cheered with those of the socialist candidates Barb\u00e8s and Louis Blanc.\nThe Moderate Republican leaders of the provisional government, Lamartine and Cavaignac, considered arresting Louis Napoleon as a dangerous revolutionary, but once again he outmaneuvered them. He wrote to the president of the provisional government: \"I believe I should wait to return to the heart of my country, so that my presence in France will not serve as a pretext to the enemies of the Republic.\"\nIn June 1848, the June Days Uprising broke out in Paris, led by the far left, against the conservative majority in the National Assembly. Hundreds of barricades appeared in the working-class neighborhoods. General Louis-Eug\u00e8ne Cavaignac, the leader of the army, first withdrew his soldiers from Paris to allow the insurgents to deploy their barricades, and then returned with overwhelming force to crush the uprising; from 24 to 26 June, there were battles in the streets of the working class districts of Paris. An estimated five thousand insurgents were killed at the barricades, fifteen thousand were arrested, and four thousand deported.\nLouis Napoleon's absence from Paris meant that he was not connected either with the uprising, or with the brutal repression that had followed. He was still in London on 17\u201318 September, when the elections for the National Assembly were held, but he was a candidate in thirteen departments. He was elected in five departments; in Paris, he received 110,000 votes of the 247,000 cast, the highest number of votes of any candidate. He returned to Paris on 24 September, and this time he took his place in the National Assembly. In seven months, he had gone from a political exile in London to a highly visible place in the National Assembly, as the government finished the new constitution and prepared for the first election ever of a president of the French Republic.\nPresidential election of 1848.\nThe new constitution of the Second Republic, drafted by a commission including Alexis de Tocqueville, called for a strong executive and a president elected by popular vote through universal male suffrage, rather than chosen by the National Assembly. The elections were scheduled for 10\u201311 December 1848. Louis Napoleon promptly announced his candidacy. There were four other candidates for the post: General Cavaignac, who had led the suppression of the June uprisings in Paris; Lamartine, the poet-philosopher and leader of the provisional government; Alexandre Auguste Ledru-Rollin, the leader of the socialists; and Raspail, the leader of the far left wing of the socialists.\nLouis Napoleon established his campaign headquarters and residence at the H\u00f4tel du Rhin on Place Vend\u00f4me. He was accompanied by his companion, Harriet Howard, who gave him a large loan to help finance his campaign. He rarely went to the sessions of the National Assembly and rarely voted. He was not a gifted orator; he spoke slowly, in a monotone, with a slight German accent from his Swiss education. His opponents sometimes ridiculed him, one comparing him to \"a turkey who believes he's an eagle\".\nLouis Napoleon's campaign appealed to both the left and right. His election manifesto proclaimed his support for \"religion, family, property, the eternal basis of all social order\". But it also announced his intent \"to give work to those unoccupied; to look out for the old age of the workers; to introduce in industrial laws those improvements which do not ruin the rich, but which bring about the well-being of each and the prosperity of all\".\nLouis Napoleon's campaign agents, many of them veterans from Napoleon Bonaparte's army, raised support for him around the country. Louis Napoleon won the grudging endorsement of the conservative leader Adolphe Thiers, who believed he could be the most easily controlled; Thiers called him \"of all the candidates, the least bad\". He won the backing of \"L'Evenement\", the newspaper of Victor Hugo, which declared, \"We have confidence in him; he carries a great name.\" His chief opponent, General Cavaignac, expected that Louis Napoleon would come in first, but that he would receive less than fifty percent of the vote, which would mean the election would go to the National Assembly, where Cavaignac was certain to win.\nThe elections were held on 10\u201311 December. Results were announced on 20 December. Louis Napoleon was widely expected to win, but the size of his victory surprised almost everyone. He won 5,572,834 votes, or 74.2 percent of votes cast, compared with 1,469,156 for Cavaignac. The socialist Ledru-Rollin received 376,834; the extreme left candidate Raspail 37,106, and the poet Lamartine only 17,000 votes. Louis Napoleon won the support of all segments of the population: the peasants unhappy with rising prices and high taxes; unemployed workers; small businessmen who wanted prosperity and order; and intellectuals such as Victor Hugo. He won the votes of 55.6 percent of all registered voters, and won in all but four of France's departments.\nPrince-President (1848\u20131851).\nLouis Napoleon moved his residence to the \u00c9lys\u00e9e Palace at the end of December 1848 and immediately hung a portrait of his mother in the boudoir and a portrait of Napoleon I, in his coronation robes, in the grand salon. Adolphe Thiers recommended that he wear clothing of \"democratic simplicity\", but following the model of his uncle, he chose instead the uniform of the General-in-Chief of the National Guard, and chose the title of \"Prince-President\".\nLouis Napoleon also made his first venture into foreign policy, in Italy, where as a youth he had joined in the patriotic uprising against the Austrians. The previous government had sent an expeditionary force, which had been tasked and funded by the National Assembly to support the republican forces in Italy against the Austrians and against the Pope. Instead the force was secretly ordered to do the opposite, namely to enter Rome to help restore the temporal authority of Pope Pius IX, who had been overthrown by Italian republicans including Mazzini and Garibaldi. The French troops came under fire from Garibaldi's soldiers. The Prince-President, without consulting his ministers, ordered his soldiers to fight if needed in support of the Pope. This was very popular with French Catholics, but infuriated the republicans, who supported the Roman Republic. To please the radical republicans, he asked the Pope to introduce liberal reforms and the \"Code Napoleon\" to the Papal States. To gain support from the Catholics, he approved the \"Loi Falloux\" in 1851, which restored a greater role for the Catholic Church in the French educational system.\nElections were held for the National Assembly on 13\u201314 May 1849, only a few months after Louis Napoleon had become president, and were largely won by a coalition of conservative republicans\u2014which Catholics and monarchists called \"The Party of Order\"\u2014led by Thiers. The socialists and \"red\" republicans, led by Ledru-Rollin and Raspail, also did well, winning two hundred seats. The moderate republicans, in the middle, did very badly, taking just 70\u201380 seats. The Party of Order had a clear majority, enough to block any initiatives of Louis Napoleon.\nOn 11 June 1849, the socialists and radical republicans made an attempt to seize power. Ledru-Rollin, from his headquarters in the Conservatory of Arts and Professions, declared that Louis Napoleon was no longer President and called for a general uprising. A few barricades appeared in the working-class neighborhoods of Paris. Louis Napoleon acted swiftly, and the uprising was short-lived. Paris was declared in a state of siege, the headquarters of the uprising was surrounded, and the leaders arrested. Ledru-Rollin fled to England, Raspail was arrested and sent to prison, the republican clubs were closed, and their newspapers closed down.\nThe National Assembly, now without the left republicans and determined to keep them out forever, proposed a new election law that placed restrictions on universal male suffrage, imposing a three-year residency requirement. This new law excluded 3.5 of 9\u00a0million French voters, the voters that the leader of the Party of Order, Adolphe Thiers, scornfully called \"the vile multitude\". This new election law was passed in May 1850 by a majority of 433 to 241, putting the National Assembly on a direct collision course with the Prince-President. Louis Napoleon broke with the Assembly and the conservative ministers opposing his projects in favour of the dispossessed. He secured the support of the army, toured the country making populist speeches that condemned the Assembly, and presented himself as the protector of universal male suffrage. He demanded that the law be changed, but his proposal was defeated in the Assembly by a vote of 355 to 348.\nAccording to the Constitution of 1848, Louis Napoleon had to step down at the end of his term. He sought a constitutional amendment to allow him to succeed himself, arguing that four years were not enough to fully implement his political and economic program. He toured the country and gained support from many of the regional governments and many within the Assembly. The vote in July 1851 was 446 to 278 in favor of changing the law and allowing him to run again, but this was short of the two-thirds majority needed to amend the constitution.\nCoup d'\u00e9tat (December 1851).\nLouis Napoleon believed that he was supported by the people and he chose to retain power by other means. His half-brother Charles, duc de Morny, and a few close advisors quietly began to organize a coup d'\u00e9tat. They included minister of war Jacques Leroy de Saint Arnaud and officers from the French Army in North Africa to provide military backing for the coup. On the night of 1\u20132 December, Saint Arnaud's soldiers quietly occupied the national printing office, the Palais Bourbon, newspaper offices, and the strategic points in the city. In the morning, Parisians found posters around the city announcing the dissolution of the National Assembly, the restoration of universal suffrage, new elections, and a state of siege in Paris and the surrounding departments. Sixteen members of the National Assembly were arrested in their homes. When about 220 deputies of the moderate right gathered at the city hall of the 10th arrondissement, they were also arrested. On 3 December, writer Victor Hugo and a few other republicans tried to organize an opposition to the coup. A few barricades appeared, and about 1,000 insurgents came out in the streets, but the army moved in force with 30,000 troops and the uprisings were swiftly crushed, with the killing of an estimated 300 to 400 opponents of the coup. There were also small uprisings in the more militant red republican towns in the south and center of France, but these were all put down by 10 December.\nLouis Napoleon followed the self-coup by a period of repression of his opponents, aimed mostly at the red republicans. About 26,000 people were arrested, including 4,000 in Paris alone. The 239 inmates who were judged most severely were sent to the penal colony in Cayenne. 9,530 followers were sent to French Algeria, 1,500 were expelled from France, and another 3,000 were given forced residence away from their homes. Soon afterwards, a commission of revision freed 3,500 of those sentenced. In 1859, the remaining 1,800 prisoners and exiles were amnestied, with the exception of the republican leader Ledru-Rollin, who was released from prison but required to leave the country.\nStrict press censorship was enacted by a decree from 17 February 1852. No newspaper dealing with political or social questions could be published without the permission of the government, fines were increased, and the list of press offenses was expanded. After three warnings, a newspaper or journal could be suspended or even permanently closed.\nLouis Napoleon wished to demonstrate that his new government had a broad popular mandate, so on 20\u201321 December a national plebiscite was held asking if voters agreed to the coup. Mayors in many regions threatened to publish the names of any electors who refused to vote. When asked if they agreed to the coup, 7,439,216 voters said yes, 641,737 voted no, and 1.7\u00a0million voters abstained. The fairness and legality of the referendum was immediately questioned by Louis Napoleon's critics, but Louis Napoleon was convinced that he had been given a public mandate to rule.\nFollowing the returns, many challenged the validity of such an implausibly lopsided result. One such critic was Victor Hugo, who had originally supported Louis Napoleon but had been infuriated by the coup d'\u00e9tat, departed for Brussels on 11 December 1851. He became the most bitter critic of Louis Napoleon, rejected the amnesty offered to him, and did not return to France for twenty years.\nThe Second French Empire.\nMiddle years.\nThe 1851 referendum gave Louis Napoleon a mandate to amend the constitution. Work began on the new document in 1852. It was officially prepared by a committee of eighty experts but was actually drafted by a small group of the Prince-President's inner circle. Under the new constitution, Louis Napoleon was automatically reelected as president. Under Article Two, the president could now serve an unlimited number of 10-year terms. He was given the absolute authority to declare war, sign treaties, form alliances and initiate laws. The Constitution re-established universal male suffrage, and also retained a National Assembly, albeit one with reduced authority.\nLouis Napoleon's government imposed new authoritarian measures to control dissent and reduce the power of the opposition. One of his first acts was to settle scores with his old enemy, King Louis Philippe, who had sent him to prison for life and who had died in 1850. A decree on 23 January 1852 forbade the late king's family to own property in France and annulled the inheritance he had given to his children before he became king.\nThe National Guard, whose members had sometimes joined anti-government demonstrations, was re-organized and largely used only in parades. Government officials were required to wear uniforms at official formal occasions. The Minister of Education was given the power to dismiss professors at the universities and review the content of their courses. Students at the universities were forbidden to wear beards, seen as a symbol of republicanism.\nAn election was held for a new National Assembly on 29 February 1852. All resources of the government were used on behalf of the candidates backing the Prince-President. Of eight million eligible voters, 5,200,000 votes went to the official candidates and 800,000 to opposition candidates. About one third of the eligible voters abstained. The new Assembly included a small number of opponents of Louis Napoleon, including 17 monarchists, 18 conservatives, two liberal democrats, three republicans and 72 independents.\nDespite now holding all governing power in the nation, Louis Napoleon was not content with being an authoritarian president. The ink had barely dried on his new, severely authoritarian constitution when he set about restoring the empire. Following the election, the Prince-President went on a triumphal national tour. In Marseille, he laid the cornerstone of a new cathedral, a new stock exchange, and a chamber of commerce. In Bordeaux, on 9 October 1852, he gave his principal speech:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Some people say the Empire is war. I say the Empire is peace. Like the Emperor I have many conquests to make... Like him I wish ... to draw into the stream of the great popular river those hostile side-currents which lose themselves without profit to anyone. We have immense unplowed territories to cultivate; roads to open; ports to dig; rivers to be made navigable; canals to finish, a railway network to complete. We have, in front of Marseille, a vast kingdom to assimilate into France. We have all the great ports of the west to connect with the American continent by modern communications, which we still lack. We have ruins to repair, false gods to tear down, truths which we need to make triumph. This is how I see the Empire, if the Empire is re-established. These are the conquests I am considering, and you around me, who, like me, want the good of our country, you are my soldiers.\n\u00c9douard Drouyn de Lhuys, twice foreign minister to Napoleon III, later commented that, \"the Emperor has immense desires and limited abilities. He wants to do extraordinary things but is only capable of extravagances.\"\nWhen Louis Napoleon returned to Paris the city was decorated with large arches, with banners proclaiming, \"To Napoleon III, emperor\". In response to officially inspired requests for the return of the empire, the Senate scheduled another referendum for 21\u201322 November 1852 on whether to make Napoleon emperor. After an implausible 97 percent voted in favour (7,824,129 votes for and 253,159 against, with two million abstentions), on 2 December 1852\u2014exactly one year after the coup\u2014the Second Republic was officially ended, replaced by the Second French Empire. Prince-President Louis Napoleon Bonaparte became Napoleon III, Emperor of the French. His regnal name treats Napoleon II, who never actually ruled, as a true Emperor (he had been briefly recognized as emperor from 22 June to 7 July 1815). The 1852 constitution was retained; it concentrated so much power in Napoleon's hands that the only substantive changes were to replace the word \"president\" with the word \"emperor\", and make the post hereditary.\nModernising the infrastructure and the economy (1853\u20131869).\nEarly construction.\nOne of the first priorities of Napoleon III was the modernisation of the French economy, which had fallen far behind that of the United Kingdom and some of the German states. Political economics had long been a passion of the Emperor. While in Britain, he had visited factories and railway yards; in prison, he had studied and written about the sugar industry and policies to reduce poverty. He wanted the government to play an active, not a passive, role in the economy. In 1839, he had written: \"Government is not a necessary evil, as some people claim; it is instead the benevolent motor for the whole social organism.\" He did not advocate the government getting directly involved in industry. Instead, the government took a very active role in building the infrastructure for economic growth; stimulating the stock market and investment banks to provide credit; building railways, ports, canals and roads; and providing training and education. He also opened up French markets to foreign goods, such as railway tracks from England, forcing French industry to become more efficient and more competitive.\nThe period was favorable for industrial expansion. The gold rushes in California and Australia increased the European money supply. In the early years of the Empire, the economy also benefited from the coming of age of those born during the baby boom of the Restoration period. The steady rise of prices caused by the increase of the money supply encouraged company promotion and investment of capital.\nBeginning in 1852, Napoleon encouraged the creation of new banks, such as Cr\u00e9dit Mobilier, which sold shares to the public and provided loans to both private industry and to the government. Cr\u00e9dit Lyonnais was founded in 1863 and Soci\u00e9t\u00e9 G\u00e9n\u00e9rale in 1864. These banks provided the funding for Napoleon III's major projects, from railway and canals to the rebuilding of Paris.\nIn 1851, France had only 3,500 kilometers of railway, compared with 10,000 kilometers in England and 800 kilometers in Belgium, a country one-twentieth the size of France. Within days of the coup d'\u00e9tat of 1851, Napoleon's Minister of Public Works launched a project to build a railway line around Paris, connecting the different independent lines coming into Paris from around the country. The government provided guarantees for loans to build new lines and urged railway companies to consolidate. There were 18 railway companies in 1848 and six at the end of the Empire. By 1870, France had 20,000 kilometers of railway linked to the French ports and to the railway systems of the neighbouring countries that carried over 100\u00a0million passengers a year and transported the products of France's new steel mills, mines and factories.\nDevelopment of steamships and early reconstruction on Paris.\nNew shipping lines were created, and ports rebuilt in Marseille and Le Havre, which connected France by sea to the US, Latin America, North Africa and the Far East. During the Empire, the number of steamships tripled, and by 1870, France possessed the second-largest maritime fleet in the world after England. Napoleon III backed the greatest maritime project of the age, the construction of the Suez Canal between 1859 and 1869. The canal project was funded by shares on the Paris stock market and led by a former French diplomat, Ferdinand de Lesseps. It was opened by Empress Eug\u00e9nie with a performance of Verdi's opera \"Aida.\"\nThe rebuilding of central Paris also encouraged commercial expansion and innovation. The first department store, Bon March\u00e9, opened in Paris in 1852 in a modest building and expanded rapidly, its income increasing from 450,000 francs a year to 20\u00a0million. Its founder, Aristide Boucicaut, commissioned a new glass and iron building designed by Louis-Charles Boileau and Gustave Eiffel that opened in 1869 and became the model for the modern department store. Other department stores quickly appeared: Au Printemps in 1865 and La Samaritaine in 1870. They were soon imitated around the world.\nNapoleon's program also included reclaiming farmland and reforestation. One such project in the Gironde department drained and reforested 10,000 square kilometers (3,900 square miles) of moorland, creating the Landes forest, the largest maritime pine forest in Europe.\nReconstruction of Paris (1854\u20131870).\nNapoleon III began his regime by launching a series of enormous public works projects in Paris, hiring tens of thousands of workers to improve the sanitation, water supply and traffic circulation of the city. To direct this task, he named a new prefect of the Seine department, Georges-Eug\u00e8ne Haussmann, and gave him extraordinary powers to rebuild the center of the city. He installed a large map of Paris in a central position in his office, and he and Haussmann planned the new Paris.\nThe population of Paris had doubled since 1815, with neither an increase in its area nor a development of its structure of very narrow medieval streets and alleys.\nTo accommodate the growing population and those who would be forced from the center by the construction of new boulevards and squares, Napoleon issued a decree in 1860 to annex eleven communes (municipalities) on the outskirts of Paris and increase the number of arrondissements (city boroughs) from twelve to twenty. Paris was thus enlarged to its modern boundaries with the exception of the two major city parks (Bois de Boulogne and Bois de Vincennes) that became part of the French capital in 1920.\nFor the duration of Napoleon III's reign and a decade afterwards, most of Paris was an enormous construction site. His hydraulic chief engineer, Eug\u00e8ne Belgrand, built a new aqueduct to bring clean water from the Vanne River in the Champagne region, and a new huge reservoir near the future Parc Montsouris. These two works increased the water supply of Paris from 87,000 to 400,000 cubic meters of water a day. Hundreds of kilometers of pipes distributed the water throughout the city, and a second network, using the less-clean water from the Ourcq and the Seine, washed the streets and watered the new park and gardens. He completely rebuilt the Paris sewers and installed miles of pipes to distribute gas for thousands of new streetlights along the Paris streets.\nBeginning in 1854, in the center of the city, Haussmann's workers tore down hundreds of old buildings and constructed new avenues to connect the central points of the city. Buildings along these avenues were required to be the same height, constructed in an architecturally similar style, and be faced with cream-coloured stone to create the signature look of Paris boulevards.\nThe emperor built two new railway stations: the Gare de Lyon (1855) and the Gare du Nord (1865). He completed Les Halles, the great cast iron and glass pavilioned produce market in the center of the city, and built a new municipal hospital, the H\u00f4tel-Dieu, in the place of crumbling medieval buildings on the Ile de la Cit\u00e9. The signature architectural landmark was the Paris Opera, the largest theater in the world, designed by Charles Garnier to crown the center of Napoleon's new Paris.\nNapoleon also wanted to build new parks and gardens for the recreation and relaxation of the Parisians, particularly those in the new neighbourhoods of the expanding city. Napoleon's new parks were inspired by his memories of the parks in London, especially Hyde Park, where he had strolled and promenaded in a carriage while in exile; but he wanted to build on a much larger scale. Working with Haussmann and Jean-Charles Adolphe Alphand, the engineer who headed the new Service of Promenades and Plantations, he laid out a plan for four major parks at the cardinal points of the compass around the city. Thousands of workers and gardeners began to dig lakes, build cascades, plant lawns, flowerbeds and trees, and construct chalets and grottoes. Napoleon III transformed the Bois de Boulogne into a park to the west of Paris. To the east, he created the Bois de Vincennes, and to the north, the Parc des Buttes-Chaumont. The Parc Montsouris was created to the south.\nIn addition to building the four large parks, Napoleon had the city's older parks, including the Parc Monceau, formerly owned by the Orl\u00e9ans family, and the Jardin du Luxembourg, refurbished and replanted. He also created some twenty small parks and gardens in the neighbourhoods as miniature versions of his large parks. Alphand termed these small parks \"green and flowering salons\". The intention of Napoleon's plan was to have one park in each of the eighty \"quartiers\" (neighbourhoods) of Paris, so that no one was more than a ten-minute walk from such a park. The parks were an immediate success with all classes of Parisians.\nSearch for a wife.\nSoon after becoming emperor, Napoleon III began searching for a wife to give him an heir. He was still attached to his companion Harriet Howard, who attended receptions at the \u00c9lys\u00e9e Palace and traveled around France with him. He quietly sent a diplomatic delegation to approach the family of Princess Carola of Vasa, the granddaughter of deposed King Gustav IV Adolf of Sweden. They declined because of his Catholic religion and the political uncertainty about his future, as did the family of Princess Adelheid of Hohenlohe-Langenburg, a niece of Queen Victoria.\nThe Emperor fell in love with a 23-year-old Spaniard noblewoman, Eug\u00e9nie du Derje de Montijo. She received much of her education in Paris. Her beauty attracted Napoleon III, who, as was his custom, tried to seduce her, but Eug\u00e9nie told him to wait for marriage. The civil ceremony took place at Tuileries Palace on 22 January 1853, and a much grander ceremony was held a few days later at the Cathedral of Notre-Dame de Paris. In 1856, Eug\u00e9nie gave birth to a son and heir-apparent, Napol\u00e9on, Prince Imperial.\nWith an heir to the throne secured, Napoleon resumed his \"petites distractions\" with other women. Eug\u00e9nie faithfully performed the duties of an empress, entertaining guests and accompanying the Emperor to balls, opera, and theatre. She traveled to Egypt to open the Suez Canal and officially represented him whenever he traveled outside France.\nThough a fervent Catholic and conservative on many other issues, Eug\u00e9nie strongly advocated equality for women. She pressured the Ministry of National Education to give the first baccalaureate diploma to a woman and tried unsuccessfully to induce the to elect the writer George Sand as its first female member.\nForeign policy (1852\u20131860).\nIn foreign policy, Napoleon III aimed to reassert French influence in Europe and around the world as a supporter of popular sovereignty and nationalism. In Europe, he allied himself with Britain and defeated Russia in the Crimean War (1854\u20131856). French troops assisted Italian unification by fighting on the side of the Kingdom of Sardinia. In return, France received Savoy and the county of Nice in 1860. Later, however, to appease fervent French Catholics, he sent soldiers to defend the residual Papal States against annexation by Italy.\nPrinciple of Nationalities.\nIn a speech at Bordeaux shortly after becoming Emperor, Napoleon III proclaimed that \"The Empire means peace\" (\"L'Empire, c'est la paix\"), reassuring foreign governments that he would not attack other European powers in order to extend the French Empire. He was, however, determined to follow a strong foreign policy to extend France's influence and warned that he would not stand by and allow another European power to threaten its neighbour.\nAt the beginning of his reign, he was also an advocate of a new \"principle of nationalities\" (\"principe des nationalit\u00e9s\") that supported the creation of new states based on nationality, such as Italy, in place of the old multinational empires, such as the Habsburg monarchy (or Empire of Austria, known since 1867 as Austria-Hungary). In this he was influenced by his uncle's policy as described in the \"M\u00e9morial de Sainte-H\u00e9l\u00e8ne\". In all of his foreign policy ventures, he put the interests of France first. Napoleon III felt that new states created on the basis of national identity would become natural allies and partners of France.\nAlliance with Britain and the Crimean War (1853\u20131856).\nLord Palmerston as Britain's Foreign Secretary and later Prime Minister had close personal ties with leading French statesmen, notably Napoleon III himself. Palmerston's goal was to arrange peaceful relations with France in order to free Britain's diplomatic hand elsewhere in the world. Napoleon at first had a pro-British foreign policy and was eager not to displease the British government, whose friendship he saw as important to France. After a brief threat of an invasion of Britain in 1851, France and Britain cooperated in the 1850s with an alliance in the Crimean War and a major trade treaty in 1860.\nWar scares were consistently worked up by the press nonetheless. John Delane, editor of \"The Times\", visited France in January 1853 and was impressed by its military preparedness. He expressed his conviction that \"Louis-Napoleon was resolved on a forward foreign policy\". Napoleon III was actually determined to increase the country's naval power. The first purpose-built steam-powered battleship (worryingly christened after Napoleon I) was launched in 1850, and the fortification of Cherbourg was strengthened. This led to the extension of the breakwater of Alderney and the construction of Fort Clonque.\nFrom the start of his Empire, Napoleon III sought an alliance with Britain. He had lived there while in exile and saw Britain as a natural partner in the projects he wished to accomplish. An opportunity soon presented itself: In early 1853, Tsar Nicholas I of Russia put pressure on the weak Ottoman government, demanding that they give Russia a protectorate over the Christian people of the Balkans as well as control over Constantinople and the Dardanelles. The Ottoman Empire, backed by Britain and France, refused Russia's demands, and a joint British-French fleet was sent to support the Ottoman Empire. When Russia refused to leave the Danubian Principalities it had occupied, Britain and France declared war on 27 March 1854.\nIt took France and Britain six months to organize a full-scale military expedition to the Black Sea. The Anglo-French fleet landed thirty thousand French and twenty thousand British soldiers in the Crimea on 14 September and began to lay siege to the major Russian port of Sevastopol. As the siege dragged on, the French and British armies were reinforced and troops from the Kingdom of Sardinia joined them, reaching a total of 140,000 soldiers, but they suffered terribly from epidemics of typhus, dysentery, and cholera. During the 332 days of the siege, the French lost 95,000 soldiers, including 75,000 due to disease. The suffering of the army in the Crimea was carefully concealed from the French public by press censorship.\nThe death of Tsar Nicholas I on 2 March 1855 and his replacement by Alexander II changed the political equation. In September, after a massive bombardment, the Anglo-French army of fifty thousand men stormed the Russian positions, and the Russians were forced to evacuate Sevastopol. Alexander II sought a political solution, and negotiations were held in Paris in the new building of the French Foreign Ministry on the Quai d'Orsay, from 25 February to 8 April 1856.\nThe Crimean War added three new place names to Paris: Alma, named for the first French victory on the river of that name; Sevastopol; and Malakoff, named for a tower in the center of the Russian line captured by the French. The war had two important diplomatic consequences: Alexander II became an ally of France, and Britain and France were reconciled. In April 1855, Napoleon III and Eug\u00e9nie went to England and were received by the Queen; in turn, Victoria and Prince Albert visited Paris. Victoria was the first British monarch to do so in centuries.\nThe defeat of Russia and the alliance with Britain gave France increased authority and prestige in Europe. This was the first war between European powers since the close of the Napoleonic Wars and the Congress of Vienna, marking a breakdown of the alliance system that had maintained peace for nearly half a century. The war also effectively ended the Concert of Europe and the Quadruple Alliance, or \"Waterloo Coalition\", that the other four powers (Russia, Prussia, Austria, and Great Britain) had established. The Paris Peace Conference of 1856 represented a high-water mark for Napoleon's regime in foreign affairs. It encouraged Napoleon III to make an even bolder foreign policy venture in Italy.\nItalian Campaign.\nEarly years.\nOn the evening of 14 January 1858, Napoleon and the Empress escaped an assassination attempt unharmed. A group of conspirators threw three bombs at the imperial carriage as it made its way to the opera. Eight members of the escort and bystanders were killed and over one hundred people injured. The culprits were quickly arrested. The leader was an Italian nationalist, Felice Orsini, who was aided by a French surgeon Simon Fran\u00e7ois Bernard. They believed that if Napoleon III were killed, a republican revolt would immediately follow in France and the new republican government would help all Italian states win independence from Austria and achieve national unification. Bernard was in London at the time. Since he was a political exile, the Government of the United Kingdom refused to extradite him, but Orsini was tried, convicted and executed on 13 March 1858. The bombing focused the attention of France and particularly of Napoleon III, on the issue of Italian nationalism.\nPart of Italy, particularly the Kingdom of Sardinia, was independent, but central Italy was still ruled by the Pope (in this era, Pope Pius IX), while Lombardy, Venice and much of the north was ruled by Austria. Other states were \"de jure\" independent (notably the Duchy of Parma and the Grand Duchy of Tuscany) but \"de facto\" fully under Austrian influence. Napoleon III had fought with the Italian patriots against the Austrians when he was young and his sympathy was with them, but the Empress, most of his government and the Catholic Church in France supported the Pope and the existing governments. The British Government was also hostile to the idea of promoting nationalism in Italy. Despite the opposition within his government and in his own palace, Napoleon III did all that he could to support the cause of Piedmont-Sardinia. The King of Piedmont-Sardinia, Victor Emmanuel II, was invited to Paris in November 1855 and given the same royal treatment as Queen Victoria.\nCount Cavour, the Prime Minister of Piedmont-Sardinia, came to Paris with the King and employed an unusual emissary in his efforts to win the support of Napoleon III: his young cousin, Virginia Oldoini, Countess of Castiglione (1837\u20131899). As Cavour had hoped, she caught the Emperor's eye and became his mistress. Between 1855 and 1857, she used the opportunity to pass messages and to plead the Italian cause.\nIn July 1858, Napoleon arranged a secret visit by Count Cavour. In the Plombi\u00e8res Agreement they agreed to join forces and drive the Austrians from Italy. In exchange, Napoleon III asked for Savoy (the ancestral land of the King of Piedmont-Sardinia) and the then bilingual County of Nice, which had been taken from France after Napoleon's fall in 1815 and returned to Piedmont-Sardinia. Cavour protested that Nice was Italian, but Napoleon responded that \"these are secondary questions. There will be time later to discuss them.\"\nAssured of the support of Napoleon III, Count Cavour began to prepare the Royal Sardinian Army for war against Austria. Napoleon III looked for diplomatic support. He approached Lord Derby (the Prime Minister of the United Kingdom) and his government; Britain was against the war, but agreed to remain neutral. Still facing strong opposition within his own government, Napoleon III offered to negotiate a diplomatic solution with the twenty-eight-year-old Emperor Franz Joseph I of Austria in the spring of 1858. The Austrians demanded the disarmament of Piedmont-Sardinia first and sent thirty thousand soldiers to reinforce their garrisons in Italy. Napoleon III responded on 26 January 1859 by signing a treaty of alliance with Piedmont-Sardinia. Napoleon promised to send two hundred thousand soldiers to help one hundred thousand soldiers from Piedmont-Sardinia to force the Austrians out of Northern Italy; in return, France would receive the County of Nice and Savoy provided that their populations would agree in a referendum.\nIt was the Emperor Franz Joseph, growing impatient, who finally unleashed the war. On 23 April 1859, he sent an ultimatum to the government of Piedmont-Sardinia demanding that they stop their military preparations and disband their army. On 26 April, Count Cavour rejected the demands, and on 27 April, the Austrian army invaded Piedmont.\nWar in Italy \u2013 Magenta and Solferino (1859).\nNapoleon III, though he had very little military experience, decided to lead the French army in Italy himself. Part of the French army crossed over the Alps, while the other part, with the Emperor, landed in Genoa on 18 May 1859. Fortunately for Napoleon and the Piedmontese, the commander of the Austrians, General Ferenc Gyulay, was not very aggressive. His forces greatly outnumbered the Piedmontese army at Turin, but he hesitated, allowing the French and Piedmontese to unite their forces.\nNapoleon III wisely left the fighting to his professional generals. The first great battle of the war, on 4 June 1859, was fought at the town of Magenta. It was long and bloody, and the French center was exhausted and nearly broken, but the battle was finally won by a timely attack on the Austrian flank by the soldiers of General Patrice de MacMahon. The Austrians had seven thousand men killed and five thousand captured, while the French forces had four thousand men killed. The battle was largely remembered because, soon after it was fought, patriotic chemists in France gave the name of the battle to their newly discovered bright purple chemical dye; the dye and the colour took the name magenta.\nThe rest of the Austrian army was able to escape while Napoleon III and King Victor Emmanuel made a triumphal entry on 10 June into the city of Milan, previously ruled by the Austrians. They were greeted by huge, jubilant crowds waving Italian and French flags.\nThe Austrians had been driven from Lombardy, but the army of General Gyulay remained in the Veneto. His army had been reinforced and numbered 130,000 men, roughly the same as the French and Piedmontese, though the Austrians were superior in artillery. On 24 June, the second and decisive battle was fought at Solferino. This battle was even longer and bloodier than Magenta. In confused and often ill-directed fighting, there were approximately forty thousand casualties, including 11,500 French. Napoleon III was horrified by the thousands of dead and wounded on the battlefield. He proposed an armistice to the Austrians, which was accepted on 8 July. A formal treaty ending the war was signed on 11 July 1859.\nCount Cavour and the Piedmontese were bitterly disappointed by the abrupt end of the war. Lombardy had been freed, but Venetia (the Venice region) was still controlled by the Austrians, and the Pope was still the ruler of Rome and Central Italy. Cavour angrily resigned his post. Napoleon III returned to Paris on 17 July, and a huge parade and celebration were held on 14 August, in front of the Vend\u00f4me column, the symbol of the glory of Napoleon I. Napoleon III celebrated the day by granting a general amnesty to the political prisoners and exiles he had chased from France.\nIn Italy, even without the French army, the process of Italian unification launched by Cavour and Napoleon III took on a momentum of its own. There were uprisings in central Italy and the Papal States, and Italian patriots, led by Garibaldi, invaded and took over Sicily, which would lead to the collapse of the Kingdom of the Two Sicilies. Napoleon III wrote to the Pope and suggested that he \"make the sacrifice of your provinces in revolt and confide them to Victor Emmanuel\". The Pope, furious, declared in a public address that Napoleon III was a \"liar and a cheat\". Rome and the surrounding Latium region remained in Papal hands, and therefore did not immediately become the capital of the newly created Kingdom of Italy, and Venetia was still occupied by the Austrians, but the rest of Italy had come under the rule of Victor Emmanuel.\nAs Cavour had promised, Savoy and the County of Nice were annexed by France in 1860 after referendums, although it is disputed how fair they were. In Nice, 25,734 voted for union with France, just 260 against, but Italians still called for its return into the 20th century. On 18 February 1861, the first Italian parliament met in Turin, and on 23 March, Victor Emmanuel was proclaimed King of Italy. Count Cavour died a few weeks later, declaring that \"Italy is made.\"\nNapoleon's support for the Italian patriots and his confrontation with Pope Pius IX over who would govern Rome made him unpopular with fervent French Catholics, and even with Empress Eug\u00e9nie, who was a fervent Catholic. To win over the French Catholics and his wife, he agreed to guarantee that Rome would remain under the Pope and independent from the rest of Italy and agreed to keep French troops there. The capital of Italy became Turin (in 1861) then Florence (in 1865), not Rome. However, in 1862, Garibaldi gathered an army to march on Rome, under the slogan, \"Rome or death\". To avoid a confrontation between Garibaldi and the French soldiers, the Italian government sent its own soldiers to face them, arrested Garibaldi and put him in prison. Napoleon III sought a diplomatic solution that would allow him to withdraw French troops from Rome while guaranteeing that the city would remain under Papal control. In the 1864 September Convention the Italian government guaranteed the independence of the rump Papal States and the French garrison in Rome was withdrawn.\nHowever, Garibaldi made another attempt to capture Rome in November 1867, but was defeated by a hastily dispatched French force and Papal troops at the Battle of Mentana on 3 November 1867.\nThe garrison of eight thousand French troops remained in Rome until August 1870, when they were recalled at the start of the Franco-Prussian War. In September 1870, the Royal Italian Army finally captured Rome and made it the capital of Italy.\nAfter the successful conclusion of the Italian campaign and the annexation of Savoy and Nice to the territory of France, the Continental foreign policy of Napoleon III entered a calmer period. Expeditions to distant corners of the world and the expansion of the Empire replaced major changes in the map of Europe. The Emperor's health declined; he gained weight, he began to dye his hair to cover the gray, he walked slowly because of gout, and in 1864, at the military camp of Ch\u00e2lons-en-Champagne, he suffered the first medical crisis from his gallstones, the ailment that killed him nine years later. He was less engaged in governing and less attentive to detail, but still sought opportunities to increase French commerce and prestige globally.\nOverseas empire.\nIn 1862, Napoleon III sent troops to Mexico in an effort to establish an allied monarchy in the Americas, with Archduke Ferdinand Maximilian of Austria enthroned as Emperor Maximilian I. The Second Mexican Empire faced resistance from the republican government of President Benito Ju\u00e1rez, however. After victory in the American Civil War in 1865, the United States made clear that France would have to leave. It sent 50,000 troops under General Philip H. Sheridan to the Mexico\u2013United States border and helped resupply Ju\u00e1rez. Napoleon III's military was stretched very thin; he had committed 40,000 troops to Mexico, 20,000 to Rome to guard the Pope against the Italians, as well as another 80,000 in restive Algeria. Furthermore, Prussia, having just defeated Austria in the Austro-Prussian War of 1866, was an imminent threat. Napoleon III realised his predicament and withdrew his troops from Mexico in 1866. Maximilian was overthrown and executed.\nNapoleon III also supported a project of an Arab kingdom in Algeria, associated with France, based solely on the Arab cultural element to the detriment of others (Berber, etc.).\nIn Southeast Asia, Napoleon III was more successful in establishing control with one limited military operation at a time. In the Cochinchina Campaign, he took over Cochinchina (the southernmost part of modern Vietnam, including Saigon) in 1862. In 1863, he established a protectorate over Cambodia. Additionally, France had a sphere of influence during the 19th century and early 20th century in Southern China, including a naval base at Kuangchow Bay (Guangzhouwan). A French expedition to Korea was also mounted in response to the murder of French missionaries, although this ended in failure.\nAccording to information given to Abd\u00f3n Cifuentes in 1870 the possibility of an intervention in favour of the Kingdom of Araucan\u00eda and Patagonia against Chile was discussed in Napoleon's . In 1870 the French battleship \"D'Entrecasteaux\" anchored at Corral drawing suspicions from Cornelio Saavedra of some sort of French interference in the ongoing occupation of Mapuche lands. A shipment arms was seized by Argentine authorities at Buenos Aires in 1871, reportedly this had been ordered by Or\u00e9lie-Antoine de Tounens, the so-called King of Araucan\u00eda and Patagonia.\nLife at the court of Napoleon III.\nFollowing the model of the kings of France and of his uncle, Napoleon Bonaparte, Napoleon III moved his official residence to the Tuileries Palace, where he had a suite of rooms on the ground floor of the south wing between the Seine and the Pavillon de l'Horloge (Clock Pavilion), facing the garden.\nNapoleon III's bedroom was decorated with a talisman from Charlemagne (a symbol of good luck for the Bonaparte family), while his office featured a portrait of Julius Caesar by Ingres and a large map of Paris that he used to show his ideas for the reconstruction of Paris to his prefect of the Seine department, Baron Georges-Eug\u00e8ne Haussmann. The Emperor's rooms were overheated and were filled with smoke, as he smoked cigarette after cigarette. The Empress occupied a suite of rooms just above his, highly decorated in Louis XVI style with a pink salon, a green salon and a blue salon.\nThe court moved with the Emperor and Empress from palace to palace each year following a regular calendar. At the beginning of May, the Emperor and court moved to the Ch\u00e2teau de Saint-Cloud for outdoor activities in the park. In June and July, they moved with selected guests to the Palace of Fontainebleau for walks in the forest and boating on the lake. In July, the court moved to thermal baths for a health cure, first to Plombi\u00e8res, then to Vichy, and then, after 1856, to the military camp and residence built at Ch\u00e2lons-sur-Marne (nowadays: Ch\u00e2lons-en-Champagne), where Napoleon could take the waters and review military parades and exercises. Beginning in 1856, the Emperor and Empress spent each September in Biarritz in the Villa Eug\u00e9nie, a large villa overlooking the sea. They would walk on the beach or travel to the mountains, and in the evenings, they would dance and sing and play cards and take part in other games and amateur theatricals and charades with their guests. In November, the court moved to the Ch\u00e2teau de Compi\u00e8gne for forest excursions, dancing and more games. Famous scientists and artists, such as Louis Pasteur, Gustave Flaubert, Eug\u00e8ne Delacroix and Giuseppe Verdi, were invited to participate in the festivities at Compi\u00e8gne.\nAt the end of the year the Emperor and court returned to the Tuileries Palace and gave a series of formal receptions and three or four grand balls with six hundred guests early in the new year. Visiting dignitaries and monarchs were frequently invited. During Carnival, there was a series of very elaborate costume balls on the themes of different countries and different historical periods, for which guests sometimes spent small fortunes on their costumes.\nVisual arts.\nNapoleon III had conservative and traditional taste in art: his favourite painters were Alexandre Cabanel and Franz Xaver Winterhalter, who received major commissions, and whose work was purchased for state museums. At the same time, he followed public opinion, and he made an important contribution to the French avant-garde. In 1863, the jury of the Paris Salon, the famous annual showcase of French painting, headed by the ultra-conservative director of the Acad\u00e9mie des Beaux-Arts, Count \u00c9milien de Nieuwerkerke, refused all submissions by avant-garde artists, including those by \u00c9douard Manet, Camille Pissarro and Johan Jongkind. The artists and their friends complained, and the complaints reached Napoleon III. His office issued a statement: \"Numerous complaints have come to the Emperor on the subject of the works of art which were refused by the jury of the Exposition. His Majesty, wishing to let the public judge the legitimacy of these complaints, has decided that the works of art which were refused should be displayed in another part of the Palace of Industry.\"\nFollowing Napoleon's decree, an exhibit of the rejected paintings, called the Salon des Refus\u00e9s, was held in another part of the Palace of Industry, where the Salon took place. More than a thousand visitors a day came to see now-famous paintings such as \u00c9douard Manet's and James McNeill Whistler's \"\". ' The journalist \u00c9mile Zola reported that visitors pushed to get into the crowded galleries where the refused paintings were hung, and the rooms were full of the laughter and mocking comments of many of the spectators. While the paintings were ridiculed by many critics and visitors, the work of the avant-garde became known for the first time to the French public, and it took its place alongside the more traditional style of painting.\nNapoleon III also began or completed the restoration of several important historic landmarks, carried out for him by Eug\u00e8ne Viollet-le-Duc. He restored the fl\u00e8che, or spire, of the Cathedral of Notre-Dame de Paris, which had been partially destroyed and desecrated during the French Revolution. In 1855, he completed the restoration, begun in 1845, of the stained-glass windows of the Sainte-Chapelle, and in 1862, he declared it a national historical monument. In 1853, he approved and provided funding for Viollet-le-Duc's restoration of the medieval town of Carcassonne. He also sponsored Viollet-le-Duc's restoration of the Ch\u00e2teau de Vincennes and the Ch\u00e2teau de Pierrefonds. In 1862, he closed the prison which had occupied the Abbey of Mont-Saint-Michel since the French Revolution, where many important political prisoners had been held, so it could be restored and opened to the public.\nSocial and economic policies.\nSocial policy and reforms.\nFrom the beginning of his reign, Napoleon III launched a series of social reforms aimed at improving the life of the working class. He began with small projects, such as opening up two clinics in Paris for sick and injured workers, a programme of legal assistance to those unable to afford it, as well as subsidies to companies that built low-cost housing for their workers. He outlawed the practice of employers taking possession of or making comments in the work document that every employee was required to carry; negative comments meant that workers were unable to get other jobs. In 1866, he encouraged the creation of a state insurance fund to help workers or peasants who became disabled and help their widows and families.\nTo help the working class, Napoleon III offered a prize to anyone who could develop an inexpensive substitute for butter; the prize was won by the French chemist Hippolyte M\u00e8ge-Mouri\u00e8s, who in 1869 patented a product he named oleomargarine, later shortened simply to margarine.\nNapoleon III and his administration enacted significant censorship of the media, targeting political caricatures like those of Honor\u00e9 Daumier.\nRights to strike and organise (1864\u20131866).\nHis most important social reform was the 1864 law that gave French workers the right to strike, which had been forbidden since 1810. In 1866, he added to this an \"Edict of Tolerance\" which gave factory workers the right to organise. He issued a decree regulating the treatment of apprentices and limited working hours on Sundays and holidays. He removed from the Napoleonic Code the infamous article 1781, which said that the declaration of the employer, even without proof, would be given more weight by the court than the word of the employee.\nEducation for girls and women, school reform (1861\u20131869).\nNapoleon III and the Empress Eug\u00e9nie worked to give girls and women greater access to public education. In 1861, through the direct intervention of the Emperor and the Empress, Julie-Victoire Daubi\u00e9 became the first woman in France to receive the baccalaur\u00e9at diploma. In 1862, the first professional school for young women was opened, and Madeleine Br\u00e8s became the first woman to enroll in the Faculty of Medicine at the University of Paris.\nIn 1863, he made Victor Duruy, the son of a factory worker and a respected historian, his new Minister of Public Education. Duruy accelerated the pace of the reforms, often coming into conflict with the Catholic Church, which wanted to keep control over education. Despite the opposition of the Church, Duruy opened schools for girls in each commune with more than five hundred residents, a total of eight hundred new schools.\nBetween 1863 and 1869, Duruy created scholastic libraries for fifteen thousand schools and required that primary schools offer courses in history and geography. Secondary schools began to teach philosophy, which had been banned by the previous regime at the request of the Catholic Church. For the first time, public schools in France began to teach contemporary history, modern languages, art, gymnastics and music. The results of the school reforms were dramatic: in 1852, over 40 percent of army conscripts in France were unable to read or write, yet by 1869, the number had dropped to 25 percent. The rate of illiteracy among both girls and boys dropped to 32 percent.\nAt the university level, Napoleon III founded new faculties in Marseille, Douai, Nancy, Clermont-Ferrand and Poitiers and founded a network of research institutes of higher studies in the sciences, history, and economics. These also were criticized by Catholic ecclesiastics. The Cardinal-Archbishop of Rouen, Monseigneur Bonnechose, wrote, \"True science is religious, while false science, on the other hand, is vain and prideful; being unable to explain God, it rebels against him.\"\nEconomic policy.\nLower tariffs and the re-opening of French markets (1860).\nOne of the centerpieces of the economic policy of Napoleon III was the lowering of tariffs and the opening of French markets to imported goods. He had been in Britain in 1846 when Prime Minister Robert Peel had lowered tariffs on imported grains, and he had seen the benefits to British consumers and the British economy. However, he faced bitter opposition from many French industrialists and farmers, who feared British competition. Convinced he was right, he sent his chief economic advisor, Michel Chevalier, to London to begin discussions, and secretly negotiated a new commercial agreement with Britain, calling for the gradual lowering of tariffs in both countries. He signed the treaty, without consulting with the Assembly, on 23 January 1860. Four hundred of the top industrialists in France came to Paris to protest, but he refused to yield. Industrial tariffs on such products as steel rails for railways were lowered first; tariffs on grains were not lowered until June 1861. Similar agreements were negotiated with the Netherlands, Italy, and France's other neighbors. France's industries were forced to modernize and become more efficient to compete with the British, as Napoleon III had intended. Commerce between the countries surged.\nEconomic expansion and social change.\nBy the 1860s, the huge state investment in railways, infrastructure and fiscal policies of Napoleon III had brought dramatic changes to the French economy and French society. French people travelled in greater numbers, more often and farther than they had ever travelled before. The opening of the first public school libraries by Napoleon III and the opening by Louis Hachette of the first bookstores in Napoleon's new train stations led to the wider circulation of books around France.\nDuring the Empire, industrial production increased by 73 percent, growing twice as rapidly as that of the United Kingdom, though its total output remained lower. From 1850 to 1857, the French economy grew at a pace of five percent a year and exports grew by sixty percent between 1855 and 1869.\nFrench agricultural production increased by sixty percent, spurred by new farming techniques taught at the agricultural schools started in each Department by Napoleon III, and new markets opened by the railways. The threat of famine, which for centuries had haunted the French countryside, receded. The last recorded famine in France was in 1855.\nDuring the Empire, the migration of the rural population to the cities increased. The portion of the population active in agriculture dropped from 61 percent in 1851 to 54 percent in 1870.\nThe average salary of French workers grew by 45 percent during the Second Empire, but only kept up with price inflation. On the other hand, more French people than ever were able to save money; the number of bank accounts grew from 742,889 in 1852 to 2,079,141 in 1870.\nGrowing opposition and liberal concessions (1860\u20131870).\nDespite the economic progress the country had made, domestic opposition to Napoleon III was slowly growing, particularly in the \"Corps l\u00e9gislatif\" (Parliament). The liberal republicans on the left had always opposed him, believing he had usurped power and suppressed the Republic. The conservative Catholics were increasingly unhappy, because he had abandoned the Pope in his struggle to retain political control of the Papal States and had built up a public education system that was a rival to the Catholic system. Many businessmen, particularly in the metallurgical and textile industries, were unhappy, because he had reduced the tariffs on British products, putting the British products in direct competition with their own. The members of Parliament were particularly unhappy with him for dealing with them only when he needed money. When he had liberalized trade with England, he had not even consulted them.\nNapoleon's large-scale program of public works, and his expensive foreign policy, had created rapidly mounting government debts; the annual deficit was about 100\u00a0million gold-francs, and the cumulative debt had reached nearly 1,000\u00a0million gold-francs (1\u00a0billion in US readings). The Emperor needed to restore the confidence of the business world and to involve the legislature and have them share responsibility.\nOn 24 December 1860, Napoleon III, against the opposition of his own ministers, issued a decree announcing that the legislature would have greater powers. The Senate and the Assembly could, for the first time, give a response to the Emperor's program, ministers were obliged to defend their programs before the Assembly, and the right of Deputies to amend the programs was enlarged. On 1 February 1861, further reforms were announced: Deputies could speak from the tribune, not just from their seats, and a stenographic record would be made and published of each session. Another even more important reform was announced on 31 December 1861: the budget of each ministry would be voted section by section, not in a block, and the government could no longer spend money by special decree when the legislature was not in session. He did retain the right to change the budget estimates section by section.\nThe Deputies quickly took advantage of their new rights; the Emperor's Italian policy was bitterly condemned in Parliament, and anti-government amendments by the pro-Catholic deputies were defeated by votes of 158 to 91 in the \"Corps l\u00e9gislatif\" and 79 to 61 in the Senate.\nIn the legislative elections of 1863, pro-government candidates received 5,308,000 votes, while the opposition received 1,954,000 votes, three times more than in the previous elections. The rural departments still voted for Napoleon III's candidates, but in Paris, 63 percent of the votes went to anti-government republican candidates, with similar numbers in all the large cities. The new Assembly contained a large opposition block ranging from Catholics outraged by the Papal policies to Legitimists, Orl\u00e9anists, protectionists and republicans, armed with new powers given to them by the Emperor himself.\nDespite the opposition in the legislature, Napoleon III's reforms remained popular in the rest of the country. A new plebiscite was held in 1870, on this text: \"The people approve the liberal reforms added to the Constitution since 1860 by the Emperor, with the agreement of the legislative bodies and ratified by the Senate on April 20, 1870.\" Napoleon III saw this as a referendum on his rule as Emperor: \"By voting yes,\" he wrote, \"you will chase away the threat of revolution; you will place the nation on a solid base of order and liberty, and you will make it easier to pass on the Crown to my son.\" When the votes were counted, Napoleon III had lost Paris and the other big cities but decisively won the rest of the country. The final vote was 7,336,434 votes yes, 1,560,709 votes no, and 1,900,000 abstentions. L\u00e9on Gambetta, the leader of the republican opposition, wrote in despair, \"We were crushed. The Emperor is more popular than ever.\"\nLater years.\nDeclining health and rise of Prussia.\nThrough the 1860s, the health of the Emperor steadily worsened. It had been damaged by his six years in prison at Ham; he had chronic pains in his legs and feet, particularly when it was cold, and as a result, he always lived and worked in overheated rooms and offices. He smoked heavily, distrusted doctors and their advice and attributed any problems simply to \"rheumatism\", for which he regularly visited the hot springs at Vichy and other spas. It became difficult for him to ride a horse, and he was obliged to walk slowly, often with a cane. From 1869 onwards, the crises of his urinary tract were treated with opium, which made him seem lethargic and apathetic. His writing became hard to read and his voice weak. In the spring of 1870, he was visited by an old friend from England, Lord Malmesbury. Malmesbury found him to be \"terribly changed and very ill\".\nThe health problems of the Emperor were kept secret by the government, which feared that, if his condition became public, the opposition would demand his abdication. One newspaper, the \"Courrier de la Vienne\", was warned by the censors to stop publishing articles which had \"a clear and malicious intent to spread, contrary to the truth, alarms about the health of the Emperor\".\nAt the end of June 1870, a specialist in the problems of urinary tracts, Germain S\u00e9e, was finally summoned to examine him. S\u00e9e reported that the Emperor was suffering from a bladder stone. On 2 July, four eminent French doctors, Auguste N\u00e9laton, Philippe Ricord, Fauvel and Corvisart, examined him and confirmed the diagnosis. They were reluctant to operate, however, because of the high risk and because of the Emperor's weakness. Before anything further could be done, however, France was in the middle of a diplomatic crisis.\nIn the 1860s, Prussia appeared on the horizon as a new rival to French power in Europe. Its Minister President, Otto von Bismarck, had ambitions for Prussia to lead a unified Germany. In May 1862, Bismarck came to Paris on a diplomatic mission and met Napoleon III for the first time. They had cordial relations. On 30 September 1862, however, in Munich, Bismarck declared, in a famous speech: \"It is not by speeches and votes of the majority that the great questions of our period will be settled, as one believed in 1848, but by iron and blood.\" Bismarck saw Austria and France as the main obstacles to his ambitions, and he set out to divide and defeat them.\nSearch for allies, and war between Austria and Prussia.\nIn the winter and spring of 1864, when the German Confederation invaded and occupied the German-speaking duchies ruled by Denmark (Schleswig and Holstein), Napoleon III recognized the threat that a unified Germany would pose to France, and he looked for allies to challenge Germany, without success.\nThe British government was suspicious that Napoleon wanted to take over Belgium and Luxembourg, felt secure with its powerful navy, and did not want any military engagements on the European continent at the side of the French.\nThe Russian government was also suspicious of Napoleon, who it believed had encouraged Polish nationalists to rebel against Russian rule in 1863. Bismarck and Prussia, on the other hand, had offered assistance to Russia to help crush the Polish patriots.\nIn October 1865, Napoleon had a cordial meeting with Bismarck at Biarritz. They discussed Venetia, Austria's remaining province in Italy. Bismarck told Napoleon that Prussia had no secret arrangement to give Venetia to Italy, and Napoleon assured him in turn that France had no secret understanding with Austria. Bismarck hinted vaguely that, in the event of a war between Austria and Prussia, French neutrality would be rewarded with some sort of territory as a compensation. Napoleon III had Luxembourg in mind.\nIn 1866, relations between Austria and Prussia worsened and Bismarck demanded the expulsion of Austria from the German Confederation. Napoleon and his foreign minister, Drouyn de Lhuys, expected a long war and an eventual Austrian victory. Napoleon III felt he could extract a price from both Prussia and Austria for French neutrality. On 12 June 1866, France signed a secret treaty with Austria, guaranteeing French neutrality in a Prussian-Austrian war. In exchange, in the event of an Austrian victory, Austria would give Venetia to France and would also create a new independent German state on the Rhine, which would become an ally of France. At the same time, Napoleon proposed a secret treaty with Bismarck, promising that France would remain neutral in a war between Austria and Prussia. In the event of a Prussian victory, France would recognize Prussia's annexation of smaller German states, and France, in exchange, would receive a portion of German territory, the Palatinate region north of Alsace. Bismarck, rightly confident of success due to the modernization of the Prussian Army, summarily rejected Napoleon's offer.\nOn 15 June, the Prussian Army invaded Saxony, an ally of Austria. On 2 July, Austria asked Napoleon to arrange an armistice between Italy, which had allied itself with Prussia, and Austria, in exchange for which France would receive Venetia. But on 3 July, the Prussian army crushed the Austrian army at the Battle of K\u00f6niggr\u00e4tz in Bohemia. The way to Vienna was open for the Prussians, and Austria asked for an armistice. The armistice was signed on 22 July; Prussia annexed the Kingdom of Hanover, the Electorate of Hesse, the Duchy of Nassau and the Free City of Frankfurt, with a combined population of four million people.\nThe Austrian defeat was followed by a new crisis in the health of Napoleon III. Marshal Canrobert, who saw him on 28 July, wrote that the Emperor \"was pitiful to see. He could barely sit up in his armchair, and his drawn face expressed at the same time moral anguish and physical pain.\nLuxembourg Crisis.\nNapoleon III still hoped to receive some compensation from Prussia for French neutrality during the war. His foreign minister, Drouyn, asked Bismarck for the Palatinate region on the Rhine, which belonged to Bavaria, and for the demilitarization of Luxembourg, which was the site of a formidable fortress staffed by a strong Prussian garrison in accordance with international treaties. Napoleon's senior advisor Eug\u00e8ne Rouher increased the demands, asking that Prussia accept the annexation by France of Belgium and of Luxembourg, sparking the Luxembourg Crisis.\nLuxembourg had regained its de jure independence in 1839 as a grand duchy. However, it was in personal union with the Netherlands. King William III of the Netherlands, who was also Grand Duke of Luxembourg, desperately needed money and was prepared to sell the Grand Duchy to France. Bismarck swiftly intervened and showed the British ambassador a copy of Napoleon's demands; as a result, he put pressure on William III to refuse to sell Luxembourg to France. France was forced to renounce any claim to Luxembourg in the Treaty of London (1867). Napoleon III gained nothing for his efforts but the demilitarization of the Luxembourg fortress.\nFailure to increase the size of the French Army.\nDespite his failing health, Napoleon III could see that the Prussian Army, combined with the armies of Bavaria and the other German states, would be a formidable enemy. In 1866, Prussia, with a population of 22\u00a0million, had been able to mobilize an army of 700,000 men, while France, with a population of 38 million, had an army of only 385,000 men, of whom 140,000 were in Algeria, Mexico, and Rome. In the autumn of 1867, Napoleon III proposed a form of universal military service similar to the Prussian system to increase the size of the French Army, if needed, to 1\u00a0million. His proposal was opposed by many French officers, such as Marshal Randon, who preferred a smaller, more professional army; he said: \"This proposal will only give us recruits; it's soldiers we need.\" It was also strongly opposed by the republican opposition in the French parliament, who denounced the proposal as a militarization of French society. The republican deputy, \u00c9mile Ollivier, who later became Napoleon's prime minister, declared: \"The armies of France, which I always considered too large, are now going to be increased to an exorbitant size. Why? What is the necessity? Where is the danger? Who is threatening us? ...If France were to disarm, the Germans would know how to convince their governments to do the same.\" Facing almost certain defeat in the parliament, Napoleon III withdrew the proposal. It was replaced in January 1868 by a much more modest project to create a \"garde mobile\", or reserve force, to support the army.\nA last search for allies.\nNapoleon III was overconfident in his military strength and went into war even after he failed to find any allies who would support a war to stop German unification.\nFollowing the defeat of Austria, Napoleon resumed his search for allies against Prussia. In April 1867, he proposed an alliance, defensive and offensive, with Austria. If Austria joined France in a victorious war against Prussia, Napoleon promised that Austria could form a new confederation with the southern states of Germany and could annex Silesia, while France took for its part the left bank of the Rhine River. But the timing of Napoleon's offer was poorly chosen; Austria was in the process of a major internal reform, creating the new Dual Monarchy of Austria-Hungary.\nNapoleon's attempt to install the Archduke Maximilian, the brother of the Austrian Emperor, in Mexico was just coming to its disastrous conclusion; the French troops had just been withdrawn from Mexico in February 1867, and the unfortunate Maximilian would be captured, judged and shot by a firing squad on 19 June. Napoleon III made these offers again in August 1867, on a visit to offer condolences for the death of Maximilian, but the proposal was not received with enthusiasm.\nNapoleon III also made one last attempt to persuade Italy to be his ally against Prussia. Italian King Victor Emmanuel was personally favorable to a better relationship with France, remembering the role that Napoleon III had played in achieving Italian unification, but Italian public opinion was largely hostile to France; on 3 November 1867, French and Papal soldiers had fired upon the Italian patriots of Garibaldi, when he tried to capture Rome. Napoleon presented a proposed treaty of alliance on 4 June 1869, the anniversary of the joint French-Italian victory at Magenta. The Italians responded by demanding that France withdraw its troops who were protecting the Pope in Rome. Given the opinion of fervent French Catholics, this was a condition Napoleon III could not accept.\nWhile Napoleon III was having no success finding allies, Bismarck signed secret military treaties with the southern German states, who promised to provide troops in the event of a war between Prussia and France. In 1868, Bismarck signed an accord with Russia that gave Russia liberty of action in the Balkans in exchange for neutrality in the event of a war between France and Prussia. This treaty put additional pressure on Austria-Hungary, which also had interests in the Balkans, not to ally itself with France.\nBut most importantly, Prussia promised to support Russia in lifting the restrictions of the Congress of Paris. \"Bismarck had bought Tsar Alexander II's complicity by promising to help restore his naval access to the Black Sea and Mediterranean (cut off by the treaties ending the Crimean War), other powers were less biddable\". Bismarck also reached out to the liberal government of William Gladstone in London, offering to protect the neutrality of Belgium against a French threat. The British Foreign Office under Lord Clarendon mobilized the British fleet, to dissuade France against any aggressive moves against Belgium. In any war between France and Prussia, France would be entirely alone.\nIn 1867, French politician Adolphe Thiers (who became President of the French Republic in 1871) accused Napoleon III of erroneous foreign policy: \"There is no mistake that can be made\". Bismarck thought that French vanity would lead to war; he exploited that vanity in the Ems Dispatch in July 1870. France took the bait and declared war on Prussia, which proved to be a major miscalculation. This allowed Bismarck and Prussia to present the war to the world as defensive, although Prussia and Bismarck had aggressive plans, and they soon became known in relation to the annexation of the French provinces of Alsace-Lorraine.\nHohenzollern candidacy and the Ems telegram.\nIn his memoirs, written long after the war, Bismarck wrote, \"I always considered that a war with France would naturally follow a war against Austria... I was convinced that the gulf which was created over time between the north and the south of Germany could not be better overcome than by a national war against the neighbouring people who were aggressive against us. I did not doubt that it was necessary to make a French-German war before the general reorganization of Germany could be realized.\" As the summer of 1870 approached, pressure mounted on Bismarck to have a war with France as quickly as possible. In Bavaria, the largest of the southern German states, unification with (mostly Protestant) Prussia was being opposed by the Patriotic Party, which favoured a confederacy of (Catholic) Bavaria with (Catholic) Austria. German Protestant public opinion was on the side of unification with Prussia.\nIn France, patriotic sentiment was also growing. On 8 May 1870, French voters had overwhelmingly supported Napoleon III's program in a national plebiscite, with 7,358,000 votes yes against 1,582,000 votes no, an increase of support of two million votes since the legislative elections in 1869. The Emperor was less popular in Paris and the big cities, but highly popular in the French countryside. Napoleon had named a new foreign minister, Antoine Agenor, the Duke de Gramont, who was hostile to Bismarck. The Emperor was weak and ill, but the more extreme Bonapartists were prepared to show their strength against the republicans and monarchists in the parliament.\nThe news of Leopold, Prince of Hohenzollern's candidacy for the Spanish crown, published 2 July 1870, aroused fury in the French parliament and press. The government was attacked by both the republicans and monarchist opposition, and by the ultra-Bonapartists, for its weakness against Prussia. On 6 July, Napoleon III held a meeting of his ministers at the ch\u00e2teau of Saint-Cloud and told them that Prussia must withdraw the Hohenzollern candidacy or there would be a war. He asked Marshal Leboeuf, the chief of staff of the French army, if the army was prepared for a war against Prussia. Leboeuf responded that the French soldiers had a rifle superior to the Prussian rifle, that the French artillery was commanded by an elite corps of officers, and that the army \"would not lack a button on its puttees\". He assured the Emperor that the French army could have four hundred thousand men on the Rhine in less than fifteen days.\nThe French Ambassador to Prussia, Count Vincent Benedetti, was sent to the German spa resort of Bad Ems, where the Prussian king was staying. Benedetti met with the king on 13 July in the park of the ch\u00e2teau. The king told him courteously that he agreed fully with the withdrawal of the Hohenzollern candidacy, but that he could not make promises on behalf of the government for the future. He considered that the matter was closed. As he was instructed by Gramont, Benedetti asked for another meeting with the king to repeat the request, but the king politely, yet firmly, refused. Benedetti returned to Paris and the affair seemed finished. However, Bismarck edited the official dispatch of the meeting to make it appear that both sides had been hostile: \"His majesty the King,\" the dispatch read, \"refused to meet again with the French ambassador, and let him know, through an aide-de-camp of service, that His Majesty had nothing more to say to the Ambassador.\" This version was communicated to governments, and the next day was in the French press.\nThe Ems telegram had exactly the effect that Bismarck had intended. Once again, public opinion in France was inflamed. \"This text produced the effect of a red flag to the Gallic bull,\" Bismarck later wrote. Gramont, the French foreign minister, declared that he felt \"he had just received a slap.\" The leader of the conservatives in parliament, Thiers, spoke for moderation, arguing that France had won the diplomatic battle and there was no reason for war, but he was drowned out by cries that he was a traitor and a Prussian. Napoleon's new prime minister, \u00c9mile Ollivier, declared that France had done all that it could humanly and honourably do to prevent the war, and that he accepted the responsibility \"with a light heart\". A crowd of 15,000\u201320,000 persons, carrying flags and patriotic banners, marched through the streets of Paris, demanding war. On 19 July 1870, a declaration of war was sent to the Prussian government.\nDefeat in the Franco-Prussian War.\nWhen France entered the war, there were patriotic demonstrations in the streets of Paris, with crowds singing \"La Marseillaise\" and chanting \"To Berlin! To Berlin!\" But Napoleon was melancholic. He told General Lepic that he expected the war to be \"long and difficult\", and wondered, \"Who knows if we'll come back?\" He told Marshal Randon that he felt too old for a military campaign. Despite his declining health, Napoleon decided to go with the army to the front as commander in chief, as he had done during the successful Italian campaign. On 28 July, he departed Saint-Cloud by train for the front. He was accompanied by the 14-year-old Prince Imperial in the uniform of the army, by his military staff, and by a large contingent of chefs and servants in livery. He was pale and visibly in pain. The Empress remained in Paris as the Regent, as she had done on other occasions when the Emperor was out of the country.\nThe mobilization of the French army was chaotic. Two hundred thousand soldiers converged on the German frontier, along a front of 250 kilometers, choking all the roads and railways for miles. Officers and their respective units were unable to find one another. General Moltke and the Prussian Army, having gained experience mobilizing in the war against Austria, were able to efficiently move three armies of 518,000 men to a more concentrated front of just 120 kilometers. In addition, the German soldiers were backed by a substantial reserve of the Landwehr (Territorial defence), with 340,000 men, and an additional reserve of 400,000 territorial guards. The French army arrived at the frontier equipped with maps of Germany, but without maps of France\u2014where the actual fighting took place\u2014and without a specific plan of what it was going to do.\nOn 2 August, Napoleon and the Prince Imperial accompanied the army as it made a tentative crossing of the German border toward the city of Saarbr\u00fccken. The French won a minor skirmish and advanced no further. Napoleon III, very ill, was unable to ride his horse and had to support himself by leaning against a tree. In the meantime, the Prussians had assembled a much larger army opposite Alsace and Lorraine than the French had expected or were aware of. On 4 August 1870, the Prussians attacked with overwhelming force against a French division in Alsace at the Battle of Wissembourg (German: Weissenburg), forcing it to retreat. On 5 August, the Germans defeated another French army at the Battle of Spicheren in Lorraine.\nOn 6 August, 140,000 Germans attacked 35,000 French soldiers at the Battle of W\u00f6rth; the French lost 19,200 soldiers killed, wounded and captured, and were forced to retreat. The French soldiers fought bravely, and French cavalry and infantry attacked the German lines repeatedly, but the Germans had superior logistics, communications, and leadership. The decisive weapon was the new German Krupp six pound field gun, which was breech-loading, had a steel barrel, longer range, a higher rate of fire, and was more accurate than the bronze muzzle-loading French cannons. The Krupp guns caused terrible casualties in the French ranks.\nWhen news of the French defeats reached Paris on 7 August, it was greeted with disbelief and dismay. Prime Minister Ollivier and the army chief of staff, Marshal Edmond Le Boeuf, both resigned. The Empress Eug\u00e9nie took it upon herself as the Regent to name a new government. She chose General Cousin-Montauban, better known as the Count of Palikao, seventy-four years old and former commander of the French expeditionary force to China, as her new prime minister. The Count of Palikao named Marshal Fran\u00e7ois Achille Bazaine, the commander of the French forces in Lorraine, as the new military commander. Napoleon III proposed returning to Paris, realizing that he was not doing any good for the army. The Empress, in charge of the government, responded by telegraph, \"Don't think of coming back, unless you want to unleash a terrible revolution. They will say you quit the army to flee the danger.\" The Emperor agreed to remain with the army. With the Empress directing the country, and Bazaine commanding the army, the Emperor no longer had any real role to play. At the front, the Emperor told Marshal Leboeuf, \"we've both been dismissed.\"\nOn 18 August 1870, the Battle of Gravelotte, the biggest battle of the war, took place in Lorraine between the Germans and the army of Marshal Bazaine. The Germans suffered 20,000 casualties and the French 12,000, but the Germans emerged as the victors, as Marshal Bazaine's army, with 175,000 soldiers, six divisions of cavalry and five hundred cannons, was besieged inside the fortifications of Metz, unable to move.\nNapoleon was at Ch\u00e2lons-sur-Marne with the army of Marshal Patrice de MacMahon. MacMahon, Marshal Bazaine, and the count of Palikao, with the Empress in Paris, all had different ideas of what the army should do next, and the Emperor had to act as a referee. The Emperor and MacMahon proposed moving their army closer to Paris to protect the city, but on 17 August Bazaine telegraphed to the Emperor: \"I urge you to renounce this idea, which seems to abandon the Army at Metz... Couldn't you make a powerful diversion toward the Prussian corps, which are already exhausted by so many battles? The Empress shares my opinion.\" Napoleon III wrote back, \"I yield to your opinion.\" The Emperor sent the Prince Imperial back to Paris for his safety and went with the weary army in the direction of Metz. The Emperor, riding in an open carriage, was jeered, sworn at and insulted by demoralized soldiers.\nThe direction of movement of MacMahon's army was supposed to be secret, but it was published in the French press and thus was quickly known to the German General Staff. Moltke, the German commander, ordered two Prussian armies marching toward Paris to turn towards MacMahon's army. On 30 August, one corps of MacMahon's army was attacked by the Germans at Beaumont, losing five hundred men and forty cannons. MacMahon, believing he was ahead of the Germans, decided to stop and reorganize his forces at the fortified city of Sedan, in the Ardennes close to the Belgian border.\nBattle of Sedan and capitulation.\nThe Battle of Sedan was a total disaster for the French\u2014the army surrendered to the Prussians and Napoleon III himself was made a prisoner of war. MacMahon arrived at Sedan with one hundred thousand soldiers, not knowing that two German armies were closing in on the city (one from the west and one from the east), blocking any escape. The Germans arrived on 31 August, and by 1 September, occupied the heights around Sedan where they placed artillery batteries, and began shelling the French positions below. At five o'clock in the morning on 1 September, a German shell seriously wounded MacMahon in the hip. Sedan quickly came under bombardment from seven hundred German guns. MacMahon's replacement, General Wimpffen, launched a series of cavalry attacks to try to break the German encirclement, with no success. During the battle and bombardment, the French lost seventeen thousand killed or wounded and twenty-one thousand captured.\nAs the German shells rained down on the French positions, Napoleon III wandered aimlessly in the open around the French positions. One officer of his military escort was killed and two more received wounds. A doctor accompanying him wrote in his notebook, \"If this man has not come here to kill himself, I don't know what he has come to do. I have not seen him give an order all morning.\"\nFinally, at one o'clock in the afternoon, Napoleon III emerged from his reverie and ordered a white flag hoisted above the citadel. He then had a message sent to the Prussian king, who was at Sedan with his army: \"Monsieur my brother, not being able to die at the head of my troops, nothing remains for me but to place my sword in the hands of Your Majesty.\"\nAfter the war, when accused of having made a \"shameful surrender\" at Sedan, he wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Some people believe that, by burying ourselves under the ruins of Sedan, we would have better served my name and my dynasty. It's possible. Nay, to hold in my hand the lives of thousands of men and not to make a sign to save them was something that was beyond my capacity...my heart refused these sinister grandeurs.\nAt six o'clock in the morning on 2 September, in the uniform of a general and accompanied by four generals from his staff, Napoleon was taken to the German headquarters at Donchery. He expected to see King Wilhelm I, but instead he was met by Otto von Bismarck and the German commander, General Helmuth von Moltke. They dictated the terms of the surrender to Napoleon. Napoleon asked that his army be disarmed and allowed to pass into Belgium, but Bismarck refused. They also asked Napoleon to sign the preliminary documents of a peace treaty, but Napoleon refused, telling them that the French government headed by the Regent, Empress Eug\u00e9nie, would need to negotiate any peace agreement. The Emperor was then taken to the Ch\u00e2teau at Bellevue near Fr\u00e9nois (Ardennes), where the Prussian king visited him. Napoleon told the king that he had not wanted the war, but that public opinion had forced him into it. That evening, from the Ch\u00e2teau, Napoleon wrote to the Empress Eug\u00e9nie:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;It is impossible for me to say what I have suffered and what I am suffering now...I would have preferred death to a capitulation so disastrous, and yet, under the present circumstances, it was the only way to avoid the butchering of sixty thousand people. If only all my torments were concentrated here! I think of you, our son, and our unhappy country.\nAftermath.\nThe news of the capitulation reached Paris on 3 September, confirming the rumours that were already circulating in the city. When the Empress heard the news that the Emperor and the army had been taken prisoner, she reacted by shouting at the Emperor's personal aide, \"No! An Emperor does not capitulate! He is dead!...They are trying to hide it from me. Why didn't he kill himself! Doesn't he know he has dishonoured himself?!\" Later, when hostile crowds formed near the palace and the staff began to flee, the Empress slipped out with one of her entourage and sought sanctuary with her American dentist, Thomas Evans, who took her to Deauville. From there, on 7 September, she took the yacht of a British official to England.\nOn 4 September, a group of republican deputies, led by L\u00e9on Gambetta, gathered at the H\u00f4tel de Ville in Paris and proclaimed the return of the Republic and the creation of a Government of National Defence. The Second Empire had come to an end.\nCaptivity, exile and death.\nFrom 5 September 1870 until 19 March 1871, Napoleon III and his entourage of thirteen aides were held in comfortable captivity at Schloss Wilhelmsh\u00f6he near Kassel, Germany. Eug\u00e9nie traveled there incognito to visit Napoleon.\nGeneral Bazaine, staying in the fortification of Metz with a large part of the remaining French Army while being besieged, had secret talks with Bismarck's envoys on 23 September. The idea was for Bazaine to establish a conservative regime in France, for himself or for Napoleon's son. Bazaine's envoy, who spoke to Bismarck at Versailles on 14 October, declared that the army in Metz was still loyal to Napoleon. Bazaine was willing to take over power in France after the Germans had defeated the republic in Paris. Because of the weakening of the French position overall, Bismarck lost interest in this option.\nOn 27 November, Napoleon composed a memorandum to Bismarck that raised the possibility that the Prussian king might urge the French people to recall him as Emperor after a peace treaty was signed and Paris surrendered. But by this time, Metz had already fallen, leaving Napoleon without a power base. Bismarck did not see much chance for a restored empire, as the French people would consider Napoleon a mere marionette of the enemy. One last initiative from Eug\u00e9nie failed in January, because of the late arrival of her envoy from London. Bismarck refused to acknowledge the former empress, as this had caused irritations with Britain and Russia. Shortly afterwards, the Germans signed a truce with the Government of France.\nNapoleon continued to write political tracts and letters and dreamed of a return to power. Bonapartist candidates participated in the first elections for the National Assembly on 8 February but won only five seats. On 1 March, the newly elected assembly officially declared the removal of the emperor from power and placed all the blame for the French defeat squarely on him. When peace was arranged between France and Germany, Bismarck released Napoleon; the emperor decided to go into exile in Great Britain. Having limited funds, Napoleon sold properties and jewels and arrived in England on 20 March 1871.\nNapoleon, Eug\u00e9nie, their son and their entourage, settled at Camden Place, a large three-story country house in the village of Chislehurst in Kent, a half-hour by train from London. He was received by Queen Victoria, who also visited him at Chislehurst.\nLouis-Napoleon had a longtime connection with Chislehurst and Camden Place: years earlier, while exiled in Great Britain, he had often visited Emily Rowles, whose father had owned Camden Place in the 1830s. She had assisted his escape from a French prison in 1846.\nNapoleon passed his time writing and designing a stove which would be more energy efficient. In the summer of 1872, his health began to worsen. Doctors recommended surgery to remove his bladder stones. After two operations, he became very seriously ill. His final defeat in the war would haunt the dying former emperor throughout his last days. His last words were \"Isn't it true that we weren't cowards at Sedan?\", directed at Henri Conneau, his attendant who fought in the battle alongside him. He was given last rites and died on 9 January 1873.\nNapoleon was originally buried at St Mary's Catholic Church in Chislehurst. However, after his son, an officer in the British Army, died in 1879 fighting against the Zulus in South Africa in the Anglo-Zulu War, Eug\u00e9nie decided to build a monastery and a chapel for the remains of Napoleon III and their son. In 1888, the bodies were moved to the Imperial Crypt at St Michael's Abbey, Farnborough, Hampshire, England.\nPersonal life.\nLouis Napoleon has a historical reputation as a womanizer, yet he said: \"It is usually the man who attacks. As for me, I defend myself, and I often capitulate.\" He had many mistresses. During his reign, it was the task of Count Felix Bacciochi, his social secretary, to arrange for trysts and to procure women for the Emperor's favours. His affairs were not trivial sideshows: they distracted him from governing, affected his relationship with the empress, and diminished him in the views of the other European courts.\nAmong his numerous lovers and mistresses were:\nHis wife, Eug\u00e9nie, resisted his advances prior to marriage. She was coached by her mother and her friend, Prosper M\u00e9rim\u00e9e. \"What is the road to your heart?\" Napoleon demanded to know. \"Through the chapel, Sire,\" she answered. Yet, after marriage, it took not long for him to stray as Eug\u00e9nie found sex with him \"disgusting\". It is doubtful that she allowed further approaches by her husband once she had given him an heir.\nBy his late forties, Napoleon started to suffer from numerous medical ailments, including kidney disease, bladder stones, chronic bladder and prostate infections, arthritis, gout, obesity, and the chronic effects of smoking. In 1856, Dr. Robert Ferguson, a consultant called from London, diagnosed a \"nervous exhaustion\" that had a \"debilitating impact upon sexual ... performance\" which he also reported to the British government.\nLegacy.\nConstruction.\nWith Prosper M\u00e9rim\u00e9e, Napoleon III continued to seek the preservation of numerous medieval buildings in France that had been neglected since the French Revolution, a project M\u00e9rim\u00e9e had begun during the July Monarchy. With Eug\u00e8ne Viollet-le-Duc acting as chief architect, many buildings were saved, including some of the most famous in France: Notre Dame Cathedral, Mont Saint-Michel, Carcassonne, V\u00e9zelay Abbey, Pierrefonds, and Roquetaillade castle.\nNapoleon III also directed the building of the French railway network, which contributed to the development of the coal mining and steel industry in France. This advance radically changed the nature of the French economy, which entered the modern age of large-scale capitalism. The French economy, the second largest in the world at the time (behind the British economy), experienced a very strong growth during the reign of Napoleon III. Names such as steel tycoon Eug\u00e8ne Schneider and banking mogul James de Rothschild are symbols of the period. Two of France's largest banks, Soci\u00e9t\u00e9 G\u00e9n\u00e9rale and Cr\u00e9dit Lyonnais, still in existence today, were founded during that period. The French stock market also expanded prodigiously, with many coal mining and steel companies issuing stocks. Historians credit Napoleon chiefly for supporting the railways, but not otherwise building the economy.\nNapoleon's military pressure and Russian mistakes, culminating in the Crimean War, dealt a blow to the Concert of Europe, since it precipitated a war that disrupted the post-Napoleonic peace, although the ultimately diplomatic solution to the war demonstrated the continued vitality of the system. The concert was based on stability and balance of powers, whereas Napoleon attempted to rearrange the world map to France's advantage.\nA 12-pound cannon designed by France is commonly referred to as a \"Napoleon cannon\" or \"12-pounder Napoleon\" in his honor.\nAssessment and reputation.\nThe historical reputation of Napoleon III is far below that of his uncle and had been heavily tarnished by the empire's military failures in Mexico and against Prussia. Victor Hugo portrayed him as \"Napoleon the Small\" (\"Napol\u00e9on le Petit\"), a mere mediocrity, in contrast with Napoleon I \"The Great\", presented as a military and administrative genius. In France, such arch-opposition from the age's central literary figure, whose attacks on Napoleon III were obsessive and powerful, made it impossible for a very long time to assess his reign objectively. Karl Marx, in \"The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Napoleon\", famously mocked Napoleon III by saying \"Hegel remarks somewhere that all great world-historical facts and personages appear, so to speak, twice. He forgot to add: the first time as tragedy, the second time as farce.\" Napoleon III has often been seen as an authoritarian but ineffectual leader who brought France into dubious, and ultimately disastrous, foreign military adventures.\nHistorians by the 1930s saw the Second Empire as a precursor of fascism, but by the 1950s were celebrating it as leading example of a modernizing regime. However, historians have generally given Napoleon negative evaluations on his foreign policy, and somewhat more positive evaluations of his domestic policies, especially after he liberalized his rule after 1858. His greatest achievements came in material improvements, in the form of a grand railway network that facilitated commerce and tied the nation together and centered it on Paris. He is given high credits for the rebuilding of Paris with broad boulevards, striking public buildings, very attractive residential districts for upscale Parisians, and great public parks, including the Bois de Boulogne and Bois de Vincennes, used by all classes of Parisians. He promoted French business and exports. In international policy, he tried to emulate his uncle, with numerous imperial ventures around the world, as well as wars in Europe. He badly mishandled the threat from Prussia and found himself without allies in the face of overwhelming force.\nIn films.\nNapoleon has been portrayed by:\nNapoleon III also plays a small but crucial role in \"April and the Extraordinary World\" (2015).\nIn fiction.\nNapoleon III is a principal character (with Horatio Hornblower) in C. S. Forester's final story \"The Last Encounter\".\nLife in the Second Empire is depicted in Emile Zola's epic Rougon-Macquart cycle of 20 novels. Napoleon III appears in \"La Cur\u00e9e\" (1872), when the Saccards attend a ball at the Tuileries.\nTitles, styles, honours and arms.\nTitles and styles.\nDuring his tenure as President of the Second French Republic, Louis Napoleon Bonaparte adopted the style and title of \"His Imperial Highness, the Prince-President of the French Republic\". Once he became emperor, his style and title became \" His Majesty Napoleon the Third, by the Grace of God and the will of the Nation, Emperor of the French\".\nAs head of state of France, Napoleon III was also \"ex officio\" Co-Prince of Andorra, from 1848 as Prince-President of the French Republic, and from 1852 as Emperor of the French.\nHonours.\nNational\nForeign\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWorks cited.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "62582", "revid": "50900241", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62582", "title": "Georg von Trapp", "text": "Trapp family patriarch (1880\u20131947)\nGeorg Ludwig Ritter von Trapp (4 April 1880 \u2013 30 May 1947) was an officer in the Austro-Hungarian Navy who became the patriarch of the Trapp Family Singers. After their naturalisation as US citizens, the family name was changed to 'Trapp' without the 'von'.\nTrapp was the most successful Austro-Hungarian submarine commander of World War I, sinking 11 Allied merchant ships totaling 47,653 GRT and two Allied warships displacing 12,641 tons. Trapp's accomplishments during World War I earned him numerous decorations, including the Military Order of Maria Theresa.\nHis first wife Agathe Whitehead died of scarlet fever in 1922, leaving behind seven children. Trapp hired Maria Augusta Kutschera to tutor one of his daughters and married her in 1927. He lost most of his wealth in the Great Depression, so the family turned to singing as a way of earning a livelihood. Trapp declined a commission in the German Navy after the \"Anschluss\" and emigrated with his family to the United States.\nAfter his death in 1947, the family home in Stowe, Vermont, became the Trapp Family Lodge. Maria von Trapp's 1949 memoir \"The Story of the Trapp Family Singers\" was adapted into the West German film \"The Trapp Family\" (1956), which served as the basis for the Rodgers and Hammerstein musical \"The Sound of Music\" (1959) and the 1965 film adaptation directed by Robert Wise.\nEarly life.\nGeorg Ludwig Ritter von Trapp was born in Zara in the Kingdom of Dalmatia, then a crown land of the Austro-Hungarian Empire and now in Croatia. His father, \"Fregattenkapit\u00e4n\" August Johann Trapp (1836-1884), was a naval officer, and his mother, Hedwig Wepler (1855-1911) had immigrated to the Adriatic Coast from the Grand Duchy of Hesse. His father had been raised to the Austrian nobility with the hereditary title of \"Ritter,\" upon being made a member of the Order of the Iron Crown; he died of typhoid fever in 1884 (aged forty-eight), when Georg was four. Trapp\u2019s older sister was the Austrian artist Hede von Trapp, and his brother Werner died in 1915 during World War I.\nNaval career.\nIn 1894, aged fourteen, Trapp followed in his father's footsteps and joined the Austro-Hungarian Navy, entering the Imperial and Royal Naval Academy at Fiume. As part of their required education, all naval cadets were taught to play a musical instrument; Georg von Trapp selected the violin. He graduated four years later and completed two years of follow-on training voyages, including one to Australia, as a cadet aboard the sail training corvette SMS \"Saida II\". On the voyage home, he visited the Holy Land, where he met a Franciscan friar who took him on a tour of all the Biblical sites he wanted to see. Among other things, Trapp bought seven bottles of water from the Jordan River which were later used to baptize his first seven children.\nIn 1900, he was assigned to the protected cruiser and was decorated for his performance during the Boxer Rebellion in China, in which he participated in the assault on the Taku Forts. In 1902, he passed the final officer's examination, and was commissioned a \"Fregattenleutnant\" (frigate lieutenant, equivalent to sub-lieutenant) in May 1903. He was fascinated by submarines, and in 1908 seized the opportunity to transfer to the navy's newly formed submarine arm, or \"U-boot-Waffe\", receiving promotion to \"Linienschiffsleutnant\" (ship-of-the-line lieutenant, or lieutenant) that November. In 1910 he was given command of the newly constructed . He commanded \"U-6\" until 1913.\nWorld War I.\nOn 17 April 1915, Trapp took command of . He conducted nine combat patrols in \"U-5\", and sank two enemy warships. One was the French armored cruiser , sunk at on 27 April 1915, south of Cape Santa Maria di Leuca. In hunting and sinking \"Gambetta\", Trapp achieved a notable success as commander of the first-ever underwater nighttime (and only the second) submarine attack on a vessel in the Adriatic. Just over three months later, he sank the Italian submarine at on 5 August 1915, off Pelagosa (Palagru\u017ea) Island. He also captured the Greek steamer \"Cefalonia\" off Durazzo on 29 August 1915. Some sources incorrectly credit Trapp with sinking the Italian troop transport and armed merchant cruiser , which resulted in the greatest loss of life in any submarine attack in World War I, but the ship was actually sunk by \"U-5\" under its later commander, Friedrich Schlosser.\nTrapp was transferred to the , the former French submarine \"Curie\", which had been sunk and salvaged by the Austro-Hungarian Navy. He conducted ten more war patrols in the much larger submarine, attacking merchant ships instead of warships. Between April 1917 and October 1917, \"U-14\" sank 11 Allied merchant ships under Trapp's command.\nIn May 1918, he was promoted to \"Korvettenkapit\u00e4n\" (equal to lieutenant commander) and given command of the submarine base at Cattaro in the Gulf of Kotor. However, Austria-Hungary's defeat in World War I led to the empire's collapse. The territory of the Austro-Hungarian Empire was divided among seven countries, with the Kingdom of Serbs, Croats and Slovenes keeping most of the seacoast. The Republic of German-Austria was landlocked and no longer had a navy, putting an end to Trapp's naval career.\nWar record.\nTrapp's patrols in \"U-5\" and \"U-14\" made him the most successful Austro-Hungarian submarine commander of World War I, sinking 11 Allied merchant ships totaling 47,653 GRT and two Allied warships displacing a total of 12,641 tons.\nFirst marriage and inherited wealth.\nTrapp married Agathe Gobertina Whitehead, the eldest daughter and third child of Countess Agathe Gobertina von Breunner-Enckevoirth (1856\u20131945), Austro-Hungarian nobility, and Cavaliere (Knight) John Whitehead (1854\u20131902), son of Robert Whitehead (1823\u20131905) who invented the modern torpedo and a partner at the family's Fiume Whitehead Torpedo Factory (not, as frequently stated, a niece of the British Government minister St John Brodrick, 1st Earl of Midleton). The British government rejected Whitehead's invention, but Austrian Emperor Franz Josef invited him to open a torpedo factory in Fiume. Trapp's first command was the U-boat \"U-6\" which was launched by Agathe.\nAgathe's inherited wealth sustained the couple and permitted them to start a family, and they had two sons and five daughters over the next ten years. Their first child was Rupert, born on 1 November 1911 at Pula while the couple were living at Pina Budicina 11. Their other children were: Agathe, also born in Pula; Maria Franziska, Werner; Hedwig, and Johanna, all born at the family home the Erlhof in Zell am See; and Martina, born at the Martinsschl\u00f6ssel at Klosterneuburg, for which she was named.\nOn 3 September 1922, Agathe von Trapp died of scarlet fever contracted from her daughter Agathe. Trapp then acquired Villa Trapp in Aigen, a suburb of Salzburg, and moved his family there in 1924. During this period, he delivered several lectures and conducted interviews on his naval career.\nSecond marriage.\nAbout 1926, Maria Franziska was recovering from an illness and was unable to go to school, so Trapp hired Maria Augusta Kutschera, a novice from the nearby Nonnberg Abbey as a tutor. They were married on 26 November 1927 when he was 47 and she was 22. They had three children: Rosmarie, born on 8 February 1929, Eleonore (called Lorli), born 14 May 1931, and Johannes, born 17 January 1939 in Pennsylvania.\nTurning to music.\nIn 1935, Trapp's money, inherited from his English first wife, was invested in a bank in England. Austria was under economic pressure from a hostile Germany, and Austrian banks were in a precarious position. Trapp sought to help a friend in the banking business, Auguste Caroline Lammer (1885\u20131937), so he withdrew most of his money from London and deposited it in an Austrian bank. The bank failed, wiping out most of the family's substantial fortune.\nAt about that time, a Catholic priest, Franz Wasner, instructed the children in music. Around 1936, Lotte Lehmann heard the family sing, and she suggested they perform paid concerts. When the Austrian Chancellor Kurt von Schuschnigg heard them on the radio, he invited them to perform in Vienna. Father Wasner became the group's musical director.\nDeparture from Austria.\nAccording to Maria von Trapp's memoirs, Georg von Trapp found himself in a vexing situation after the German takeover of Austria in 1938. He was offered a commission in the German Navy. This was a tempting proposition, particularly when Georg von Trapp saw the technological advances in 1930s U-boats unthinkable compared to those he had once commanded in World War I, but Trapp decided to decline the offer out of opposition to Nazi ideology. He also politely declined a request for the family choir to perform at Hitler's birthday concert. After his eldest son also announced his intention to refuse to benefit from anti-Semitism and to similarly decline a medical position at a prestigious Vienna hospital that had just fired all Jewish doctors, Georg von Trapp realized that the writing was on the wall. He summoned all his children and warned them that no family could safely refuse three successive offers from a man like Adolf Hitler. After Georg advised them that they must choose between a life of comfort or become refugees and keep their honour, the Trapp family decided to emigrate from Nazi Austria.\nOn leaving Austria, the Trapps traveled by train to Italy (not over the mountains by foot to Switzerland as is depicted in \"The Sound of Music\"). The family had a contract with an American booking agent when they left Austria. Once in Italy, they contacted the agent and requested fare to America, first traveling to London, before sailing to the United States for their first concert tour.\nIn 1939, the family returned to Europe to tour Scandinavia, hoping to continue their concerts in cities beyond the reach of the Third Reich. During this time, they went back to Salzburg for a few months before returning to Sweden to finish the tour. From there, they traveled to Norway to begin the trip back to the United States in September 1939, just after World War II broke out.\nAfter living for a short time in Merion, Pennsylvania, where their youngest child, Johannes, was born, the family settled in Stowe, Vermont, in 1941. They purchased a farm in 1942 and converted it into the Trapp Family Lodge. In January 1947, Major General Harry J. Collins turned to the Trapp family in the US pleading for help for the Austrian people, having seen first-hand the suffering of the residents of Salzburg when he had arrived there with the 42nd Infantry Division after World War II. The Trapp Family founded the Trapp Family Austrian Relief, Inc.; the priest Franz Wasner, their pre-war friend, became its treasurer.\nDeath.\nTrapp died of lung cancer on 30 May 1947 in Stowe, Vermont. In \"The Story of the Trapp Family Singers\" (1949), Maria von Trapp pointed out that there was a high incidence of lung cancer among World War I U-boat crews, due to the diesel and gasoline fumes and poor ventilation, and that his death could be considered service-related. She also acknowledged in her book that, like most men of the period, he was a heavy smoker.\nPortrayals.\nTrapp has been portrayed in various adaptations of his family's life such as \"The Sound of Music,\" both the 1965 film (played by Christopher Plummer) and the Broadway musical, as well as two German films, \"The Trapp Family\" (1956) and \"The Trapp Family in America\" (1958). However, these adaptations often altered the portrayal of the Captain. In real life and in the memoir \"The Story of the Trapp Family Singers\", written by his second wife Maria Augusta Trapp, the Captain has been described as being a warm and loving father who was always around. However, the Captain was portrayed in a more negative light in many adaptations. For instance, in the 1965 film, Georg von Trapp was portrayed as a disciplinary man who always went away and did not care for his children or their feelings at the beginning of the film. BBC Radio presented a different account of the family in October, 2009, in a play by Annie Caulfield called \"The Von Trapps and Me\", focused on Princess Yvonne, \"the woman Captain Von Trapp jilted in order to marry Maria.\"\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nMap locations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "62583", "revid": "51028635", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62583", "title": "History of Italy", "text": "Italy has been inhabited by humans since the Paleolithic. During antiquity, there were many peoples in the Italian peninsula, including Etruscans, Latins, Samnites, Umbri, Cisalpine Gauls, Greeks in \"Magna Graecia\" and others. Most significantly, Italy was the cradle of the Roman civilization. Rome was founded as a kingdom in 753 BC and became a republic in 509 BC. The Roman Republic then unified Italy forming a confederation of the Italic peoples and rose to dominate Western Europe, Northern Africa, and the Near East. The Roman Empire, established in 27 BC, ruled the Mediterranean region for centuries, contributing to the development of Western culture, philosophy, science and art.\nDuring the early Middle Ages, Italy experienced the succession in power of Ostrogoths, Byzantines, Longobards and the Holy Roman Empire and fragmented into numerous city-states and regional polities, a situation that would remain until the unification of the country. These polities and the maritime republics, in particular Venice and Genoa, rose to prosperity. Eventually, the Italian Renaissance emerged and spread to the rest of Europe, bringing a renewed interest in humanism, science, exploration, and art with the start of the modern era. In the medieval and early modern era, Southern Italy was ruled by the Norman, Swabian and Angevin dynasties and the Aragonese, French and Spanish crowns. Central Italy was largely part of the Papal States.\nIn the 19th century, Italian unification led to the establishment of an Italian nation-state under the House of Savoy. The new Kingdom of Italy quickly modernized and built a colonial empire, controlling parts of Africa and countries along the Mediterranean. At the same time, Southern Italy remained rural and poor, originating the Italian diaspora. Victorious in World War I, Italy completed the unification by acquiring Trento and Trieste and gained a permanent seat in the League of Nations's executive council. The partial infringement of the Treaty of London (1915) led to the sentiment of a \"mutilated victory\" among radical nationalists, contributing to the rise of the fascist dictatorship of Benito Mussolini in 1922. During World War II, Italy was part of the Axis powers until the Italian surrender to Allied powers and its occupation by Nazi Germany with Fascist collaborators and then a co-belligerent of the Allies during the Italian resistance and liberation of Italy.\nFollowing the end of the German occupation and the killing of Benito Mussolini, the 1946 Italian institutional referendum abolished the monarchy and became a republic, reinstated democracy, enjoyed an economic boom, and co-founded the European Union (Treaty of Rome), NATO, the Group of Six (later G7), and the G20.\nPrehistory.\nThe arrival of the first hominins was 850,000 years ago at Monte Poggiolo. The presence of the \"Homo neanderthalensis\" has been demonstrated in archaeological findings near Rome and Verona dating to c.\u200950,000 years ago (late Pleistocene). Homo sapiens sapiens appeared during the upper Palaeolithic. Remains of the later prehistoric age include \u00d6tzi the Iceman, dating to c.\u20093400\u20133100 BC (Copper Age).\nDuring the Copper Age, Indoeuropean people migrated to Italy in four waves. A first Indoeuropean migration occurred around the mid-3rd millennium BC, from a population who imported coppersmithing. The Remedello culture took over the Po Valley. The second wave occurred in the Bronze Age, from the late 3rd to the early 2nd millennium BC, with tribes identified with the Beaker culture and by the use of bronze smithing, in the Padan Plain, in Tuscany and on the coasts of Sardinia and Sicily. In the mid-2nd millennium BC, a third wave arrived, associated with the Apenninian civilization and the Terramare culture. The Terramare people were hunters, but had domesticated animals and cultivated crops; they were fairly skilful metallurgists, casting bronze in moulds.\nIn the late Bronze Age, from the late 2nd millennium to the early 1st millennium BC, a fourth wave, the Proto-Villanovan culture, brought iron-working to the Italian peninsula. Proto-Villanovan culture may have been part of the central European Urnfield culture system, or a derivation from Terramare culture. Various authors, such as Marija Gimbutas, associated this culture with the spread of the proto-Italics into the Italian Peninsula.\nNuragic civilization.\nBorn in Sardinia and southern Corsica (where it is called Torrean civilization), the Nuraghe civilization lasted from the 18th century BC to the 2nd century AD. They take their name from the characteristic Nuragic towers, which evolved from the pre-existing megalithic culture, which built dolmens and menhirs. Today more than 7,000\u00a0nuraghes appear in Sardinia.\nNo written records of this civilization have been discovered, apart from a few possible short epigraphic documents. The only written information comes from classical literature of the Greeks and Romans, and may be considered more mythological than historical. The language (or languages) spoken in Sardinia during the Bronze Age is (are) unknown since there are no written records from the period, although research suggests that around the 8th\u00a0century\u00a0BC the Nuragic populations may have adopted an alphabet similar to that used in Euboea.\nIron Age.\nEtruscan civilization.\nThe Etruscan civilization flourished in central Italy after 800 BC. The main hypotheses on the origins of the Etruscans are that they are indigenous, probably stemming from the Villanovan culture, or that they are the result of invasion from the north or the Near East. A 2007 study has suggested a Near Eastern origin. The researchers conclude that their data, taken from the modern Tuscan population, \"support the scenario of a post-Neolithic genetic input from the Near East to the present-day population of Tuscany\". In the absence of any dating evidence, there is however no direct link between this genetic input and the Etruscans. By contrast, a mitochondrial DNA study of 2013 has suggested that the Etruscans were probably an indigenous population. Among ancient populations, ancient Etruscans are found to be closest to a Neolithic population from Central Europe.\nIt is widely accepted that Etruscans spoke a non-Indo-European language. Some inscriptions in a similar language, known as Lemnian, have been found on the Aegean island of Lemnos. Etruscans were a monogamous society that emphasized pairing. The historical Etruscans had achieved a form of state with remnants of chiefdom and tribal forms. The first attestations of an Etruscan religion can be traced to the Villanovan culture.\nEtruscan expansion was focused across the Apennines. The political structure of the Etruscan culture was similar, albeit more aristocratic, to Magna Graecia in the south. The mining and commerce of metal, especially copper and iron, led to an enrichment of the Etruscans and to the expansion of their influence in the Italian peninsula and the western Mediterranean. Here their interests collided with those of the Greeks, especially in the 6th century BC, when Phoceans of Italy founded colonies along the coast of France, Catalonia and Corsica. This led the Etruscans to ally themselves with the Carthaginians.\nAround 540 BC, the Battle of Alalia led to a new distribution of power in the western Mediterranean. Carthage expanded its sphere of influence at the expense of the Greeks, and Etruria saw itself relegated to Corsica. From the first half of the 5th century, the new international political situation meant the beginning of the Etruscan decline. In 480 BC, Etruria's ally Carthage was defeated by a coalition of Magna Graecia cities led by Syracuse.\nA few years later, in 474 BC, Syracuse's tyrant Hiero defeated the Etruscans at the Battle of Cumae. Etruria's influence over the cities of Latium and Campania weakened, and it was taken over by Romans and Samnites. In the 4th century, Etruria saw a Gallic invasion end its influence over the Po valley and the Adriatic coast. Meanwhile, Rome had started annexing Etruscan cities. This led to the loss of their north provinces. Etruscia was assimilated by Rome around 500 BC.\nItalic peoples.\nThe Italic peoples were an ethnolinguistic group identified by use of Italic languages. Among the Italic peoples in the Italian peninsula were the Osci, the Veneti, the Samnites, the Latins and the Umbri.\nIn the region south of the Tiber (\"Latium Vetus\"), the Latial culture of the Latins emerged, while in the north-east of the peninsula the Este culture of the Veneti appeared. Roughly in the same period, from their core area in central Italy (modern-day Umbria and Sabina), the Osco-Umbrians began to emigrate in various waves, through the process of Ver sacrum, the ritualized extension of colonies, in southern Latium, Molise and the whole southern half of the peninsula, replacing the previous tribes, such as the Opici and the Oenotrians. This corresponds with the emergence of the Terni culture, which had strong similarities with the Celtic cultures of Hallstatt and La T\u00e8ne.\nBefore and during the period of the arrival of the Greek and Phoenician immigrants, Sicily was already inhabited by native Italics in three major groups: the Elymians in the west, the Sicani in the centre, and the Sicels (source of the name Sicily) in the east.\nIt is generally believed that around 2000 BC, the Ligures occupied a large area of the peninsula, including much of north-western Italy and all of northern Tuscany. Since many scholars consider the language of this ancient population to be Pre-Indo-European, they are often not classified as Italics.\nBy the mid-first millennium BC, the Latins of Rome were growing in power and influence. After the Latins had liberated themselves from Etruscan rule they acquired a dominant position among the Italic tribes. Frequent conflict between various Italic tribes followed; the best documented are the Samnite Wars. The Latins eventually succeeded in unifying the Italic elements in the country. In the early first century BC, several Italic tribes, in particular the Marsi and the Samnites, rebelled against Roman rule (the Social War). After Roman victory was secured, all peoples in Italy, except for the Celts of the Po Valley, were granted Roman citizenship. In the subsequent centuries, Italic tribes adopted Latin language and culture in a process known as Romanization.\nMagna Graecia.\nIn the eighth and seventh centuries BC, for reasons including demographic crisis, the search for new commercial outlets and ports, and expulsion from their homeland, Greeks began to settle along the coast of Sicily and the southern part of the Italian peninsula, which became known as Magna Graecia.\nGreek culture was exported to Italy, in its dialects of the Ancient Greek language, its religious rites and its traditions of the independent \"polis\". An original Hellenic civilization soon developed, later interacting with the native Italic and Latin civilisations. The most important cultural transplant was the Chalcidean/Cumaean variety of the Greek alphabet, which was adopted by the Etruscans; the Old Italic alphabet subsequently evolved into the Latin alphabet.\nMany of the new Hellenic cities became very rich and powerful, like \"Neapolis\" (Naples), \"Syracuse\", \"Acragas\", and \"Sybaris\". Other cities in Magna Graecia included \"Tarentum\", \"Epizephyrian Locri\", \"Rhegium\", \"Croton\", \"Thurii\", \"Elea\", \"Nola\", \"Ancona\", \"Syessa\", \"Bari\", and others.\nAfter Pyrrhus of Epirus failed to stop the spread of Roman hegemony in 282 BC, the south fell under Roman domination. It was held by the Byzantine Empire after the fall of Rome in the West and even the Lombards failed to consolidate it, though the centre of the south was theirs from Zotto's conquest in the final quarter of the 6th century.\nRoman period.\nRoman Kingdom.\nLittle is certain about the history of the Roman Kingdom, as nearly no written records from that time survive, and the histories written during the Republic and Empire are largely based on legends. According to the founding myth of Rome, the city was founded on 21 April 753 BC by twin brothers Romulus and Remus, who descended from the Trojan prince Aeneas and who were grandsons of Numitor of Alba Longa. Natale di Roma (\"Birthday of Rome\") is an annual festival held in Rome on 21 April to celebrate the founding of the city. \nThe traditional account of Roman history, which has come down through Livy, Plutarch, Dionysius of Halicarnassus, and others, is that in Rome's first centuries, it was ruled by a succession of seven kings. The Gauls destroyed much of Rome's historical records when they sacked the city after the Battle of the Allia in 390 or 387 BC. With no contemporary records, all accounts of the kings must be carefully evaluated.\nRoman Republic.\nAccording to tradition and later writers such as Livy, the Roman Republic was established around 509 BC, when the last of the seven kings of Rome, Tarquin the Proud, was deposed by Lucius Junius Brutus. A system based on annually elected magistrates and various representative assemblies was established. A constitution set a series of checks and balances, and a separation of powers. The most important magistrates were the two consuls, who together exercised executive authority as \"imperium\", or military command. The consuls had to work with the senate, which was initially an advisory council of the ranking nobility, or patricians, but grew in size and power.\nIn the 4th century BC, the Republic came under attack by the Gauls, who initially prevailed and sacked Rome. The Romans then drove the Gauls back, led by Camillus. The Romans gradually subdued the other peoples on the peninsula. The last threat to Roman hegemony in Italy came when Tarentum, a major Greek colony, enlisted the aid of Pyrrhus of Epirus in 281 BC, but this effort failed.\nIn the 3rd century BC, Rome had to face a new and formidable opponent: Carthage. In the three Punic Wars, Carthage was eventually destroyed and Rome gained control over Hispania, Sicily and North Africa. After defeating the Macedonian and Seleucid Empires in the 2nd century BC, the Romans became the dominant people of the Mediterranean. The conquest of the Hellenistic kingdoms provoked a fusion between Roman and Greek cultures and the Roman elite, once rural, became a luxurious and cosmopolitan one. By this time Rome was a consolidated empire \u2013 in the military view \u2013 and had no major enemies.\nRoman armies occupied Spain in the early 2nd century BC but encountered stiff resistance. The Celtiberian stronghold of Numantia became the centre of Spanish resistance in the 140s and 130s BC. Numantia fell and was razed to the ground in 133 BC. In 105 BC, the Celtiberians drove the Cimbri and Teutones from northern Spain, though these had crushed Roman arms in southern Gaul, inflicting 80,000 casualties on the Roman army. The conquest of Hispania was completed in 19 BC\u2014but at a heavy cost.\nTowards the end of the 2nd century BC, a huge migration of Germanic tribes took place, led by the Cimbri and the Teutones. These tribes overwhelmed the peoples with whom they came into contact and threatened Italy. At the Battle of Aquae Sextiae and the Battle of Vercellae the Germans were virtually annihilated. In these two battles the Teutones and Ambrones are said to have lost 290,000 men, and the Cimbri 220,000.\nIn the mid-1st century BC, the Republic faced a period of political crisis and social unrest. Julius Caesar reconciled the two more powerful men in Rome: Marcus Licinius Crassus and Pompey. In 53 BC, the Triumvirate disintegrated at the death of Crassus. After being victorious in the Gallic Wars, Caesar crossed the Rubicon and invaded Rome in 49 BC, rapidly defeating Pompey. Caesar was eventually granted a dictatorship for perpetuity but was murdered in 44 BC. Caesar's assassination caused political and social turmoil; without the dictator's leadership, Rome was ruled by his friend and colleague, Mark Antony. Octavian (Caesar's adopted son), along with Antony and Marcus Aemilius Lepidus, established the Second Triumvirate. Lepidus was forced to retire in 36 BC after betraying Octavian in Sicily. Antony settled in Egypt with his lover, Cleopatra VII, which was seen as an act of treason.\nFollowing Antony's Donations of Alexandria, which gave Cleopatra the title of \"Queen of Kings\", and to their children the regal titles to the newly conquered Eastern territories, war between Octavian and Mark Antony broke out. Octavian annihilated Egyptian forces in the Battle of Actium in 31 BC. Mark Antony and Cleopatra committed suicide. Rome thus possessed unchallenged naval supremacy in the North Sea, Atlantic coasts, Mediterranean, Red Sea, and the Black Sea.\nRoman Empire.\nOctavian's leadership brought the zenith of the Roman civilization, which lasted for four decades. His adoption of the name \"Augustus\" in 27 BC is usually taken by historians as the beginning of the Roman Empire. Officially, the government was republican, but Augustus assumed absolute powers. The Senate granted Octavian a unique grade of Proconsular \"imperium\", which gave him authority over all Proconsuls (military governors). The unruly imperial provinces at the borders, where the vast majority of the legions were stationed, were under the control of Augustus. The peaceful senatorial provinces were under the control of the Senate. The Roman legions, which had reached an unprecedented number (around 50) because of the civil wars, were reduced to 28.\nWithin Italy in times of peace, Roman magistrates exercised the (police power) as an alternative to the (military power). Italy's inhabitants had Latin Rights as well as religious and financial privileges.\nRoman literature grew steadily in the Golden Age of Latin Literature, with poets like Vergil, Horace, Ovid and Rufus. Augustus also continued the shifts on the calendar promoted by Caesar, and the month of August is named after him. Augustus' enlightened rule resulted in 200 years of peace for the Empire, known as \"Pax Romana\".\nIn the Principate, Italy was legally distinguished from the provinces, and along with some favored provincial communities, enjoyed immunity from the property tax and poll tax. However, under the Emperor Diocletian, Italy lost these privileges and was subdivided into provinces.\nDespite its military strength, the Empire made few efforts to expand, the most notable being the conquest of Britain, begun by emperor Claudius (47), and emperor Trajan's conquest of Dacia (101\u2013102, 105\u2013106). In the 1st and 2nd centuries, Roman legions were also employed in intermittent warfare with the Germanic tribes to the north and the Parthian Empire to the east. Meanwhile, armed insurrections (e.g. the Hebraic insurrection in Judea, 70) and brief civil wars (e.g. in 68 AD the year of the four emperors) demanded the legions' attention. The seventy years of Jewish\u2013Roman wars in the second half of the 1st century and the first half of the 2nd century were exceptional in their duration and violence. An estimated 1,356,460 Jews were killed as a result of the First Jewish Revolt; the Second Jewish Revolt (115\u2013117) led to the death of more than 200,000 Jews; and the Third Jewish Revolt (132\u2013136) resulted in the death of 580,000 Jewish soldiers.\nAfter the 395 death of Theodosius I, the Empire was divided into an Eastern and a Western Roman Empire. The Western part faced increasing economic and political crises and frequent barbarian invasions, so the capital was moved from Mediolanum to Ravenna. In 476, the last Western Emperor Romulus Augustulus was deposed by Odoacer.\nMiddle Ages.\nOdoacer's rule ended when the Ostrogoths, under the leadership of Theodoric, conquered Italy. Decades later, the armies of Eastern Emperor Justinian entered Italy with the goal of re-establishing imperial Roman rule, which led to the Gothic War that devastated the whole country with famine and epidemics. This ultimately allowed another Germanic tribe, the Lombards, to take control over vast regions of Italy. In 751 the Lombards seized Ravenna, ending Byzantine rule in northern Italy. Facing a new Lombard offensive, the Papacy appealed to the Franks for aid.\nIn 756 Frankish forces defeated the Lombards and gave the Papacy legal authority over much of central Italy, establishing the Papal States. In 800, Charlemagne was crowned emperor of the Holy Roman Empire. After the death of Charlemagne (814), the new empire disintegrated under his weak successors, resulting in a power vacuum in Italy and coinciding with the rise of Islam in North Africa and the Middle East. In the South, there were attacks from the Umayyad Caliphate and the Abbasid Caliphate. In the North, there was a rising power of communes. In 852, the Saracens took Bari and founded an emirate there. Islamic rule over Sicily was effective from 902.\nIn the 11th century, trade slowly recovered as the cities started to grow again and the Papacy regained its authority. The Investiture controversy, over whether secular authorities had any legitimate role in appointments to ecclesiastical offices, was resolved by the Concordat of Worms in 1122, although problems continued in many areas of Europe until the end of the medieval era. In the north, a Lombard League of communes launched a successful effort to win autonomy from the Holy Roman Empire, defeating Emperor Frederick Barbarossa at the Battle of Legnano in 1176. In the south, the Normans occupied the Lombard and Byzantine possessions.\nThe few independent city-states were also subdued. During the same period, the Normans ended Muslim rule in Sicily. In 1130, Roger II of Sicily began his rule as the first king of the Norman Kingdom of Sicily; he had succeeded in uniting all the Norman conquests in Southern Italy into one kingdom with a strong centralized government. In 1155, Emperor Manuel Komnenos attempted to regain Southern Italy, but the attempt failed and in 1158 the Byzantines left Italy. The Norman Kingdom lasted until 1194 when Sicily was claimed by the German Hohenstaufen Dynasty.\nBetween the 12th and 13th centuries, Italy developed a peculiar political pattern, significantly different from feudal Europe north of the Alps. The oligarchic city-state became the prevalent form of government. Keeping direct Church control and Imperial power at arm's length, the many independent city-states prospered through commerce, ultimately creating the conditions for the artistic and intellectual changes produced by the Renaissance. Northern cities and states were notable for their merchant republics, especially the Republic of Venice. Compared to feudal and absolute monarchies, the merchant republics enjoyed relative political freedom.\nDuring this period, many Italian cities developed republican forms of government, such as the republics of Florence, Lucca, Genoa, Venice and Siena. During the 13th and 14th centuries these cities became major financial and commercial centres. Milan, Florence and Venice, among other city-states, played a crucial innovative role in financial development, devising the main instruments and practices of banking and new forms of social and economic organization.\nDuring the same period, Italy saw the rise of the Maritime Republics: Venice, Genoa, Pisa, Amalfi, Ragusa, Ancona, Gaeta and Noli. From the 10th to the 13th centuries these cities built fleets of ships for their own protection and to support extensive trade networks across the Mediterranean, leading to an essential role in the Crusades. The maritime republics, especially Venice and Genoa, soon became Europe's main gateways to trade with the East, establishing colonies as far as the Black Sea and often controlling most of the trade with the Byzantine Empire and the Islamic Mediterranean world. The county of Savoy expanded its territory into the peninsula in the late Middle Ages, while Florence developed into a highly organized commercial and financial city-state, becoming for many centuries the European capital of silk, wool, banking and jewellery. Central and southern Italy was far poorer than the north. Rome was largely in ruins, and the Papal States were a loosely administered region with little law and order. Partly because of this, the Papacy had relocated to Avignon in France. Naples, Sicily, and Sardinia had for some time been under foreign domination. The Black Death in 1348 killed perhaps one-third of Italy's population.\nRenaissance.\nThe recovery from the demographic and economic disaster of the late Middle Ages led to a resurgence of cities, trade and economy. Italy was the main centre of the Renaissance, whose flourishing of the arts, architecture, literature, science, historiography, and political theory influenced all of Europe. The Renaissance represented a \"rebirth\" not only of economy and urbanization but also of arts and science, fuelled by rediscoveries of ancient texts and the migration west into Italy of intellectuals fleeing the Eastern Roman Empire. The fall of Constantinople led to the migration of Greek scholars and texts to Italy, fueling the rediscovery of Greco-Roman Humanism. Humanist rulers such as Federico da Montefeltro and Pope Pius II worked to establish ideal cities, founding Urbino and Pienza respectively. Pico della Mirandola wrote the \"Oration on the Dignity of Man\", considered the manifesto of Renaissance Humanism.\nThe Italian Renaissance began in Tuscany and spread south, having an especially significant impact on Rome, which was largely rebuilt by the Renaissance popes. The Tuscan variety of Italian came to predominate throughout the region, especially in Renaissance literature. Prominent authors of the era include Petrarch and Giovanni Boccaccio. Italian Renaissance painting and architecture exercised a dominant influence on subsequent European art. The Aldine Press, founded by the printer Aldo Manuzio, developed Italic type and the small, relatively portable and inexpensive printed book that could be carried in one's pocket. In the early 16th century, Baldassare Castiglione with \"The Book of the Courtier\" laid out his vision of the ideal gentleman and lady, while Niccol\u00f2 Machiavelli in \"The Prince\", laid down the foundation of modern philosophy, especially modern political philosophy. It was also in direct conflict with the dominant Catholic and scholastic doctrines of the time.\nThe Italian Renaissance was remarkable in economic development. Venice and Genoa were trade pioneers, first as maritime republics and then as regional states, followed by Milan, Florence, and the rest of northern Italy. Reasons for their early development include the relative military safety of Venetian lagoons, the high population density and the institutional structure which inspired entrepreneurs. Venice was the first real international financial center, which slowly emerged from the 9th century to its peak in the 14th century. Tradeable bonds were invented during this period.\nAge of Discovery.\nItalian explorers and navigators from the dominant maritime republics, eager to find an alternative route to the Indies to bypass the Ottoman Empire, played a key role in the Age of Discovery and European colonization of the Americas. The most notable among them were Christopher Columbus, who is credited with discovering the New World; John Cabot, the first European to set foot in \"New Found Land\" and explore parts of the North American continent in 1497; Amerigo Vespucci, who first demonstrated in about 1501 that the New World was not Asia as initially conjectured but a different continent (America is named after him); and Giovanni da Verrazzano, the first European to explore the Atlantic coast of North America between Florida and New Brunswick in 1524. Marco da Nizza explored the region that later became Arizona and New Mexico in 1539. Henri de Tonti explored the Great Lakes region and co-founded New Orleans. Italian missionaries, including Alessandro Geraldini, Fran\u00e7ois-Joseph Bressani, and Eusebio Kino, played a role in establishing Catholic missions in California. Kino explored and mapped the southwest and California. In the beginning of the 15th century, adventurers and traders such as Niccol\u00f2 Da Conti travelled as far as Southeast Asia.\nWarfare.\nIn the 14th century, Northern Italy was divided into warring city-states, the most powerful being Milan, Florence, Pisa, Siena, Genoa, Ferrara, Mantua, Verona and Venice. High Medieval Northern Italy was further divided by the long-running battle for supremacy between the Papacy and the Holy Roman Empire. Warfare between the states was common, and invasion from outside Italy was confined to intermittent sorties of Holy Roman Emperors. Since the 13th century, as armies became primarily composed of mercenaries, prosperous city-states could field considerable forces despite their low populations. Over the 15th century, the most powerful city-states annexed their smaller neighbours: Florence took Pisa in 1406, Venice captured Padua and Verona, while the Duchy of Milan annexed nearby areas including Pavia and Parma.\nThe early Renaissance saw almost constant warfare on land and sea as the city-states vied for preeminence. On land, these wars were primarily fought by armies of mercenaries known as \"condottieri\", bands of soldiers drawn from around Europe (especially Germany and Switzerland) led largely by Italian captains. Decades of fighting saw Florence, Milan and Venice emerge as the dominant players. These three powers agreed to the Peace of Lodi in 1454, which saw relative calm brought to the region for the next forty years. At sea, the main contenders were Pisa, Genoa, and Venice, but after a long conflict, the Genoese succeeded in reducing Pisa. Venice proved to be a more powerful adversary, and with the decline of Genoese power during the 15th century Venice became pre-eminent on the seas.\nForeign invasions of Italy (the Italian Wars) began with the 1494 invasion by France that wreaked widespread devastation on Northern Italy and ended the independence of many of the city-states. Originally arising from dynastic disputes over the Duchy of Milan and the Kingdom of Naples, the wars rapidly became a general struggle for power and territory. The French were routed by Holy Roman Emperor Charles V at the Battle of Pavia (1525) and again in the War of the League of Cognac (1526\u201330). After years of inconclusive fighting and involvement by multiple countries, with the Peace of Cateau-Cambr\u00e9sis (1559), France renounced its claims in Italy, while the south of Italy remained under Spanish rule.\nMuch of Venice's hinterland (but not the city itself) was devastated by the Turks in 1499 and plundered by the League of Cambrai in 1509. Worst of all was the 6 May 1527 Sack of Rome by mutinous German mercenaries that all but ended the role of the Papacy as the largest patron of Renaissance art. The long Siege of Florence (1529\u20131530) brought the destruction of its suburbs, the ruin of its export business and the confiscation of its citizens' wealth. Italy's urban population halved; ransoms paid to the invaders and emergency taxes drained the finances. The wool and silk industries of Lombardy collapsed when their looms were wrecked by invaders. The defensive tactic of scorched earth only slightly delayed the invaders, and made the recovery much longer.\nFrom the Counter-Reformation to Napoleon.\nThe 17th century was a tumultuous period in Italian history, marked by deep political and social changes. These included the increase of Papal power in the peninsula and the influence of the Catholic Church at the peak of the Counter Reformation, the Catholic reaction against the Protestant Reformation. From the Peace of Cateau-Cambr\u00e9sis to the War of the Spanish Succession, the Spanish Habsburgs ruled Sicily, Naples, and Milan; these territories passed to the Austrian Habsburgs in 1700.\nDespite important artistic and scientific achievements, such as the discoveries of Galileo and the flourishing of Baroque style, after 1600 Italy experienced an economic catastrophe. In 1600 Northern and Central Italy comprised one of the most advanced industrial areas of Europe, with an exceptionally high standard of living. By 1870 Italy was an economically backward and depressed area; its industrial structure had almost collapsed, its population was too high for its resources, its economy had become primarily agricultural. Wars, political fractionalization, limited fiscal capacity and the shift of world trade to north-western Europe and the Americas were key factors.\nThe growing importance of the Atlantic trade undermined the importance of Venice as a commercial hub. Spain's involvement in the Thirty Years' War (1618\u201348), financed in part by taxes on its Italian possessions, heavily drained the commerce and agriculture of the south; as Spain declined, it dragged its Italian domains down with it, spreading conflicts and revolts (such as the Neapolitan 1647 tax-related \"Revolt of Masaniello\").\nThe plague of 1630 that ravaged northern Italy, notably Milan and Venice, claimed possibly one million lives, or about 25% of the population. The plague of 1656 killed up to 43% of the population of the Kingdom of Naples. Historians believe the dramatic reduction in population (and, thus, in economic activity) contributed to Italy's downfall as a major commercial and political centre. By one estimate, while in 1500 the GDP of Italy was 106% of the French GDP, by 1700 it was only 75% of it.\n18th century.\nThe War of the Spanish Succession (1701\u20131714) was triggered by the death without issue of the last Habsburg king of Spain, Charles II, who fixed the Spanish inheritance on Philip, Duke of Anjou, the grandson of King Louis XIV of France. In face of the threat of a French hegemony over much of Europe, a Grand Alliance between Austria, England, the Dutch Republic and other minor powers (including the Duchy of Savoy) was signed in The Hague. The Alliance successfully fought and defeated the Franco-Spanish \"Party of the Two Crowns\", and the subsequent Treaty of Utrecht and Rastatt passed control of much of Italy (Milan, Naples and Sardinia) from Spain to Austria, while Sicily was ceded to the Duchy of Savoy. Spain attempted to retake territories in Italy and to claim the French throne in the War of the Quadruple Alliance (1718\u20131720), but was again defeated. As a result of the Treaty of The Hague, Spain agreed to abandon its Italian claims, while Duke Victor Amadeus II of Savoy agreed to exchange Sicily with Austria for the island of Sardinia, after which he was known as the King of Sardinia. The Spaniards regained Naples and Sicily following the Battle of Bitonto in 1738. Corsica passed from the Republic of Genoa to France in 1769 after the Treaty of Versailles. Italian was the official language of Corsica until 1859.\nAge of Napoleon.\nAt the end of the 18th century, Italy was almost in the same political conditions as in the 16th century; the main differences were that Austria had replaced Spain as the dominant foreign power (though the War of the Polish Succession resulted in the re-installment of the Spanish in the south, as the House of Bourbon-Two Sicilies), and that the dukes of Savoy had become kings of Sardinia. In 1796 the French Army of Italy under Napoleon invaded Italy, with the aims of forcing the First Coalition to abandon Sardinia and forcing Austria to withdraw from Italy. Within only two weeks Victor Amadeus III of Sardinia was forced to sign an armistice. Napoleon then entered Milan, where he was welcomed as a liberator. Subsequently, beating off Austrian counterattacks and continuing to advance, he arrived in the Veneto in 1797. Here occurred the Veronese Easters, an act of rebellion against French oppression, that tied down Napoleon for about a week.\nNapoleon conquered most of Italy in 1797\u201399. He set up a series of new republics, complete with new codes of law and abolition of old feudal privileges. Napoleon's Cisalpine Republic was centered on Milan. Genoa the city became a republic while its hinterland became the Ligurian Republic. The Roman Republic was formed out of the papal holdings while the pope himself was sent to France. The Neapolitan Republic was formed around Naples, but it lasted only five months before the Coalition recaptured it. In 1805, he formed the Kingdom of Italy, with himself as king and his stepson as viceroy. All these new countries were satellites of France, and had to pay large subsidies to Paris, as well as provide military support for Napoleon's wars. Their political and administrative systems were modernized, the metric system introduced, and trade barriers reduced. Jewish ghettos were abolished. Belgium and Piedmont became integral parts of France.\nDuring the Napoleonic era, in 1797, the first official adoption of the Italian tricolour as a national flag by a sovereign Italian state, the Cispadane Republic, a sister republic of Revolutionary France, took place. This event is celebrated by the Tricolour Day. The Italian national colours appeared for the first time on a tricolour cockade in 1789, anticipating by seven years the first green, white and red Italian military war flag, which was adopted by the Lombard Legion in 1796.\nIn 1805, after the French victory over the Third Coalition and the Peace of Pressburg, Napoleon recovered Veneto and Dalmatia, annexing them to the Italian Republic and renaming it the Kingdom of Italy. Also that year a second satellite state, the Ligurian Republic (successor to the old Republic of Genoa), was pressured into merging with France. In 1806, he conquered the Kingdom of Naples and granted it to his brother and then (from 1808) to Joachim Murat, along with marrying his sisters Elisa and Paolina off to the princes of Massa-Carrara and Guastalla. In 1808, he annexed Marche and Tuscany to the Kingdom of Italy. In 1809, Bonaparte occupied Rome, exiling the Pope first to Savona and then to France.\nAfter Russia, the other states of Europe re-allied themselves and defeated Napoleon at the Battle of Leipzig, after which his Italian allied states abandoned him to ally with Austria. As Napoleon's reign began to fail, other national monarchs he had installed tried to keep their thrones by feeding nationalistic sentiments. Among these was the viceroy of Italy, Eug\u00e8ne de Beauharnais, who tried to get Austrian approval for his succession to the Kingdom of Italy, and Joachim Murat, who called for Italian patriots' help for the unification of Italy under his rule. Napoleon was defeated on 6 April 1814. The resulting Congress of Vienna (1814) restored a situation close to that of 1795, dividing Italy between Austria (in the north-east and Lombardy), the Kingdom of Sardinia, the Kingdom of the Two Sicilies (in the south and in Sicily), and Tuscany, the Papal States and other minor states in the centre. However, old republics such as Venice and Genoa were not recreated, Venice went to Austria, and Genoa went to the Kingdom of Sardinia.\nOn Napoleon's return to France (the Hundred Days), he regained Murat's support, but Murat proved unable to convince the Italians to fight for Napoleon with his Proclamation of Rimini and was beaten and killed. The Italian kingdoms thus fell, and Italy's Restoration period began, with many pre-Napoleonic sovereigns returned to their thrones. Piedmont, Genoa and Nice came to be united, as did Sardinia (which went on to create the State of Savoy), while Lombardy, Veneto, Istria and Dalmatia were re-annexed to Austria. The dukedoms of Parma and Modena re-formed, and the Papal States and the Kingdom of Naples returned to the Bourbons. The political and social events in the restoration period of Italy (1815\u20131835) led to popular uprisings throughout the peninsula and greatly shaped what would become the Italian Wars of Independence. All this led to a new Kingdom of Italy and Italian unification. Frederick Artz emphasizes the benefits the Italians gained:\nFor nearly two decades the Italians had the excellent codes of law, a fair system of taxation, a better economic situation, and more religious and intellectual toleration than they had known for centuries. ... Everywhere old physical, economic, and intellectual barriers had been thrown down and the Italians had begun to be aware of a common nationality.\nFrench historian Hippolyte Taine stated:\nNapoleon, far more Italian than French, Italian by race, by instinct, imagination, and souvenir, considers in his plan the future of Italy, and, on casting up the final accounts of his reign, we find that the net loss is for France and the net profit is for Italy.\nUnification (1814\u20131861).\nThe \"Risorgimento\" was the political and social process that unified different states of the Italian Peninsula. It is difficult to pin down exact dates for the beginning and end of Italian reunification, but most scholars agree that it began with the end of Napoleonic rule and the Congress of Vienna in 1815, and approximately ended with the Franco-Prussian War in 1871, though the last \"citt\u00e0 irredente\" did not join until the Italian victory in World War I.\nIn 1820, Spaniards successfully revolted over disputes about their Constitution, which influenced the development of a similar movement in Italy. A regiment in the army of the Kingdom of Two Sicilies, commanded by Guglielmo Pepe, a \"Carbonaro\" (member of the secret republican organization), mutinied, conquering the peninsular part of Two Sicilies. The king, Ferdinand I, agreed to enact a new constitution. The revolutionaries, though, failed to court popular support and fell to Austrian troops of the Holy Alliance. Ferdinand abolished the constitution and began systematically persecuting revolutionaries, many of whom were forced into exile.\nThe leader of the 1821 revolutionary movement in Piedmont was Santorre di Santarosa, who wanted to remove the Austrians and unify Italy under the House of Savoy. The Piedmont revolt started in Alessandria. The king's regent, prince Charles Albert, acting while the king Charles Felix was away, approved a new constitution to appease the revolutionaries, but when the king returned he disavowed the constitution and requested assistance from the Holy Alliance. Di Santarosa's troops were defeated, and the would-be Piedmontese revolutionary fled to Paris.\nArtistic and literary sentiment also turned towards nationalism; perhaps the most famous of proto-nationalist works was Alessandro Manzoni's \"I promessi sposi\" (\"The Betrothed\"), published in 1827. The 1840 version of \"I promessi sposi\" used a standardized version of the Tuscan dialect, a conscious effort by the author to provide a language and force people to learn it.\nAt the time, the struggle for Italian unification was perceived to be waged primarily against the Austrian Empire and the Habsburgs, since they directly controlled the predominantly Italian-speaking northeastern part of present-day Italy and were the single most powerful force against unification. The Austrian Empire vigorously repressed nationalist sentiment. Austrian Chancellor Franz Metternich, an influential diplomat at the Congress of Vienna, stated that the word \"Italy\" was nothing more than \"a geographic expression.\" Those in favour of unification also faced opposition from the Holy See, particularly after failed attempts to broker a confederation with the Papal States, which would have left the Papacy with some measure of autonomy over the region. Pius IX feared that giving up power in the region could mean the persecution of Italian Catholics.\nEven among those who wanted to see the peninsula unified, different groups could not agree on what form a unified state would take. Vincenzo Gioberti suggested a confederation of Italian states under the rulership of the Pope. His book, \"Of the Moral and Civil Primacy of the Italians\", was published in 1843 and created a link between the Papacy and the Risorgimento. Many leading revolutionaries wanted a republic, but eventually, it was a king and his chief minister who had the power to unite the Italian states as a monarchy.\nOne of the most influential revolutionary groups was the Carbonari (charcoal burners), a secret organization formed in southern Italy early in the 19th century. Inspired by the principles of the French Revolution, its members were mainly drawn from the middle class and intellectuals. After the Congress of Vienna, the \"Carbonari\" movement spread into the Papal States, the Kingdom of Sardinia, the Grand Duchy of Tuscany, the Duchy of Modena and the Kingdom of Lombardy\u2013Venetia. The revolutionaries were so feared that the reigning authorities passed an ordinance condemning to death anyone who attended a Carbonari meeting. The \"Carbonari\" condemned Napoleon III to death for failing to unite Italy, and the group almost succeeded in assassinating him in 1858. Many leaders of the unification movement were at one time members of this organization.\nIn this context, in 1847, the first public performance of the song \"Il Canto degli Italiani\", the Italian national anthem since 1946, took place.\nTwo prominent radical figures in the unification movement were Giuseppe Mazzini and Giuseppe Garibaldi. The more conservative constitutional monarchic figures included the Count of Cavour and Victor Emmanuel II, who would later become the first king of a united Italy. Mazzini's activity in revolutionary movements caused him to be imprisoned soon after he joined. While in prison, he concluded that Italy could \u2013 and therefore should \u2013 be unified and formulated his program for establishing a free, independent, and republican nation with Rome as its capital. After Mazzini's release in 1831, he went to Marseille, where he organized a new political society called \"La Giovine Italia\" (Young Italy) seeking the unification of Italy. Garibaldi participated in an uprising in Piedmont in 1834, was sentenced to death, and escaped to South America. He returned to Italy in 1848. The creation of the Kingdom of Italy was the result of concerted efforts by Italian nationalists and monarchists loyal to the House of Savoy to establish a united kingdom encompassing the entire Italian Peninsula.\nSardinia industrialized from 1830 onward. A constitution, the Statuto Albertino was enacted in the year of revolutions, 1848, under liberal pressure. Under the same pressure, the First Italian War of Independence was declared on Austria. After initial success, the war took a turn for the worse and the Kingdom of Sardinia lost.\nAfter the Revolutions of 1848, the apparent leader of the Italian unification movement was Garibaldi, popular amongst southern Italians. Garibaldi led the Italian republican drive for unification in southern Italy, but the northern Italian monarchy of the House of Savoy in the Kingdom of Piedmont-Sardinia whose government was led by Camillo Benso, Count of Cavour, also had the ambition of establishing a united Italian state. Although the kingdom had no physical connection to Rome (deemed the natural capital of Italy), the kingdom had successfully challenged Austria in the Second Italian War of Independence, liberating Lombardy\u2013Venetia from Austrian rule. On the basis of the Plombi\u00e8res Agreement, the Kingdom of Sardinia ceded Savoy and Nice to France, an event that caused the Ni\u00e7ard exodus, that was the emigration of a quarter of the Ni\u00e7ard Italians to Italy. The kingdom also had established important alliances which helped it improve the possibility of Italian unification, such as Britain and France in the Crimean War.\nGaribaldi was elected in 1871 in Nice at the National Assembly where he tried to promote the annexation of his hometown to the Italian unitary state, but he was prevented from speaking. Because of this denial, between 1871 and 1872 there were riots in Nice, promoted by the Garibaldini and called \"Ni\u00e7ard Vespers\", which demanded the annexation of the city and its area to Italy. Fifteen Nice people who participated in the rebellion were tried and sentenced.\nSouthern question and Italian diaspora.\nThe transition was not smooth for the south (the \"Mezzogiorno\"). The path to unification and modernization created a divide between Northern and Southern Italy called Southern question. The entire region south of Naples was afflicted with numerous deep economic and social liabilities. However, many of the South's political problems and its reputation of being \"passive\" or lazy (politically speaking) was due to the new government that alienated the South. On the other hand, transportation was difficult, soil fertility was low with extensive erosion, deforestation was severe, many businesses could stay open only because of high protective tariffs, large estates were often poorly managed, most peasants had only very small plots, and there was chronic unemployment and high crime rates.\nCavour decided the basic problem was poor government, and believed that could be remedied by strict application of the Piedmontese legal system. The main result was an upsurge in brigandage, which turned into a bloody civil war that lasted almost ten years. The insurrection reached its peak mainly in Basilicata and northern Apulia, headed by the brigands Carmine Crocco and Michele Caruso. With the end of the southern riots, there was an outflow of millions of peasants in the Italian diaspora, especially to the United States and South America. Others relocated to the northern industrial cities such as Genoa, Milan and Turin, and sent money home.\nThe first Italian diaspora began around 1880 and ended in the 1920s to the early 1940s with the rise of Fascist Italy. Poverty was the main reason for emigration, specifically the lack of land as \"mezzadria\" sharecropping flourished in Italy, especially in the South, and property became subdivided over generations. Especially in Southern Italy, conditions were harsh. Until the 1860s to 1950s, most of Italy was a rural society with many small towns and cities and almost no modern industry in which land management practices, especially in the South and the Northeast, did not easily convince farmers to stay on the land and to work the soil.\nAnother factor was related to the overpopulation of Southern Italy as a result of the improvements in socioeconomic conditions after Unification. That created a demographic boom and forced the new generations to emigrate en masse in the late 19th century and the early 20th century, mostly to the Americas. The new migration of capital created millions of unskilled jobs around the world and was responsible for the simultaneous mass migration of Italians searching for \"work and bread\" ().\nUnification broke down the feudal land system, which had survived in the south since the Middle Ages, especially where land had been the inalienable property of aristocrats, religious bodies or the king. The breakdown of feudalism, however, and redistribution of land did not necessarily lead to small farmers in the south winding up owning arable land. Many remained landless, and plots grew smaller and smaller and so less and less productive, as land was subdivided amongst heirs. Between 1860 and World War I, at least 9 million Italians left permanently of a total of 16 million who emigrated, most travelling to North or South America.\nLiberal period (1861\u20131922).\nItaly became a nation-state on 17 March 1861, when most of the states of the peninsula were united under king Victor Emmanuel II. The architects of Italian unification were Camillo Benso, Count of Cavour, and Giuseppe Garibaldi. In 1866, Prussian Prime Minister Otto von Bismarck offered Victor Emmanuel II an alliance with the Kingdom of Prussia in the Austro-Prussian War. In exchange Prussia would allow Italy to annex Austrian-controlled Venice. King Emmanuel agreed to the alliance and the Third Italian War of Independence began. The victory against Austria allowed Italy to annex Venice. In 1870, France started the Franco-Prussian War and brought home its soldiers in Rome; Italy marched in to take over the Papal State. Italian unification was completed, and the capital was moved from Florence to Rome.\nSome of the states that had been targeted for unification (\"terre irredente\"), Trentino-Alto Adige and Julian March, did not join the Kingdom of Italy until 1918 after Italy defeated Austria-Hungary in the First World War. For this reason, historians sometimes describe the unification period as reaching completion only with the Armistice of Villa Giusti on 4 November 1918.\nParliamentary democracy developed considerably in the 19th century. The Sardinian Statuto Albertino of 1848, extended to the whole Kingdom of Italy in 1861, provided for basic freedoms, but the electoral laws excluded the non-propertied and uneducated classes from voting. Italy's political arena was sharply divided between broad camps of left and right which created frequent deadlock and attempts to preserve governments. Marco Minghetti lost power in 1876 and was replaced by the Democrat Agostino Depretis, who began a period of political dominance in the 1880s, but continued attempts to appease the opposition to hold power.\nDepretis began his term by initiating an experimental political idea called \"Trasformismo\" (transformism). The theory of \"Trasformismo\" was that a cabinet should select a variety of moderates and capable politicians from a non-partisan perspective. In practice, \"trasformismo\" was authoritarian and corrupt: Depretis pressured districts to vote for his candidates if they wished to gain favourable concessions from Depretis when in power, resulting in only four representatives from the right being elected in 1876. Depretis put through authoritarian measures, such as banning public meetings, placing \"dangerous\" individuals in internal exile on remote penal islands, and adopting militarist policies. Depretis enacted controversial legislation for the time, such as abolishing arrest for debt, making elementary education free and compulsory while ending compulsory religious teaching in elementary schools. The first government of Depretis collapsed after his dismissal of his Interior Minister, and ended with his resignation in 1877. The second government of Depretis started in 1881. Depretis' goals included widening suffrage in 1882 and increasing the tax intake from Italians by expanding the minimum requirements of who could pay taxes and the creation of a new electoral system. In 1887, Depretis was finally pushed out of office after years of political decline.\nFrancesco Crispi was prime minister from 1887 until 1891 and again from 1893 until 1896. Historian R.J.B. Bosworth says of his foreign policy that Crispi \"pursued policies whose openly aggressive character would not be equaled until the days of the Fascist regime... His policies were ruinous, both for Italy's trade with France, and, more humiliatingly, for colonial ambitions in East Africa.\" Crispi's major concerns during 1887\u201391 was protecting Italy from Austria-Hungary. Crispi worked to build Italy as a great world power through increased military expenditures, advocation of expansionism, and trying to win Germany's favor even by joining the Triple Alliance. While helping Italy develop strategically, he continued \"trasformismo\" and was authoritarian, once suggesting the use of martial law to ban opposition parties. Despite being authoritarian, Crispi put through liberal policies such as the Public Health Act of 1888 and establishing tribunals for redress against abuses by the government.\nThe overwhelming attention paid to foreign policy alienated the agricultural community which needed help. Both radical and conservative forces in the Italian parliament demanded that the government investigate how to improve agriculture. The investigation showed that agriculture was not improving, that landowners were swallowing up revenue from their lands and contributing almost nothing to development of the land. There was aggravation by lower class Italians to the break-up of communal lands which benefited only landlords. Most of the workers on the agricultural lands were not peasants but short-term labourers who at best were employed for one year. Peasants without stable income were forced to live off meager food supplies, disease was spreading rapidly, plagues were reported, including a major cholera epidemic which killed at least 55,000 people. The Italian government could not deal with the situation effectively due to the mass overspending that left Italy in huge debt. Italy also suffered economically because of overproduction of grapes in the 1870s and 1880s when France's vineyard industry was suffering from vine disease. Italy during that time prospered as the largest exporter of wine in Europe but following the recovery of France in 1888, southern Italy was overproducing and had to split in two which caused greater unemployment and bankruptcies.\nFrom 1901 to 1914, Italian history and politics was dominated by Giovanni Giolitti. He first confronted the wave of widespread discontent that Crispi's policy had provoked: no more authoritarian repression, but acceptance of protests and therefore of strikes, as long as they are neither violent nor political, with the (successful) aim of bringing the socialists in the political life of the country. Giolitti's most important interventions were social and labor legislation, universal male suffrage, the nationalization of the railways and insurance companies, the reduction of state debt, and the development of infrastructure and industry. In foreign policy, there was a movement away from Germany and Austria-Hungary and toward the Triple Entente of France, Britain and Russia.\nStarting from the late 19th century, Italy developed its own colonial Empire. It took control of Somalia. Its attempt to occupy Ethiopia failed in the First Italo\u2013Ethiopian War of 1895\u20131896. In 1911, Giolitti's government sent forces to occupy Libya and declared war on the Ottoman Empire. Italy soon annexed Libya (then divided in Tripolitania and Cyrenaica) and the Dodecanese Islands after the Italo-Turkish War. Nationalists advocated Italy's domination of the Mediterranean Sea by occupying Greece as well as the Adriatic coastal region of Dalmatia but no attempts were made. In June 1914 the left became repulsed by the government after the killing of three anti-militarist demonstrators. The Italian Socialist Party declared a general strike in Italy. The protests that ensued became known as \"Red Week\", as leftists rioted and various acts of civil disobedience occurred such as seizing railway stations, cutting telephone wires and burning tax-registers.\nWorld War I and crisis of the Liberal state.\nItaly entered into the First World War on 24 May 1915 with the aim of completing national unity: for this reason, it is also considered the Fourth Italian War of Independence, in a historiographical perspective that identifies in the latter the conclusion of the unification of Italy.\nThe war forced the decision whether to honour the alliance with Germany and Austria. For six months, Italy remained neutral, as the Triple Alliance was only for defensive purposes. Italy took the initiative in entering the war in spring 1915, despite strong popular and elite sentiment in favour of neutrality. Italy was, since its unification, the least of the great powers: a relatively large, but only partially industrialized country, whose political system was chaotic; its finances were heavily strained, and its army had not been prepared for a long conflict. The Triple Alliance meant little either to Italians or Austrians. Prime Minister Antonio Salandra and Foreign Minister Sidney Sonnino negotiated with both sides in secret for the best deal, and got one from the Entente, which was quite willing to promise large slices of the Austro-Hungarian Empire, including the Tyrol and Trieste, as well as making Albania a protectorate. Russia vetoed giving Italy Dalmatia. Britain was willing to pay subsidies and loans to get 36 million Italians as new allies who threatened the southern flank of Austria.\nWhen the Treaty of London was announced in May 1915, there was an uproar from antiwar elements. Reports from around Italy showed the people feared war, and cared little about territorial gains. Pro-war supporters mobbed the streets. The fervor for war represented a bitterly hostile reaction against politics as usual, and the failures, frustrations, and stupidities of the ruling class. Benito Mussolini created the newspaper \"Il Popolo d'Italia\", which at first attempted to convince socialists and revolutionaries to support the war. The Allied Powers, eager to draw Italy to the war, helped finance the newspaper. Later, after the war, this publication would become the official newspaper of the Fascist movement.\nItaly entered the war with an army of 875,000 men, but the Austrians had terrain advantage and superior artillery and machine guns. Italy's war supplies had also been depleted in the war of 1911\u201312 against Turkey. Italy fought a long trench warfare, with fighting raging for three years on front along the Alps and the Isonzo River, and later on the Piave river. In 1916, Italy declared war on Germany. Some 650,000 Italian soldiers died and 950,000 were wounded, while the economy required large-scale Allied funding to survive.\nBefore the war the government had ignored labor issues, but now it had to intervene to mobilize war production. With the main working-class Socialist party reluctant to support the war effort, strikes were frequent and cooperation was minimal, especially in the Socialist strongholds of Piedmont and Lombardy. The government imposed high wage scales, as well as collective bargaining and insurance schemes. Many large firms expanded dramatically. Inflation doubled the cost of living. Industrial wages kept pace but not wages for farm workers. Discontent was high in rural areas since so many men were taken for service, industrial jobs were unavailable, wages grew slowly and inflation was just as bad.\nThe Italian victory, which was announced by the \"Bollettino della Vittoria\" and the \"Bollettino della Vittoria Navale\", marked the end of the war on the Italian Front, secured the dissolution of the Austro-Hungarian Empire and was chiefly instrumental in ending the First World War less than two weeks later. More than 651,000 Italian soldiers died on the battlefields. The Italian civilian deaths were estimated at 589,000 due to malnutrition and food shortages. In November 1918, after the surrender of Austria-Hungary, Italy occupied militarily Trentino Alto-Adige, the Julian March, Istria, the Kvarner Gulf and Dalmatia, all Austro-Hungarian territories. On the Dalmatian coast, Italy established the Governorate of Dalmatia, which had the provisional aim of ferrying the territory towards full integration into the Kingdom of Italy, progressively importing national legislation in place of the previous one. The administrative capital was Zara. The Governorate of Dalmatia was evacuated following the Italo-Yugoslav agreements which resulted in the Treaty of Rapallo (1920), although Zara was annexed.\nAs the war came to an end, Italian Prime Minister Vittorio Emanuele Orlando met with British Prime Minister David Lloyd George, Prime Minister of France Georges Clemenceau and United States President Woodrow Wilson in Versailles to discuss how the borders of Europe should be redefined to help avoid a future European war. The talks provided considerable territorial gains to Italy, but not all those promised in the Treaty of London, as Wilson championed freedom to all European nationalities to form their nation-states. As a result, the Treaty of Versailles did not assign Dalmatia (inhabited by a Slavic majority) to Italy as had been promised. Furthermore, the British and French decided to divide the German and Ottoman overseas possessions into their mandates, with Italy receiving only some colonial compensations. Despite this, Orlando agreed to sign the Treaty of Versailles, which caused the uproar of nationalists against his government. The Treaty of Saint-Germain-en-Laye (1919) and the Treaty of Rapallo (1920) allowed the annexation of Trentino Alto-Adige, Julian March, Istria, Kvarner as well as the Dalmatian city of Zara.\nFurious over the peace settlement, the Italian nationalist poet Gabriele D'Annunzio led disaffected war veterans and nationalists to form the Free State of Fiume in September 1919. His popularity among nationalists led him to be called \"Il Duce\" (\"The Leader\"), and he used black-shirted paramilitary in his assault on Fiume. The leadership title of \"Duce\" and the blackshirt paramilitary uniform would later be adopted by the fascist movement of Benito Mussolini. The demand for the Italian annexation of Fiume spread to all sides of the political spectrum. The Italians claimed Fiume on the principle of self-determination, disregarding its mainly Slavic suburb of Su\u0161ak.\nThe subsequent Treaty of Rome (1924) led to the annexation of the city of Fiume to Italy. Italy's lack of territorial gain led to the outcome being denounced as a \"mutilated victory\". The rhetoric of \"mutilated victory\" was adopted by Mussolini and led to the rise of Italian fascism, becoming a key point in the propaganda of Fascist Italy. Historians regard \"mutilated victory\" as a \"political myth\", used by fascists to fuel Italian imperialism and obscure the successes of liberal Italy in the aftermath of World War I. Italy also gained a permanent seat in the League of Nations's executive council.\nFascist regime and World War II (1922\u20131945).\nRise of Fascism into power.\nBenito Mussolini created the \"Fasci di Combattimento\" or Combat League in 1919. It was originally dominated by patriotic socialist and syndicalist veterans who opposed the pacifist policies of the Italian Socialist Party. This early Fascist movement had a platform more inclined to the left, promising social revolution, proportional representation in elections, women's suffrage (partly realized in 1925) and dividing rural private property held by estates. They also differed from later Fascism by opposing censorship, militarism and dictatorship.\nAt the same time, the so-called \"Biennio Rosso\" (red biennium) took place in the two years following the war in a context of economic crisis, high unemployment and political instability. The 1919\u201320 period was characterized by mass strikes, worker manifestations as well as self-management experiments through land and factory occupations. In Turin and Milan, workers councils were formed and many factory occupations took place under the leadership of anarcho-syndicalists. The agitations also extended to the agricultural areas of the Padan plain and were accompanied by peasant strikes, rural unrests and guerilla conflicts between left-wing and right-wing militias. Thenceforth, the Fasci di Combattimento (forerunner of the National Fascist Party, 1921) successfully exploited the claims of Italian nationalists and the quest for order and normalization of the middle class. In October 1922, Mussolini took advantage of a general strike to announce his demands to the Italian government to give the Fascist Party political power or face a coup. With no immediate response, a group of 30,000 Fascists began a long trek across Italy to Rome (the March on Rome), claiming that Fascists were intending to restore law and order. The Fascists demanded Prime Minister Luigi Facta's resignation and that Mussolini be named to the post. Although the Italian Army was far better armed than the Fascist militias, the liberal system and King Victor Emmanuel III were facing a deeper political crisis. The King was forced to choose which of the two rival movements in Italy would form the government: Mussolini's Fascists, or the marxist Italian Socialist Party. He selected the Fascists.\nMussolini formed a coalition with nationalists and liberals, and in 1923 passed the electoral Acerbo Law, which assigned two thirds of the seats to the party that achieved at least 25% of the vote. The Fascist Party used violence and intimidation to achieve the threshold in the 1924 election, thus obtaining control of Parliament. Socialist deputy Giacomo Matteotti was assassinated after calling for a nullification of the vote. The parliament opposition responded to Matteotti's assassination with the Aventine Secession.\nOver the next four years, Mussolini eliminated nearly all checks and balances on his power. On 24 December 1925, he passed a law that declared he was responsible to the king alone, making him the sole person able to determine Parliament's agenda. Local governments were dissolved, and appointed officials (called \"Podest\u00e0\") replaced elected mayors and councils. In 1928, all political parties were banned, and parliamentary elections were replaced by plebiscites in which the Grand Council of Fascism nominated a single list of 400 candidates. Christopher Duggan argues that his regime exploited Mussolini's popular appeal and forged a cult of personality that served as the model that was emulated by dictators of other fascist regimes of the 1930s.\nIn summary, historian Stanley G. Payne says that Fascism in Italy was:\nA primarily political dictatorship. The Fascist Party itself had become almost completely bureaucratized and subservient to, not dominant over, the state itself. Big business, industry, and finance retained extensive autonomy, particularly in the early years. The armed forces also enjoyed considerable autonomy. ... The Fascist militia was placed under military control. The judicial system was left largely intact and relatively autonomous as well. The police continued to be directed by state officials and were not taken over by party leaders, nor was a major new police elite created. There was never any question of bringing the Church under overall subservience. Sizable sectors of Italian cultural life retained extensive autonomy, and no major state propaganda-and-culture ministry existed. The Mussolini regime was neither especially sanguinary nor particularly repressive.\nEnd of the Roman question.\nDuring the unification of Italy in the mid-19th century, the Papal States resisted incorporation into the new nation. The nascent Kingdom of Italy invaded and occupied Romagna (the eastern portion of the Papal States) in 1860, leaving only Latium in the pope's domains. Latium, including Rome itself, was occupied and annexed in 1870. For the following sixty years, relations between the Papacy and the Italian government were hostile, and the status of the pope became known as the \"Roman Question\".\nThe Lateran Treaty was one component of the Lateran Pacts of 1929, agreements between the Kingdom of Italy under King Victor Emmanuel III of Italy and the Holy See under Pope Pius XI to settle the question. The treaty and associated pacts were signed on 11 February 1929. The treaty recognized Vatican City as an independent state under the sovereignty of the Holy See. The Italian government also agreed to give the Roman Catholic Church financial compensation for the loss of the Papal States. In 1948, the Lateran Treaty was recognized in the Constitution of Italy as regulating the relations between the state and the Catholic Church. The treaty was significantly revised in 1984, ending the status of Catholicism as the sole state religion.\nForeign politics.\nLee identifies three major themes in Mussolini's foreign policy. The first was a continuation of the foreign-policy objectives of the preceding Liberal regime. Liberal Italy had allied itself with Germany and Austria, and had great ambitions in the Balkans and North Africa. Ever since it had been badly defeated in Ethiopia in 1896, there was a strong demand for seizing that country. Second was a profound disillusionment after the heavy losses of the First World War; the small territorial gains from Austria were not enough to compensate. Third was Mussolini's promise to restore the pride and glory of the Roman Empire.\nItalian Fascism is based upon Italian nationalism and in particular, seeks to complete what it considers as the incomplete project of \"Risorgimento\" by incorporating \"Italia Irredenta\" (unredeemed Italy) into the state of Italy. To the east of Italy, the Fascists claimed that Dalmatia was a land of Italian culture. To the south, the Fascists claimed Malta, which belonged to the United Kingdom, and Corfu, which belonged to Greece, to the north claimed Italian Switzerland, while to the west claimed Corsica, Nice and Savoy, which belonged to France.\nMussolini promised to bring Italy back as a great power in Europe, building a \"New Roman Empire\" and holding power over the Mediterranean Sea. In propaganda, Fascists used the ancient Roman motto \"Mare Nostrum\" (Latin for \"Our Sea\") to describe the Mediterranean. For this reason the Fascist regime engaged in interventionist foreign policy in Europe. In 1923, the Greek island of Corfu was briefly occupied by Italy, after the assassination of General Tellini in Greek territory. In 1925, Albania came under heavy Italian influence as a result of the Tirana Treaties, which also gave Italy a stronger position in the Balkans. Relations with France were mixed. The Fascist regime planned to regain Italian-populated areas of France. With the rise of Nazism, it became more concerned about the potential threat of Germany to Italy. Due to concerns about German expansionism, Italy joined the Stresa Front with France and the United Kingdom, which existed from 1935 to 1936. The Fascist regime held negative relations with Yugoslavia, as it continued to claim Dalmatia.\nDuring the Spanish Civil War between the socialist Republicans and Nationalists led by Francisco Franco, Italy sent arms and over 60,000 troops to aid the Nationalist faction. This secured Italy's naval access to Spanish ports and increased Italian influence in the Mediterranean. During the 1930s, Italy strongly pursued a policy of naval rearmament; by 1940, the was the fourth-largest navy in the world.\nMussolini and Adolf Hitler first met in June 1934, when Mussolini opposed German plans to annex Austria to ensure that Nazi Germany would not become hegemonic in Europe. Public appearances and propaganda constantly portrayed the closeness of Mussolini and Hitler and the similarities between Italian Fascism and German National Socialism. While both ideologies had significant similarities, the two factions were suspicious of each other, and both leaders were in competition for world influence.\nIn 1935 Mussolini decided to invade Ethiopia; 2,313 Italians and 275,000 Ethiopians died. The Second Italo-Ethiopian War resulted in the international isolation of Italy; the only nation to back Italy's aggression was Germany. After being condemned by the League of Nations, Italy decided to leave the League on 11 December 1937. Mussolini had little choice but to join Hitler in international politics, thus he reluctantly abandoned support of Austrian independence. Mussolini later supported German claims on Sudetenland at the Munich Conference. In 1938, under the influence of Hitler, Mussolini supported the adoption of anti-semitic racial laws in Italy. After Germany annexed Czechoslovakia in March 1939, Italy invaded Albania and made it an Italian protectorate.\nAs war approached in 1939, the Fascist regime stepped up an aggressive press campaign against France claiming that its Italian residents were suffering. This was important to the alliance as both regimes mutually had claims on France: Germany on German-populated Alsace-Lorraine and Italy on the mixed Italian and French populated Nice and Corsica. In May 1939, a formal alliance with Germany was signed, known as the Pact of Steel. Mussolini felt obliged to sign the pact in spite of his own concerns that Italy could not fight a war in the near future. This obligation grew from his promises to Italians that he would build an empire for them and from his personal desire to not allow Hitler to become the dominant leader in Europe. Mussolini was repulsed by the Molotov\u2013Ribbentrop Pact agreement where Germany and the Soviet Union agreed to partition the Second Polish Republic into German and Soviet zones for an impending invasion. The Fascist government saw this as a betrayal of the Anti-Comintern Pact, but decided to remain officially silent.\nWorld War II and fall of Fascism.\nWhen Germany invaded Poland on 1 September 1939 beginning World War II, Mussolini chose to stay non-belligerent, although he declared his support for Hitler. In drawing out war plans, Mussolini and the Fascist regime decided that Italy would aim to annex large portions of Africa and the Middle East. Hesitance remained from the King and military commander Pietro Badoglio who warned Mussolini that Italy had too few tanks, armoured vehicles, and aircraft available to be able to carry out a long-term war. Mussolini and the Fascist regime thus waited as France was invaded by Germany in June 1940 (Battle of France) before deciding to get involved.\nItaly entered the war on 10 June 1940, fulfilling its obligations towards the Pact of Steel. Mussolini hoped to quickly capture Savoy, Nice, Corsica, and the African colonies of Tunisia and Algeria from the French, but Germany signed an armistice (22 June: Second Armistice at Compi\u00e8gne) with Marshal Philippe P\u00e9tain establishing Vichy France, that retained control over southern France and colonies. This decision angered the Fascist regime. In summer 1940, Mussolini ordered the bombing of Mandatory Palestine and the conquest of British Somaliland. In September, he ordered the invasion of Egypt; despite initial success, Italian forces were soon driven back by the British (see Operation Compass). Hitler had to intervene with the sending of the Afrika Korps that was the mainstay in the North African campaign.\nOn 28 October, Mussolini launched an attack on Greece. The Royal Air Force prevented the Italian invasion and allowed the Greeks to push the Italians back to Albania. Hitler came to Mussolini's aid by attacking the Greeks through the Balkans. The Balkans Campaign had as a result the dissolution of Yugoslavia and Greece's defeat. Italy gained southern Slovenia, Dalmatia, Montenegro and established the puppet states of Croatia and Hellenic State. By 1942, it was faltering as its economy failed to adapt to the conditions of war and Italian cities were being heavily bombed by the Allies. Also, despite Rommel's advances, the campaign in North Africa began to fail in late 1942. The complete collapse came after the decisive defeat at El Alamein.\nBy 1943, Italy was losing on every front. Half of the Italian forces fighting in the Soviet Union had been destroyed, the African campaign had failed, the Balkans remained unstable, and Italians wanted an end to the war. \nIn July 1943, the Allies invaded Sicily in an effort to knock Italy out of the war and establish a foothold in Europe. On 25 July, Mussolini was ousted by the Great Council of Fascism and arrested by order of King Victor Emmanuel III, who appointed General Pietro Badoglio as new prime minister. Badoglio stripped away the final elements of Fascist rule by banning the National Fascist Party, then signed an armistice with the Allied armed forces.\nThere is controversy on the effectiveness of Italy's performance in World War II. Donald Detwiler notes that \"Italy's entrance into the war showed very early that her military strength was only a hollow shell.\" \nMacGregor Knox argues that it was \"first and foremost a failure of Italy's military culture and military institutions.\" Norman Polmar and Thomas B. Allen argue that \"the Regia Aeronautica failed to perform effectively in modern conflict.\" James Sadkovich argues that inferior equipment, overextension, and inter-service rivalries meant that Italians had \"more than their share of handicaps.\" Several authors (James Sadkovich, Peter Haining, Vincent O'Hara, Ian Walker and others) have reassessed the performance of the Italian army, navy and air force, providing numerous examples of actions where Italian forces were effective. Gerhard L.Weinberg argues that \"there is far too much denigration of the performance of Italy's forces during the conflict.\" \nItalian resistance, co-belligerence with the Allies and Liberation.\nSoon after being ousted, Mussolini was rescued by a German commando in Operation Eiche (\"Oak\"). The Germans brought Mussolini to northern Italy where he set up a Fascist puppet state, the Italian Social Republic (RSI). Meanwhile, the Allies advanced in southern Italy. In September 1943, Naples rose against the occupying German forces. The Allies organized some royalist Italian troops into the Italian Co-Belligerent Army, while other troops continued to fight alongside Nazi Germany in the \"Esercito Nazionale Repubblicano\", the National Republican Army. A large Italian resistance movement started a long guerrilla war against the German and Fascist forces, while clashes between the Fascist RSI Army and the Royalist Italian Co-Belligerent Army were rare. The Germans, often helped by Fascists, committed several atrocities against Italian civilians in occupied zones, such as the Ardeatine massacre and the Sant'Anna di Stazzema massacre. The Kingdom of Italy declared war on Nazi Germany on 13 October 1943; tensions between the Axis Powers and the Italian military were rising following the failure to defend Sicily.\nOn 4 June 1944, the German occupation of Rome came to an end as the Allies advanced. The final Allied victory over the Axis in Italy did not come until the spring offensive of 1945, after Allied troops had breached the Gothic Line, leading to the surrender of German and Fascist forces in Italy on 2 May shortly before Germany finally surrendered ending World War II in Europe on 8 May. It is estimated that between September 1943 and April 1945, some 60,000 Allied and 50,000 German soldiers died in Italy.\nDuring World War II, Italian war crimes included extrajudicial killings and ethnic cleansing by the deportation of about 25,000 people, mainly Jews, Croats, and Slovenians, to the Italian concentration camps, such as Rab, Gonars, Monigo, Renicci di Anghiari and elsewhere. Yugoslav Partisans perpetrated their own crimes against the local ethnic Italian population during and after the war, including the foibe massacres. In Italy and Yugoslavia, unlike in Germany, few war crimes were prosecuted.\nOn 25 April 1945 the National Liberation Committee for Northern Italy proclaimed a general insurrection in all the territories still occupied by the Nazis, indicating to all the partisan forces active in Northern Italy that were part of the Volunteer Corps of Freedom to attack the fascist and German garrisons by imposing the surrender, days before the arrival of the Allied troops; at the same time, the National Liberation Committee for Northern Italy personally issued legislative decrees, assuming power \"in the name of the Italian people and as a delegate of the Italian Government\", establishing among other things the death sentence for all fascist hierarchs, Today the event is commemorated in Italy every 25 April by the Liberation Day, National Day introduced on 22 April 1946, which celebrates the liberation of the country from fascism.\nMussolini was captured on 27 April 1945 and the next day was executed for high treason. On 2 May 1945, the German forces in Italy surrendered. On 9 June 1944, Badoglio was replaced as prime minister by anti-fascist leader Ivanoe Bonomi. In June 1945 Bonomi was in turn replaced by Ferruccio Parri, who in turn gave way to Alcide de Gasperi on 4 December 1945. Finally, De Gasperi supervised the transition to a Republic following the abdication of Vittorio Emanuele III on 9 May 1946, the one-month-long reign of his son Umberto II (\"King of May\") and the Constitutional Referendum that abolished the monarchy; De Gasperi briefly became acting Head of State as well as prime minister on 18 June 1946, but ceded the former role to Provisional President Enrico de Nicola ten days later.\nAnti-fascism against Mussolini's regime.\nIn Italy, Mussolini's fascist regime used the term \"anti-fascist\" to describe its opponents. Mussolini's secret police was officially known as the Organization for Vigilance and Repression of Anti-Fascism (OVRA). During the 1920s, anti-fascists, many of them from the labour movement, fought against the violent Blackshirts and against the rise of the fascist leader Benito Mussolini. After the Italian Socialist Party (PSI) signed a pacification pact with Mussolini and his Fasces of Combat on 3 August 1921, and trade unions adopted a legalist and pacified strategy, members of the workers' movement who disagreed with this strategy formed \"Arditi del Popolo\".\nThe Italian General Confederation of Labour (CGL) and the PSI refused to officially recognize the anti-fascist militia and maintained a non-violent, legalist strategy, while the Communist Party of Italy (PCd'I) ordered its members to quit the organization. The PCd'I organized some militant groups, but their actions were relatively minor. The Italian anarchist Severino Di Giovanni, who exiled himself to Argentina following the 1922 March on Rome, organized several bombings against the Italian fascist community. The Italian liberal anti-fascist Benedetto Croce wrote his \"Manifesto of the Anti-Fascist Intellectuals\", which was published in 1925. Other notable Italian liberal anti-fascists around that time were Piero Gobetti and Carlo Rosselli.\nConcentrazione Antifascista Italiana (), officially known as Concentrazione d'Azione Antifascista (Anti-Fascist Action Concentration), was an Italian coalition of Anti-Fascist groups which existed from 1927 to 1934, trying to promote and to coordinate expatriate actions to fight fascism in Italy; they published a propaganda paper entitled \"La Libert\u00e0\". Giustizia e Libert\u00e0 () was an Italian anti-fascist resistance movement, active from 1929 to 1945 which shared a belief in active, effective opposition to fascism, compared to the older Italian anti-fascist parties. \"Giustizia e Libert\u00e0\" also made the international community aware of the realities of fascism in Italy, thanks to the work of Gaetano Salvemini.\nBetween 1920 and 1943, several anti-fascist movements were active among the Slovenes and Croats in the territories annexed to Italy after World War I, known as the Julian March. The most influential was the militant insurgent organization TIGR, which carried out numerous sabotages, as well as attacks on representatives of the Fascist Party and the military. Most of the underground structure of the organization was discovered and dismantled by the OVRA in 1940 and 1941, and after June 1941 most of its former activists joined the Slovene Partisans. Many members of the Italian resistance left their homes and went to live in the mountains, fighting against Italian fascists and German Nazi soldiers during the Italian Civil War. Many cities in Italy, including Turin, Naples and Milan, were freed by anti-fascist uprisings.\nRepublican era (1946\u2013present).\nBirth of the Republic.\nThe aftermath of World War II left Italy with a destroyed economy, a divided society, and anger against the monarchy for its endorsement of the Fascist regime. These frustrations contributed to a revival of the Italian republican movement. Umberto II was pressured by the threat of another civil war to call the 1946 Italian institutional referendum to decide whether Italy should remain a monarchy or become a republic. On 2 June 1946, the republican side won 54% of the vote and Italy officially became a republic.\nUnder the Treaty of Peace with Italy, 1947, Istria, Kvarner, most of the Julian March as well as the Dalmatian city of Zara was annexed by Yugoslavia causing the Istrian-Dalmatian exodus, which led to the emigration of between 230,000 and 350,000 local ethnic Italians (Istrian Italians and Dalmatian Italians), the others being ethnic Slovenians, ethnic Croatians, and ethnic Istro-Romanians, choosing to maintain Italian citizenship. Later, the Free Territory of Trieste was divided between the two states. Italy also lost all of its colonial possessions, formally ending the Italian Empire. In 1950, Italian Somaliland was made a United Nations Trust Territory under Italian administration until 1 July 1960. The Italian border that applies today has existed since 1975, when Trieste was formally re-annexed to Italy.\nThe General Elections of 1946, held at the same time as the Constitutional Referendum, elected 556 members of a Constituent Assembly. A new constitution was approved, setting up a parliamentary democracy. In 1947, under American pressure, the communists were expelled from the government. The Italian general election, 1948 saw a landslide victory for Christian Democrats, that dominated the system for the following forty years.\nItaly joined the Marshall Plan (ERP) and NATO. By 1950, the economy had largely stabilized and started booming. In 1957, Italy was a founding member of the European Economic Community, which later transformed into the European Union (EU). The Marshall Plan's long-term legacy was to help modernize Italy's economy. By 1953, industrial production had doubled compared with 1938 and the annual rate of productivity increase was 6.4%, twice the British rate.\nEconomic miracle.\nIn the 1950s and 1960s, the country enjoyed a prolonged economic boom, which was accompanied by a dramatic rise in the standard of living of ordinary Italians. The so-called Italian economic miracle lasted almost uninterruptedly until the \"Hot Autumn's\" massive strikes and social unrest of 1969\u201370, that combined with the later 1973 oil crisis, gradually cooled the economy. It has been calculated that the Italian economy experienced an average rate of growth of GDP of 5.8% per year between 1951 and 1963, and 5.0% per year between 1964 and 1973. Between 1955 and 1971, around 9 million people are estimated to have been involved in inter-regional migrations in Italy, uprooting entire communities. Emigration was especially directed to the factories of the so-called \"industrial triangle\", a region encompassed between the major manufacturing centres of Milan and Turin and the seaport of Genoa.\nThe needs of a modernizing economy demanded new transport and energy infrastructures. Thousands of kilometres of railways and highways were completed in record times to connect the main urban areas, while dams and power plants were built all over Italy, often without regard for geological and environmental conditions. Strong urban growth led to uncontrolled urban sprawl. The natural environment was constantly under threat by wild industrial expansion, leading to ecological disasters like the Vajont Dam inundation and the Seveso chemical accident.\nYears of Lead.\nDuring the 1970s, Italy saw an unexpected escalation of political violence. From 1969 to 1980, repeated neofascist outrages were launched such as the Piazza Fontana bombing in 1969. Red Brigades and many other groups decided on armed attacks as a revolutionary strategy. They carried out urban riots, as in Rome and Bologna in 1977. Known as the Years of Lead, this period was characterised by widespread social conflicts and terrorist acts carried out by extra-parliamentary movements. The assassination of the leader of the Christian Democracy (DC), Aldo Moro, led to the end of a \"historic compromise\" between the DC and the Communist Party (PCI). In the 1980s, for the first time, two governments were managed by a Republican (Giovanni Spadolini 1981\u201382) and a Socialist (Bettino Craxi 1983\u201387) rather than by a Christian Democrat.\nAt the end of the Lead years, the PCI gradually increased their votes thanks to Enrico Berlinguer. The Socialist Party (PSI), led by Bettino Craxi, became more and more critical of the Communists and of the Soviet Union; Craxi himself pushed in favour of US President Ronald Reagan's positioning of Pershing II missiles in Italy.\nSecond Republic (1992\u2013present).\nItaly faced several terror attacks between 1992 and 1993, perpetrated by the Sicilian Mafia as a consequence of several life sentences pronounced during the \"Maxi Trial\", and of the new anti-mafia measures launched by the government. In 1992, two major dynamite attacks killed two judges, and a year later tourist spots, leaving 10 dead and 93 injured and causing severe damage to cultural heritage such as the Uffizi Gallery. The Catholic Church openly condemned the Mafia, and two churches were bombed and an anti-Mafia priest shot dead in Rome.\nFrom 1992 to 1997, Italy faced significant challenges as voters disenchanted with political paralysis, massive government debt, extensive corruption, and organised crime's considerable influence collectively called the political system Tangentopoli. As Tangentopoli was under a set of judicial investigations by the name of Mani pulite (Italian for \"clean hands\"), voters demanded political, economic, and ethical reforms. Between 1992 and 1994 the DC underwent a severe crisis and was dissolved, splitting up into several pieces. The PSI (along with other minor governing parties) completely dissolved.\nThe 1994 general election also swept media magnate Silvio Berlusconi (Leader of \"Pole of Freedoms\" coalition) into office as prime minister. Berlusconi was forced to step down in December 1994 when his Lega Nord partners withdrew support. The Berlusconi government was succeeded by a technical government headed by Lamberto Dini. At the 1996 general election, Romano Prodi led a centre-left coalition to victory. He narrowly lost a vote of confidence in October 1998. A new government was formed by Democrats of the Left leader Massimo D'Alema, but in April 2000, following poor performance by his coalition in regional elections, he resigned.\nThe succeeding centre-left government was headed by Giuliano Amato. That same year, a centre-right coalition formed the government and Silvio Berlusconi was able to regain power and keep it for a complete five-year mandate. Berlusconi participated in the US-led multinational coalition in Iraq.\nThe 2006 general election returned Prodi to government, leading a coalition of 11 parties (The Union). Prodi followed a cautious policy of economic liberalisation and reduction of public debt. Berlusconi won the 2008 general election. Italy was among the countries hit hardest by the Great Recession of 2008\u201309 and the subsequent European debt crisis. The national economy shrunk by 6.76% over seven quarters of recession. On 12 November 2011, Berlusconi resigned, and the economist Mario Monti was sworn in as prime minister at the head of a technocratic government. To avoid the debt crisis and kick-start economic growth, Monti's national unity government launched a massive programme of austerity measures; that reduced the deficit but precipitated a double-dip recession in 2012 and 2013.\nOn 24 and 25 February 2013, a general election was held; a centre-left coalition led Pier Luigi Bersani, Leader of the Democratic Party, won a slight majority in the Chamber of Deputies but did not control the Senate. On 24 April, President Napolitano gave to the Vice-Secretary of the Democratic Party, Enrico Letta, the task of forming a government. Letta formed a short-lived grand coalition government which lasted until 22 February 2014. Matteo Renzi formed a new government with the support of some centrist parties. The government implemented numerous reforms, including changes to the electoral system, a relaxation of labour and employment laws with the intention of boosting economic growth, a thorough reformation of the public administration and the introduction of same-sex civil unions. However, Renzi resigned after losing a constitutional referendum in December 2016, and was succeeded by Paolo Gentiloni. The centre-left Cabinets were plagued by the aftermath of the European debt crisis and the European migrant crisis, which fuelled support for populist and right-wing parties.\nThe 2018 general election resulted in a hung parliament once again, which led to an unlikely populist government led by Giuseppe Conte. However, after only fourteen months, the League withdrew its support and Conte allied with the Democratic Party and other smaller left-wing parties to form a new Cabinet. In 2020, Italy was severely hit by the COVID-19 pandemic. From March to May 2020, Conte's government imposed a national lockdown. The measures, despite being widely approved by public opinion, were also described as the largest suppression of constitutional rights in the history of the republic. With more than 100,000 confirmed fatalities, Italy had one of the highest total number of deaths in the coronavirus pandemic. The pandemic caused also a severe economic disruption. In February 2021, these extraordinary circumstances resulted in the formation of a national coalition government led by former president of the European Central Bank Mario Draghi. In January 2022, President Sergio Mattarella was re-elected.\nOn 21 July 2022, following a government crisis, Draghi resigned. A snap election resulted in the centre-right coalition gaining an absolute majority. On 22 October 2022, Giorgia Meloni was sworn in as Italy's first female prime minister.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "62584", "revid": "51208", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62584", "title": "Italian History", "text": ""}
{"id": "62588", "revid": "15881234", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62588", "title": "Katoomba", "text": "Chief town of the City of Blue Mountains in New South Wales, Australia\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Infobox_Australian_place/styles.css\"/&gt;\nKatoomba is the main town and council seat of the City of Blue Mountains in New South Wales, Australia, and is the administrative centre of Blue Mountains City Council. \nSituated on the Great Western Highway and the Great Western Railway, Katoomba is home to the Three Sisters, by road west of Sydney Central Business District and south-east of Lithgow. Katoomba railway station serves the town. Katoomba is located on the lands of the Dharug and Gundungurra Aboriginal peoples.\nKatoomba is a base for bush and nature walks in the surrounding Blue Mountains. At the 2021 census, Katoomba had a population of 8,268 people.\nEtymology.\nKedumba or Katta-toon-bah is an Aboriginal term for \"shining falling water\" or \"water tumbling over hill\" and takes its name from a waterfall that drops into the Jamison Valley below the Harrys Amphitheatre escarpment. Previously, the site was known as William's Chimney and Collett's Swamp. In 1874 the locality was named The Crushers after the name of the railway station that served a nearby quarry. The name Katoomba was adopted in 1877 and the town achieved municipality status in 1889.\nHistory.\nFor thousands of years, the Blue Mountains were home to Aboriginal peoples, specifically, the Gundungurra and Darug tribes. They knew the area as \"kedumba\", meaning \"shiny, falling waters\". Many of them were forced to move from their ancestral lands to Aboriginal settlements such as \"The Gully\", a tract of land in south Katoomba, as part of discriminatory policies established at the beginning of the 20th century. It was used as a summer encampment by the Darug and Gundungurra peoples long before the arrival of white settlers. Settlements on the Blue Mountains before 1950 led to the relocation of many Aboriginal families to \"The Gully\".\nBetween 1955 and 1957, dozens of the inhabitants of \"The Gully\" were forcibly evicted in order to clear the land for a racetrack being developed by a group of local businessmen. By 1958, at least 27 children from the area had also been taken from their families.\nToday, there are still many traditional Aboriginal peoples living in the Blue Mountains, where there are now a number of cultural sites that walk visitors through the region's rich past and share the customs and heritage of the local tribes.\nKatoomba and nearby Medlow Bath were first developed as tourist destinations towards the end of the 19th century when a series of hotels were built and then repeatedly extended. \nKatoomba Coffee Palace was a coffee palace created around 1900 by \"Mr Tamm\" in a building previously known as The Priory, which was the boarding house of a school before being converted into a guesthouse. Tamm renamed it Royal Coffee Palace. Council headquarters were built on the site in 1961. It included a large dining room seating up to 75 people, as well as 35 bedrooms. An undated photograph shows intricate Victorian filigree architecture, while a photo dated 1906 shows a very different facade, with the balcony removed.\nCoal and oil shale mining was also carried out in the Jamison Valley for many years, but when the seams were completely exhausted by the early 20th century, Katoomba was an established resort town. By the 1960s, Katoomba had somewhat declined, and several of its guest houses were converted for other purposes, including convalescent hospitals.\nIn the 1980s, the guest houses and hotels again became fashionable and many were restored.\nIn 2012, under the National Parks and Wildlife Act 1974, the Hon. Bob Debus, local Member of Parliament, officially declared \"The Gully\" an \u201cAboriginal place\u201d, a place of special significance to Aboriginal culture.\nClimate.\nKatoomba has an oceanic climate (\"Cfb\") with mild summers and cool to cold winters. At Katoomba (1040 metres above sea level) summer daytime temperatures are usually in the low 20s \u2013 with a few rare days extending into the 30s (Celsius) \u2013 and night-time temperatures usually in the low teens. \nIn winter, the maximum temperature is typically about while the minimum generally around or so on clear nights and on cloudy nights. There are usually two or three settled snowfalls per year. Temperatures are on average lower than Sydney with many misty days. Katoomba has 79.8 days of clear skies, annually. \nSnowfall.\nThe Blue Mountains has a reputation for snow in winter. However, despite the cool temperatures, there are only around five snowy days per year in the upper mountains area. It is extremely rare to see snow below Lawson. It is not unusual to see white blankets of frost covering the ground in the early morning hours. In the evening, thick coverings of ice can form on car windscreens. \nMoreover, winters are not as snowy and rainy as those of Orange and Oberon, to the west; this is due to the fact Katoomba mostly lies on the leeward (eastern) side of the ranges, thereby experiencing a moderate foehn effect.\nSeveral significant snowfalls have been recorded. On 5 July 1900, snowdrifts were over deep in parts of the Blue Mountains. The snow and ice caused significant problems throughout central New South Wales, with rail and road closures, damage to buildings, and disruption to telegraph services. A winter storm on 17 July 1965 also produced very heavy snow and ice in the area, with damage to buildings and major difficulties with road and rail transport. More recently, a cold snap brought heavy snow, up to , to Katoomba and other towns in the upper Blue Mountains on 17 July 2015 which was the heaviest snowfall in many years. \nPeople and culture.\nThe area's scenery and art deco-style shops and houses attract an alternative subculture. Many poets, artists and environmentalists reside in Katoomba and the Blue Mountains generally, and the town hosts the Winter Solstice festival, Winter Magic, that features local talent, art and handicraft. The festival was established in 1994 to provide a local focus for the Blue Mountains-wide Yulefest. Yulefest is a long-running tourism initiative that promotes Northern Hemisphere-style Christmas celebrations during the Australian winter months June to August.\nNovelist and historian Eleanor Dark (1901\u20131985) lived in Katoomba with her husband Eric Dark from 1923 until her death. The couple's home \"Varuna\" is now Varuna, The Writers' House. In 1921, production house duo Raymond Longford and Lottie Lyell filmed \"The Blue Mountains Mystery\" in part around the town centre. Ursula Dubosarsky's 1991 time-travel novel \"Zizzy Zing\" is set in Katoomba in 1938, at the time of the Sesquicentenary.\nPoet and author, Steven Herrick wrote a novel, 'The Bogan Mondrian' located in modern-day Katoomba. His verse-novel, 'love, ghosts and nose-hair' is also set in the town.\nBlues musician Claude Hay is also a resident of Katoomba, having built his home and recording studio on the outskirts of town. Both of Hay's albums, 2007's \"Kiss the Sky\" and 2010s \"Deep Fried Satisfied\" were recorded in Katoomba, with the latter earning Hay critical acclaim and a No. 1 on the Roots Music Report Australian chart and No. 21 for airplay worldwide in October 2010.\nIn addition to its alternative sub-culture, the area is home to a large number of culturally diverse families and has a significant Aboriginal population. Catalina Park, commonly known as the Gully, was declared an Aboriginal Place in May 2002. It is an ecologically and culturally sensitive area with a long history of occupation by the Gundungarra and Darug tribes.\nThe Gundungurra Tribal Council Aboriginal Corporation, which is based in Katoomba, is a not-for-profit organization representing the Gundungurra traditional owners, promoting heritage and culture and providing a support for Gundungurra people connecting back to Country. Gundungurra Tribal Council Aboriginal Corporation has had a registered Native Title Claim since 1995 over their traditional lands which include the Blue Mountains and surrounding areas.\nKatoomba is the home of local community radio station 89.1 Radio Blue Mountains. The local cinema is called The Edge, located on the Great Western Highway.\nSince 2014, Katoomba has hosted the biennial Vertical Film Festival. There is also a live entertainment scene in Katoomba, with a wide range of music on offer at various venues, and theatre.\nDemographics.\nAt the 2021 census, the suburb of Katoomba recorded a population of 8,268. Of these:\nTourism.\nKatoomba's main industry is tourism based on its mountain scenery. The rock formation known as the Three Sisters, viewable from Echo Point about south of the main town, attracts thousands of visitors each year. Other features of the Jamison Valley visible from Echo Point include Mount Solitary and the rock formation known as the Ruined Castle. A short walk from Echo Point leads to the Giant Stairway which provides access to a number of nature walks through the Valley. Several of the Jamison Valley tracks, including the Stairway itself, were closed in recent years due to maintenance, but most have since been re-opened. The local geography includes extensive areas of dense warm temperate rainforest, hanging swamps and a series of waterfalls.\nOther attractions include Scenic World, a tourist complex in the southwest of the town. This site is home to the steepest funicular railway in the world, the Katoomba Scenic Railway, which was originally built to facilitate coal and oil shale mining in the Jamison Valley. Scenic World also offers the Scenic Skyway cable car, which travels over an arm of the Jamison Valley and offers views of Katoomba Falls and Orphan Rock. In 2004 the original Skyway car was replaced by a new car with a liquid crystal panel floor, which becomes transparent while the car travels. In 1983 construction began at the site on a roller coaster called the Orphan Rocker; the track was completed, but this attraction has never been opened to the public.\nKatoomba is served by hotels and guest-houses, the oldest of which is the Carrington Hotel, established in 1882 and occupying the highest point in town. The town centre, centred on Katoomba Street, features dozens of cafes and restaurants, including the Paragon which dates to the early 20th century, as well as a number of second-hand book and antique stores.\nTransport.\nKatoomba was connected to the Main Western railway line in 1874, when the station was called \"The Crushers\". Katoomba railway station is now served by the Blue Mountains Line. The weekly \"Outback Xplorer\" from Sydney to Broken Hill also stops at Katoomba.\nKatoomba is also serviced by buses operated by Blue Mountains Transit, Katoomba Taxis, and other cab services. Often doing routes between Scenic World and other attractions around Katoomba.\nThe Great Western Highway is the main road access route.\nKatoomba Airfield is also located about by road from the Katoomba Central Business District. The airfield is currently closed to airplanes and helicopters, but is available for use by emergency services.\nServices.\nKatoomba is the home of the Blue Mountains Hospital.\nEducation.\nKatoomba has a high school and a primary school.\nHeritage listings.\nKatoomba has a number of heritage-listed sites, including the following listed on the New South Wales State Heritage Register:\nThe following are listed on other heritage registers:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "62589", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62589", "title": "Indian Music", "text": ""}
{"id": "62591", "revid": "1095935", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62591", "title": "Comparison of butterflies and moths", "text": "A common classification of the Lepidoptera involves their differentiation into butterflies and moths. Butterflies are a natural monophyletic group, historically treated as the suborder Rhopalocera, which includes Papilionoidea (true butterflies), Hesperiidae (skippers), and Hedylidae (butterfly moths). In this taxonomic scheme, moths formed the suborder Heterocera. Other taxonomic schemes have been proposed, the most common putting the butterflies into the suborder Ditrysia and then the \"superfamily\" Papilionoidea and ignoring a classification for moths.\nTaxonomy.\nWhile the butterflies form a monophyletic group, the moths, which comprise the rest of the Lepidoptera, do not. Many attempts have been made to group the superfamilies of the Lepidoptera into natural groups, most of which fail because one of the two groups is not monophyletic: Microlepidoptera and Macrolepidoptera, Heterocera and Rhopalocera, Jugatae and Frenatae, Monotrysia and Ditrysia.\nAlthough the rules for distinguishing these groups are not absolute, one very good guiding principle is that butterflies have thin antennae and (with one exception) have small balls or clubs at the end of their antennae. Moth antennae can be quite varied in appearance, but in particular lack the club end. The divisions are named by this principle: \"club-antennae\" (Rhopalocera) or \"varied-antennae\" (Heterocera).\nThe following families of Lepidoptera are usually considered butterflies:\nThe family Hesperiidae, or the skippers, often considered as butterflies, have significant morphological differences from butterflies and moths.\nThe other families of the Lepidoptera are considered moths.\nMorphological differences.\nShape and structure of antennae.\nThe most obvious difference is in the feelers, or antennae. Most butterflies have thin slender filamentous antennae which are club shaped at the end. Moths, on the other hand, often have comb-like or feathery antennae, or filamentous and unclubbed. This distinction is the basis for the earliest taxonomic divisions in the Lepidoptera: the Rhopalocera (\"clubbed horn\", the butterflies) and the Heterocera (\"varied horn\", the moths).\nThere are, however, exceptions to this rule and a few moths (the families Castniidae, Uraniidae, Apoprogonidae, Sematuridae, and some members of Sphingidae) have clubbed antennae. Some butterflies, like \"Pseudopontia paradoxa\" from the forests of central Africa, lack the club ends. The hesperiids often have an angle to the tip of the antenna, with the clubs hooked backwards like a crochet hook.\nWing-coupling mechanisms.\nMany moths have a frenulum which is a filament arising from the hindwing and coupling (matching up) with barbs on the forewing. The frenulum can be observed only when a specimen is in hand. There is only one known species of butterfly with a frenulum, which is the male regent skipper \"Euschemon rafflesia\". Some moths have a lobe on the forewing called a jugum that helps in coupling with the hindwing. Butterflies lack these structures.\nPupae.\nMost moth caterpillars spin a cocoon made of silk within which they metamorphose into the pupal stage. Most butterfly caterpillars, on the other hand, form an exposed pupa made from a hardened protein, also termed a chrysalis.\nThere are many exceptions to this rule, however. For example, the hawk moths form an exposed pupa which is underground. Spongy moths sometimes form butterfly-style pupae, hanging on twigs or tree bark, although usually they create flimsy cocoons out of silk webbing and leaf bits, leaving the pupa exposed. The plume winged moths of the family Pterophoridae also pupates without a cocoon and the pupa resembles the chrysalis of the pierid butterfly. A few skipper butterfly larvae also make crude cocoons in which they pupate, exposing the pupa a bit. The \"Parnassius\" butterfly larvae make a flimsy cocoon for pupation and they pupate near the ground surface between debris.\nColouration of the wings.\nMost butterflies have bright colours on their wings. Nocturnal moths on the other hand are usually plain brown, grey, white or black and often with obscuring patterns of zigzags or swirls which help camouflage them from predators as they rest during the day. However, many day-flying moths are brightly coloured, particularly if they are toxic. These diurnal species evolved to locate their mates visually and not primarily by pheromone as their drab nocturnal cousins. Several species of Saturniidae moths, such as the giant silk moths, are nocturnal but often have bright colours and striking patterns on their wings. A few butterflies are also plain-coloured, like the cabbage white butterfly or the baron butterfly.\nStructure of the body.\nMoths tend to have stout and hairy or furry-looking bodies, while butterflies have slender and smoother abdomens. Moths have larger scales on their wings which makes them look more dense and fluffy. Butterflies on the other hand possess fine scales. This difference is possibly due to the need for moths to conserve heat during the cooler nights, or to confound echolocation by bats, whereas butterflies are able to absorb sunlight.\nEye types.\nDespite appearances, butterflies and moths have different types of compound eyes. Though not universal, moths very commonly have superposition eyes, while butterflies equally commonly favour apposition eyes. This is due to the superposition eye's adaptations for low light environments suiting the nocturnal moths, and the apposition eye's superior resolution and potential for colour vision benefiting the more diurnal butterflies.\nThere are several exceptions to this rule, such as with the diurnal Zygaenidae and Sytomidae families of moths, both of which have apposition eyes, or the Hedyloidea family of butterflies, which are nocturnal and feature superposition eyes. In most cases where one species is found to be using the opposite type of eye than expected, it is because they are active during the opposite time of day than is normal for other butterflies or moths.\nBehavioural differences.\nTime of activity.\nMost moths are nocturnal or crepuscular while most butterflies are diurnal. There are however exceptions, including the spectacular Uraniidae or sunset moths. A few species, such as the male European/North American spongy moth, fly during both day and night in search of the females, which are flightless.\nResting posture.\nMoths usually rest with their wings spread out to their sides. Butterflies frequently fold their wings above their backs when they are perched although they will occasionally \"bask\" with their wings spread for short periods (several types of Swallowtail butterflies tend to frequently rest with their wings spread when in sunlight). However, some butterflies, like the skippers, may hold their wings either flat, or folded, or even in-between (the so-called \"jet plane\" position) when perched.\nMost moths also occasionally fold their wings above their backs when there is no room to fully spread their wings.\nA sometimes confusing family can be the Geometridae (such as the winter moth) because the adults often rest with their wings folded vertically. These moths have thin bodies and large wings like many butterflies but may be distinguished easily by structural differences in their antennae (e.g. bipectinate).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "62592", "revid": "3679191", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62592", "title": "The Philadelphia Story (film)", "text": "1940 film by George Cukor\nThe Philadelphia Story is a 1940 American romantic comedy film starring Cary Grant, Katharine Hepburn, James Stewart and Ruth Hussey. Directed by George Cukor, the film is based on the 1939 Broadway play of the same name by Philip Barry about a socialite whose wedding plans are complicated by the simultaneous arrival of her ex-husband and a tabloid magazine journalist. The socialite, played by Hepburn in both productions, was inspired by Helen Hope Montgomery Scott (1904\u20131995), a Philadelphia heiress who had married Barry's friend.\nWritten for the screen by Donald Ogden Stewart and an uncredited Waldo Salt, it is considered among the best examples of a comedy of remarriage, in which a couple divorce, flirt with outsiders and then remarry. The genre was popular in the 1930s and 1940s at a time when divorce was considered scandalous and the depiction of extramarital affairs was blocked by the Production Code.\nThe film was Hepburn's first success following several failures that caused her placement on a 1938 list of actors considered to be \"box office poison\" compiled by theater owner Harry Brandt. Hepburn starred in the play and acquired the film rights, with the help of Howard Hughes, to control it as a vehicle for her screen comeback.\nNominated for six Academy Awards, including Outstanding Production (Best Picture), the film won two: Best Actor (Stewart) and Best Adapted Screenplay. MGM remade the film in 1956 as a musical retitled \"High Society\", starring Bing Crosby, Grace Kelly and Frank Sinatra.\n\"The Philadelphia Story\" was produced by Joseph L. Mankiewicz and was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry in 1995.\nPlot.\nTracy Lord is the elder daughter of a wealthy Philadelphia Main Line socialite family. She was married to C.K. Dexter Haven, a yacht designer and member of her social set, but divorced him two years prior because, according to her father, he does not meet the standards that she sets for all her friends and family. She is soon to marry the wealthy George Kittredge.\nIn New York, \"Spy\" magazine publisher Sidney Kidd is eager to cover the wedding and assigns reporter Mike Connor and photographer Liz Imbrie. Kidd intends to use the assistance of Dexter, who has been working for \"Spy\" in South America. Dexter tells Kidd that he will introduce them as friends of Tracy's brother Junius, a diplomat in Argentina. Tracy is not fooled, but Dexter tells her that Kidd has threatened her family's reputation with an innuendo-laden article about her father's affair with a dancer. Tracy deeply resents her father's infidelity, which has prompted her parents to live separately. Nonetheless, to protect her family's reputation, she agrees to let Mike and Liz stay and cover her wedding.\nDexter is welcomed by Tracy's mother Margaret and teenage sister Dinah, much to Tracy's frustration. She soon discovers that Mike has admirable qualities and finds his book of short stories in the library. As the wedding nears, she finds herself torn among George, Dexter, and Mike.\nThe night before the wedding, Tracy becomes drunk, kisses Mike and takes an innocent midnight swim with him. When George observes Mike carrying Tracy into the house afterward, he assumes the worst. The next day, George tells her that he was shocked and feels entitled to an explanation before proceeding with the wedding. She admits to having no excuse and realizes that he does not really know her and has loved her as an idealized, perfect angel, so she cancels the engagement.\nTracy realizes that the guests have arrived and are waiting for the wedding ceremony to begin. Mike quickly volunteers to marry her, but she graciously declines because she perceives that Liz is in love with him. Dexter then offers to remarry her, and she gladly accepts.\nCast.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;* Cary Grant as C.K. Dexter Haven\nProduction.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"Everyone had enormous fun on the movie. The days and nights were sweltering that summer of 1940, but nobody cared. Cary got along very well with Kate Hepburn. She enjoyed him pushing her through a doorway in one scene (so she fell over backward) so much that she had him do it to her over and over again. There was a scene in which she had to throw Cary out the door of a house, bag and baggage, and she did it so vigorously he fell over and was bruised. As he stood up, looking rueful, Kate said, \"That'll serve you right, Cary, for trying to be your own stuntman.\"\n\u2014Cameraman Joseph Ruttenberg, recalling \"The Philadelphia Story\" (1940).\nBroadway playwright Philip Barry wrote the play specifically for Hepburn, who financially supported the play and declined a salary in return for a percentage of the profits. Her costars were Joseph Cotten as Dexter Haven, Van Heflin as Mike Connor and Shirley Booth as Liz Imbrie.\nThe original play, starring Hepburn, ran for 417 performances.\nHepburn had hoped to create a film vehicle for herself that would erase the label of \"box office poison\" that she had acquired after a number of commercial failures (such as \"Bringing Up Baby\"). Howard Hughes purchased the film rights for the play and gave them to her. Hepburn then sold the rights to MGM's Louis B. Mayer for $250,000 and the power of final approval of the film's producer, director, screenwriter and cast.\nHepburn selected director George Cukor, with whom she had worked for \"A Bill of Divorcement\" (1932) and \"Little Women\" (1933), and Barry's friend Donald Ogden Stewart, a writer experienced with adapting plays to the screen. Stewart, who won an Oscar for the script, said that \"getting an Oscar for \"The Philadelphia Story\" was the easiest Oscar you could imagine. All you had to do was get out of the way.\" He wrote the script while listening to a tape recording of a live performance of the play to ensure that he preserved the lines that received the most laughter.\nHepburn wanted Clark Gable to play Dexter Haven and Spencer Tracy to play Mike Connor, but both had other commitments. The pairing of Cukor and Gable might have been problematic in any case, as they had clashed during the filming of the recent \"Gone with the Wind\", with Cukor replaced by Gable's friend Victor Fleming. Grant agreed to play the part only if he were afforded top billing and that his salary would be $137,000, which he donated to the British War Relief Society.\nAccording to the documentary \"MGM: When the Lion Roars\", after Mayer purchased the film rights, he was skeptical about Hepburn's box-office appeal and took the unusual precaution of engaging two top male stars (Grant and Stewart) to support Hepburn.\nThe film was in production from July 5 to August 14, 1940, five days under schedule, at MGM's studios in Culver City. The art director was Cedric Gibbons, and the costume designer was Adrian.\nReception.\nRelease.\nThe film premiered in New York City on December 26, 1940 and was shown in select theaters in December, but MGM had agreed to hold its general release until January 1941 to avoid competition with the stage play that was touring the country. It entered general American release on January 17, 1941. It broke a box-office record at Radio City Music Hall by earning $600,000 in just six weeks.\nAccording to MGM records, the film earned $2,374,000 in the U.S. and Canada, and $885,000 elsewhere, resulting in a profit of $1,272,000.\nCritical reception.\nWriting for \"The New York Times\" in 1940, Bosley Crowther wrote that the film \"has just about everything that a blue-chip comedy should have\u2014a witty, romantic script derived by Donald Ogden Stewart out of Philip Barry's successful play; the flavor of high-society elegance, in which the patrons invariably luxuriate; and a splendid cast of performers headed by Hepburn, Stewart, and Grant. If it doesn't play out this year and well along into next, they should turn the Music Hall into a shooting gallery ... Metro and Director George Cukor have graciously made it apparent, in the words of a character, that one of 'the prettiest sights in this pretty world is the privileged classes enjoying their privileges'. And so, in this instance, will you, too.\"\n\"Life\" named \"The Philadelphia Story\" its film of the week in January 1941, describing it as \"among the best funny pictures\" of the year.\nThe film has a 100% rating on Rotten Tomatoes based on 101 reviews, with an average rating of 9/10. The consensus reads: \"Offering a wonderfully witty script, spotless direction from George Cukor, and typically excellent lead performances, \"The Philadelphia Story\" is an unqualified classic.\" Rotten Tomatoes has also ranked it as the best romantic comedy of all time. Metacritic, which uses a weighted average, assigned the a score of 96 out of 100, based on 13 critics, indicating .\nThe film was the last of four starring Grant and Hepburn following \"Sylvia Scarlett\" (1935), \"Bringing Up Baby\" (1938), and \"Holiday\" (1938).\nAwards and nominations.\nThe film was nominated for six Academy Awards, winning two (Best Actor and Best Screenplay). James Stewart did not expect to win and felt that the award was given to him as compensation for his role in \"Mr. Smith Goes to Washington\" the previous year. Stewart later provided his Oscar statue for use in his father's hardware store in Indiana, Pennsylvania, where it was displayed for many years.\nThe film was named the third-best of the year by \"The Film Daily\".\nIn 1995, the film was deemed \"culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant\" by the Library of Congress and was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry.\nThe film was included in various American Film Institute lists:\nAdaptations.\nThe stars of \"The Philadelphia Story\" appeared in a one-hour radio adaptation on the premiere episode of the Department of War's special \"Victory Theater\" summer series, airing on July 20, 1942. \"Lux Radio Theatre\" produced a second adaptation for its own use on June 14, 1943, starring Robert Taylor, Loretta Young and Robert Young. The film was also adapted for two half-hour episodes of \"The Screen Guild Theater\", first with Greer Garson, Henry Fonda and Fred MacMurray (April 5, 1942), and then with Hepburn, Grant and Stewart reprising their film roles (March 17, 1947).\nThe film was adapted in 1956 as the MGM musical \"High Society\", directed by Charles Walters and starring Bing Crosby, Grace Kelly, Frank Sinatra, Celeste Holm and Louis Armstrong.\nIn popular culture.\nThe final scene from the film is viewed by two characters in season seven, episode eight of \"Gilmore Girls\", \"Introducing Lorelai Planetarium.\" Another scene is viewed in season four, episode fourteen of \"Gossip Girl\", \"While You Weren't Sleeping.\"\nIn \"The Half of It\" (2020), two of the characters watch and discuss the movie.\nDespite taking place in 1938, a character in \"Double Indemnity\" (1944) makes a reference to the title of the film and play.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "62593", "revid": "36336112", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62593", "title": "Omsk", "text": "City in Omsk Oblast, Russia\nOmsk (; , ) is the administrative center and largest city of Omsk Oblast, Russia. It is situated in southwestern Siberia and has a population of over one million. Omsk is the third largest city in Siberia after Novosibirsk and Krasnoyarsk, and the twelfth-largest city in Russia. It is an important transport node, serving as a train station for the Trans-Siberian Railway and as a staging post for the Irtysh River.\nDuring the Imperial era, Omsk was the seat of the Governor General of Western Siberia and, later, of the Governor General of the Steppes. For a brief period during the Russian Civil War in 1918\u20131920, it served as the capital of the anti-Bolshevik Russian State and held the imperial gold reserves.\nOmsk serves as the episcopal see of the bishop of Omsk and Tara, as well as the administrative seat of the Imam of Siberia. The mayor is Sergey Shelest.\nEtymology.\nThe city of Omsk is named after the Om river. This hydronym in the dialect of Baraba Tatars means \"the quiet one\".\nHistory.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nTimeline of Omsk &lt;br&gt;\n Tsardom of Russia, 1716\u20131721 \n Russian Empire, 1721\u20131917\n Russian Republic, 1917\u20131918 \n Provisional All-Russian Government, 1918\u20131919 \n Soviet Union (RSFSR), 1919\u20131991 \n Russia, 1991\u2013present\nImperial period.\nThe creation of the Omsk fortress, like other Upper Irtysh fortresses, was caused by the urgent need to strengthen the trade route to China. The credit for their arrangement belongs entirely to the Siberian governor, Prince M.P. Gagarin. However, he also bears a large share of the responsibility. Gagarin, being the governor in Nerchinsk and then the head of the Siberian order and the Siberian province, devoted a lot of time and effort to trade with China. And above all, he organized the trade route to this country.\nThe main route passed from Tobolsk, down the Irtysh, then up the Ob, then along the Ket portage to the Yenisei, and on to the border with China. The journey was long, difficult, and expensive. There was also a second option - up the Irtysh, twice shorter and much easier. Kalmyk, Kyrgyz-Kaisak and Chinese chiefs were interested in this route as they all had their share of international trade. However, above the mouth of the Ob, trade caravans were attacked by free detachments of Kalmyks (Oirats) and Kirghiz-Kaisaks, which their rulers could not cope with. A reliable guard was needed with its placement in stationary fortifications.\nIn May 1714, the Siberian governor received the tsar's consent to build fortresses along the Irtysh and to the existing trade route. In his report to the tsar on May 22, 1714, Gagarin substantiated the need to build fortresses along the Irtysh to ensure communication and safety of the expedition going to the city of Yarkand for the golden sand.\nThe gold deposit was behind the Tien Shan ridges, on the territory of a neighboring state, in the Taklamakan Desert. Prince Gagarin understood the consequences of this adventure. With a positive result, this would threaten a military conflict with China and Dzungaria. Of course, the Siberian governor did not expect the military expedition to reach Yarkand. It was almost impossible and unnecessary. The fortresses along the trade route would remain. The tsar believed in the governor and signed a decree organizing an expedition under the command of a former captain of the Guards, Army Lieutenant Colonel Ivan Bukholts, about the construction of fortresses along the Irtysh above Yamyshev.\nOn January 2, 1716, Matvey Petrovich Gagarin took up his governor's duties and actively took up the construction of fortresses in Siberia including those on Lake Kosogol, and the Yenisei and Irtysh rivers. Between January 8\u201310, 1716, the prince met with the king and made him an offer as a golden collection from the ancient burial mounds plundered along the Ishim and Irtysh.\nAt the meeting, Gagarin reported to Peter about his plans for the development of Siberia and received the tsar's permission, presumably as the highest resolution. On January 27, 1716, Peter I left for Europe, where he stayed until October 1717 and ceased receiving timely and reliable information from Siberia. In January 1716, Gagarin (regarding the tsar's decree) issued his own orders for the construction of a fortress on the frontier of Kosogol Lake and in April on the construction of the fortresses on the Upper Yenisei.\nOn April 28, the Buholz detachment abandoned the Yamyshev fortress and moved down the Irtysh to the territory of the Tarsky district. Gagarin assessed the situation and gave instructions to Lieutenant Colonel Buholz and the Tara commandant to build a fortress at the mouth of the Om and sent recruits to reinforce them. By the end of 1716, the first fortress (fortified place) was built in the modern river station. It comprised an earthen pentagonal fortress, powder and food stores, barracks for soldiers, and houses for officers.\nThe first Omsk fortress (fortified place) was practically a copy of the fortress erected in 1715 near Yamyshevskoye Lake. However, it also had a significant drawback: the fortifications were scattered and the outer fence was weak. When the enemy attacked, the entire garrison would have to defend the fortress with objects separate from each other. This actually happened in 1716 during the defense of the Yamyshevskaya fortress. The unsuccessful layout of the first Yamyshev and Omsk fortresses was explained by the lack of fortification experience among the construction managers.\nAt the beginning of 1717, the dragoon captain, Ilya Gavrilovich Aksakov, was requested to make the trip from Russia. The Governor conferred a major on him and directed him to supervise the construction of a new (second) fortress at the mouth of the Om.\nIn the summer of 1717, the Omsk garrison under the command of Stupin went to the upper Irtysh to build fortresses. Lieutenant Colonel Ivan Buholz categorically refused to lead a new expedition. In March 1717, he was sent from Tobolsk to the capital. There is very little information about the foundation of the Omsk settlement and the construction of the second fortress. One of the most valuable sources of information is the inventory of documents of the Tara Chancellery, copied for Professor G.F. Miller in 1734. This inventory was mentioned by Professor V.I. Kochedamov in 1960, and in 2015 it was published by the Barnaul scientists V.B. Borodaev and A.V. Kontev. However, there are no drawings and it is not known where and how the new city (fortress) was built. From Tara to the Omsk fortress, a drawing was sent \"On the structure of the Omsk fortress beyond the Omya river prison and courtyards in a line.\"\nIn 1722, this drawing was used by the captain-engineer, Paul de Grange, in the plan's development of the fortress on the right bank of the Om. At the end of the summer of 1717, Gagarin ordered the production of six bells for the Yamyshevskaya and Omsk fortresses. Bells were made by the military department, in the amount of three pieces per fortress. According to the drawing of the Omsk fortress in 1717, there was a triangular guard redoubt at the mouth of the Om, a quadrangular fort at the crossing over the Om, and a pentagonal fortress in the yard. At the beginning of 1718, seven bells were made. Perhaps the seventh was intended for the Omsk Sloboda on the right bank of the Om. There is no information about whether the quadrangular fort and the triangular redoubt were built. However, it is known that the fortress (defensive structure) was built pentagonal, although not as regular as in the drawing. This is clear from the plans of 1745 and 1755. The entire settlement (Omsk fortress, including the Cossack settlement and the main defensive structure) had the shape of an irregular, broken quadrangle.\nIn 1768 Om fortress was moved. The original Tobolsk and the restored Tara gates, along with the original German Lutheran Church and several public buildings, are left. Omsk was granted town status in 1782.\nIn 1822, Omsk became an administrative capital of Western Siberia and later in 1882 the center of the vast Steppes region (today the northern part of Kazakhstan) and Akmolinsk Oblast acquiring several churches and cathedrals of various denominations, mosques, a synagogue, the governor-general's mansion, and a military academy. But as the frontier receded and its military importance diminished, the town fell into disarray. For that reason, Omsk became a major center of the Siberian exile. From 1850 to 1854, Fyodor Dostoyevsky served his sentence in an Omsk katorga prison.\nInside the Omsk settlement (the city of Omsk), a military settlement - the Omsk fortress - lived on its own for approximately 150 years. By 1845, the structures of the Omsk fortress were half destroyed, which prompted the engineering department of the military department to petition for the abolition of the fortress. In 1864, the fortress was destroyed.\nThe development of the city was generated by the construction of the Trans-Siberian Railway in the 1890s. This move led to the significance of Omsk as a logistic hub. Many trade companies established stores and offices in Omsk which came to define the character of the city center. British, Dutch, and German consulates were established roughly at the same time to represent their commercial interests. The pinnacle of development for pre-revolutionary Omsk was the Siberian Exposition of Agriculture and Industry in 1910. The popularity of the World Fair contributed to the image of Omsk as the \"Chicago of Siberia.\"\nAfter the October Revolution, anti-Bolshevik White forces seized control of Omsk. The \"Provisional All-Russian Government\" was established in Omsk in 1918, headed by the Arctic explorer and decorated war hero Admiral Kolchak. Omsk was proclaimed the capital of Russia, and its central bank was tasked with safekeeping the former empire's gold reserves. These were guarded by a garrison of former Czechoslovak POWs trapped in Siberia by the chaos of World War I and the subsequent Revolution. Omsk became a prime target for the Red Army, which viewed it as a major focus of their Siberian campaign and eventually forced Kolchak and his government to abandon the city and retreat along the Trans-Siberian eastward to Irkutsk. Bolshevik forces entered the city in 1919.\nSoviet period.\nThe Soviet government preferred the young Novonikolayevsk (later known as Novosibirsk) as the administrative center of Western Siberia, prompting the mass transfer of administrative, cultural, and educational functions from Omsk to Novonikolayevsk. This directive stunted Omsk's growth and sparked a continuing rivalry between the two cities. Omsk received a new life because of World War II. Because it was both far from the fighting and had a well-developed infrastructure, Omsk provided a perfect haven for much of the industry evacuated away from the frontlines. Contingency plans were made to transfer the provisional Soviet capital to Omsk in the event of a German victory during the Battle of Moscow (October 1941 to January 1942). At the end of the war, Omsk remained a major industrial center, subsequently becoming a leader in Soviet military production.\nMilitary industries that moved to Omsk included part of the OKMO tank-design bureau in 1941, and S.M. Kirov Factory no. 185 from Chelyabinsk, in 1962. The Kirov Factory and Omsk Transmash design bureau (KBTM) produced T-80 tanks from the 1970s, and handled the BTR-T, TOS-1, and the prototype Black Eagle tank. Omsk Transmash declared bankruptcy in 2002.\nIn the 1950s, following the development of the oil and natural gas field in Siberia, an oil refinery complex was built, along with an entire \"town of oil workers\", expanding Omsk northward along the Irtysh. It is currently the largest such complex in Russia. Gazprom Neft, the parent company, is the largest employer in the city, wielding its tax rates as leverage in negotiations with municipal and regional authorities. The nearby parts of the city close to the complex were nicknamed Neftezovodskaya by refinery workers.\nOmsk-Severnyy (air base), a Soviet then Russian Air Force base, is located nearby.\nPost-Soviet period.\nFollowing the dissolution of the Soviet Union, Omsk experienced a period of economic instability and political stagnation. Most of the city's large businesses, which had been state-owned, were fought over by members of the former party elite, the emerging nouveau riche, and fast-growing criminal syndicates. The most notorious cases involved the privatization of Sibneft, a major oil company. Until the end of the 1990s, political life in Omsk was defined by an ongoing feud between the oblast and city authorities. The resulting conflict developed into two points of view, which served as the impetus for some improvements to the city's infrastructure and cultural life. These improvements included the construction of new leisure parks and the renovation of the city's historic center, the establishment of the annual Siberian International Marathon, and of the annual City Days Festival. Despite this, internal political competition continued to drain the city's resources and served as a major obstacle to smooth government operations and city development.\nFrom 1941 onwards prisoners who died in the prisons of Omsk were buried in the Staro-Severnoe cemetery. After 1944 forced settlers, including deported Kalmyks, were buried in other parts of the cemetery. On 24 May 2002 with the agreement of the city administration a memorial was erected in the cemetery to deported Kalmyks who died in the Omsk Region.\nGeography.\nLocation.\nOmsk is in the south of the West Siberian Plain, along the banks of the north-flowing Irtysh, at its confluence with the Om River. The city has an elevation of above mean sea level at its highest point.\nOmsk is an important railroad hub and is the junction point for the northern and southern branches of the Trans-Siberian Railway. The city also serves as a major hub for the regional highway network. River-port facilities handle both passengers and freight, giving the city access to navigating the extensive waterways of the Irtysh and Ob River. The waterways connect Omsk with the coal and mineral-mining towns further up the river in Kazakhstan, as well as with the oil, natural gas and lumber operations of northern Siberia. Omsk is served by the Tsentralny Airport, which offers access to domestic and international (primarily, German and Kazakh) destinations, making the city an important aviation hub for Siberia and the Russian Far East.\nIt is about north of Kazakhstan's capital Astana, and west of Siberia's largest city, Novosibirsk, and east of Russia's capital and largest city, Moscow.\nClimate.\nOmsk has a humid continental climate (K\u00f6ppen \"Dfb\") characterized by dramatic seasonal shifts in weather: winters are long, dry, windy and very cold, and summers are short but sunny and warm, sometimes hot. Average daily temperatures, taken over the past three decades, are between for July and for January, although temperatures can reach in the summer and drop to in the winter. On average, Omsk sees over 300 sunny days a year (2201 hours). The average annual precipitation is .\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe population in Omsk had been steadily rising, according to the records: from 31,000 in 1881 to 53,050 in 1900 and to 1,148,418 in 1989. The 2002 Census recorded that the population had declined to\u00a01,134,016, but it rebounded marginally, according to the 2010 Census, which listed the population of 1,154,116. By 2021, the population had declined to 1,125,695.\nAs of the 2021 Census, the ethnic composition of Omsk was:\nArchitecture.\nThe architectural centerpiece of the city is an ensemble of buildings along Lyubinsky Avenue/Lenina Street, anchored by the former Gostiny Dvor, and flanked by two chapels. The area is an eclectic mix of architectural styles, dominated by Art nouveau, Neoclassical and Second Empire.\nCloser to the confluence of the Om and the Irtysh are the few surviving sombre buildings of the 18th-century fortress. The largest and most opulent church in the city is the Dormition Cathedral, a five-domed edifice in the Russian Revival style, consecrated in 1896, demolished by the Soviets, and restored in the first decade of the 21st century.\nAnother area of interest is Nikolsky Avenue-Krasnykh Zor Street, where a line of merchants' wooden houses still stands. The street leads to the Neoclassical cathedral of St.\u00a0Nicholas, which was commissioned by the Cossacks, designed by Vasily Stasov and consecrated in 1840. It contains various relics of the Siberian Cossacks.\nAlso, an important sigh-seen of the city is the Achair Women's Monastery in the name of the Life-giving Cross of the Lord. It is known for a mineral spring (+37 degrees) on its territory alleged to have healing properties, which was consecrated on September 14, 1993, by Patriarch Alexy II of Moscow.\nEducation.\nOmsk is home to many institutions of higher learning and several universities:\nCulture.\nAs a prominent educational center, Omsk has several museums, theaters, music venues, and educational institutions.\nAmong Omsk's museums, the most notable are:\nTheaters include the Omsk Opera, The Omsk Theater of Drama, The Omsk Circus, the Omsk State Music Theater, and several smaller venues.\nSports.\nOmsk is represented nationally by professional association football and hockey clubs.\nPolitics.\nThe socio-political life of Omsk has long been known for the conflict between the city and regional authorities.\nFor more than ten years, there was an information war between Governor Leonid Polezhayev of the Omsk Oblast and the city's mayors. It began with a confrontation between Polezhayev and Valery Roshchupkin (1995-2001) in 1999 and was accompanied by black PR from the media owned by the governor (for example, Channel 12) and from the media owned or supported by the mayor. The heads of several newspapers and one television company issued a joint statement accusing the governor of violating the \"media law\" and the Constitution, which guarantees freedom of speech. Then, in 2003, the conflict between the governor and the mayor Yevgeny Belov (2001-2004) began, culminating in the change of the mayor. The new mayor Viktor Schrader (2004-2012) initially came with the governor's full support; however, in 2010, the information war unfolded again. Several pro-governor media sought the resignation of the mayor. At a press conference on 1 December 2010, Viktor Schreider said he did not intend to participate. According to another version, the information war began in November 2009 after the primaries of the Omsk branch of the United Russia party, but the prerequisites were still in the summer of 2009; as a result, the entire information war was reduced to a political game. Schreider, as a result, changed the post of mayor to the place of a deputy in the State Duma, and the acting mayor T. A. Vizhevitova was appointed in his place.\nIn 2012, the Omsk Oblast Governor Polezhayev, permanent since the Soviet era, resigned, and Viktor Nazarov, who previously held the post of general director at CJSC Gazprom Mezhregiongaz Omsk, was appointed in his place. In the same year, early mayoral elections (due to the resignation of the previous mayor) were held, and United Russia candidate Vyacheslav Dvorakovsky, who previously served as chief engineer of the Omsk NPO Mostovik, was elected the new mayor. The information war continued, with the next round beginning during a direct line with President Putin, when an Omsk woman complained that she could not get an appointment with the Omsk mayor, and Putin publicly called Dvorakovsky a \"piglet\". In March 2016, at an air show attended by more than 100,000 spectators, Nazarov ignored the mayor. BK55 correspondent Yelena Yarovaya noted that the mayor at this event was deprived of the right to speak:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;It turns out like this: for bad roads, unremoved snow, and landfills, we \"beat\" the mayor with a poor budget. And we celebrate holidays, all sorts of shows and pleasures, without a representative of the municipal government elected by Omsk residents. Here are all the laurels and applause to the head of the region.&lt;br&gt;&lt;br&gt;At [\u2026] the event, a trend was clearly outlined, a fashionable tone set by the former governor Leonid Polezhayev - the separation of the city and the region. Although, in poor budgets, Nazarov and Dvorakovsky, on the contrary, should have worked \"in one bundle.\"\nAccording to Vyacheslav Dvorakovsky, the information war is needed by people whose interests are to weaken both city and regional authorities, while both authorities have already successfully cooperated in solving the problem of kindergartens. On 30 April 2016, during a prank call from the NTV channel, the governor Nazarov sharply criticized Dvorakovsky for his inactivity concerning the city and unwillingness to accept help in critical communal tasks. At the same time, Nazarov stressed that normal interaction, without a \"war\", with the mayor does not work even with a mutual desire for this.\nAdministrative and municipal status.\nWithin the framework of administrative divisions, Omsk is incorporated as a city of oblast significance\u2014an administrative unit with the status equal to that of the districts. As a municipal division, Omsk is incorporated as the Omsk Urban Okrug.\nOmsk City Council.\nThe representative body of local self-government is the Omsk City Council, elected for five years and consisting of forty deputies. The acting City Council is of the sixth convocation, elected on 10 September 2017, 20 deputies were elected from party lists, the remaining 20 deputies from single-mandate constituencies. Vladimir Valentinovich Korbut, a member of the United Russia party, has been the chairman of the Omsk City Council since 27 September 2017.\nEconomy.\nGazprom's Omsk Refinery is the leading employer of Omsk.\nThe Russian Air Force base called Omsk-Severnyy (air base) is located nearby. The OKMO tank-design bureau, the S.M. Kirov Factory no. 185, the Omsk Transmash all produce weaponry. Transmash produced T-80 tanks from the 1970s, and handled the BTR-T, TOS-1, and the prototype Black Eagle tank.\nTransportation.\nOmsk is a major rail, road, and air hub. The city is served by a station on the Trans-Siberian Railway, and by the Tsentralny Airport Omsk possesses a river port on the Irtysh, offering service to domestic destinations and to cities within Kazakhstan. Omsk is in European route E30 (in Russia R254 highway) that provides access to all of Europe.\nMunicipal public transportation comprises large networks of buses and trolleys along with trams, although the latter has deteriorated severely since the collapse of the USSR. \"Marshrutkas\" (shared taxis) supplement municipal transit networks.\nA Metro system, proposed in the late 1980s, but postponed for lack of funds, is currently under construction, with the Metro bridge over the Irtysh River. The bridge is already open for cars (upper level), but the metro (lower level) is still under construction. As a first step, one short line will connect the districts in the northwest with the city center. As of 2017,[ [update]] only one station is open and serves as a pedestrian subway.\nNotable people.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAthletes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nTwin towns \u2013 sister cities.\nOmsk is twinned with:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "62594", "revid": "48643156", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62594", "title": "Irtysh", "text": "River in China, Kazakhstan, and Russia\nThe Irtysh () is a river in Russia, China, and Kazakhstan. It is the chief tributary of the Ob and is also the longest tributary in the world.\nThe river's source lies in the Mongolian Altai in Dzungaria (the northern part of Xinjiang, China) close to the border with Mongolia.\nThe Irtysh's main tributaries include the Tobol, Demyanka and the Ishim. The Ob-Irtysh system forms a major drainage basin in Asia, encompassing most of Western Siberia and the Altai Mountains.\nEtymology.\nThe name was first encountered in the epitaphs of the Second Eastern Turkic Khaganate commanders Tonyukuku (646-724) and Kul-teginu (684-731).\nThe first to attempt to decipher the name of the Irtysh was the Turkic philologist Mahmud al-Kashgari (1029-1101). According to his interpretation, the river got its name from the word \"ertishmak\" (quick jump). At the same time, according to the legend cited by his contemporary, the Persian geographer al-Gardizi (d. 1061) in his treatise \"Zayn al-akhbar\", the author of the name is a slave of the founder of the Kimaks, Prince Shad. Seeing the Turks wandering near the river, she said to them \"\u00abirtysh\u00bb\", which meant \"stop\".\nG. F. Miller gives a version of the formation of the name of the river from the name of the Tatar Khan Irtyshak, the successor of Khan On-Som.\nAccording to one version, the name of the river comes from the Turkic words: \"ir\" - \"earth\", \"tysh\" - \"dig\", that is, it means \"digging the earth\".\nAccording to A. P. Dulzon and V. N. Popova, in the name Irtysh the segment \"tysh\" goes back to the Ket \"chesh, shesh, sis, ses\" - \"river\", and the initial \"ir\" is associated with the pre-Ket (Iranian) root meaning \"stormy\", \"rapid\".\nThe Hungarian chronicles about the prehistory of Hungary speak of the river Togora, the same river is named in the Vienna illustrated chronicle and in Turoc-Togat. Hunfalvi sees here a Hungarian memory of the Irtysh, which, according to Castren, is called by the Ostyaks Tangat or Tlangatl(Langal).\nGeography.\nFrom its origins as the \"Kara-Irtysh\" (Black Irtysh) in the Mongolian Altay mountains in Xinjiang, China, the Irtysh flows northwest through Lake Zaysan in Kazakhstan, meeting the Ishim and Tobol rivers before merging with the Ob near Khanty-Mansiysk in western Siberia, Russia after .\nThe name Black Irtysh (\"Kara-Irtysh\" in Kazakh, or \"Cherny Irtysh\" in Russian) is applied by some authors, especially in Russia and Kazakhstan, to the upper course of the river, from its source entering Lake Zaysan. The term White Irtysh, in contrast to the Black Irtysh, was occasionally used in the past to refer to the Irtysh below Lake Zaysan; now this usage is largely obsolete.\nMain tributaries.\nThe largest tributaries of the Irtysh are, from source to mouth:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nEconomic use.\nIn Kazakhstan and Russia, tankers, passenger ships, and cargo vessels navigate the river during the ice-free season, between April and October. Omsk, home to the headquarters of the state-owned Irtysh River Shipping Company, functions as the largest river port in Western Siberia.\nOn the Kazakhstan section of the river there are presently three major hydroelectric plants, namely at Bukhtarma, Ust-Kamenogorsk and Shulbinsk. The world's deepest lock, with a drop of , allows river traffic to by-pass the dam at Ust-Kamenogorsk. Plans exist for the construction of several more dams.\nThree dams have been constructed on the Chinese section of the Irtysh as well:\nthe Keketuohai (\u53ef\u53ef\u6258\u6d77) Dam (),\nthe Kalasuke (\u5580\u814a\u5851\u514b) Dam (), and the Project 635 Dam. There are also the Burqin Chonghu'er Dam and the Burqin Shankou Dam on the Irtysh's right tributary, the Burqin River and the Jilebulake Dam and Haba River Shankou Dam on another right tributary, the Haba River.\nThe Northern river reversal proposals, widely discussed by the USSR planners and scientists in the 1960s and 1970s, would send some of the Irtysh's (and possibly Ob's) water to the water-deficient regions of central Kazakhstan and Uzbekistan. Some versions of this project would have seen the direction of flow of the Irtysh reversed in its section between the mouth of the Tobol (at Tobolsk) and the confluence of the Irtysh with the Ob at Khanty-Mansiysk, thus creating an \"Anti-Irtysh\".\nWhile these gigantic interbasin transfer schemes were not implemented, a smaller Irtysh\u2013Karaganda Canal was built between 1962 and 1974 to supply water to the dry Kazakh steppes and to one of the country's main industrial center, Karaganda. In 2002, pipelines were constructed to supply water from the canal to the Ishim river and Kazakhstan's capital, Astana.\nIn China, a short canal was constructed in 1987 (water intake at ) to divert some of the Irtysh water to the endorheic Lake Ulungur, whose level had been falling precipitously due to the increasing irrigation use of the lake's main affluent, the Ulungur River. In the last years of the 20th century and the early 2000s, a much more major project, the Irtysh\u2013Karamay\u2013Ur\u00fcmqi Canal was completed. Increased water use in China has caused significant concerns among Kazakh and Russian environmentalists.\nAccording to a report published by Kazakhstan fishery researchers in 2013, the total Irtysh water use in China is about per year; as a result, only about 2/3 of what would be the river's \"natural\" flow (6\u00a0km3 out of 9\u00a0km3) reaches the Kazakh border.\nCities.\nMajor cities along the Irtysh, from source to mouth, include:\nBridges.\nSeven railway bridges span the Irtysh. They are located in the following cities:\nAs the Kuytun\u2013Beitun Railway in China's Xinjiang is being extended toward Altay City, a railway bridge over the Irtysh at Beitun will need to be constructed as well.\nNumerous highway bridges over the Irtysh exist in China, Kazakhstan, and Russia.\nThe last bridge downstream on the Irtysh, a highway bridge opened in 2004, is at Khanty-Mansiysk, right before the river's confluence with Ob.\nHistory.\nA number of Mongol and Turkic peoples occupied the river banks for many centuries. In 657, Tang dynasty general Su Dingfang defeated Ashina Helu, qaghan of the Western Turkic Khaganate, at the Battle of Irtysh River, ending the Tang campaign against the Western Turks. Helu's defeat ended the Khaganate, strengthened Tang control of Xinjiang, and led to Tang suzerainty over the western Turks.\nThe Battle of Irtysh River took place in 1208 between the Mongol Empire and an alliance of Merkit and Naimans near where Bukhtarma river becomes a tributary of the Irtysh.\nIn the north-east of Irtysh, there was the , ruled by the family from the \u00d6gedei dynasty of the Yuan dynasty, which ruled until 1361. It was destroyed by the Oirats.\nIn the 15th and 16th centuries the lower and middle courses of the Irtysh lay within the Tatar Khanate of Sibir; its capital, Qashliq (also known as Sibir) was located on the Irtysh a few kilometres upstream from the mouth of the Tobol (where today's Tobolsk is situated).\nThe Khanate of Sibir was conquered by the Russians in the 1580s. The Russians started building fortresses and towns next to the sites of former Tatar towns; one of the first Russian towns in Siberia (after Tyumen) was Tobolsk, founded in 1587 at the fall of the Tobol into the Irtysh, downstream from the former Qashliq.\nFarther east, Tara was founded in 1594, roughly at the border of the taiga belt (to the north) and the steppe to the south.\nIn the 17th century the Dzungar Khanate, formed by the Mongol Oirat people, became Russia's southern neighbor, and controlled the upper Irtysh. As a result of Russia's confrontation with the Dzungars in the Peter the Great's era, the Russians founded the cities of Omsk in 1716, Semipalatinsk in 1718, Ust-Kamenogorsk in 1720, and Petropavlovsk in 1752.\nThe Chinese Qing Empire conquered Dzungaria in the 1750s. This prompted an increase in the Russian authorities' attention to their borderland; in 1756, the Orenburg Governor Ivan Neplyuyev even proposed the annexation of the Lake Zaysan region, but this project was forestalled by Chinese successes. Concerns were raised in Russia (1759) about the (theoretical) possibility of a Chinese fleet sailing from Lake Zaysan down the Irtysh and into Western Siberia. A Russian expedition visited Lake Zaysan in 1764, and concluded that such a riverine invasion would not be likely. Nonetheless, a chain of Russian pickets was established on the Bukhtarma River, north of Lake Zaysan. Thus the border between the two empires in the Irtysh basin became roughly delineated, with a (sparse) chain of guard posts on both sides. In the summer of 1828, the Prussian explorer Alexander von Humboldt visited the Irtysh region on his journey through Russia and Central Asia; he came face-to-face with Chinese and Mongol border guards.\nThe situation in the borderlands in the mid-19th century is described in a report by A. Abramof (; 1865). Even though the Zaysan region was recognized by both parties as part of the Qing empire, it had been annually used, by fishing expeditions sent by the Siberian Cossack Host. The summer expeditions started in 1803, and in 1822\u201325 their range was expanded through the entire Lake Zaysan and to the mouth of the Black Irtysh. Through the mid-19th century, the Qing presence on the upper Irtysh was mostly limited to the annual visit of the Qing \"amban\" from Chuguchak to one of the Cossacks' fishing stations (\"Batavski Piket\").\nThe border between the Russian and the Qing empires in the Irtysh basin was established along the line fairly similar to China's modern border with Russia and Kazakhstan by the Convention of Peking of 1860. The actual border line pursuant to the convention was drawn by the Protocol of Chuguchak (1864), leaving Lake Zaysan on the Russian side. The Qing empire's military presence in the Irtysh basin crumbled during the 1862\u201377 Dungan Revolt. After the fall of the rebellion and the reconquest of Xinjiang by Zuo Zongtang, the border between the Russian and the Qing empires in the Irtysh basin was further slightly readjusted, in Russia's favor, by the Treaty of Saint Petersburg (1881).\nCultural references.\nThe Irtysh River serves as a backdrop in the epilogue of Fyodor Dostoyevsky's 1866 novel \"Crime and Punishment\". In Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn's \"The Gulag Archipelago\", the chapter \"The White Kitten\" details Georgi Tenno's escape from a camp along this river.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "62599", "revid": "4892749", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62599", "title": "Event-driven programming", "text": "Computer programming paradigm\nIn computer programming, event-driven programming is a programming paradigm in which the flow of the program is determined by external events. UI events from mice, keyboards, touchpads and touchscreens, and external sensor inputs are common cases. Events may also be programmatically generated, such as from messages from other programs, notifications from other threads, or other network events.\nEvent-driven programming is the dominant paradigm used in graphical user interfaces applications and network servers.\nIn an event-driven application, there is generally an event loop that listens for events and then triggers a callback function when one of those events is detected.\nEvent-driven programs can be written in any programming language, although the task is easier in languages that provide high-level abstractions.\nAlthough they do not exactly fit the event-driven model, interrupt handling and exception handling have many similarities.\nIt is important to differentiate between event-driven and message-driven (aka queue driven) paradigms: Event-driven services (e.g. AWS SNS) are decoupled from their consumers. Whereas queue / message driven services (e.g. AWS SQS) are coupled with their consumers.\nEvent loop.\nBecause the event loop that retrieves and dispatches events is common amongst applications, many programming frameworks provide an implementation of an event loop, and the application developer only needs to write the event handlers. \nRPG, an early programming language from IBM, whose 1960s design concept was similar to event-driven programming discussed above, provided a built-in main I/O loop (known as the \"program cycle\") where the calculations responded in accordance with \"indicators\" (flags) that were set earlier in the cycle. \nEvent handlers.\nThe actual logic is contained in event handler routines. These routines handle the events to which the main program will respond. For example, a single mouse-click on a \"Save\" command button in a GUI program might trigger a routine to save data to a database. An \"Exit\" button might trigger a routine to exit the program. The event loop receives events from all such command buttons and other GUI elements, dispatching the appropriate event handler routine for each button.\nEvent handler routines need to be bound to specific events, so the event loop can dispatch the correct routine in response to the event. Many IDEs simplify this process by providing the programmer with an event handling template for each specific event (such as a button click), allowing the programmer to focus on writing the event-handling code.\nIn a sequential program, keeping track of execution order and history is normally trivial. But in an event-driven program, event handlers execute non-sequentially in response to external events. Special attention and planning is required to correctly structure the event handlers to work when called in any order.\nCommon uses.\nMost existing GUI architectures use event-driven programming. Windows has an event loop. The Java AWT framework processes all UI changes on a single thread, called the Event dispatching thread. Similarly, all UI updates in the Java framework JavaFX occur on the JavaFX Application Thread.\nMost network servers and frameworks such as Node.js are also event-driven.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "62600", "revid": "15956498", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62600", "title": "Pathology of Schizophrenia", "text": ""}
{"id": "62601", "revid": "1319954793", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62601", "title": "Lake Zaysan", "text": "Lake in Kazakhstan\nLake Zaysan (, ) is a freshwater lake in Tarbagatay District, East Kazakhstan Region, Kazakhstan. It is the largest lake in the region. The lake is generally frozen from the beginning of November to the end of April, but still has an abundance of fish.\nThe lake has been drying in the modern era, but that process has been stabilized by the construction of the Bukhtarma Hydroelectric Power Plant, whose reservoir it is now a part of. \nNames.\nThe Kazakh name of the lake is \"Zaisan k\u00f6l\u0131\" ( or ), pronounced . It derives from the Mongolian \"Zaisan nuur\" (), meaning \"Noble Lake\". Aside from its own nobility in size and beauty, it was used as the headquarters for various hordes and khanates, including the Dzungar Khanate. In the language of the local Dungan people, it is \"Jesonpe\" or \"Zhaisaonpe\" (). In Russian, it is \"Ozero Zajsan\" () and, in Chinese, \"Zh\u0101is\u0101ng P\u014d\" ( , , x ).\nGeography.\nThe lake lies at an altitude of , in a hollow between the Altai and the Tarbagatai Mountains. It is long with an approximate width of between . The major river flowing into it is the \"Kara Irtysh\" (Black Irtysh) and \"Kendyrlyk\" from the east; its only outlet is the \"Ertis\", or Irtysh River.\nSince the construction of the Bukhtarma Dam on the Irtysh, downstream from the Zaysan, the lake has risen around above its natural level. As a result, the area of the lake has (essentially) doubled, from about 1,800\u00a0km2 to 3,500\u00a0km2 (or even to 5,000\u00a0km2); thus, in some sources, the lake is indicated as part of an artificial reservoir. Man-made reservoirs are abundant over a large portion of the surrounding area.\nLake Baikal is often considered the most ancient lake in the world, as clear evidence shows that it is 25\u201330 million years old. Lake Zaysan, however, may be even older, dating possibly from the Cretaceous period, with a potential age in excess of 66 million years old (most probably around 70 million years); the exact age is debatable, and surrounded with some uncertainty. A clear indication of Lake Zaysan's age has proven hard to find, although some geological studies of the Zaysan Basin have been undertaken. Modern geological analysis of the entire field, apparently, supports an exceptionally old age for Lake Zaysan.\nHistory.\nIn the third century B.C.E., the lake marked the rough border between the tribes of the Xiongnu Confederation and the Yuezhi. Later, in the early 2nd century, the Xiongnu successfully seized much of the area from the Yuezhi.\nDuring the Han-Xiongnu wars, Lake Zaysan and the Black Irtysh were a point of contention between the Chinese Han Dynasty and the Xiongnu, with a notable campaign made in the region by general Huo Qubing.\nFrom the early 4th century, Lake Zaysan and the Irtysh on either side of it came under the control of three successive Turkic empires: the Rouran Khaganate, the First Turkic Khaganate, and the Second Turkic Khaganate. After the reformation of the nomadic state by the Gokturks in the 500s and their subsequent division into eastern and western halves, Lake Zaysan was conquered by China's Tang Dynasty in the 600s during the Battle of Irtysh River.\nAfter the loss of the Tang's northern possessions, the lake came to be governed by various nomadic tribes of the Karluks and the Oirats during the middle medieval period from the 700s\u20131000s. Two major powers controlling the region from the 1000s\u20131215 were the Kara-Khanids and the Qara-Khitai, the latter being overrun by the Mongol general Jebe in 1216. From thence, Lake Zaysan passed into Mongol possession. When the empire was yet unified, the lake served as a waypoint for large Mongol expeditions into Central and Western Asia from Mongolia, such as those of Genghis Khan (1224) and Hulagu Khan (1251).\nThe region continued to be administered under the Yuan Dynasty, before later being divided between local nomadic powers. Timur launched a military expedition to the lake and the Black Irtysh in 1391 in pursuit of the Moghul khan Qumaruddin Dughlat.\nThe first Russian to reach the area was Ivan Bukholts who ascended the Irtysh to build a fort and search for gold. In 1715 he was driven back downriver by the Oirats, who had established the Zunghar Khanate in the region.\nThe Chinese Qing Empire conquered the Zunghar state in the 1750s. This prompted an increase in the Russian authorities' attention to their borderland; in 1756, the Orenburg Governor Ivan Neplyuyev even proposed the annexation of the Lake Zaysan region, but this project was forestalled by Chinese successes. Concerns were raised in Russia (1759) about the (theoretical) possibility of a Chinese fleet sailing from Lake Zaysan down the Irtysh and into Western Siberia. A Russian expedition visited Lake Zaysan in 1764, and concluded that such a riverine invasion would not be likely. Nonetheless, a chain of Russian pickets was established on the Bukhtarma River, north of Lake Zaysan. Thus the border between the two empires in the Irtysh basin became roughly delineated, with a (sparse) chain of guard posts on both sides.\nThe situation on the Zaysan in the mid-19th century is described in a report by A. Abramof (1865). Even though the Zaysan region was recognized by both parties as part of the Qing Empire, it had been annually used by fishing expeditions sent by the Siberian Cossack Host. These summer expeditions started in 1803. And in 1822\u201325, their range was expanded through the entire Lake Zaysan and to the mouth of the Black Irtysh. Through the mid-19th century, the Qing presence on the upper Irtysh was mostly limited to the annual visit of the Qing \"amban\" from Chuguchak to one of the Cossacks' fishing stations (\"Batavski Piket\").\nThe border between the Russian and the Qing empires in the Irtysh basin was established along the line fairly similar to China's modern border with Russia and Kazakhstan by the Convention of Peking of 1860. The actual border line pursuant to the convention was drawn by the Protocol of Chuguchak (1864), leaving Lake Zaysan on the Russian side. The Qing Empire's military presence in the Irtysh basin crumbled during the Dungan revolt (1862\u201377). After the fall of the rebellion and the reconquest of Xinjiang by Zuo Zongtang, the border between the Russian and the Qing empires in the Irtysh basin was further slightly readjusted, in Russia's favor, by the Treaty of Saint Petersburg (1881).\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "62603", "revid": "50076165", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62603", "title": "Domain (biology)", "text": "Taxonomic rank\nIn biological taxonomy, a domain ( or ) (Latin: \"regio\" or \"dominium\"), also dominion, superkingdom, realm, or empire, is the highest taxonomic rank of all organisms taken together. It was introduced in the three-domain system of taxonomy devised by Carl Woese, Otto Kandler and Mark Wheelis in 1990.\nAccording to the domain system, the tree of life consists of either three domains, Archaea, Bacteria, and Eukarya, or two domains, Archaea and Bacteria, with Eukarya included in Archaea. In the three-domain model, the first two are prokaryotes, single-celled microorganisms without a membrane-bound nucleus. All organisms that have a cell nucleus and other membrane-bound organelles are included in Eukarya and called eukaryotes.\nNon-cellular life, most notably the viruses, is not included in this system. Alternatives to the three-domain system include the earlier two-empire system (with the empires Prokaryota and Eukaryota), and the eocyte hypothesis (with two domains of Bacteria and Archaea, with Eukarya included as a branch of Archaea).\nTerminology.\nThe term \"domain\" was proposed by Carl Woese, Otto Kandler, and Mark Wheelis (1990) in a three-domain system.\nDevelopment of the domain system.\nCarl Linnaeus made the classification \"domain\" popular in the famous taxonomy system he created in the middle of the eighteenth century. This system was further improved by the studies of Charles Darwin later on but could not classify bacteria easily, as they have very few observable features to compare to the other domains. \nThe mycologist Royall T. Moore proposed the similar term dominion () in 1974, but this was not widely adopted. His proposed system had three dominions: Virus, Prokaryota, and Eukaryota.\nCarl Woese made a revolutionary breakthrough when, in 1977, he compared the nucleotide sequences of the 16s ribosomal RNA and discovered that the rank \"domain\" contained three branches, not two as scientists had previously thought. Initially, due to their physical similarities, Archaea and Bacteria were classified together and called \"archaebacteria\". However, scientists now know that these two domains are hardly similar and are internally distinctly different.\nCharacteristics of the three domains.\nEach of these three domains contains unique ribosomal RNA. This forms the basis of the three-domain system. While the presence of a nuclear membrane differentiates the Eukarya from the Archaea and Bacteria, both of which lack a nuclear envelope, the Archaea and Bacteria are distinct from each other due to differences in the biochemistry of their cell membranes and RNA markers.\nArchaea.\nArchaea are prokaryotic cells, typically characterized by membrane lipids that are branched hydrocarbon chains attached to glycerol by ether linkages. The presence of these ether linkages in Archaea adds to their ability to withstand extreme temperatures and highly acidic conditions, but many archaea live in mild environments. Halophiles (organisms that thrive in highly salty environments) and hyperthermophiles (organisms that thrive in extremely hot environments) are examples of Archaea.\nArchaea are relatively small. They range from 0.1\u00a0\u03bcm to 15\u00a0\u03bcm diameter and up to 200\u00a0\u03bcm long, about the size of bacteria and the mitochondria found in eukaryotic cells. Members of the genus \"Thermoplasma\" are the smallest Archaea.\nBacteria.\nCyanobacteria and mycoplasmas are two examples of bacteria.\nEven though bacteria are prokaryotic cells like Archaea, their cell membranes are instead made of phospholipid bilayers, with none of the ether linkages that Archaea have. Internally, bacteria have different RNA structures in their ribosomes, hence they are grouped into a different category. In the two- and three-domain systems, this puts them into a separate domain.\nThere is a great deal of diversity in the domain Bacteria. That diversity is further confounded by the exchange of genes between different bacterial lineages. The occurrence of duplicate genes between otherwise distantly-related bacteria makes it nearly impossible to distinguish bacterial species, count the bacterial species on the Earth, or organize them into a tree-like structure (unless the structure includes cross-connections between branches, making it a \"network\" instead of a \"tree\").\nEukarya.\nMembers of the domain Eukarya\u2014called \"eukaryotes\"\u2014have membrane-bound organelles (including a nucleus containing genetic material) and are represented by five kingdoms: Plantae, Protozoa, Animalia, Chromista, and Fungi.\nExclusion of viruses and prions.\nThe three-domain system includes no form of non-cellular life. Stefan Luketa proposed a five-dominion system in 2012, adding Prionobiota (acellular and without nucleic acid) and Virusobiota (acellular but with nucleic acid) to the traditional three domains.\nAlternative classifications.\nAlternative classifications of life include:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "62606", "revid": "3145267", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62606", "title": "Alfonso X", "text": ""}
{"id": "62607", "revid": "40192293", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62607", "title": "Pharmaceutical", "text": ""}
{"id": "62608", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62608", "title": "Sankt Petersburg", "text": ""}
{"id": "62609", "revid": "5098269", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62609", "title": "338 BC", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 338 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Camillus and Maenius (or, less frequently, year 416 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 338 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "62610", "revid": "50972477", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62610", "title": "Polyploidy", "text": "Condition where cells have more than two sets of chromosomes\nPolyploidy is a condition in which the cells of an organism have more than two paired sets of (homologous) chromosomes. Most species whose cells have nuclei (eukaryotes) are diploid, meaning they have two complete sets of chromosomes, one from each of two parents; each set contains the same number of chromosomes, and the chromosomes are joined in pairs of homologous chromosomes. However, some organisms are polyploid. Polyploidy is especially common in plants. Most eukaryotes have diploid somatic cells, but produce haploid gametes (eggs and sperm) by meiosis. A monoploid has only one set of chromosomes, and the term is usually only applied to cells or organisms that are normally diploid. Males of bees and other Hymenoptera, for example, are monoploid. Unlike animals, plants and multicellular algae have life cycles with two alternating multicellular generations. The gametophyte generation is haploid, and produces gametes by mitosis; the sporophyte generation is diploid and produces spores by meiosis.\nPolyploidy is the result of whole-genome duplication during the evolution of species. It may occur due to abnormal cell division, either during mitosis, or more commonly from the failure of chromosomes to separate during meiosis or from the fertilization of an egg by more than one sperm. In addition, it can be induced in plants and cell cultures by some chemicals: the best known is colchicine, which can result in chromosome doubling, though its use may have other less obvious consequences as well. Oryzalin will also double the existing chromosome content.\nAmong mammals, a high frequency of polyploid cells is found in organs such as the brain, liver, heart, and bone marrow. It also occurs in the somatic cells of other animals, such as goldfish, salmon, and salamanders. It is common among ferns and flowering plants (see \"Hibiscus rosa-sinensis\"), including both wild and cultivated species. Wheat, for example, after millennia of hybridization and modification by humans, has strains that are diploid (two sets of chromosomes), tetraploid (four sets of chromosomes) with the common name of durum or macaroni wheat, and hexaploid (six sets of chromosomes) with the common name of bread wheat. Many agriculturally important plants of the genus \"Brassica\" are also tetraploids. Sugarcane can have ploidy levels higher than octaploid.\nPolyploidization can be a mechanism of\u00a0sympatric speciation\u00a0because polyploids are usually unable to interbreed with their diploid ancestors. An example is the plant \"Erythranthe peregrina\". Sequencing confirmed that this species originated from \"E. \u00d7 robertsii\", a sterile triploid hybrid between \"E. guttata\" and \"E. lutea,\" both of which have been introduced and naturalised in the United Kingdom. New populations of \"E. peregrina\" arose on the Scottish mainland and the Orkney Islands via genome duplication from local populations of \"E. \u00d7 robertsii\". Because of a rare genetic mutation, \"E. peregrina\" is not sterile. \nOn the other hand, polyploidization can also be a mechanism for a kind of 'reverse speciation', whereby gene flow is enabled following the polyploidy event, even between lineages that previously experienced no gene flow as diploids. This has been detailed at the genomic level in \"Arabidopsis arenosa\" and \"Arabidopsis lyrata\". Each of these species experienced independent autopolyploidy events (within-species polyploidy, described below), which then enabled subsequent interspecies gene flow of adaptive alleles, in this case stabilising each young polyploid lineage. Such polyploidy-enabled adaptive introgression may allow polyploids at act as 'allelic sponges', whereby they accumulate cryptic genomic variation that may be recruited upon encountering later environmental challenges.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nTerminology.\nTypes.\nPolyploid types are labeled according to the number of chromosome sets in the nucleus. The letter \"x\" is used to represent the number of chromosomes in a single set:\nClassification.\nAutopolyploidy.\nAutopolyploids are polyploids with multiple chromosome sets derived from a single taxon.\nTwo examples of natural autopolyploids are the piggyback plant, \"Tolmiea menzisii\" and the white sturgeon, \"Acipenser transmontanum\". Most instances of autopolyploidy result from the fusion of unreduced (2\"n\") gametes, which results in either triploid (\"n\" + 2\"n\" = 3\"n\") or tetraploid (2\"n\" + 2\"n\" = 4\"n\") offspring. Triploid offspring are typically sterile (as in the phenomenon of triploid block), but in some cases they may produce high proportions of unreduced gametes and thus aid the formation of tetraploids. This pathway to tetraploidy is referred to as the \"triploid bridge\". Triploids may also persist through asexual reproduction. In fact, stable autotriploidy in plants is often associated with apomictic mating systems. In agricultural systems, autotriploidy can result in seedlessness, as in watermelons and bananas. Triploidy is also utilized in salmon and trout farming to induce sterility.\nRarely, autopolyploids arise from spontaneous, somatic genome doubling, which has been observed in apple (\"Malus domesticus\") bud sports. This is also the most common pathway of artificially induced polyploidy, where methods such as protoplast fusion or treatment with colchicine, oryzalin or mitotic inhibitors are used to disrupt normal mitotic division, which results in the production of polyploid cells. This process can be useful in plant breeding, especially when attempting to introgress germplasm across ploidal levels.\nAutopolyploids possess at least three homologous chromosome sets, which can lead to high rates of multivalent pairing during meiosis (particularly in recently formed autopolyploids, also known as neopolyploids) and an associated decrease in fertility due to the production of aneuploid gametes. Natural or artificial selection for fertility can quickly stabilize meiosis in autopolyploids by restoring bivalent pairing during meiosis. Rapid adaptive evolution of the meiotic machinery, resulting in reduced levels of multivalents (and therefore stable autopolyploid meiosis) has been documented in \"Arabidopsis arenosa\" and \"Arabidopsis lyrata\", with specific adaptive alleles of these species shared between only the evolved polyploids. \nThe high degree of homology among duplicated chromosomes causes autopolyploids to display polysomic inheritance. This trait is often used as a diagnostic criterion to distinguish autopolyploids from allopolyploids, which commonly display disomic inheritance after they progress past the neopolyploid stage. While most polyploid species are unambiguously characterized as either autopolyploid or allopolyploid, these categories represent the ends of a spectrum of divergence between parental subgenomes. Polyploids that fall between these two extremes, which are often referred to as segmental allopolyploids, may display intermediate levels of polysomic inheritance that vary by locus.\nAbout half of all polyploids are thought to be the result of autopolyploidy, although many factors make this proportion hard to estimate.\nAllopolyploidy.\nAllopolyploids or amphipolyploids or heteropolyploids are polyploids with chromosomes derived from two or more diverged taxa.\nAs in autopolyploidy, this primarily occurs through the fusion of unreduced (2\"n\") gametes, which can take place before or after hybridization. In the former case, unreduced gametes from each diploid taxon \u2013 or reduced gametes from two autotetraploid taxa \u2013 combine to form allopolyploid offspring. In the latter case, one or more diploid F1 hybrids produce unreduced gametes that fuse to form allopolyploid progeny. Hybridization followed by genome duplication may be a more common path to allopolyploidy because F1 hybrids between taxa often have relatively high rates of unreduced gamete formation \u2013 divergence between the genomes of the two taxa result in abnormal pairing between homoeologous chromosomes or nondisjunction during meiosis. In this case, allopolyploidy can actually restore normal, bivalent meiotic pairing by providing each homoeologous chromosome with its own homologue. If divergence between homoeologous chromosomes is even across the two subgenomes, this can theoretically result in rapid restoration of bivalent pairing and disomic inheritance following allopolyploidization. However multivalent pairing is common in many recently formed allopolyploids, so it is likely that the majority of meiotic stabilization occurs gradually through selection.\nBecause pairing between homoeologous chromosomes is rare in established allopolyploids, they may benefit from fixed heterozygosity of homoeologous alleles. In certain cases, such heterozygosity can have beneficial heterotic effects, either in terms of fitness in natural contexts or desirable traits in agricultural contexts. This could partially explain the prevalence of allopolyploidy among crop species. Both bread wheat and triticale are examples of an allopolyploids with six chromosome sets. Cotton, peanut, and quinoa are allotetraploids with multiple origins. In Brassicaceous crops, the Triangle of U describes the relationships between the three common diploid Brassicas (\"B. oleracea, B. rapa,\" and \"B. nigra\") and three allotetraploids (\"B. napus, B. juncea,\" and \"B. carinata\") derived from hybridization among the diploid species. A similar relationship exists between three diploid species of \"Tragopogon\" (\"T. dubius, T. pratensis,\" and \"T. porrifolius\") and two allotetraploid species (\"T. mirus\" and \"T. miscellus\"). Complex patterns of allopolyploid evolution have also been observed in animals, as in the frog genus \"Xenopus.\"\nAneuploid.\nOrganisms in which a particular chromosome, or chromosome segment, is under- or over-represented are said to be aneuploid (from the Greek words meaning \"not\", \"good\", and \"fold\"). Aneuploidy refers to a numerical change in part of the chromosome set, whereas polyploidy refers to a numerical change in the whole set of chromosomes.\nEndopolyploidy.\nPolyploidy occurs in some tissues of animals that are otherwise diploid, such as human muscle tissues. This is known as endopolyploidy. Species whose cells do not have nuclei, that is, prokaryotes, may be polyploid, as seen in the large bacterium \"Epulopiscium fishelsoni\". Hence ploidy is defined with respect to a cell.\nMonoploid.\nA monoploid has only one set of chromosomes and the term is usually only applied to cells or organisms that are normally diploid. The more general term for such organisms is haploid.\nTemporal terms.\nNeopolyploidy.\nA polyploid that is newly formed.\nMesopolyploidy.\nThat has become polyploid in more recent history; it is not as new as a neopolyploid and not as old as a paleopolyploid. It is a middle aged polyploid. Often this refers to whole genome duplication followed by intermediate levels of diploidization.\nPaleopolyploidy.\nAncient genome duplications probably occurred in the evolutionary history of all life. Duplication events that occurred long ago in the history of various evolutionary lineages can be difficult to detect because of subsequent diploidization (such that a polyploid starts to behave cytogenetically as a diploid over time) as mutations and gene translations gradually make one copy of each chromosome unlike the other copy. Over time, it is also common for duplicated copies of genes to accumulate mutations and become inactive pseudogenes.\nIn many cases, these events can be inferred only through comparing sequenced genomes. Examples of unexpected but recently confirmed ancient genome duplications include baker's yeast (\"Saccharomyces cerevisiae\"), mustard weed/thale cress (\"Arabidopsis thaliana\"), rice (\"Oryza sativa\"), and two rounds of whole genome duplication (the 2R hypothesis) in an early evolutionary ancestor of the vertebrates (which includes the human lineage) and another near the origin of the teleost fishes. Angiosperms (flowering plants) have paleopolyploidy in their ancestry. All eukaryotes probably have experienced a polyploidy event at some point in their evolutionary history.\nOther similar terms.\nKaryotype.\nA karyotype is the characteristic chromosome complement of a eukaryote species. The preparation and study of karyotypes is part of cytology and, more specifically, cytogenetics.\nAlthough the replication and transcription of DNA is highly standardized in eukaryotes, the same cannot be said for their karyotypes, which are highly variable between species in chromosome number and in detailed organization despite being constructed out of the same macromolecules. In some cases, there is even significant variation within species. This variation provides the basis for a range of studies in what might be called evolutionary cytology.\nHomoeologous chromosomes.\nHomoeologous chromosomes are those brought together following inter-species hybridization and allopolyploidization, and whose relationship was completely homologous in an ancestral species. For example, durum wheat is the result of the inter-species hybridization of two diploid grass species \"Triticum urartu\" and \"Aegilops speltoides\". Both diploid ancestors had two sets of 7 chromosomes, which were similar in terms of size and genes contained on them. Durum wheat contains a hybrid genome with two sets of chromosomes derived from \"Triticum urartu\" and two sets of chromosomes derived from \"Aegilops speltoides\". Each chromosome pair derived from the \"Triticum urartu\" parent is homoeologous to the opposite chromosome pair derived from the \"Aegilops speltoides\" parent, though each chromosome pair unto itself is homologous.\nExamples.\nHumans.\nTrue polyploidy rarely occurs in humans, although polyploid cells occur in highly differentiated tissue, such as liver parenchyma, heart muscle, placenta and in bone marrow. Aneuploidy is more common.\nPolyploidy occurs in humans in the form of triploidy, with 69 chromosomes (sometimes called 69, XXX), and tetraploidy with 92 chromosomes (sometimes called 92, XXXX). Triploidy, usually due to polyspermy, occurs in about 2\u20133% of all human pregnancies and ~15% of miscarriages. The vast majority of triploid conceptions end as a miscarriage; those that do survive to term typically die shortly after birth. In some cases, survival past birth may be extended if there is mixoploidy with both a diploid and a triploid cell population present. There has been one report of a child surviving to the age of seven months with complete triploidy syndrome. He failed to exhibit normal mental or physical neonatal development, and died from a \"Pneumocystis carinii\" infection, which indicates a weak immune system.\nTriploidy may be the result of either digyny (the extra haploid set is from the mother) or diandry (the extra haploid set is from the father). Diandry is mostly caused by reduplication of the paternal haploid set from a single sperm, but may also be the consequence of dispermic (two sperm) fertilization of the egg. Digyny is most commonly caused by either failure of one meiotic division during oogenesis leading to a diploid oocyte or failure to extrude one polar body from the oocyte. Diandry appears to predominate among early miscarriages, while digyny predominates among triploid zygotes that survive into the fetal period. However, among early miscarriages, digyny is also more common in those cases less than &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;8+1\u20442 weeks gestational age or those in which an embryo is present. There are also two distinct phenotypes in triploid placentas and fetuses that are dependent on the origin of the extra haploid set. In digyny, there is typically an asymmetric poorly grown fetus, with marked adrenal hypoplasia and a very small placenta. In diandry, a partial hydatidiform mole develops. These parent-of-origin effects reflect the effects of genomic imprinting.\nComplete tetraploidy is more rarely diagnosed than triploidy, but is observed in 1\u20132% of early miscarriages. However, some tetraploid cells are commonly found in chromosome analysis at prenatal diagnosis and these are generally considered 'harmless'. It is not clear whether these tetraploid cells simply tend to arise during \"in vitro\" cell culture or whether they are also present in placental cells \"in vivo\". There are, at any rate, very few clinical reports of fetuses/infants diagnosed with tetraploidy mosaicism.\nMixoploidy is quite commonly observed in human preimplantation embryos and includes haploid/diploid as well as diploid/tetraploid mixed cell populations. It is unknown whether these embryos fail to implant and are therefore rarely detected in ongoing pregnancies or if there is simply a selective process favoring the diploid cells.\nOther animals.\nExamples in animals are more common in non-vertebrates such as flatworms, leeches, and brine shrimp. Polyploidy also occurs commonly in amphibians; for example the biomedically important genus \"Xenopus\" contains many different species with as many as 12 sets of chromosomes (dodecaploid). Polyploid lizards are also quite common. Most are sterile and reproduce by parthenogenesis; others, like \"Liolaemus chiliensis\", maintain sexual reproduction. Polyploid mole salamanders (mostly triploids) are all female and reproduce by kleptogenesis, \"stealing\" spermatophores from diploid males of related species to trigger egg development but not incorporating the males' DNA into the offspring.\nWhile some tissues of mammals, such as parenchymal liver cells, are polyploid, rare instances of polyploid mammals are known, but most often result in prenatal death. An octodontid rodent of Argentina's harsh desert regions, known as the plains viscacha rat (\"Tympanoctomys barrerae\") has been reported as an exception to this 'rule'. However, careful analysis using chromosome paints shows that there are only two copies of each chromosome in \"T. barrerae\", not the four expected if it were truly a tetraploid. This rodent is not a rat, but kin to guinea pigs and chinchillas. Its \"new\" diploid (2\"n\") number is 102 and so its cells are roughly twice normal size. Its closest living relation is \"Octomys mimax\", the Andean Viscacha-Rat of the same family, whose 2\"n\" = 56. It was therefore surmised that an \"Octomys\"-like ancestor produced tetraploid (i.e., 2\"n\" = 4\"x\" = 112) offspring that were, by virtue of their doubled chromosomes, reproductively isolated from their parents.\nPolyploidy was induced in fish by Har Swarup (1956) using a cold-shock treatment of the eggs close to the time of fertilization, which produced triploid embryos that successfully matured. Cold or heat shock has also been shown to result in unreduced amphibian gametes, though this occurs more commonly in eggs than in sperm. John Gurdon (1958) transplanted intact nuclei from somatic cells to produce diploid eggs in the frog, \"Xenopus\" (an extension of the work of Briggs and King in 1952) that were able to develop to the tadpole stage. The British scientist J. B. S. Haldane hailed the work for its potential medical applications and, in describing the results, became one of the first to use the word \"clone\" in reference to animals. Later work by Shinya Yamanaka showed how mature cells can be reprogrammed to become pluripotent, extending the possibilities to non-stem cells. Gurdon and Yamanaka were jointly awarded the Nobel Prize in 2012 for this work.\nFish.\nA polyploidy event occurred within the stem lineage of the teleost fish. Some fish which include the salmonids and many cyprinids (i.e. carp) exhibit stable polyploidy, where entire species consist entirely of polyploid individuals. Some fish have as many as 400 chromosomes.\nPlants.\nPolyploidy is frequent in plants, some estimates suggesting that 30\u201380% of living plant species are polyploid, and many lineages show evidence of ancient polyploidy (paleopolyploidy) in their genomes. Huge explosions in angiosperm species diversity appear to have coincided with the timing of ancient genome duplications shared by many species. It has been established that 15% of angiosperm and 31% of fern speciation events are accompanied by ploidy increase.\nPolyploid plants can arise spontaneously in nature by several mechanisms, including meiotic or mitotic failures, and fusion of unreduced (2\"n\") gametes. Both autopolyploids (e.g. potato) and allopolyploids (such as canola, wheat and cotton) can be found among both wild and domesticated plant species.\nMost polyploids display novel variation or morphologies relative to their parental species, that may contribute to the processes of speciation and eco-niche exploitation. The mechanisms leading to novel variation in newly formed allopolyploids may include gene dosage effects (resulting from more numerous copies of genome content), the reunion of divergent gene regulatory hierarchies, chromosomal rearrangements, and epigenetic remodeling, all of which affect gene content and/or expression levels. Many of these rapid changes may contribute to reproductive isolation and speciation. However, seed generated from interploidy crosses, such as between polyploids and their parent species, usually have aberrant endosperm development which impairs their viability, thus contributing to polyploid speciation. Polyploids may also interbreed with diploids and produce polyploid seeds, as observed in the agamic complexes of \"Crepis\".\nSome plants are triploid. As meiosis is disturbed, these plants are sterile, with all plants having the same genetic constitution: Among them, the exclusively vegetatively propagated saffron crocus (\"Crocus sativus\"). Also, the extremely rare Tasmanian shrub \"Lomatia tasmanica\" is a triploid sterile species.\nThere are few naturally occurring polyploid conifers. One example is the Coast Redwood \"Sequoia sempervirens\", which is a hexaploid (6\"x\") with 66 chromosomes (2\"n\" = 6\"x\" = 66), although the origin is unclear.\nAquatic plants, especially the Monocotyledons, include a large number of polyploids.\nCrops.\nThe induction of polyploidy is a common technique to overcome the sterility of a hybrid species during plant breeding. For example, triticale is the hybrid of wheat (\"Triticum turgidum\") and rye (\"Secale cereale\"). It combines sought-after characteristics of the parents, but the initial hybrids are sterile. After polyploidization, the hybrid becomes fertile and can thus be further propagated to become triticale.\nIn some situations, polyploid crops are preferred because they are sterile. For example, many seedless fruit varieties are seedless as a result of polyploidy. Such crops are propagated using asexual techniques, such as grafting.\nPolyploidy in crop plants is most commonly induced by treating seeds with the chemical colchicine.\nExamples.\nSome crops are found in a variety of ploidies: tulips and lilies are commonly found as both diploid and triploid; daylilies (\"Hemerocallis\" cultivars) are available as either diploid or tetraploid; apples and kinnow mandarins can be diploid, triploid, or tetraploid.\nFungi.\nBesides plants and animals, the evolutionary history of various fungal species is dotted by past and recent whole-genome duplication events (see Albertin and Marullo 2012 for review). Several examples of polyploids are known:\nIn addition, polyploidy is frequently associated with hybridization and reticulate evolution that appear to be highly prevalent in several fungal taxa. Indeed, homoploid speciation (hybrid speciation without a change in chromosome number) has been evidenced for some fungal species (such as the basidiomycota \"Microbotryum violaceum\").\nAs for plants and animals, fungal hybrids and polyploids display structural and functional modifications compared to their progenitors and diploid counterparts. In particular, the structural and functional outcomes of polyploid \"Saccharomyces\" genomes strikingly reflect the evolutionary fate of plant polyploid ones. Large chromosomal rearrangements leading to chimeric chromosomes have been described, as well as more punctual genetic modifications such as gene loss. The homoealleles of the allotetraploid yeast \"S. pastorianus\" show unequal contribution to the transcriptome. Phenotypic diversification is also observed following polyploidization and/or hybridization in fungi, producing the fuel for natural selection and subsequent adaptation and speciation.\nChromalveolata.\nOther eukaryotic taxa have experienced one or more polyploidization events during their evolutionary history (see Albertin and Marullo, 2012 for review). The oomycetes, which are non-true fungi members, contain several examples of paleopolyploid and polyploid species, such as within the genus \"Phytophthora\". Some species of brown algae (Fucales, Laminariales and diatoms) contain apparent polyploid genomes. In the Alveolata group, the remarkable species \"Paramecium tetraurelia\" underwent three successive rounds of whole-genome duplication and established itself as a major model for paleopolyploid studies.\nBacteria.\nEach \"Deinococcus radiodurans\" bacterium contains 4-8 copies of its chromosome. Exposure of \"D. radiodurans\" to X-ray irradiation or desiccation can shatter its genomes into hundred of short random fragments. Nevertheless, \"D. radiodurans\" is highly resistant to such exposures. The mechanism by which the genome is accurately restored involves RecA-mediated homologous recombination and a process referred to as extended synthesis-dependent strand annealing (SDSA).\n\"Azotobacter vinelandii\" can contain up to 80 chromosome copies per cell. However this is only observed in fast growing cultures, whereas cultures grown in synthetic minimal media are not polyploid.\nArchaea.\nThe archaeon \"Halobacterium salinarium\" is polyploid and, like \"Deinococcus radiodurans\", is highly resistant to X-ray irradiation and desiccation, conditions that induce DNA double-strand breaks. Although chromosomes are shattered into many fragments, complete chromosomes can be regenerated by making use of overlapping fragments. The mechanism employs single-stranded DNA binding protein and is likely homologous recombinational repair.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "62611", "revid": "13669800", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62611", "title": "Parma Calcio 1913", "text": "Italian association football club\nFootball club\nParma Calcio 1913 () is an Italian professional football club based in Parma, Emilia-Romagna, which competes in the Serie A, the top tier of Italian league system, following promotion from Serie B in the 2023\u201324 season.\n\"Parma Football Club\" was originally founded in December 1913, while the current society dates back to 2015. The team has been playing its home matches at the 27,906-seat Stadio Ennio Tardini, often referred to as simply \"Il Tardini\", since 1923.\nFinanced by Calisto Tanzi, the club won eight trophies between 1992 and 2002, a period in which it achieved its best ever league finish as runners-up in the 1996\u201397 season. The club has won three Coppa Italia, one Supercoppa Italiana, two UEFA Cups, one European Super Cup and one UEFA Cup Winners' Cup.\nFinancial troubles were brought about in late 2003 by the Parmalat scandal which caused the parent company to collapse and resulted in the club operating in controlled administration until January 2007. The club was declared bankrupt in 2015 and refounded in the Serie D, but secured a record three straight promotions to return to the top flight in 2018.\nHistory.\nEarly years (1913\u20131968).\nThe club was founded in July 1913 as Verdi Foot Ball Club in honour of the centenary of famous opera composer Giuseppe Verdi, who was born in the province of Parma. It adopted yellow and blue as its colours.\nIn December of the same year, Parma Foot Ball Club was formed from many of the original club's players and began wearing white shirts emblazoned with a black cross. Parma began playing league football during the 1919\u201320 season after the end of World War I. Construction of a stadium, the Stadio Ennio Tardini, began two years later. Parma became a founder member of Serie B after finishing as runners-up in the Prima Divisione in the 1928\u201329 season. The club would remain in Serie B for three years before being relegated and changing its name to Associazione Sportiva Parma in 1930. In the 1935\u201336 season, Parma became a founding member of Serie C, where the club stayed until winning promotion back to Serie B in 1943. Italian football was then brought to a halt as the Second World War intensified, although the team did make an appearance in the Campionato Alta Italia in 1944.\nFollowing the restart of organised football, Parma spent three years in Serie B, then split into two regional divisions, before again being relegated in 1948\u201349 to Serie C. The side would spend another five seasons in Serie C before an eleven-year spell in Serie B that included the achievement of ninth position in 1954\u201355, a club record at that time. This was an era in which the club's players generally held down other jobs or were still in education and when the town's amateur rugby union and volleyball sides, Rugby Parma F.C. 1931 and Ferrovieri Parma, proved more popular among the more privileged. Parma made its debut in European competition during the 1960\u201361 season, defeating Swiss side AC Bellinzona in the Coppa delle Alpi, but relegation to Serie C followed in 1964\u201365 season. Parma spent just one season in Serie C before a second successive relegation, this time to Serie D, in 1966.\nRebirth and improvement (1968\u20131989).\nThe club was in turmoil and was ordered into liquidation by the Court of Parma in 1968, changing its name to Parma Football Club that year. In 1969, another local team, Associazione Calcio Parmense, won promotion to Serie D. On 1 January 1970, A.C. Parmense adopted the sporting licence of the liquidated club which had been formed in 1913. This meant that it had the right to use the \"Crociata\" shirts, the badge and the city's name. This brought about a change of luck in both financial and sporting terms, as the side was crowned Serie D champions and spent three years in Serie C before promotion to Serie B; however, it was a short stay. The team was relegated back to Serie C in its second season in the division. A return to Serie B did not materialise until the end of the 1970s and the club again lasted only one season in the second division of Italian football.\nUnder the management of Cesare Maldini, Parma once again returned to Serie B after winning its division in 1984 with victory on the final day over Sanremo; Juventus-bound Stefano Pioli scored the only goal of the game. The Ducali again only spent a year in Serie B, finishing third from bottom and succumbing to relegation as a consequence. Arrigo Sacchi did, however, manage to return the club to Serie B in 1986 after a single season in the third tier. The side enjoyed good success that season in missing out on promotion to Italy's top tier by just three points and eliminating A.C. Milan from the Coppa Italia, a result that convinced owner Silvio Berlusconi to hire Sacchi as the new manager of the \"Rossoneri\". Sacchi's replacement, Zden\u011bk Zeman, was fired after just seven matches and replaced by Giampieri Vitali, who secured two consecutive mid-table finishes.\nSuccess and insolvency (1989\u20132004).\nNevio Scala was appointed as head coach in 1989. Scala's Parma secured a historic promotion in 1990 to Serie A with a 2\u20130 Derby dell'Enza win over Reggiana. Investment from parent company Parmalat helped to improve the team's fortunes and the club made its debut in UEFA competition in 1991. Scala led the club to its first four major honours. The first of these was the Coppa Italia in 1991\u201392, beating Juventus 2\u20131 over two legs. The following year came the first international triumph in a 3\u20131 victory in the Cup Winners' Cup over Belgian side Antwerp at Wembley. The next season, the side was successful in the European Super Cup, overcoming Milan 2\u20131 on aggregate, but lost the Cup Winners' Cup final 1\u20130 to Arsenal. Scala's final success with Parma was in another two-legged final against Juventus: Dino Baggio scored twice to give Parma a 2\u20131 aggregate win, but Juventus exacted revenge in the Coppa Italia final. Replaced by Carlo Ancelotti, Scala departed in 1996 and was a popular coach for the trophies he won and because the team played attractive football in the tradition of the club.\nAncelotti overhauled the team and guided it to a record second place in 1997. Parma consequently made its debut in the UEFA Champions League the following year. Alberto Malesani was installed as coach in 1998 and the club completed a rare cup double in his first season, winning the Coppa Italia final against Fiorentina on the away goals rule and the UEFA Cup against Marseille at the Luzhniki Stadium in Moscow with a 3\u20130 victory before 1999 Supercoppa Italiana victory over league champions Milan followed in August 1999. In 2000, Hern\u00e1n Crespo was sold to Lazio for a world record transfer fee and Malesani departed.\nUnder replacement Renzo Ulivieri, the club lost the Coppa Italia final to Fiorentina. Under Pietro Carmignani in 2002, Parma won the third Coppa Italia trophy against Juventus (but would slip to defeat in the 2002 Supercoppa Italiana) and finished outside the top six for the first time since promotion in 1990. This success earned it a tag as one of the \"Seven Sisters\". In April 2004, the club was declared insolvent following the financial meltdown of Parmalat and the club remained in special administration for three years.\nRebirth and another bankruptcy (2004\u20132015).\nThe club re-formed as Parma Football Club SpA in June 2004 (as a subsidiary of being liquidated Parma AC SpA) and the 2004\u201305 season saw Parma plummet to its lowest finish in Serie A\u00a0\u2013 despite a second consecutive 23-goal haul from Gilardino, who was then sold for \u20ac25\u00a0million\u00a0\u2013 as managers came and went. Parma ended the following season, its first without European competition since 1991, in tenth, but returned in 2006 after the \"Calciopoli\" scandal.\nOn 24 January 2007, Tommaso Ghirardi bought the club out of administration and became the owner and president of the club. Manager Claudio Ranieri helped the team avoid relegation to Serie B on the final day of the 2006\u201307 season following his February appointment. However, under a succession of managers, Parma's battle with relegation the following year was not successful, consigning the club to Serie B after 18 years in the top flight.\nFrancesco Guidolin won promotion back to Serie A at the first attempt with a second-place finish and led the side to eighth on its return to Serie A in 2009\u201310, narrowly missing out on qualification for the UEFA Europa League before leaving for Udinese. In May 2010, Guidolin swapped jobs with Pasquale Marino, who was sacked by Ghirardi in April 2011 when Parma was caught in another relegation dogfight. Under Marino's replacement, Franco Colomba, Parma escaped the threat of relegation with two games to spare. In January 2012, Colomba was replaced by Roberto Donadoni following a winless run that culminated in a 5\u20130 loss to Inter Milan and the new coach led the team to eighth position in a Serie A club record seven-match winning run.\nIn 2014, Donadoni guided Parma to sixth in Serie A and a third consecutive top ten finish, but a return to Europe in the Europa League for the first time since 2007 was barred due to the late payment of income tax on salaries, not qualifying for a UEFA license, for which the club would also be docked points during the 2014\u201315 Serie A season. Financial troubles precipitated a succession of ownership changes and the club's eventual bankruptcy in March 2015 with total liabilities of \u20ac218\u00a0million, including \u20ac63m unpaid salaries. The club was allowed to finish the season but finished bottom of the league in 20th place. Administrators Angelo Anedda and Alberto Guiotto were forced to put some trophies to sell in an auction in a desperate attempt to raise money to cover the debt. These included: three Coppa Italia won in 1992, 1999 and 2002, the UEFA Cup Winners' Cup from 1993, the 1994 UEFA Super Cup, two UEFA Cup of 1995 and 1999 and the 1999 Supercoppa Italiana.\nAnother rebirth (2015\u2013present).\nThe re-founded club, S.S.D. Parma Calcio 1913, was formed in July 2015, taking its name from the year of foundation of the predecessor club and securing a place in the 2015\u201316 Serie D under article 52 of N.O.I.F. as the representative of Parma. Ex-head coach Nevio Scala was appointed as president and former player Luigi Apolloni was chosen as head coach. In the club's first season, it sold over 9,000 season tickets, more than doubling the Serie D record. Parma achieved promotion from Serie D into professional football league Lega Pro with three games to spare following a 2\u20131 win against Delta Rovigo, ending the season in first place with 94 points from 38 games, and an unbeaten run of 28 victories and 10 draws.\nParma ended the 2016\u201317 Lega Pro season in second place of Group B, but were promoted to Serie B after a 2\u20130 win over Alessandria in the promotion play-off final.\nOn 18 May 2018, Parma achieved a third promotion in three seasons, becoming the first Italian football club to achieve this, having finished the 2017\u201318 Serie B season second behind champions Empoli and level on points with Frosinone, but achieving automatic promotion due to a better head-to-head record, thus making a comeback to the top flight for the next season in 2018\u201319 Serie A just three seasons after their bankruptcy relegation to Serie D.\nOn 23 July 2018, Parma were handed a 5 point deduction for the 2018\u201319 Serie A season, following text messages from Parma player Emanuele Calaio \"eliciting a reduced effort\" from two players of Spezia (Filippo De Col and Claudio Terzi) during the 2017\u201318 season, a match Parma won 2\u20130 to secure promotion. On 9 August, Parma had the 5-point deduction expunged. In the club's first season back in Serie A, they managed to achieve a 14th placed finish on the table, three points above the relegation zone.\nFor the 2019\u201320 Serie A season, Parma finished in 11th place with 49 points. Dejan Kulusevski, playing for Parma on loan from Atalanta, won the Best Young Player in Serie A award.\nAhead of the 2020\u201321 Serie A season, manager Roberto D'Aversa was sacked on 23 August 2020 and replaced by Fabio Liverani. Liverani would only last until 7 January 2021, himself being replaced by his predecessor D'Aversa. Parma finished the season in bottom place, managing just three wins from 38 games and were relegated to Serie B. In September 2020, Parma was purchased by American Kyle Krause.\nEnzo Maresca was appointed as the new head coach for the 2021\u201322 Serie B season. Maresca was sacked on 23 November 2021 and he was replaced by Giuseppe Iachini the same day. Parma finished the season in 12th place. Argentinian midfielder Franco V\u00e1zquez was the joint second highest scorer in the league with 14 goals. Fabio Pecchia took over as coach for the 2022\u201323 Serie B season. Parma was promoted to Serie A in the following season. In the 2024-2025 Serie A season, they sacked their manager Fabio Pecchia who managed to promote Parma from Serie B back to Seria A and Cristian Chivu was put in his place. Parma managed to finish 16th in this season.\nColours and badge.\nOriginally, the club wore blue and yellow chequered shirts in honour of the city's traditional colours, which date back to 1545 when the Duchy of Parma was established, but white shirts with a black cross on the chest were introduced after the First World War, drawing inspiration from Juventus' colours, following a name change. White continued to be worn as the main colour of the home kits for much of the remainder of the century, although often complemented with yellow, blue or both, rather than black. The club did, however, experiment in the 1950s with blue shirts and blue and yellow striped shirts. The cross shirts were restored and worn until bankruptcy in 1968, when white shirts with off-centre blue and yellow vertical bands were worn, but the cross returned from 1970 until 1983 when a yellow and blue-sleeved white shirt was introduced and used for 8 years.\nAfter decades in the lower divisions, Parma was promoted to Serie A in 1990, where the side immediately became a major force in the battle for major trophies, on many notable occasions in direct opposition to Juventus, who would become fierce rivals of Parma's. This rivalry and the influence of Parmalat led to the demotion of the white shirts to the away kit, so the side wore yellow and blue hooped shirts at home for six seasons between 1998 and 2004, and navy blue shirts often worn as third choice in this period. This was a time of great success for the club, thus the shirts became synonymous with Parma, often still called the \"Giallobl\u00f9\" (Yellow and Blues) today, despite a recent reversion to the traditional white shirts emblazoned with a cross caused by parent company Parmalat's collapse and the clubs subsequent re-foundation as Parma Football Club. Yellow and blue were Parma's traditional change colours, used in various combinations from 2004 to 2015, such as vertical stripes, hoops, crosses or as solid colour designs.\nParma's logo changed in 2005 to reflect the name change from Parma A.C. to Parma F.C., but the logo otherwise remained the same, encompassing the city colours of yellow and blue and the club's traditional black cross set on a white background, and has not changed much in years, although it was dramatically overhauled to feature a prancing bull for one season in 2000\u201301 before it was criticised and discontinued in favour of the old badge. A new badge with broadly similar features was introduced for the 2014\u201315 season following the use of a commemorative centenary badge for the 2013\u201314 campaign. The newly formed club in 2015 adopted a new logo before acquiring the rights to a number of legacy items for \u20ac250,000 a year later.\nGrounds.\nParma initially had no permanent home and used the \"Piazza d'Armi\", where two wooden posts constituted the frame of each goal. In December 1914, the club began to use land between the Via Emilia, the Eridania refinery and the Ferraguti factory, but it was sold, so the club returned to the \"Piazza d'Armi\" before transferring to the \"Tre Pioppi\", the first fenced-off pitch in the city. Parma moved into the Stadio Ennio Tardini in 1923 and remains there today, although the stadium saw drastic change from the vision of Ennio Tardini, under whose auspices the stadium was to be built, but who died before completion of the venue. Much of the renovation took place after the club's first promotion to Serie A at the start of the 1990s.\nSince 1996, the first team has trained and played friendly matches at the Centro Sportivo di Collecchio in Collecchio, which is located 15 kilometres to the south-west of the stadium. Parma's youth teams also play their home matches in the same complex. Until 2015, younger youth teams trained at Campi Stuard but now train at Collechio. In 2018, the refounded Parma Calcio 1913 acquired the centre from the administrator of Eventi Sportivi\u00a0S.p.A., the parent company of Parma F.C., and the former owner of the centre, for about \u20ac3\u00a0million.\nSupport.\nThe supporters of Parma are seen as placid fans. Traditionally, they have been seen as fans who enjoy the spectacle of football and are less partisan, although they have been more characterised by impatience of late. The supporters were praised for their loyalty after the club sold more season tickets in 2015 when playing in Serie D than the previous year in Serie A following bankruptcy. In Northeast Italy, the team is the fifth best supported, behind Inter Milan, Juventus, Milan and Bologna, the first three of which are not based in that region. They are represented by three main groups: \"il Centro di Coordinamento dei Parma Club\" (which represents most of the fanbase), \"l'Associazione Petitot\" and the club's ultras, \"Boys Parma\", which was established on 3 August 1977 by young fans wanting to split from the Centro di Coordinamento and to encourage meetings with opposition fans. The Boys Parma occupy the northern end of the home stadium, \"La Curva Nord\", directly opposite to where the away fans sit in the south stand. In 2008, the Curva Nord was renamed in honour of Boys Parma 1977 member Matteo Bagnaresi, who died when he was run over on the way to the Tardini by a coach which was carrying the opposition Juventus fans. In a not uncommon practice, the number 12 shirt has been reserved for the Parma fans, meaning no player is registered to play with that number on his kit for the club. The implication is that the supporters, particularly those of the famous Curva Nord, are the twelfth man. The last player to be registered with the number was Gabriele Giroli for the 2002\u201303 season. Parma's club anthem is \"Il grido di battaglia\", which means \"The Battle Cry\".\nRivalries.\nParma maintains rivalries with regional and national clubs; some of these are keenly fought local derbies. \"Derby dell'Enza\" opponents Reggiana are the club's bitterest rivals. The ill-feeling with Reggiana comes from a traditional city rivalry between Parma and Reggio Emilia. Parma contests the \"Derby dell'Emilia\" with Bologna. Bologna and Parma are Emilia-Romagna's two most decorated clubs, winning the region's only domestic titles: 7 Serie A titles and 5 Coppe Italia. Two other local derbies are the \"Derby dei Ducati\", which is contested with neighbours Modena, and the \"Derby del Ducato\", which is played against Piacenza. Despite their relative obscurity, Lombardian side Cremonese and Tuscan outfit Carrarese, to Parma's north and south, respectively, are both seen as rivals too.\nJuventus is considered a great rival of Parma largely due to their recent duels, which include Parma's 1995 UEFA Cup victory, its first and third Coppa Italia triumphs, Supercoppa Italiana defeats in 1995 and 2002, and its 1995 domestic cup final defeat to \"The Old Lady\". These six matches comprise nearly half of the fourteen major finals Parma has participated in. Ironically, Parma's colours have their origins in those Juventus wears, and the switch from white and black to a yellow and blue home kit in the late 1990s took place in order to distance and distinguish Parma from Juventus. Parma maintain keenly fought rivalries with Vicenza and Genoa.\nIn Italy, it is common for clubs to be twinned in an arrangement called \"gemellaggi\". This is a practice uncommon elsewhere. Parma enjoy amicable relations with Empoli in an arrangement that dates back to a game played in foggy conditions in 1984 that ended in the Parma fans congratulating those of Empoli on its win when the full-time whistle was blown without the \"Azzurri\" fans' knowledge. Perhaps a more current bond is felt towards the fans of Sampdoria.\nOwnership and finances.\nIn 1991, the club was bought by multinational Italian dairy and food corporation Parmalat. This was the platform for success on the pitch but the club eventually succumbed to administration in 2004 due to Parmalat's massive bankruptcy with debts of $20\u00a0billion and fraudulent activity at Parmalat worth over \u20ac10\u00a0billion and a \u20ac167\u00a0million net loss by the club in 2003. On 24 January 2007, engineering entrepreneur Tommaso Ghirardi bought the club after three years of administration for $39\u00a0million and incorporated Eventi Sportivi as a holding company owning 100% of the club's shares of \u20ac20\u00a0million nominal value. Eventi Sportivi Srl (later S.p.A.), at first had a share capital of just \u20ac3\u00a0million, with Banca Monte Parma, owned 10% of the shares as minority. By 21 January 2009, Ghirardi's ownership of Eventi Sportivi was 75% with Banca Monte Parma holding 10% and Marco Ferrari, former vice-president Diego Penocchio and Penocchio's company Brixia Incipit each owning 5%. In July 2011, Ghirardi sold to both Alberto Rossi and Alberto Volpi 5% each of Eventi Sportivi. On 29 February 2014, Energy T.I. Group bought 10% of the shares in the club from Eventi Sportivi.\nOn 19 December 2014 and as a result of a ruling which barred the club from a first European campaign under Tommaso Ghirardi, Ghirardi sold his 66.55% controlling stake in Eventi Sportivi to Dastraso Holding Ltd, a company based in Cyprus and controlled by Rezart Ta\u00e7i for \u20ac1, at which point the club was $200\u00a0million in debt. The club became the third Serie A club to become foreign-owned as a result and Albanian Emir Kodra was installed as president.\nIn February 2015, Taci sold his stake to Giampietro Manenti for the price he bought it, \u20ac1, less than two months after buying it, at which point salaries at the financially stricken club had not been paid since the previous summer. With Parma bottom of Serie A, Manenti was arrested in March 2015 on allegations of money laundering and his involvement in a credit card fraud ring, imperilling the already precarious situation as the club was plunged further into debt.\nOn 19 March 2015, the club was declared bankrupt with a total liabilities of \u20ac218\u00a0million (including unpaid wages of \u20ac63\u00a0million). On 22 April 2015, the intermediate holding company of Parma, Eventi Sportivi SpA, was also declared bankruptcy by the Tribunal of Parma. The club was then declared legally bankrupt on 22 June 2015 after no new investors willing to refurbish \u20ac22.6\u00a0million debt in order to trigger Comma 3 of Article 52 of N.O.I.F. to allow the club to remain in Serie B. Other debts of the club were either waived by the footballers or settled by the administrator. New investor was not required to repay the subordinated debt and bank debt of the old company. The medals of Parma, which was owned by the company, as well as Centro Sportivo di Collecchio which was owned by its holding company Eventi Sportivi, were under auction after the bankruptcy.\nThe phoenix club S.S.D. Parma Calcio 1913 S.r.L. was incorporated in 2015 under the ownership of Nuovo Inizio SrL with share capital of \u20ac250,000. Nuovo Inizio was owned by a number of backers including representatives of Parmalat and local businessmen Guido Barilla (co-owner of Barilla Group), Paolo Pizzarotti (president of Impresa Pizzarotti), Mauro Del Rio and Giampaolo Dallara. The new owners sought to overhaul the core philosophy of Italian club ownership and formed Parma Partecipazioni Calcistiche SrL to act as a vehicle for fan ownership, so issued a further \u20ac89,286 of shares to that company. Fans therefore own approximately 25% of the club at a cost of \u20ac500 per share.\nIn June 2017, Chinese businessman Jiang Lizhang's Desports group acquired a 60% majority stake in the club. The seven local businessman who launched the club in 2015 retained 30% of the club, while the remaining 10% remained in the hands of fans through Parma Partecipazione Calcistiche. At the end of October 2018 the local Nuovo Inizio group regained control of the club reacquiring 60% of the shares, with the Chinese partners forced to downsize to 30% in light of alleged lack of diligence in meeting their obligations, while 10% remained unchanged in the public company Partecipazioni Calcistiche. On 9 November Parma Calcio held a shareholders' Meeting to appoint a new board of directors, at the end of which Pietro Pizzarotti, at the time vice-president, was appointed the new president of the club.\nIn 2020, Parma were purchased by the Krause Group, owners of American-based convenience store chain Kum &amp; Go.\nSince 2013 the main sponsor is Cetilar by Pharmanutra.\n \"As of 22 November 2025\"\nPlayers.\nCurrent squad.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Football squad player/styles.css\" /&gt;\n \"As of 22 November 2025\"\nPrimavera.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Football squad player/styles.css\" /&gt;\n \"As of 8 September 2025\"\nOut on loan.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Football squad player/styles.css\" /&gt;\nRetired numbers.\n6\u00a0\u2013 The club announced the retirement of the shirt number worn by club's captain Alessandro Lucarelli after his retirement announcement. Lucarelli holds the record for league appearances for the club and stayed with the club from its 2015 relegation from Serie A to Serie D following bankruptcy and through its three straight promotions back to Serie A between 2015 and 2018.\n12\u00a0\u2013 From the 2002\u201303 season until the present (with the exception of the 2015\u201316 season in Serie D, where league rules required that the number be assigned to a substitute), Curva Nord of the Stadio Ennio Tardini, as a sign of recognition towards the fans who sit in the Curva Nord, considered the 12th man on the pitch.\nClub officials.\nOwner\nCoaching staff.\nChairmen history.\nParma has had numerous chairmen over the course of its history; here is a complete list of them:\nCoaching history.\nBelow is a list of Parma coaches since the end of the First World War until the present day.\nHonours.\nParma has won eight major titles in its history, all coming in a period of ten years between 1992 and 2002. These honours make it the eleventh most successful team in Italian football history in terms of the number of major trophies won, the fourth most successful Italian team in European competitions (after AC Milan, Juventus and Inter Milan), and one of thirteen Italian clubs to have won multiple major titles.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "62613", "revid": "44062", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62613", "title": "Jasper (disambiguation)", "text": "Jasper is an opaque mineral.\nJasper or Jaspers may also refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
