{"id": "67453", "revid": "47403759", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=67453", "title": "Nantes", "text": "Prefecture and commune in Pays de la Loire, France\nNantes (, ; ; or ; ) is a city in the Loire-Atlantique department of France on the Loire, from the Atlantic coast. The city is the sixth largest in France, with a population of 320,732 in Nantes proper and a metropolitan area of nearly 1 million inhabitants (2020). With Saint-Nazaire, a seaport on the Loire estuary, Nantes forms one of the main north-western French metropolitan agglomerations.\nIt is the administrative seat of the Loire-Atlantique department and the Pays de la Loire region, one of 18 regions of France. Nantes belongs historically and culturally to Brittany, a former duchy and province, and its omission from the modern administrative region of Brittany is controversial.\nNantes was identified during classical antiquity as a port on the Loire. It was the seat of a bishopric at the end of the Roman era before it was captured by the Bretons in 851 with the help of Lambert II of Nantes. Although Nantes was the primary residence of the 15th-century dukes of Brittany, Rennes became the provincial capital after the 1532 union of Brittany and France. \nDuring the 17th century, after the establishment of the French colonial empire, Nantes gradually became the largest port in France and was responsible for nearly half of the 18th-century French Atlantic slave trade. The French Revolution resulted in an economic decline, but Nantes developed robust industries after 1850 (chiefly in shipbuilding and food processing). Deindustrialization in the second half of the 20th century spurred the city to adopt a service economy. \nIn 2020, the Globalization and World Cities Research Network ranked Nantes as a Gamma world city. It is the third-highest-ranking city in France, after Paris and Lyon. The Gamma category includes cities such as Algiers, Orlando, Porto, Turin and Leipzig. Nantes has been praised for its quality of life, and it received the European Green Capital Award in 2013. The European Commission noted the city's efforts to reduce air pollution and CO2 emissions, its high-quality and well-managed public transport system and its biodiversity, with of green space and several protected Natura 2000 areas.\nEtymology.\nNantes is named after a tribe of Gaul, the Namnetes, who established a settlement between the end of the second century and the beginning of the first century BC on the north bank of the Loire near its confluence with the Erdre. The origin of the name \"Namnetes\" is uncertain, but is thought to come from the Gaulish root *\"nant-\" 'river, stream' (from the pre-Celtic root \"*nanto\" 'valley') or from \"Amnites\", another tribal name possibly meaning 'men of the river'.\nIts first recorded name was by the Greek writer Ptolemy, who referred to the settlement as () and ()\u2014which might be read as ()\u2014in his treatise, \"Geography\". The name was Latinised during the Gallo-Roman period as (the most common form), , and . Although its origins are unclear, seems to be related to the Gaulish word 'confluence'.\nThe Namnete root of the city's name was introduced at the end of the Roman period, when it became known as \"port of the Namnetes\" and 'city of the Namnetes'. Like other cities in the region (including Paris), its name was replaced during the fourth century with a Gaulish one: Lutetia became Paris (city of the Parisii), and Darioritum became Vannes (city of the Veneti). Nantes's name continued to evolve, becoming and during the fifth century and Nantes after the sixth, via syncope (suppression of the middle syllable).\nModern pronunciation and nicknames.\n\"Nantes\" is pronounced , and the city's inhabitants are known as \"Nantais\" . In Gallo, the o\u00efl language traditionally spoken in the region around Nantes, the city is spelled \"Naunnt\" or \"Nantt\" and pronounced identically to French, although northern speakers use a long . In Breton, Nantes is known as or , the latter of which is less common and reflects the more-frequent use of articles in Breton toponyms than in French ones.\nNantes's historical nickname was \"Venice of the West\" (), a reference to the many quays and river channels in the old town before they were filled in during the 1920s and 1930s. The city is commonly known as \"the City of the Dukes [of Brittany]\" for its castle and former role as a ducal residence.\nHistory.\nPrehistory and antiquity.\nThe first inhabitants of what is now Nantes settled during the Bronze Age, later than in the surrounding regions (which have Neolithic monuments absent from Nantes). Its first inhabitants were apparently attracted by small iron and tin deposits in the region's subsoil. The area exported tin, mined in Abbaretz and Piriac, as far as Ireland. After about 1,000 years of trading, local industry appeared around 900 BC; remnants of smithies dated to the eighth and seventh centuries BC have been found in the city. Nantes may have been the major Gaulish settlement of Corbilo, on the Loire estuary, which was mentioned by the Greek historians Strabo and Polybius.\nIts history from the seventh century to the Roman conquest in the first century BC is poorly documented, and there is no evidence of a city in the area before the reign of Tiberius in the first century AD. During the Gaulish period it was the capital of the Namnetes people, who were allied with the Veneti in a territory extending to the northern bank of the Loire. Rivals in the area included the Pictones, who controlled the area south of the Loire in the city of Ratiatum (present-day Rez\u00e9) until the end of the second century AD. Ratiatum, founded under Augustus, developed more quickly than Nantes and was a major port in the region. Nantes began to grow when Ratiatum collapsed after the Germanic invasions.\nBecause tradesmen favoured inland roads rather than Atlantic routes, Nantes never became a large city under Roman occupation. Although it lacked amenities such as a theatre or an amphitheatre, the city had sewers, public baths and a temple dedicated to Mars Mullo. After an attack by German tribes in 275, Nantes's inhabitants built a wall; this defense also became common in surrounding Gaulish towns. The wall in Nantes, enclosing , was one of the largest in Gaul.\nChristianity was introduced during the third century. The first local martyrs (Donatian and Rogatian) were executed in 288\u2013290, and a cathedral was built during the fourth century.\nMiddle Ages.\nLike much of the region, Nantes was part of the Roman Empire during the early Middle Ages. Although many parts of Brittany experienced significant Breton immigration (loosening ties to Rome), Nantes remained allied with the empire until its collapse in the fifth century. Around 490, the Franks under Clovis I captured the city (alongside eastern Brittany) from the Visigoths after a sixty-day siege; it was used as a stronghold against the Bretons. \nUnder Charlemagne in the eighth century the town was the capital of the Breton March, a buffer zone protecting the Carolingian Empire from Breton invasion. The first governor of the Breton March was Roland, whose feats were mythologized in the body of literature known as the Matter of France. \nAfter Charlemagne's death in 814, Breton armies invaded the March and fought the Franks. Nominoe (a Breton) became the first duke of Brittany, seizing Nantes in 850. Discord marked the first decades of Breton rule in Nantes as Breton lords fought among themselves, making the city vulnerable to Viking incursions. The most spectacular Viking attack in Nantes occurred in 843, when Viking warriors killed the bishop but did not settle in the city at that time. Nantes became part of the Viking realm in 919, but the Norse were expelled from the town in 937 by Alan II, Duke of Brittany.\nFeudalism took hold in France during the 10th and 11th centuries, and Nantes was the seat of a county founded in the ninth century. Until the beginning of the 13th century, it was the subject of succession crises which saw the town pass several times from the Dukes of Brittany to the counts of Anjou (of the House of Plantagenet). During the 14th century, Brittany experienced a war of succession which ended with the accession of the House of Montfort to the ducal throne. The Montforts, seeking emancipation from the suzerainty of the French kings, reinforced Breton institutions. They chose Nantes, the largest town in Brittany (with a population of over 10,000), as their main residence and made it the home of their council, their treasury and their chancery. Port traffic, insignificant during the Middle Ages, became the city's main activity. Nantes began to trade with foreign countries, exporting salt from Bourgneuf, wine, fabrics and hemp (usually to the British Isles). \nThe 15th century is considered Nantes's first golden age. The reign of Francis II saw many improvements to a city in dire need of repair after the wars of succession and a series of storms and fires between 1387 and 1415. Many buildings were built or rebuilt (including the cathedral and the castle), and the University of Nantes, the first in Brittany, was founded in 1460.\nModern era.\nThe marriage of Anne of Brittany to Charles VIII of France in 1491 began the unification of the duchy of Brittany with the French crown which was ratified by Francis I of France in 1532. The union ended a long feudal conflict between France and Brittany, reasserting the king's suzerainty over the Bretons. In return for surrendering its independence, Brittany retained its privileges. Although most Breton institutions were maintained, the unification favoured Rennes (the site of ducal coronations). Rennes received most legal and administrative institutions, and Nantes kept a financial role with its Chamber of Accounts. \nDuring the French Wars of Religion from 1562 to 1598, the city was a Catholic League stronghold. The Duke of Merc\u0153ur, governor of Brittany, strongly opposed the succession of the Protestant Henry IV of France to the throne of France in 1589. The Duke created an independent government in Nantes, allying with Spain and pressing for independence from France. Despite initial successes with Spanish aid, in 1598 he submitted to Henry IV (who had by then converted to Catholicism); the Edict of Nantes (legalising Protestantism in France) was signed in the town, concluding the French wars of religion. Nonetheless, the town remained fervently Catholic (by contrast to nearby La Rochelle), and the local Protestant community did not number more than 1,000.\nCoastal navigation and the export of locally produced goods (salt, wine and fabrics) dominated the local economy around 1600. During the mid-17th century, the siltation of local salterns and a fall in wine exports compelled Nantes to find other activities. Local shipowners began importing sugar from the French West Indies (Martinique, Guadeloupe and Saint-Domingue) in the 1640s, which became very profitable after protectionist reforms implemented by Jean-Baptiste Colbert prevented the import of sugar from Spanish colonies (which had dominated the market). \nIn 1664 Nantes was France's eighth-largest port, and it was the largest by 1700. Plantations in the colonies needed labour to produce sugar, rum, tobacco, indigo dye, coffee and cocoa, and Nantes shipowners began trading African slaves in 1706. The port was part of the triangular trade: ships went to West Africa to buy slaves, slaves were sold in the French West Indies, and the ships returned to Nantes with sugar and other exotic goods. From 1707 to 1793, Nantes was responsible for 42 percent of the French slave trade; its merchants sold about 450,000 African slaves in the West Indies.\nManufactured goods were more lucrative than raw materials during the 18th century. There were about fifteen sugar refineries in the city around 1750 and nine cotton mills in 1786. Nantes and its surrounding area were the main producers of French printed cotton fabric during the 18th century, and the Netherlands was the city's largest client for exotic goods. Although trade brought wealth to Nantes, the city was confined by its walls; their removal during the 18th century allowed it to expand. Neoclassical squares and public buildings were constructed, and wealthy merchants built sumptuous \"h\u00f4tels particuliers\".\nFrench Revolution.\nThe French Revolution initially received some support in Nantes, a bourgeois city rooted in private enterprise. On 18 July 1789, locals seized the Castle of the Dukes of Brittany in an imitation of the storming of the Bastille. Rural western France, Catholic and conservative, strongly opposed the abolition of the monarchy and the submission of the clergy. A rebellion in the neighbouring Vend\u00e9e began in 1793, quickly spreading to surrounding regions. \nNantes was an important Republican garrison on the Loire en route to England. On 29 June 1793, 30,000 Royalist troops from Vend\u00e9e attacked the city on their way to Normandy (where they hoped to receive British support). Twelve thousand Republican soldiers resisted and the Battle of Nantes resulted in the death of Royalist leader Jacques Cathelineau. Three years later another Royalist leader, Fran\u00e7ois de Charette, was executed in Nantes.\nAfter the Battle of Nantes, the National Convention (which had founded the First French Republic) decided to purge the city of its anti-revolutionary elements. Nantes was seen by the convention as a corrupt merchant city; the local elite was less supportive of the French Revolution, since its growing centralisation reduced their influence. From October 1793 to February 1794, deputy Jean-Baptiste Carrier presided over a revolutionary tribunal notorious for cruelty and ruthlessness. Between 12,000 and 13,000 people (including women and children) were arrested, and 8,000 to 11,000 died of typhus or were executed by the guillotine, shooting or drowning. The Drownings at Nantes were intended to kill large numbers of people simultaneously, and Carrier called the Loire \"the national bathtub\".\nThe French Revolution was disastrous for the local economy. The slave trade nearly disappeared because of the abolition of slavery and the independence of Saint-Domingue, and Napoleon's Continental Blockade decimated trade with other European countries. Nantes never fully recovered its 18th-century wealth; the port handled 43,242 tons of goods in 1807, down from 237,716 tons in 1790.\nIndustries.\nOutlawed by the French Revolution, the slave trade re-established itself as Nantes's major source of income in the first decades of the 19th century. It was the last French port to conduct the illegal Atlantic trade, continuing it until about 1827. The 19th-century slave trade may have been as extensive as that of the previous century, with about 400,000 slaves deported to the colonies. Businessmen took advantage of local vegetable production and Breton fishing to develop a canning industry during the 1820s, but canning was eclipsed by sugar imported from R\u00e9union in the 1840s and 1850s. Nantes tradesmen received a tax rebate on R\u00e9union sugar, which was lucrative until disease devastated the cane plantations in 1863. \nBy the mid-19th century, Le Havre and Marseille were the two main French ports; the former traded with America and the latter with Asia. They had embraced the Industrial Revolution, thanks to Parisian investments; Nantes lagged behind, struggling to find profitable activities. Nostalgic for the pre-revolutionary golden age, the local elite had been suspicious of political and technological progress during the first half of the 19th century. In 1851, after much debate and opposition, Nantes was connected to Paris by the Tours\u2013Saint-Nazaire railway.\nNantes became a major industrial city during the second half of the 19th century with the aid of several families who invested in successful businesses. In 1900, the city's two main industries were food processing and shipbuilding. The former, primarily the canning industry, included the biscuit manufacturer LU and the latter was represented by three shipyards which were among the largest in France. These industries helped maintain port activity and facilitated agriculture, sugar imports, fertilizer production, machinery and metallurgy, which employed 12,000 people in Nantes and its surrounding area in 1914. Because large, modern ships had increased difficulty traversing the Loire to reach Nantes, a new port in Saint-Nazaire had been established at the mouth of the estuary in 1835. Saint-Nazaire, primarily developed for goods to be transhipped before being sent to Nantes, also built rival shipyards. Saint-Nazaire surpassed Nantes in port traffic for the first time in 1868. Reacting to the growth of the rival port, Nantes built a canal parallel to the Loire to remain accessible to large ships. The canal, completed in 1892, was abandoned in 1910 because of the efficient dredging of the Loire between 1903 and 1914.\nLand reclamation.\nAt the beginning of the 20th century, the river channels flowing through Nantes were increasingly perceived as hampering the city's comfort and economic development. Sand siltation required dredging, which weakened the quays; one quay collapsed in 1924. Embankments were overcrowded with railways, roads and tramways. Between 1926 and 1946, most of the channels were filled in and their water diverted. Large thoroughfares replaced the channels, altering the urban landscape. Feydeau and Gloriette Islands in the old town were attached to the north bank, and the other islands in the Loire were formed into the Isle of Nantes.\nWhen the land reclamation was almost complete, Nantes was shaken by the air raids of the Second World War. The city was captured by Nazi Germany on 18 June 1940, during the Battle of France. Forty-eight civilians were executed in Nantes in 1941 in retaliation for the assassination of German officer Karl Hotz. They are remembered as \"the 50 hostages\" because the Germans initially planned to kill 50 people. Allied bombing raids first hit the city in August 1941 and May 1942. The main attacks occurred on 16 and 23 September 1943, when most of Nantes's industrial facilities and portions of the city centre and its surrounding area were destroyed by American bombs. About 20,000 people were left homeless by the 1943 raids, and 70,000 subsequently left the city. Allied raids killed 1,732 people and destroyed 2,000 buildings in Nantes, leaving a further 6,000 buildings unusable. The Germans abandoned the city on 12 August 1944, and it was recaptured without a fight by the French Forces of the Interior and the U.S. Army.\nPostwar.\nThe postwar years were a period of strikes and protests in Nantes. A strike organised by the city's 17,500 metallurgists during the summer of 1955 to protest salary disparities between Paris and the rest of France deeply impacted the French political scene, and their action was echoed in other cities. Nantes saw other large strikes and demonstrations during the May 1968 events, when marches drew about 20,000 people into the streets. The 1970s global recession brought a large wave of deindustrialisation to France, and Nantes saw the closure of many factories and the city's shipyards. The 1970s and 1980s were primarily a period of economic stagnation for Nantes. During the 1980s and 1990s its economy became service-oriented and it experienced economic growth under Jean-Marc Ayrault, the city's mayor from 1989 to 2012. Under Ayrault's administration, Nantes used its quality of life to attract service firms. The city developed a rich cultural life, advertising itself as a creative place near the ocean. Institutions and facilities (such as its airport) were re-branded as \"Nantes Atlantique\" to highlight this proximity. Local authorities have commemorated the legacy of the slave trade, promoting dialogue with other cultures.\nNantes has been noted in recent years for its climate of social unrest, marked by frequent and often violent clashes between protesters and police. Tear gas is frequently deployed during protests. The city has a significant ultra-left radical scene, owing in part to the proximity of the ZAD de Notre-Dame-des-Landes. Masked rioters have repeatedly ransacked shops, offices and public transport infrastructure. The in June 2019 has led to accusations of police brutality and cover-ups.\nGeography.\nLocation.\nNantes is in northwestern France, near the Atlantic Ocean and southwest of Paris. Bordeaux, the other major metropolis of western France, is south. Nantes and Bordeaux share positions at the mouth of an estuary, and Nantes is on the Loire estuary.\nThe city is at a natural crossroads between the ocean in the west, the centre of France (towards Orl\u00e9ans) in the east, Brittany in the north and Vend\u00e9e (on the way to Bordeaux) in the south. It is an architectural junction; northern French houses with slate roofs are north of the Loire, and Mediterranean dwellings with low terracotta roofs dominate the south bank. The Loire is also the northern limit of grape culture. \nLand north of Nantes is dominated by bocage and dedicated to polyculture and animal husbandry, and the south is renowned for its Muscadet vineyards and market gardens. The city is near the geographical centre of the land hemisphere, identified in 1945 by Samuel Boggs as near the main railway station (around ).\nHydrology.\nThe Loire is about long and its estuary, beginning in Nantes, is in length. The river's bed and banks have changed considerably over a period of centuries. In Nantes the Loire had divided into a number of channels, creating a dozen islands and sand ridges. They facilitated crossing the river, contributing to the city's growth. Most of the islands were protected with levees during the modern era, and they disappeared in the 1920s and 1930s when the smallest waterways were filled in. The Loire in Nantes now has only two branches, one on either side of the Isle of Nantes.\nThe river is tidal in the city, and tides are observed about further east. The tidal range can reach in Nantes, larger than at the mouth of the estuary. This is the result of 20th-century dredging to make Nantes accessible by large ships; tides were originally much weaker. Nantes was at the point where the river current and the tides cancelled each other out, resulting in siltation and the formation of the original islands.\nThe city is at the confluence of two tributaries. The Erdre flows into the Loire from its north bank, and the S\u00e8vre Nantaise flows into the Loire from its south bank. These two rivers initially provided natural links with the hinterland. When the channels of the Loire were filled, the Erdre was diverted in central Nantes and its confluence with the Loire was moved further east. The Erdre includes Versailles Island, which became a Japanese garden during the 1980s. It was created in the 19th century with fill from construction of the Nantes\u2013Brest canal.\nGeology.\nNantes is built on the Armorican Massif, a range of weathered mountains which may be considered the backbone of Brittany. The mountains, stretching from the end of the Breton peninsula to the outskirts of the sedimentary Paris Basin, are composed of several parallel ridges of Ordovician and Cadomian rocks. Nantes is where one of these ridges, the Sillon de Bretagne, meets the Loire. It passes through the western end of the old town, forming a series of cliffs above the quays. The end of the ridge, the Butte Sainte-Anne, is a natural landmark above sea level; its foothills are at an elevation of .\nThe Sillon de Bretagne is composed of granite; the rest of the region is a series of low plateaus covered with silt and clay, with mica schist and sediments found in lower areas. Much of the old town and all of the Isle of Nantes consist of backfill. Elevations in Nantes are generally higher in the western neighbourhoods on the Sillon, reaching in the north-west. The Erdre flows through a slate fault. Eastern Nantes is flatter, with a few hills reaching . The city's lowest points, along the Loire, are above sea level.\nClimate.\nNantes has an oceanic climate (K\u00f6ppen: \"Cfb\") influenced by its proximity to the Atlantic Ocean. West winds produced by cyclonic depressions in the Atlantic dominate, and north and north-west winds are also common. Slight variations in elevation make fog common in valleys, and slopes oriented south and south-west have good insolation. Winters are cool and rainy, with an average temperature of ; snow is rare. Summers are warm, with an average temperature of . Rain is abundant throughout the year, with an annual average of . The climate in Nantes is suitable for growing a variety of plants, from temperate vegetables to exotic trees and flowers imported during the colonial era.\nUrban layout.\nNantes's layout is typical of French towns and cities. It has a historical centre with old monuments, administrative buildings and small shops, surrounded by 19th-century faubourgs surrounded by newer suburban houses and public housing. The city centre has a medieval core (corresponding to the former walled town) and 18th-century extensions running west and east. The northern extension, Marchix, was considered squalid and nearly disappeared during the 20th century. The old town did not extend south before the 19th century, since it would have meant building on the unsteady islands in the Loire.\nThe medieval core has narrow streets and a mixture of half-timbered buildings, more recent sandstone buildings, post-World War II reconstruction and modern redevelopment. It is primarily a student neighbourhood, with many bars and small shops. The eastern extension (behind Nantes Cathedral) was traditionally inhabited by the aristocracy, and the larger western extension along the Loire was built for the bourgeoisie. It is Nantes's most-expensive area, with wide avenues, squares such as the Place Saint-Pierre and \"h\u00f4tels particuliers\". The area was extended towards the Parc de Proc\u00e9 during the 19th century. The other faubourgs were built along the main boulevards and the plateaus, turning the valleys into parks. Outside central Nantes several villages, including Chantenay, Doulon, L'Eraudi\u00e8re and Saint-Joseph-de-Porterie, were absorbed by urbanisation.\nAfter World War II, several housing projects were built to accommodate Nantes's growing population. The oldest, Les Dervalli\u00e8res, was developed in 1956 and was followed by Bellevue in 1959 and Le Breil and Malakoff in 1971. Once areas of poverty, they are experiencing regeneration since the 2000s. The northern outskirts of the city, along the Erdre, include the main campus of the University of Nantes and other institutes of higher education. During the second half of the 20th century, Nantes expanded south into the communes of Rez\u00e9, Vertou and Saint-S\u00e9bastien-sur-Loire (across the Loire but near the city centre) and north-bank communes including Saint-Herblain, Orvault and Sainte-Luce-sur-Loire.\nThe Isle of Nantes is divided between former shipyards on the west, an old faubourg in its centre and modern housing estates on the east. Since the 2000s, it has been subject to the conversion of former industrial areas into office space, housing and leisure facilities. Local authorities intend to make it an extension of the city centre. Further development is also planned on the north bank along an axis linking the train station and the Loire.\nParks and environment.\nNantes has 100 public parks, gardens and squares covering . The oldest is the Jardin des Plantes, a botanical garden created in 1807. It has a large collection of exotic plants, including a 200-year-old \"Magnolia grandiflora\" and the national collection of \"camellia\". Other large parks include the Parc de Proc\u00e9, Parc du Grand Blottereau and Parc de la Gaudini\u00e8re, the former gardens of country houses built outside the old town. Natural areas, an additional , include the Petite Amazonie (a Natura 2000 protected forest) and several woods, meadows and marshes. Green space (public and private) makes up 41 percent of Nantes's area.\nThe city adopted an ecological framework in 2007 to reduce greenhouse gases and promote energy transition. Nantes has three ecodistricts (one on the Isle of Nantes, one near the train station and the third in the north-east of the city), which aim to provide affordable, ecological housing and counter urban sprawl by redeveloping neglected areas of the city.\nGovernance.\nLocal government.\nNantes is the (capital city) of the Loire-Atlantique \"d\u00e9partement\" and the Pays de la Loire . It is the residence of a and \"d\u00e9partement\" \"prefect\", local representatives of the French government. Nantes is also the meeting place of the and \"d\u00e9partement\" councils, two elected political bodies.\nThe city is administered by a mayor and a council, elected every six years. The council has 65 councillors. It originated in 1410, when John V, Duke of Brittany created the Burghers's Council. The assembly was controlled by wealthy merchants and the Lord Lieutenant. After the union of Brittany and France, the burghers petitioned the French king to give them a city council which would enhance their freedom; their request was granted by Francis II in 1559. The new council had a mayor, ten aldermen and a crown prosecutor. The first council was elected in 1565 with Nantes's first mayor, Geoffroy Drouet. The present city council is a result of the French Revolution and a 4 December 1789 act. The current mayor of Nantes is Johanna Rolland (Socialist Party), who was elected on 4 April 2014. The party has held a majority since 1983, and Nantes has become a left-wing stronghold. The city council is based at the H\u00f4tel de Ville (City Hall).\nSince 1995, Nantes has been divided into 11 neighbourhoods (\"quartiers\"), each with an advisory committee and administrative agents. City-council members are appointed to each \"quartier\" to consult with the local committees. The neighbourhood committees, existing primarily to facilitate dialogue between citizens and the local government, meet twice a year.\nLike most French municipalities, Nantes is part of an intercommunal structure which combines the city with 24 smaller, neighbouring communes. Called Nantes M\u00e9tropole, it encompasses the city's metropolitan area and had a population of 609,198 in 2013. Nantes M\u00e9tropole administers urban planning, transport, public areas, waste disposal, energy, water, housing, higher education, economic development, employment and European topics. As a consequence, the city council's mandates are security, primary and secondary education, early childhood, social aid, culture, sport and health. Nantes M\u00e9tropole, created in 1999, is administered by a council consisting of the 97 members of the local municipal councils. According to an act passed in 2014, beginning in 2020, the metropolitan council will be elected by the citizens of Nantes M\u00e9tropole. The council is currently overseen by Rolland.\nHeraldry.\nLocal authorities began using official symbols in the 14th century, when the provost commissioned a seal on which the Duke of Brittany stood on a boat and protected Nantes with his sword. The present coat of arms was first used in 1514; its ermines symbolise Brittany, and its green waves suggest the Loire.\nNantes's coat of arms had ducal emblems before the French Revolution: the belt cord of the Order of the Cord (founded by Anne of Brittany) and the city's coronet. The coronet was replaced by a mural crown during the 18th century, and during the revolution a new emblem with a statue of Liberty replaced the coat of arms. During Napoleon's rule the coat of arms returned, with bees (a symbol of his empire) added to the chief. The original coat of arms was readopted in 1816, and the Liberation Cross and the 1939\u201345 War Cross were added in 1948.\nBefore the revolution, Nantes's motto was \"Oculi omnium in te sperant, Domine\" (\"The eyes of all wait upon thee, O Lord\", a line from a grace). It disappeared during the revolution, and the city adopted its current motto\u2014\"Favet Neptunus eunti\" (\"Neptune favours the traveller\")\u2014in 1816. Nantes's flag is derived from the naval jack flown by Breton vessels before the French Revolution. The flag has a white cross on a black one; its quarters have Breton ermines except for the upper left, which has the city's coat of arms. The black and white crosses are historic symbols of Brittany and France, respectively.\nNantes and Brittany.\nNantes and the Loire-Atlantique \"d\u00e9partement\" were part of the historic province of Brittany, and the city and Rennes were its traditional capitals. In the 1789 replacement of the historic provinces of France, Brittany was divided among five \"d\u00e9partements\". The administrative region of Brittany did not exist during the 19th and early 20th centuries, although its cultural heritage remained. Nantes and Rennes are in Upper Brittany (the Romance-speaking part of the region), and Lower Brittany in the west is traditionally Breton-speaking and more Celtic in culture. As a large port whose outskirts encompassed other provinces, Nantes has been Brittany's economic capital and a cultural crossroads. Breton culture in Nantes is not necessarily characteristic of Lower Brittany's, although the city experienced substantial Lower Breton immigration during the 19th century.\nIn the mid-20th century, several French governments considered creating a new level of local government by combining \"d\u00e9partements\" into larger regions. The regions, established by acts of parliament in 1955 and 1972, loosely follow the pre-revolutionary divisions and Brittany was revived as Region Brittany. Nantes and the Loire-Atlantique \"d\u00e9partement\" were not included, because each new region centred on one metropolis. Region Brittany was created around Rennes, similar in size to Nantes; the Loire-Atlantique \"d\u00e9partement\" formed a new region with four other \"d\u00e9partements\", mainly portions of the old provinces of Anjou, Maine and Poitou. The new region was called Pays de la Loire (\"Loire Countries\") although it does not include most of the Loire Valley. It has often been said that the separation of Nantes from the rest of Brittany was decided by Vichy France during the Second World War. Philippe P\u00e9tain created a new Brittany without Nantes in 1941, but his region disappeared after the liberation.\nDebate continues about Nantes's place in Brittany, with polls indicating a large majority in Loire-Atlantique and throughout the historic province favouring Breton reunification. In a 2014 poll, 67 percent of Breton people and 77 percent of Loire-Atlantique residents favoured reunification. Opponents, primarily Pays de la Loire officials, say that their region could not exist economically without Nantes. Pays de la Loire officials favour a union of Brittany with the Pays de la Loire, but Breton politicians oppose the incorporation of their region into a Greater West region. Nantes's city council has acknowledged the fact that the city is culturally part of Brittany, but its position on reunification is similar to that of the Pays de la Loire. City officials tend to consider Nantes an open metropolis with its own personality, independent of surrounding regions.\nTwin towns \u2013 sister cities.\nNantes is twinned with:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nCooperation agreements.\nPartnership agreements have been signed with cities in developing countries, including:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nPopulation.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNantes had 320,732 inhabitants in 2020, the largest population in its history. Although it was the largest city in Brittany during the Middle Ages, it was smaller than three other north-western towns: Angers, Tours and Caen. Nantes has experienced consistent growth since the Middle Ages, except during the French Revolution and the reign of Napoleon I (when it experienced depopulation, primarily due to the Continental System). In 1500, the city had a population of around 14,000. Nantes's population increased to 25,000 in 1600 and to 80,000 in 1793. In 1800 it was the sixth-largest French city, behind Paris (550,000), Lyon, Marseille, Bordeaux and Rouen (all 80,000 to 109,000). Population growth continued through the 19th century; although other European cities experienced increased growth due to industrialisation, in Nantes growth remained at its 18th-century pace. Nantes reached the 100,000 mark about 1850, and 130,000 around 1900. In 1908 it annexed the neighbouring \"communes\" of Doulon and Chantenay, gaining almost 30,000 inhabitants. Population growth was slower during the 20th century, remaining under 260,000 from the 1960s to the 2000s primarily because urban growth spread to surrounding \"communes\". Since 2000 the population of Nantes began to rise due to redevelopment, and its urban area has continued to experience population growth. The Nantes metropolitan area had a population of 907,995 in 2013, nearly doubling since the 1960s. Its population is projected to reach one million by 2030, based on the fertility rate.\nThe population of Nantes is younger than the national average, with 44.3 percent under age 29 (France 35.3 percent). People over age 60 account for 18.7 percent of the city's population (France 26.4 percent). Single-person households are 53.1 percent of the total, and 16.4 percent of households are families with children. Young couples with children tend to move outside the city because of high property prices, and most newcomers are students (37 percent) and adults moving for professional reasons (49 percent). Students generally come from within the region, and working people are often from Paris. In 2020, the unemployment rate was 10.5 percent of the active population (France 9.5 percent, Loire-Atlantique 7.9 percent). The poorest council estates had unemployment rates of 22 to 47 percent. Of those employed, 59.5 percent were in intermediate or management positions, 24.1 percent were employees and 11.4 percent were workers in 2020. In 2020, 39.7 percent of the population over 15 had a higher-education degree and 12.9 percent had no diploma.\nEthnicity and languages.\nNantes has long had ethnic minorities. Spanish, Portuguese and Italian communities were mentioned during the 16th century, and an Irish Jacobite community appeared a century later. However, immigration has always been lower in Nantes than in other large French cities. The city's foreign population has been stable since 1990, half the average for other French cities of similar size. France does not have ethnic or religious categories in its census, but counts the number of people born in a foreign country. In 2013 this category had 24,949 people in Nantes, or 8.5 percent of the total population. The majority (60.8 percent) were 25 to 54 years old. Their primary countries of origin were Algeria (13.9 percent), Morocco (11.4 percent) and Tunisia (5.8 percent). Other African countries accounted for 24.9 percent, the European Union 15.6 percent, the rest of Europe 4.8 percent and Turkey 4.3 percent.\nThe city is part of the territory of the langues d'o\u00efl, a dialect continuum which stretches across northern France and includes standard French. The local dialect in Nantes is Gallo, spoken by some in Upper Brittany. Nantes, as a large city, has been a stronghold of standard French. A local dialect (\"parler nantais\") is sometimes mentioned by the press, but its existence is dubious and its vocabulary mainly the result of rural emigration. As a result of 19th-century Lower Breton immigration, Breton was once widely spoken in parts of Nantes. Nantes signed the charter of the Public Office for the Breton Language in 2013. Since then, the city has supported its six bilingual schools and introduced bilingual signage.\nEconomy.\nFor centuries, Nantes's economy was linked to the Loire and the Atlantic; the city had France's largest harbour in the 18th century. Food processing predominated during the Industrial Age, with sugar refineries (Beghin-Say), biscuit factories (LU and BN), canned fish (Saupiquet and Tipiak) and processed vegetables (Bonduelle and Cassegrain); these brands still dominate the French market. The Nantes region is France's largest food producer; the city has recently become a hub of innovation in food security, with laboratories and firms such as Eurofins Scientific.\nNantes experienced deindustrialisation after port activity in Saint-Nazaire largely ceased, culminating in the 1987 closure of the shipyards. At that time, the city attempted to attract service firms. Nantes capitalised on its culture and proximity to the sea to present itself as creative and modern. Capgemini (management consulting), SNCF (rail) and Bouygues Telecom opened large offices in the city, followed by smaller companies. Since 2000 Nantes has developed a business district, Euronantes, with of office space and 10,000 jobs. Although its stock exchange was merged with that of Paris in 1990, Nantes is the third-largest financial centre in France after Paris and Lyon.\nThe city has one of the best-performing economies in France, producing \u20ac annually; \u20ac returns to the local economy. Nantes has over 25,000 businesses with 167,000 jobs, and its metropolitan area has 42,000 firms and 328,000 jobs. The city is one of France's most dynamic in job creation, with 19,000 jobs created in Nantes M\u00e9tropole between 2007 and 2014 (outperforming larger cities such as Marseille, Lyon and Nice). The communes surrounding Nantes have industrial estates and retail parks, many along the region's ring road. The metropolitan area has ten large shopping centres; the largest, Atlantis in Saint-Herblain, is a mall with 116 shops and several superstores (including IKEA). The shopping centres threaten independent shops in central Nantes, but it remains the region's largest retail area with about 2,000 shops. Tourism is a growing sector and Nantes, with two million visitors annually, is France's seventh-most-visited city.\nIn 2021, 79.8 percent of the city's businesses were involved in trade, transport and services; 12.2 percent in public administration, education and health; 4.4 percent in construction, and 3.6\u00a0percent in industry. Although industry is less significant than it was before the 1970s, Nantes is France's second-largest centre for aeronautics. The European company Airbus produces its fleet's wingboxes and radomes in Nantes, employing about 2,000 people. The city's remaining port terminal still handles wood, sugar, fertiliser, metals, sand and cereals, ten percent of the total Nantes\u2013Saint-Nazaire harbour traffic (along the Loire estuary). The Atlanpole technopole, in northern Nantes on its border with Carquefou, intends to develop technological and science sectors throughout the Pays de la Loire. With a business incubator, it has 422 companies and 71 research and higher-education facilities and specialises in biopharmaceuticals, information technology, renewable energy, mechanics, food production and naval engineering. Creative industries in Nantes had over 9,000 architectural, design, fashion, media, visual-arts and digital-technology companies in 2016, a 15 percent job-creation rate between 2007 and 2012 and have a hub under construction on the Isle of Nantes.\nArchitecture.\nNantes's cityscape is primarily recent, with more buildings built during the 20th century than in any other era. The city has 127 buildings listed as \"monuments historiques\", the 19th-ranked French city. Most of the old buildings were made of tuffeau stone (a light, easily sculpted sandstone typical of the Loire Valley) and cheaper schist. Because of its sturdiness, granite was often used for foundations. Old buildings on the former Feydeau Island and the neighbouring embankments often lean because they were built on damp soil.\nNantes has a few structures dating to antiquity and the early Middle Ages. Remnants of the third-century Roman city wall exist in the old town. The Saint-\u00c9tienne chapel, in the Saint-Donatien cemetery outside the city centre, dates to 510 and was originally part of a Roman necropolis. The Roman city walls were largely replaced during the 13th and 15th centuries. Although many of the walls were destroyed in the 18th century, some segments (such as Porte Saint-Pierre, built in 1478) survived.\nSeveral 15th- and 16th-century half-timbered houses still stand in Le Bouffay, an ancient area corresponding to Nantes's medieval core which is bordered by Nantes Cathedral and the Castle of the Dukes of Brittany. The large, Gothic cathedral replaced an earlier Romanesque church. Its construction took 457 years, from 1434 to 1891. The cathedral's tomb of Francis II, Duke of Brittany and his wife is an example of French Renaissance sculpture. The Psallette, built next to the cathedral about 1500, is a late-Gothic mansion. The Gothic castle is one of Nantes's chief landmarks. Begun in 1207, many of its current buildings date to the 15th century. Although the castle had a military role, it was also a residence for the ducal court. Granite towers on the outside hide delicate tuffeau-stone ornaments on its inner facades, designed in Flamboyant style with Italianate influence. The Counter-Reformation inspired two baroque churches: the 1655 Oratory Chapel and Sainte-Croix Church, rebuilt in 1670. A municipal belfry clock (originally on a tower of Bouffay Castle, a prison demolished after the French Revolution) was added to the church in 1860.\nAfter the Renaissance, Nantes developed west of its medieval core along new embankments. Trade-derived wealth permitted the construction of many public monuments during the 18th century, most designed by the neoclassical architects Jean-Baptiste Ceineray and Mathurin Crucy. They include the Chamber of Accounts of Brittany (now the \"pr\u00e9fecture\", 1763\u20131783); the Graslin Theatre (1788); Place Foch, with its column and statue of Louis XVI (1790), and the stock exchange (1790\u20131815). Place Royale was completed in 1790, and the large fountain added in 1865. Its statues represent the city of Nantes, the Loire and its main tributaries. The city's 18th-century heritage is also reflected in the \"h\u00f4tels particuliers\" and other private buildings for the wealthy, such as the Cours Cambronne (inspired by Georgian terraces). Although many of the 18th-century buildings have a neoclassical design, they are adorned with sculpted rococo faces and balconies. This architecture has been called \"Nantais baroque\".\nMost of Nantes's churches were rebuilt during the 19th century, a period of population growth and religious revival after the French Revolution. Most were rebuilt in Gothic Revival style, including the city's two basilicas: Saint-Nicolas and Saint-Donatien. The first, built between 1844 and 1869, was one of France's first Gothic Revival projects. The latter was built between 1881 and 1901, after the Franco-Prussian War (which triggered another Catholic revival in France). Notre-Dame-de-Bon-Port, near the Loire, is an example of 19th-century neoclassicism. Built in 1852, its dome was inspired by that of Les Invalides in Paris. The Passage Pommeraye, built in 1840\u20131843, is a multi-storey shopping arcade typical of the mid-19th century.\nIndustrial architecture includes several factories converted into leisure and business space, primarily on the Isle of Nantes. The former Lef\u00e8vre-Utile factory is known for its Tour Lu, a publicity tower built in 1909. Two cranes in the former harbour, dating to the 1950s and 1960s, have also become landmarks. Recent architecture is dominated by postwar concrete reconstructions, modernist buildings and examples of contemporary architecture such as the courts of justice, designed by Jean Nouvel in 2000.\nCulture.\nMuseums.\nNantes has several museums. The Fine Art Museum is the city's largest. Opened in 1900, it has an extensive collection ranging from Italian Renaissance paintings to contemporary sculpture. The museum includes works by Tintoretto, Brueghel, Rubens, Georges de La Tour, Ingres, Monet, Picasso, Kandinsky and Anish Kapoor. The Historical Museum of Nantes, in the castle, is dedicated to local history and houses the municipal collections. Items include paintings, sculptures, photographs, maps and furniture displayed to illustrate major points of Nantes history such as the Atlantic slave trade, industrialisation and the Second World War.\nThe Dobr\u00e9e Museum houses the \"d\u00e9partement\"'s archaeological and decorative-arts collections. The building is a Romanesque Revival mansion facing a 15th-century manor. Collections include a golden reliquary made for Anne of Brittany's heart, medieval statues and timber frames, coins, weapons, jewellery, manuscripts and archaeological finds. The Natural History Museum of Nantes is one of the largest of its kind in France. It has more than 1.6\u00a0million zoological specimens and several thousand mineral samples. The Machines of the Isle of Nantes, opened in 2007 in the converted shipyards, has automatons, prototypes inspired by deep-sea creatures and a walking elephant. With 620,000 visitors in 2015, the \"Machines\" were the most-visited non-free site in Loire-Atlantique. Smaller museums include the Jules Verne Museum (dedicated to the author, who was born in Nantes) and the Planetarium. The HAB Galerie, located in a former banana warehouse on the Loire, is Nantes's largest art gallery. Owned by the city council, it is used for contemporary-art exhibitions. The council manages four other exhibition spaces, and the city has several private galleries.\nVenues.\n\"Le Z\u00e9nith Nantes M\u00e9tropole\", an indoor arena in Saint-Herblain, has a capacity of 9,000 and is France's largest concert venue outside Paris. Since its opening in 2006, Placebo, Supertramp, Snoop Dogg and Bob Dylan have performed on its stage. Nantes's largest venue is \"La Cit\u00e9, Nantes Events Center\", a 2,000-seat auditorium. It hosts concerts, congresses and exhibitions, and is the primary venue of the Pays de la Loire National Orchestra. The Graslin Theatre, built in 1788, is home to the Angers-Nantes Op\u00e9ra. The former LU biscuit factory, facing the castle, has been converted into Le Lieu unique. It includes a Turkish bath, restaurant and bookshop and hosts art exhibits, drama, music and dance performances. The 879-seat Grand T is the Loire-Atlantique \"d\u00e9partement\" theatre, and the Salle Vasse is managed by the city. Other theatres include the \"Th\u00e9\u00e2tre universitaire\" and several private venues. La Fabrique, a cultural entity managed by the city, has three sites which include music studios and concert venues. The largest is Stereolux, specialising in rock concerts, experimental happenings and other contemporary performances. The 140-seat Pannonica specialises in jazz, and the nearby 503-seat Salle Paul-Fort is dedicated to contemporary French singers. Nantes has five cinemas, with others throughout the metropolitan area.\nEvents and festivals.\nThe Royal de Luxe street theatre company moved to Nantes in 1989, and has produced a number of shows in the city. The company is noted for its large marionettes (including a giraffe, the Little Giant and the Sultan's Elephant), and has also performed in Lisbon, Berlin, London and Santiago. Former Royal de Luxe machine designer Fran\u00e7ois Delarozi\u00e8re created the Machines of the Isle of Nantes and its large walking elephant in 2007. The Machines sponsor theatre, dance, concerts, ice-sculpting shows and performances for children in the spring and fall and at Christmastime.\n\"Estuaire\" contemporary-art exhibitions were held along the Loire estuary in 2007, 2009 and 2012. They left several permanent works of art in Nantes and inspired the Voyage \u00e0 Nantes, a series of contemporary-art exhibitions across the city which has been held every summer since 2012. A route (a green line painted on the pavement) helps visitors make the \"voyage\" between the exhibitions and the city's major landmarks. Some works of art are permanent, and others are used for a summer. Permanent sculptures include Daniel Buren's \"Anneaux\" (a series of 18 rings along the Loire reminiscent of Atlantic slave trade shackles) and works by Fran\u00e7ois Morellet and Dan Graham.\n\"La Folle Journ\u00e9e\" (\"The Mad Day\", an alternate title of Pierre Beaumarchais' play \"The Marriage of Figaro\") is a classical music festival held each winter. The original one-day festival now lasts for five days. Its programme has a main theme (past themes have included exile, nature, Russia and Fr\u00e9d\u00e9ric Chopin), mixing classics with lesser-known and -performed works. The concept has been exported to Bilbao, Tokyo and Warsaw, and the festival sold a record 154,000 tickets in 2015. The September Rendez-vous de l'Erdre couples a jazz festival with a pleasure-boating show on the Erdre, exposing the public to a musical genre considered elitist; all concerts are free. Annual attendance is about 150,000. The Three Continents Festival is an annual film festival dedicated to Asia, Africa and South America, with a Mongolfi\u00e8re d'or (Golden Hot-air Balloon) awarded to the best film. Nantes also hosts \"Univercin\u00e9\" (festivals dedicated to films in English, Italian, Russian and German) and a smaller Spanish film festival. The Scopitone festival is dedicated to digital art, and \"Utopiales\" is an international science fiction festival.\nSlavery Memorial.\nA path along the Loire river banks, between the Anne-de-Bretagne Bridge and the Victor-Schoelcher footbridge begins the Nantes slavery memorial. The path is covered in 2,000 spaced glass inserts, with 1,710 of them commemorating the names of slave ships and their port dates in Nantes. The other 290 inserts name ports in Africa, the Americas, and the area around the Indian Ocean. The path and surrounding 1.73-acre park lead to the under-the-docks part of the memorial which opens with a staircase, leading visitors underground closer to the water level of the river, which can be seen through the gaps between the support pillars. Upon entry, visitors are greeted with The Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the word \"freedom\" written in 47 different languages from areas affected by the slave trade. Other etchings of quotes by figures like Nelson Mandela and Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. appear on the slanted frosted glass wall which lined the memorial wall opposite the pillars which open to the river. These quotes come from across the globe, from all four continents affected by the slave trade, and span over five centuries, from the 17th to the 21st. At the end of the hall, toward the exit, is a room with the timeline of slavery as it became abolished in various countries around the world.\nIn the arts.\nNantes has been described as the birthplace of surrealism, since Andr\u00e9 Breton (leader of the movement) met Jacques Vach\u00e9 there in 1916. In \"Nadja\" (1928), Andr\u00e9 Breton called Nantes \"perhaps with Paris the only city in France where I have the impression that something worthwhile may happen to me\". Fellow surrealist Julien Gracq wrote \"The Shape of a City\", published in 1985, about the city. Nantes also inspired Stendhal (in his 1838 \"M\u00e9moires d'un touriste\"); Gustave Flaubert (in his 1881 \"Par les champs et par les gr\u00e8ves\", where he describes his journey through Brittany); Henry James, in his 1884 \"A Little Tour in France\"; Andr\u00e9 Pieyre de Mandiargues in \"Le Mus\u00e9e noir\" (1946), and Paul-Louis Rossi in \"Nantes\" (1987).\nThe city is the hometown of French New Wave film director Jacques Demy. Two of Demy's films were set and shot in Nantes: \"Lola\" (1964) and \"A Room in Town\" (1982). The Passage Pommeraye appears briefly in \"The Umbrellas of Cherbourg\". Other films set (or filmed) in Nantes include \"God's Thunder\" by Denys de La Patelli\u00e8re (1965), \"The Married Couple of the Year Two\" by Jean-Paul Rappeneau (1971), \"Day Off\" by Pascal Thomas (2001) and \"Black Venus\" by Abdellatif Kechiche (2010). Jean-Luc Godard's \"Keep Your Right Up\" was filmed at its airport in 1987.\nNantes appears in a number of songs, the best-known to non-French audiences being 2007's \"Nantes\" by the American band Beirut. French-language songs include \"Nantes\" by Barbara (1964) and \"Nantes\" by Renan Luce (2009). The city is mentioned in about 50 folk songs, making it the most-sung-about city in France after Paris. \"Dans les prisons de Nantes\" is the most popular, with versions recorded by \u00c9dith Piaf, Georges Brassens, Tri Yann and Nolwenn Leroy. Other popular folk songs include \"Le pont de Nantes\" (recorded by Guy B\u00e9art in 1967 and Nana Mouskouri in 1978), \"Jean-Fran\u00e7ois de Nantes\" (a sea shanty) and the bawdy \"De Nantes \u00e0 Montaigu\".\nBritish painter J. M. W. Turner visited Nantes in 1826 as part of a journey in the Loire Valley, and later painted a watercolour view of Nantes from Feydeau Island. The painting was bought by the city in 1994, and is on exhibit at the Historical Museum in the castle. An engraving of this work was published in The Keepsake annual for 1831, with an illustrative poem entitled . by Letitia Elizabeth Landon. Turner also made two sketches of the city, which are in collections at Tate Britain.\nCuisine.\nDuring the 19th century Nantes-born gastronome Charles Monselet praised the \"special character\" of the local \"plebeian\" cuisine, which included buckwheat crepes, \"caillebotte\" fermented milk and \"fouace\" brioche. The Nantes region is renowned in France for market gardens and is a major producer of corn salad, leeks, radishes and carrots. Nantes has a wine-growing region, the \"Vignoble nantais\", primarily south of the Loire. It is the largest producer of dry white wines in France, chiefly Muscadet and \"Gros Plant\" (usually served with fish, langoustines and oysters).\nLocal fishing ports such as La Turballe and Le Croisic mainly offer shrimp and sardines, and eels, lampreys, zander and northern pike are caught in the Loire. Local vegetables and fish are widely available in the city's eighteen markets, including the Talensac covered market (Nantes's largest and best known). Although local restaurants tend to serve simple dishes made with fresh local products, exotic trends have influenced many chefs in recent years.\n\"Beurre blanc\" is Nantes's most-famous local specialty. Made with Muscadet, it was invented around 1900 in Saint-Julien-de-Concelles (on the south bank of the Loire) and has become a popular accompaniment for fish. Other specialties are the LU and BN biscuits, including the Petit-Beurre (produced since 1886), \"berlingot\" (sweets made with flavoured melted sugar) and similar \"rigolette\" sweets with marmalade filling, \"g\u00e2teau nantais\" (a rum cake invented in 1820), \"Cur\u00e9 nantais\" and \"M\u00e2checoulais\" cheeses and \"fouace\", a star-shaped brioche served with new wine in autumn.\nEducation.\nThe University of Nantes was first founded in 1460 by Francis II, Duke of Brittany, but it failed to become a large institution during the Ancien R\u00e9gime. It disappeared in 1793 with the abolition of French universities. During the 19th century, when many of the former universities reopened, Nantes was neglected and local students had to go to Rennes and Angers. In 1961 the university was finally recreated, but Nantes has not established itself as a large university city. The university had about 30,000 students during the 2013\u20132014 academic year, and the metropolitan area had a total student population of 53,000. This was lower than in nearby Rennes (64,000), and Nantes is the ninth-largest commune in France in its percentage of students. The university is part of the EPSCP Bretagne-Loire Universit\u00e9, which joins seven universities in western France to improve the region's academic and research potential.\nIn addition to the university, Nantes has a number of colleges and other institutes of higher education. Audencia, a private management school, is ranked as one of the world's best by the \"Financial Times\" and \"The Economist\". The city has five engineering schools: Oniris (veterinary medicine and food safety), (mechanical and civil engineering), Polytech Nantes (digital technology and civil engineering), \u00c9cole des mines de Nantes (now IMT Atlantique) (information technology, nuclear technology, safety and energy) and ICAM (research and logistics). Nantes has three other \"grandes \u00e9coles\": the \u00c9cole sup\u00e9rieure du bois (forestry and wood processing), the School of Design and Exi-Cesi (computing). Other institutes of higher education include a national merchant navy school, a fine-arts school, a national architectural school and Epitech and Supinfo (computing).\nSport.\nNantes has several large sports facilities. The largest is the Stade de la Beaujoire, built for UEFA Euro 1984. The stadium, which also hosted matches during the 1998 FIFA World Cup and the 2007 Rugby World Cup, has 37,473 seats. The second-largest venue is the Hall XXL, an exhibition hall on the Stade de la Beaujoire grounds. The 10,700-seat stadium was selected as a venue for the 2017 World Men's Handball Championship. Smaller facilities include the 4,700-seat indoor Palais des Sports, a venue for EuroBasket 1983. The nearby Mangin Beaulieu sports complex has 2,500 seats and Pierre Quinon Stadium, an athletics stadium within the University of Nantes, has 790 seats. La Trocardi\u00e8re, an indoor 4,238-seat stadium, is in Rez\u00e9. The Erdre has a marina and a centre for rowing, sailing and canoeing, and the city has six swimming pools.\nSix teams in Nantes play at a high national or international level. Best known is FC Nantes, which is a member of Ligue 1 for the 2018\u201319 season. Since its formation in 1943, the club has won eight Championnat titles and three Coupes de France. FC Nantes has several French professional football records, including the most consecutive seasons in the elite division (44), most wins in a season (26), consecutive wins (32) and consecutive home wins (92 games, nearly five years). In handball, volleyball and basketball, Nantes's men's and women's clubs play in the French first division: HBC Nantes and Nantes Loire Atlantique Handball (handball), Nantes Rez\u00e9 M\u00e9tropole Volley and Neptunes de Nantes Volley-ball (volleyball), Hermine de Nantes Atlantique and Nantes Rez\u00e9 Basket (basketball). The men's Nantes M\u00e9tropole Futsal (futsal) team plays in the Championnat de France de Futsal, and the main athletics team (Nantes M\u00e9tropole Athl\u00e9tisme) includes some of France's best athletes.\nTransport.\nThe city is linked to Paris by the A11 motorway, which passes through Angers, Le Mans and Chartres. Nantes is on the Way of the Estuaries, a network of motorways connecting northern France and the Spanish border in the south-west while bypassing Paris. The network serves Rouen, Le Havre, Rennes, La Rochelle and Bordeaux. South of Nantes, the road corresponds to the A83 motorway; north of the city (towards Rennes) it is the RN137, a free highway. These motorways form a ring road around the city, France's second longest after the ring in Bordeaux.\nNantes's central railway station is connected by TGV trains to Paris, Lille, Lyon, Marseille and Strasbourg. The LGV Atlantique high-speed railway reaches Paris in two hours, ten minutes (compared with four hours by car). With almost 12 million passengers each year, the Nantes station is the sixth-busiest in France outside Paris. In addition to TGV trains, the city is connected by Intercit\u00e9s trains to Rennes, Vannes, Quimper, Tours, Orl\u00e9ans, La Rochelle and Bordeaux. Local TER trains serve Pornic, Cholet or Saint-Gilles-Croix-de-Vie.\nNantes Atlantique Airport in Bouguenais, south-west of the city centre, serves about 80 destinations in Europe (primarily in France, Spain, Italy, the United Kingdom and Greece) and connects airports in Africa, the Caribbean and Canada. Air traffic has increased from 2.6 million passengers in 2009 to 4.1 million in 2014, while its capacity has been estimated at 3.5 million passengers per year. A new A\u00e9roport du Grand Ouest in Notre-Dame-des-Landes, north of Nantes, was projected from the 1970s, to create a hub serving north-western France. Its construction was however strongly opposed, primarily by green and anti-capitalist activists. The potential construction site was long occupied and the project became a political topic on the national scale. The French government eventually decided to renounce to the project in 2018.\nPublic transport in Nantes is managed by Semitan, also known as \"Tan\". One of the world's first horsebus transit systems was developed in the city in 1826. Nantes built its first compressed-air tram network in 1879, which was electrified in 1911. Like most European tram networks, Nantes's disappeared during the 1950s in the wake of automobiles and buses. However, in 1985 Nantes was the first city in France to reintroduce trams. The city has an extensive public-transport network consisting of trams, buses and river shuttles. The Nantes tramway has three lines and a total of of track. Semitan counted 132.6 million trips in 2015, of which 72.3 million were by tram. Navibus, the river shuttle, has two lines: one on the Erdre and the other on the Loire. The latter has 520,000 passengers annually and succeeds the Roquio service, which operated on the Loire from 1887 to the 1970s.\nNantes has also developed a tram-train system, the Nantes tram-train, which would allow suburban trains to run on tram lines; the system already exists in Mulhouse (in eastern France) and Karlsruhe, Germany. The city has two tram-train lines: Nantes-Clisson (southern) and Nantes-Ch\u00e2teaubriant (northern). Neither is yet connected to the existing tram network, and resemble small suburban trains more than tram-trains. The Bicloo bicycle-sharing system has 880 bicycles at 103 stations.\nNantes Public Transportation statistics.\nThe average amount of time people spend commuting with public transit in Nantes and Saint-Nazaire, for example to and from work, on a weekday is 40 minutes. 7.1% of public transit riders, ride for more than 2 hours every day. The average amount of time people wait at a stop or station for public transit is 12 minutes, while 16.8% of riders wait for over 20 minutes on average every day. The average distance people usually ride in a single trip with public transit is 5\u00a0km, while 2% travel for over 12\u00a0km in a single direction.\nMedia.\nThe local press is dominated by the Ouest-France group, which owns the area's two major newspapers: \"Ouest-France\" and \"Presse-Oc\u00e9an\". \"Ouest-France\", based in Rennes, covers north-western France and is the country's best-selling newspaper. \"Presse-Oc\u00e9an\", based in Nantes, covers Loire-Atlantique. The Ouest-France group is also a shareholder of the French edition of \"20 Minutes\", one of two free newspapers distributed in the city. The other free paper is \"Direct Matin\", which has no local edition. The news agency \"M\u00e9dias C\u00f4te Ouest\" publishes \"Wik\" and \"Kostar\", two free magazines dedicated to local cultural life. Nantes has a satirical weekly newspaper, \"La Lettre \u00e0 Lulu\", and several specialised magazines. \"Places publiques\" is dedicated to urbanism in Nantes and Saint-Nazaire; \"Brief\" focuses on public communication; \"Le Journal des Entreprises\" targets managers; \"Nouvel Ouest\" is for decision-makers in western France, and \"Id\u00eele\" provides information on the local creative industry. Nantes is home to \"Mill\u00e9naire Presse\"\u2014the largest French publishing house dedicated to professional entertainers\u2014which publishes several magazines, including \"La Sc\u00e8ne\". The city publishes a free monthly magazine, \"Nantes Passion\", and five other free magazines for specific areas: \"Couleur locale\" (Les Dervalli\u00e8res), \"\u00c9crit de Bellevue\", \"Malakocktail\" (Malakoff), \"Mosa\u00efques\" (Nantes-Nord) and \"Zest\" for the eastern neighbourhoods.\nNational radio stations \"FIP\" and \"Fun Radio\" have outlets in Nantes. \"Virgin Radio\" has a local outlet in nearby Basse-Goulaine, and Ch\u00e9rie FM and NRJ have outlets in Rez\u00e9. Nantes is home to \"France Bleu Loire-Oc\u00e9an\", the local station of the Radio France public network, and several private local stations: \"Alternantes\", dedicated to cultural diversity and tolerance; \"Euradionantes\", a local- and European-news station; \"Fid\u00e9lit\u00e9\", a Christian station; \"Hit West\" and \"SUN Radio\", two music stations; \"Prun\", dedicated to students, and \"Radio Atlantis\" (focused on the local economy).\nNantes is the headquarters of \"France 3 Pays de la Loire\", one of 24 local stations of the France T\u00e9l\u00e9visions national public broadcaster. \"France 3 Pays de la Loire\" provides local news and programming for the region. The city is also home to \"T\u00e9l\u00e9nantes\", a local, private television channel founded in 2004. Primarily a news channel, it is available in Loire-Atlantique and parts of neighbouring Vend\u00e9e and Maine-et-Loire.\nReferences.\nFootnotes\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "67454", "revid": "2304267", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=67454", "title": "Actinidiaceae", "text": "Family of flowering plants\nThe Actinidiaceae are a small family of flowering plants. The family has three genera and about 360 species and is a member of the order Ericales.\nDistribution.\nThey are temperate and subtropical woody vines, shrubs, and trees, native to Asia (\"Actinidia\" or kiwifruit, \"Clematoclethra\", and \"Saurauia\") and Central America and South America (\"Saurauia\" only). \"Saurauia\", with its 300 species, is the largest genus in this family. Although now confined to Asia and tropical Central and South America, evidence indicates in the past the family had a wider distribution. The now extinct genus \"Parasaurauia\" is thought to have belonged to the Actinidiaceae and lived in North America during the early Campanian.\nCharacteristics.\nThe plants are usually small trees or shrubs, or sometimes vines (\"Actinidia\"). The alternate, simple, spiral leaves have serrated or entire margins. They lack stipules or are minutely stipulated. They are often beset with rather flattened bristles.\nThe flowers grow solitary or are aggregated in terminal cymes, with free sepals and petals. Except for members of the genus \"Clematoclethra\" which have 10 stamens, the stamens are numerous and originally attached at the back. They invert just before the flower starts expanding, so their bases become apical.\nThe plants may be dioecious, monoecious, or hermaphroditic. The fruit is usually a berry, such as the edible kiwifruit, a cultivar from the genus \"Actinidia\".\nEvidence supporting placement within the Ericales.\nBefore genetic evidence appeared in the last 10 years, the placement of the Actinidiaceae within the Ericales was highly controversial. The USDA Plants Database, a resource considered authoritative, still places the Actinidaceae within the Theales, an order which has been shown not to be monophyletic. Placement of the Actinidiaceae within the Ericales has been strongly supported recently by genetic evidence, and contrary to previous thought, it is not a basal member of the Ericales. Multiple studies using genetic evidence now firmly place the Actinidiaceae in the Ericoid clade, a monophyletic group consisting of the Ericaceae, the Cyrillaceae, the Clethraceae, the Sarraceniaceae, and the Roridulaceae. Further genetic evidence points to the Actinidiaceae being sister to the Roridulaceae, with the Roridulaceae and Sarraceniaceae, forming another, smaller, monophyletic group.\nEvidence supporting monophyly of the Actinidiaceae.\nWhat genera were to be placed in the Actinidiaceae before recent genetic and micromorphological studies emerged was highly controversial. Before recent evidence, the genus \"Sladenia\" was often placed within the Actinidiaceae. Also, \"Saurauia\" was sometimes considered its own family. Thus, before more detailed studies started, two to four genera could be placed within the Actinidiaceae. Micromorphological characters have confirmed that \"Sladenia\" does not belong in the Actinidiaceae. Furthermore, biological characteristics of the cells, and molecular evidence have confirmed the three genera currently circumscribed in the Actinidiaceae, \"Clematoclethra\", \"Saurauia\", and \"Actinidia\", do indeed form a monophyletic group.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "67455", "revid": "20549476", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=67455", "title": "Actinidia", "text": "Genus of plants native to temperate eastern Asia\nActinidia is a genus of woody and, with a few exceptions, dioecious plants native to temperate eastern Asia, occurring throughout most of China, Taiwan, Korea, and Japan, and extending north to southern areas of Russian Far East and south into Indochina. The genus includes shrubs growing to tall, and vigorous, strong-growing vines, growing up to in tree canopies. They mostly tolerate temperatures down to around , and some are much hardier.\nThe leaves are alternate and simple, with a dentated margin and a long petiole. The flowers are solitary or in axillary cymes, usually white, with five small petals. Most of the species are dioecious with separate male and female plants, but some are monoecious. The fruit is a large berry containing numerous small seeds; in most species, the fruit is edible. In particular, this genus is known for the taxon \"Actinidia chinensis\" var. \"deliciosa\", one of the most common cultivated kiwifruits, and for the hardy ornamental \"Actinidia kolomikta\".\nDescription.\n\"Actinidia\" are perennial climbing vines, typically found in the lower storey of forests, along stream beds and at forest margins. Some species of \"Actinidia\" can form dense thickets, such as \"Actinidia kolomikta\" and \"Actinidia venosa\".\n\"Actinidia\" leaves alternate, and typically have a long petiole, covered in hairs in some members of the genus. Leaves can be variable in size and shape, even within individual plants. Members of \"Actinidia\" have dioecious flowers, and have cup-shaped flowers, typically with five or more petals.\nThe fruit of \"Actinidia\" is a berry with hundreds of small, darkly-coloured seeds, embedded into the fruit flesh. The fruit is often a bright green colour due to the presence of chlorophyll, something uncommonly found in ripe fruit. Fruit flesh often ranges from bright yellow to dark green, depending on the species.\nRange and fossil record.\n\"Actinidia\" species are commonly found in south-western China, though they range from Siberia to Indonesia. The greatest number of taxa found in the wild are in the Yunnan province, where almost half of the known species are endemic to Yunnan. Other provinces of China with significant populations of wild \"Actinidia\" include Guanxi, Hunan, Sichuan, Guizhou, Jiangxi, Zhejiang, Guangdong, Hubei and Fujian. Fossils of the extinct species \"A. faveolata\" are known from Europe and Western Siberia extending from the Upper Oligocene to the Early Pleistocene, suggesting that the genus was previously more wide-spread across the world.\nSpecies.\nThe 40\u201360 species of \"Actinidia\" include:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nUses.\nKiwifruit is a cultivar group of \"A. chinesis\", and hardy kiwi is the species \"Actinidia arguta\", which has small fruit weighing , with green edible skins and green flesh; it is hardier than \"A.\u00a0chinensis\". Some species are grown as ornamental plants, notably \"A.\u00a0kolomikta\".\nIn Japan, \"Actinidia polygama\" (silver vine) is noted for having an effect on cats much like that of catnip. It is mentioned in the saying \u732b\u306b\u307e\u305f\u305f\u3073\u3001\u5973\u90ce\u306b\u5c0f\u5224 (\"neko ni matatabi, jor\u014d ni koban\", \"silver vine to a cat, a coin to a prostitute\"), meaning to put someone in a good mood by providing that which they most desire.\n\"A. kolomikta\" is the hardiest species (to about \u221240\u00a0\u00b0C or \u221240\u00a0\u00b0F), and has distinctive white- and pink-variegated foliage even on wild plants, an unusual phenomenon. Its fruit is very small, weighing or less.\nEtymology.\n\"Actinidia\" is derived from Ancient Greek 'ray', and is a reference to the rayed styles of the flowers.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "67456", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=67456", "title": "Vittorio Gassmann", "text": ""}
{"id": "67457", "revid": "2846386", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=67457", "title": "Second Viennese School", "text": "Group of composers in 20th century Vienna\nThe Second Viennese School () was a group of composers that comprised Arnold Schoenberg and his pupils, particularly Alban Berg and Anton Webern, and close associates in early 20th-century Vienna. Their music was initially characterized by late-Romantic expanded tonality and later, a totally chromatic expressionism without a firm tonal centre, often referred to as atonality; and later still, Schoenberg's serial twelve-tone technique. Using this technique when composing, Schoenberg employed all 12 tones present in Western music's chromatic scale when forming a melody, this melody being the \"prime series\". This method would later be enhanced in compositions by Schoenberg and his followers through permutations such as \"retrogrades\", \"inversions\", \"transformations\" etc. Later, composers such as Pierre Boulez drew influence from Schoenberg's technique in furthering serialization; serializing not only pitch but rhythm, articulation, and dynamics as well. Theodor Adorno said that the twelve-tone method, when it had evolved into maturity, was a \"veritable message in a bottle\", addressed to an unknown and uncertain future. Though this common development took place, it neither followed a common time-line nor a cooperative path. Likewise, it was not a direct result of Schoenberg's teaching\u2014which, as his various published textbooks demonstrate, was highly traditional and conservative. Schoenberg's textbooks also reveal that the Second Viennese School spawned not from the development of his serial method, but rather from the influence of his creative example.\nMembers.\nThe principal members of the school, besides Schoenberg, were Alban Berg and Anton Webern, who were among his first composition pupils. Both of them had already produced copious and talented music in a late Romantic idiom but felt they gained new direction and discipline from Schoenberg's teaching. Other members of this generation included Ernst Krenek, Heinrich Jalowetz, Erwin Stein and Egon Wellesz, and somewhat later Eduard Steuermann, Hanns Eisler, Robert Gerhard, Norbert von Hannenheim, Rudolf Kolisch, Paul A. Pisk, Karl Rankl, Josef Rufer, Nikos Skalkottas, Viktor Ullmann, and Winfried Zillig. Schoenberg's brother-in-law Alexander Zemlinsky is sometimes included as part of the Second Viennese School, though he was never Schoenberg's pupil and never renounced a traditional conception of tonality. \nThough Berg and Webern both followed Schoenberg into tonal chromaticism and both, each in his own way, adopted twelve-tone technique soon after he did, not all of these others did so, or waited for a considerable time before following suit. Several later disciples, such as Zillig, the Catalan Gerhard, the Transylvanian Hannenheim and the Greek Skalkottas, are sometimes covered by the term, though (apart from Gerhard) they never studied in Vienna but as part of Schoenberg's masterclass in Berlin. \nMembership in the school is not generally extended to Schoenberg's many pupils in the United States from 1933, such as John Cage, Leon Kirchner and Gerald Strang, nor to many other composers who, at a greater remove, wrote compositions evocative of the Second Viennese style, such as the Canadian pianist Glenn Gould. By extension, however, certain pupils of Schoenberg's pupils, such as Berg's pupil Hans Erich Apostel and Webern's pupils Ren\u00e9 Leibowitz, Leopold Spinner and Ludwig Zenk, are usually included in the roll-call.\nThe broader circle of the Second Viennese School included, among others, Oskar Adler, Theodor W. Adorno, Hans Erich Apostel, Robert Gerhard, Norbert von Hannenheim, Heinrich Jalowetz, Hanns Jelinek, S\u00e1ndor Jemnitz, Otto Jokl, Rudolf Kolisch of the Kolisch Quartet, Ernst Krenek, Rita Kurzmann-Leuchter, Erwin Leuchter, Olga Novakovic, Paul Pisk, Rudolf Ploderer, Josef Polnauer, Erwin Ratz, Willi Reich, Josef Rufer, Peter Schacht, Julius Schloss, Nikos Skalkottas, Erwin Stein, Eduard Steuermann, Viktor Ullmann, Rudolf Weirich, Adolph Weiss, Egon Wellesz, Alexander Zemlinsky, and Winfried Zillig.\nContemporaneous performers, friends, admirers, and supporters of the circle at various times included figures as diverse as Guido Adler, David Josef Bach, Ernst Bachrich, Imre [Emerich] Balab\u00e1n and B\u00e9la Bart\u00f3k of the New Hungarian Music Society, Julius Bittner, Artur Bodanzky, Mark Brunswick, Richard Buhlig, Edward Clark, Henry Cowell, Herbert Eimert, Gottfried Feist, Marya Freund, Felix Galimir of the Galimir Quartet, Rudolph Ganz, George Gershwin, Richard Gerstl, Walter Gropius, Marie Gutheil-Schoder, Alois H\u00e1ba, Emil Hertzka, Jascha Horenstein, Felicie H\u00fcni-Mihacsek, Erich Itor Kahn, Wassily Kandinsky, Hans Keller, Erich Kleiber, Gustav Klimt, Wilhelm Klitsch, Erich Wolfgang Korngold, Louis Krasner, J\u00f3zef Koffler, Oskar Kokoschka, Ren\u00e9 Leibowitz, Erich Leinsdorf, Adolf Loos, Darius Milhaud and Francis Poulenc of \"Les Six\", Elisabeth Lutyens, Gustav and Alma Mahler, Frank Martin, Dimitri Mitropoulos, Soma Morgenstern, Johanna M\u00fcller-Hermann, Dika Newlin, Will Ogdon, Max Oppenheimer, Otakar Ostr\u010dil, Maurice Ravel, Rudolph Reti, Luigi Rognoni, Arnold Ros\u00e9 et al. of the Ros\u00e9 Quartet, Hans Rosbaud, Nikolai Roslavets et al. of the Association for Contemporary Music, Hermann Scherchen, Egon Schiele, Alfredo Sangiorgi, Alfred Schlee, Erich Schmid, Franz Schreker, Erwin Schulhoff, Eugenie Schwarzwald, Rudolf Serkin, Roger Sessions, Peter Stadlen, Erika Stiedry-Wagner, Igor Stravinsky, Georg Trakl, Edgard Var\u00e8se et al. of the International Composers Guild, Steuermann's sister Salka Viertel, Imre Waldbauer et al. of the Waldbauer-Kerpely Quartet, Franz Werfel, Arnold Zweig, and \"Jung-Wien\" writers Peter Altenberg, Hermann Bahr, Karl Kraus, and Arthur Schnitzler.\nPractices.\nThough the school included highly distinct musical personalities (the styles of Berg and Webern are in fact very different from each other, and from Schoenberg\u2014for example, only the works of Webern conform to the rule stated by Schoenberg that only a single row be used throughout all movements of a composition\u2014while Gerhard and Skalkottas were closely involved with the folk music of their respective countries) the impression of cohesiveness was enhanced by the literary efforts of some of its members. Wellesz wrote the first book on Schoenberg, who was also the subject of several Festschriften put together by his friends and pupils; Rufer and Spinner both wrote books on the technique of twelve-tone composition; and Leibowitz's influential study of Schoenberg, Berg and Webern, \"Schoenberg et son \u00e9cole\", helped to establish the image of a school in the period immediately after World War II in France and abroad. Several of those mentioned (e.g. Jalowetz, Rufer) were also influential as teachers, and others (e.g. Kolisch, Rankl, Stein, Steuermann, Zillig) as performers, in disseminating the ideals, ideas and approved repertoire of the group. Perhaps the culmination of the school took place at Darmstadt almost immediately after World War II, at the Internationale Ferienkurse f\u00fcr Neue Musik, wherein Schoenberg\u2014who was invited but too ill to travel\u2014was ultimately usurped in musical ideology by the music of his pupil, Webern, as composers and performers from the Second Viennese School (e.g. Leibowitz, Rufer, Adorno, Kolisch, Heiss, Stadlen, Stuckenschmidt, Scherchen) converged with the new serialists (e.g. Boulez, Stockhausen, Maderna, Nono, et al.).\nFirst Viennese School.\nA few great Classical German composers, like Haydn, Mozart, and Beethoven, are sometimes grouped together into the so-called First Viennese School. \nIn art and culture.\nBerg, Schoenberg, and Webern inspired the work of many 20th century composers like Michael Dellaira, Ernst Krenek, Ren\u00e9 Staar, and writers like William H. Gass, Gert Jonke, Thomas Mann, Thomas Pynchon, and Amelia Rosselli. Erika Fox named her \"Malinconia Militare\" (2003) after the first line of Rosselli's \"Webern Opus 4\".\nWebern's Op. 27 was used in \"The Sopranos\" episode \"Bust Out\".\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "67458", "revid": "28903366", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=67458", "title": "Coalbed methane extraction", "text": "Method for extracting methane from a coal deposit\nCoalbed methane extraction (CBM extraction) is a method for extracting methane from a coal deposit. Coal bed methane (CBM) is one of the factors restricting the safe production of coal in underground coal mines. It is also a form of high-quality energy that can be used in many fields such as power generation, heating, and chemical industries. CBM extraction is therefore carried out before extraction with a view of increasing the safety of mining coal beds, and as a useful energy resource to be exploited.\nBasic principles.\nMethane adsorbed into a solid coal matrix (coal macerals) will be released if the coal seam is depressurized. Methane may be extracted by drilling wells into the coal seam. The goal is to decrease the water pressure by pumping water from the well. The decrease in pressure allows methane to desorb from the coal and flow as a gas up the well to the surface. Methane is then compressed and piped to market.\nThe objective is to avoid putting methane into the water line but allow it to flow up the backside of the well (casing) to the compressor station. If the water level is pumped too low during dewatering, methane may travel up the tubing into the water line causing the well to become \"gassy\". Although methane may be recovered in a water-gas separator at the surface, pumping water and gas is inefficient and can cause pump wear and breakdown.\nAreas with CBM extraction.\nTens of thousands of methane wells have been drilled, and extensive support facilities such as roads, pipelines, and compressors have been installed for CBM extraction in the Powder River Basin of northeast Wyoming and southeast Montana and now in India at West Bengal- Ranigunj, Panagarh, etc. Seven percent of the natural gas (methane) currently produced in the United States comes from CBM extraction. Methane from coalbed reservoirs can be recovered economically, but disposal of water is an environmental concern.\nThere are also sites in Central Scotland at Letham Moss.\nMost gas in coal is stored on the internal surfaces of organic matter. Because of its large internal surface area, coal stores 6 to 7 times more gas than the equivalent rock volume of a conventional gas reservoir. Gas content generally increases with coal rank, with depth of burial of the coal bed, and with reservoir pressure. Fractures, or cleats, within coal beds, are usually filled with water. Deeper coal beds contain less water, but that water is more saline. Removing water from the coal bed reduces pressure and releases methane. Large amounts of water, sometimes saline brine, are produced from coalbed methane wells. The greatest water volumes are produced during the early stages of production. Environmentally acceptable disposal of brine is a major cost factor for economic methane production. Fresh water may be discharged on the surface, but the brine is usually injected into the rock at a depth where the salinity of the injected brine is less than the connate fluids of the host rock. Evaporation of water for recovery of potentially salable solid residues might be feasible in regions having high evaporation rates.\nMeasuring the gas content of coal.\nCoal bed gas content measurements are commonly used in mine safety as well as coal bed methane resource assessment and recovery applications. Gas content determination techniques generally fall into two categories: (1) direct methods which measure the volume of methane released from a coal sample sealed into a desorption canister and (2) indirect methods based on empirical correlations, or laboratory-derived sorption isotherm methane storage capacity data. Laboratory sorption isotherms provide information about the storage capacity of a coal sample if these are measured under geological realistic pressure and temperature conditions. Thus, the maximum gas content that can be expected for methane recovery can be assessed from such laboratory isotherm measurements.\nThe total gas content by the indirect methods is based on the empirical formula given by Meisner and Kim. The quantity of gas is determined by the Meisner and Kim formula using the moisture content, volatile content, the volume of methane adsorbed on wet coal, fixed carbon, thickness of coal, and temperature.\nMeisner (1984) observed that the amount of methane gas (VCH4) is related to volatile matter (daf).\nVCH4 = \u2212325.6 \u00d7 log (V.M/37.8)\nThe estimation of the \"in situ\" gas content of the coal will be evaluated by using Kim's (Kim 1977) equation \nV = (100 \u2212M \u2212 A) /100 \u00d7 [ Vw /Vd ] [K(P)N - (b \u00d7 T)]\nWhere,\nV = Volume of methane gas adsorbed (cc/g) \nM = Moisture content (%) \nA = Ash content (%).\nVw/Vd = 1/(0.25 \u00d7M + 1)\nVw = Volume of gas adsorbed on wet coal (cc/g) \nVd = Volume of gas adsorbed on dry coal (cc/g)\nThe values of K and N depend on the rank of the coal and can be expressed in terms of the ratio of fixed carbon (FC) to Volatile matter(VM)\nK = 0.8 (F.C /V.M) + 5.6\nWhere\nF.C = Fixed carbon (%)\nVM = Volatile matter (%)\nN = Composition of coal (for most bituminous coals, N = (0.39 - 0.013 \u00d7 K)\nb =Adsorption constant due to temperature change (cc/g/\u25e6C).\nT = Geothermal Gradient \u00d7 (h/ 100) + To\nT = Temperature at a given depth\nTo = Ground temperature\nh = Depth (m)\nEstimation of methane content in coal seams by Karol curve\nIn the absence of measured methane content of coal beds, and production data from coal bed methane wells, gas content can be estimated using the Eddy curve. Eddy and others constructed a series of curves estimating the maximum producible methane content of coal beds as a function of depth and rank.\nThe estimation of the methane content of a coal bed is determined from the Eddy curve by locating the average depth of each coal seam on the depth axis. A normal line is extended upward from the depth axis (feet) to intersect the specific coal rank curves. A line from the point on the curve is extended normally to the lost and desorbed gas axis (cm3/gm). The intersection of the line and the axis is the estimated methane content of the coal seam.\nInterpretation of Ash analysis.\nAsh is an important indicator of clastic input, derived from marine or fluvial deposition of clay, silt, and sand during peat development. Outcrop ash content appears to be less than the ash content of subsurface samples. Lower ash contents of outcrop samples may be due to coal deposits being up-dip and further away from a marine influence than samples down-dip.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "67459", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=67459", "title": "Minor second", "text": ""}
{"id": "67464", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=67464", "title": "StarCraft/Broodwar", "text": ""}
{"id": "67472", "revid": "407763", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=67472", "title": "Geography of France", "text": " \nThe geography of France consists of a terrain that is mostly flat plains or gently rolling hills in the north and the west and mountainous in the south (including the Massif Central and the Pyrenees) and the east (the country's highest points being in the Alps). Metropolitan France has a total size of (Europe only). It is the third-largest country in Europe by area (after Russia and Ukraine) and the largest in Western Europe.\nPhysical geography of Metropolitan France.\nClimate.\nMetropolitan France's territory is relatively large and so it climate is not uniform and gives rise to the following climate nuances:\nClimate change in France includes above average heating.\nLand use.\n\"Irrigated land:\" 26,420\u00a0km2 (2007)\n\"Total renewable water resources:\" 211\u00a0km3 (2011)\n\"Freshwater withdrawal (domestic/industrial/agricultural):\" 31.62\u00a0km3/yr (19%/71%/10%) (512.1 m3/yr per capita) (2009)\nNatural resources.\nCoal, iron ore, bauxite, zinc, uranium, antimony, arsenic, potash, feldspar, fluorspar, gypsum, timber, fish, gold, clay, petroleum, silver\nNatural hazards.\nFlooding, Hailstorms, avalanches, midwinter windstorms, drought, forest fires in the south near the Mediterranean\nEnvironment.\nThe region that now comprises France consisted of open grassland during the Pleistocene Ice Age. France gradually became forested as the glaciers retreated starting in 10,000 BC, but clearing of these primeval forests began in Neolithic times. These forests were still fairly extensive until the medieval era.\nIn prehistoric times, France was home to large predatory animals such as wolves and brown bears, as well as herbivores such as elk. The larger fauna have disappeared outside the Pyrenees Mountains where bears live as a protected species. Smaller animals include martens, wild pigs, foxes, weasels, bats, rodents, rabbits, and assorted birds.\nBy the 15th century, France had largely been denuded of its forests and was forced to rely on Scandinavia and their North American colonies for lumber. Significant remaining forested areas are in the Gascony region and north in the Alsace-Ardennes area. The Ardennes Forest was the scene of extensive fighting in both world wars.\nThe northcentral part of the region is dominated by the Paris Basin, which consists of a layered sequence of sedimentary rocks. Fertile soils over much of the area make good agricultural land. The Normandy coast to the northwest is characterized by high, chalk cliffs, while the Brittany coast (the peninsula to the west) is highly indented in places that deep valleys were drowned by the sea, and the Biscay coast to the southwest is marked by flat, sandy beaches.\nA recent global remote sensing analysis suggested that there were 1,433\u00a0km2 of tidal flats in France, making it the 23rd ranked country in terms of tidal flat area.\nPolitical geography.\nInternal divisions.\nFrance has several levels of internal divisions. The first-level administrative division of Metropolitan France is regions. Also the French Republic has sovereignty over several other territories, with various administrative levels. \nExtreme points.\nThis is a list of the extreme points of France; the points that are farther north, south, east or west than any other location.\nTemperature extremes.\nThese are the extreme temperatures in France.\nSee also.\nGeneral:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "67473", "revid": "51045235", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=67473", "title": "Economy of France", "text": "France has a highly developed social market economy with strong state participation in strategic sectors. It is the world's seventh-largest economy by nominal GDP and the ninth-largest economy by PPP, constituting around 3% of world GDP. Due to a volatile currency exchange rate, France's GDP as measured in dollars fluctuates sharply, by 2025 it is 15% larger than in 2008. France has a diversified economy, that is dominated by the service sector (which in 2017 represented 78.8% of its GDP), whilst the industrial sector accounted for 19.5% of its GDP and the primary sector accounted for the remaining 1.7%. In 2024, France was the largest Foreign Direct Investment recipient in Europe, and Europe's second-largest spender in research and development. It was ranked among the 10 most innovative countries in the world by the 2020 Bloomberg Innovation Index, as well as the 15th most competitive nation globally according to the 2019 Global Competitiveness Report (up 2 notches compared to 2018). It was the fifth-largest trading nation in the world (and second in Europe after Germany). France is also the most-visited destination in the world, as well as the European Union's leading agricultural power.\nAccording to the International Monetary Fund (IMF), in 2025, France was the world's 25th country by GDP per capita with $48,981 per inhabitant. In 2023, France was listed on the United Nations's Human Development Index with a value of 0.920 (indicating very high human development) and 25th on the Corruption Perceptions Index in 2024. Among OECD members, France has a highly efficient and strong social security system, which comprises roughly 31.7% of GDP.\nParis is a leading global city, and has one of the largest city GDP in the world. It ranks as the first city in Europe (and 3rd worldwide) by the number of companies classified in \"Fortune\"'s Fortune Global 500. Paris produced US$738 billion (or US$882 billion at market exchange rates) or around 1/3 of the French economy in 2018 while the economy of the Paris metropolitan area\u2014the largest in Europe with London\u2014generates around 1/3 of France's GDP or around $1.0 trillion. Paris has been ranked as the 2nd most attractive global city in the world in 2019 by KPMG. La D\u00e9fense, Paris's Central Business District, was ranked by Ernst &amp; Young in 2017 as the leading business district in continental Europe, and fourth in the world. The OECD is headquartered in Paris, the nation's financial capital. The other major economic centres of the country include Lyon, Toulouse (centre of the European aerospace industry), Marseille and Lille.\nFrance's economy entered the recession of the late 2000s later and appeared to leave it earlier than most affected economies, only enduring four-quarters of contraction. However, France experienced stagnant growth between 2012 and 2014, with the economy expanding by 0% in 2012, 0.8% in 2013 and 0.2% in 2014. Growth picked up in 2015 with a growth of 0.8%. This was followed by a growth of 1.1% for 2016, a growth of 2.2% for 2017, and a growth of 2.1% for 2018.\nAccording to INSEE (2021), non-financial and non-agricultural medium-sized firms employed 3 million full-time equivalent employees (24.3% of the workforce), accounted for 27% of investment, 30% of turnover, and 26% of value added, despite accounting for only 1.6% of total firms in France.\nCorporations.\nWith 31 companies that are part of the world's biggest 500 companies, France was in 2020 the most represented European country in the 2020 Fortune Global 500, ahead of Germany (27 companies) and the UK (22).\nAs of August 2020, France was also the country that weighed the most on the Eurozone's EURO STOXX 50 (representing 36.4% of all total assets), ahead of Germany (35.2%).\nSeveral French corporations rank amongst the largest in their industries such as Axa in insurance and Air France in air transportation. Luxury and consumer goods are particularly relevant, with L'Oreal being the world's largest cosmetic company while LVMH and Kering are the world's two largest luxury product companies. In energy and utilities, GDF-Suez and EDF are amongst the largest energy companies in the world, and Areva is a large nuclear-energy company; Veolia Environnement is the world's largest environmental services and water management company; Vinci SA, Bouygues and Eiffage are large construction companies; Michelin ranks in the top 3 tire manufacturers; JCDecaux is the world's largest outdoor advertising corporation; BNP Paribas, Credit Agricole and Soci\u00e9t\u00e9 G\u00e9n\u00e9rale rank amongst the largest banks in the world by assets. Capgemini and Atos are among the largest technology consulting companies.\nCarrefour is the world's second-largest retail group in terms of revenue; Total is the world's fourth-largest private oil company; Lactalis is the world's largest dairy products group; Sanofi is the world's fifth-largest pharmaceutical company; Publicis is the world's third-largest advertising company; Groupe PSA is the world's 6th and Europe's 2nd largest automaker; Accor is the leading European hotel group; Alstom is one of the world's leading conglomerates in rail transport.\nIn 2022, the sector with the highest number of companies registered in France is Finance, Insurance, and Real Estate with 2,656,178 companies followed by Services and Retail Trade with 2,090,320 and 549,395 companies respectively.\nRise and decline of dirigisme.\nFrance embarked on an ambitious and very successful programme of modernisation under state coordination. This programme of \"dirigisme\", mostly implemented by governments between 1944 and 1983, involved the state control of certain industries such as transportation, energy and telecommunications as well as various incentives for private corporations to merge or engage in certain projects\nThe 1981 election of president Fran\u00e7ois Mitterrand saw a short-lived increase in governmental control of the economy, nationalizing many industries and private banks. This form of increased \"dirigisme\", was criticised as early as 1982. By 1983, the government decided to renounce \"dirigisme\" and start an era of rigueur (\"rigor\") or corporation. As a result, the government largely retreated from economic intervention; \"dirigisme\" has now essentially receded, though some of its traits remain. The French economy grew and changed under government direction and planning much more than in other European countries.\nDespite being a widely liberalised economy, the government continues to play a significant role in the economy: government spending, at 56% of GDP in 2014, is the second-highest in the European Union. Labor conditions and wages are highly regulated. The government continues to own shares in corporations in several sectors, including energy production and distribution, automobiles, aerospace industry, shipbuilding, the arms industry, electronics industry, machine industry, metallurgy, fuels, chemical industry, transportation, and telecommunications.\nFrance has a mixed market economy, with the majority of market activity driven by competitive private firms. However, a significant share of the market is owned by the state. According to France\u2019s National Institute of Statistics and Economic Studies (INSEE), 1,751 French companies were state-controlled by the end of 2017. OECD identified the state-owned primary sectors as energy, transportation, finance, and manufacturing. The state maintains ownership of key sectors to ensure strategic control and prevent private monopolies. \nGovernment finance.\nIn April and May 2012, France held a presidential election in which the winner Fran\u00e7ois Hollande had opposed austerity measures, promising to eliminate France's budget deficit by 2017. The new government stated that it aimed to cancel recently enacted tax cuts and exemptions for the wealthy, raising the top tax bracket rate to 75% on incomes over a million euros, restoring the retirement age to 60 with a full pension for those who have worked 42 years, restoring 60,000 jobs recently cut from public education, regulating rent increases; and building additional public housing for the poor.\nIn June 2012, Hollande's Socialist Party won an overall majority in the legislative elections, giving it the capability to amend the French Constitution and allowing immediate enactment of the promised reforms. French government bond interest rates fell 30% to record lows, less than 50 basis points above German government bond rates.\nHollande's successor as President of France, Emmanuel Macron, a centrist politician, took office in May 2017. His aim was to revive the euro zone\u2019s second-largest economy.\nIn July 2020, during the COVID-19 pandemic, the French government issued 10-years bonds which had negative interest rates, for the first time in its history (which means that investors buying French bonds will pay, rather than receive, interest for owning French sovereign debt).\nFrance possesses in 2020 the fourth-largest gold reserves in the world.\nMacron vowed in May 2023 to build factories, boost job creations and make France more independent, shaked by pension protests.\nNational debt.\nThe Government of France has run a budget deficit each year since the early 1970s. As of 2021, French government debt reached an equivalent of 118.6% of French GDP.\nUnder European Union rules, member states are supposed to limit their debt to 60% of output or be reducing the ratio structurally towards this ceiling, and run public deficits of no more than 3.0% of GDP.\nIn late 2012, credit-rating agencies warned that growing French government debt levels risked France's AAA credit rating, raising the possibility of a future credit downgrade and subsequent higher borrowing costs for the French government. In 2012 France was downgraded by ratings agencies Moody's, Standard &amp; Poor's (S&amp;P), and Fitch to an AA+ credit rating.\nIn December 2014 France's credit rating was further downgraded by Fitch and S&amp;P to AA.\nMacron, shaken by pension protests, vowed in May 2023 to build factories, boost job creations and make France more independent.\nThe Government of France experienced a significant shift in its bond market position on September 26, 2024, when its bond yield surpassed that of Spain for the first time since 2007. The yield on 10-year French bonds reached 2.97%, slightly exceeding the yield on Spanish bonds of similar maturity, despite France's typically higher credit rating.\nThis development raised concerns among investors about France's ability to manage its public finances effectively. France's bond yields were reported to be higher than those of Portugal and approaching levels seen in Italy and Greece, countries traditionally viewed as having higher economic risks in the Eurozone.\nFurthermore, France faces a budget crisis in 2024, with the deficit at risk of exceeding 6% of GDP, significantly higher than the previous government's estimate of 5.1%. Newly appointed Finance Minister Antoine Armand and Budget Minister Laurent Saint-Martin pledged to focus on spending cuts before considering tax increases to address the fiscal shortfall. Prime Minister Michel Barnier was tasked with finalizing the 2025 budget within days, amidst pressure to present realistic plans for deficit reduction.\nData.\nThe following table shows the main economic indicators in 1980\u20132021 (with IMF staff estimates in 2022\u20132027). Inflation below 5% is in green.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Static row numbers/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"template:sticky header/styles.css\"/&gt;\nEconomic sectors.\nIndustry.\nIn 2019, France was the world's 8th largest manufacturer in terms of value added, according to the World Bank.\nThe leading industrial sectors in France are telecommunications (including communication satellites), aerospace and defence, ship building, pharmaceuticals, construction and civil engineering, chemicals, textiles, and automobile production. The chemical industry is a key sector for France, helping to develop other manufacturing activities and contributing to economic growth.\nResearch and development spending is also high in France at 2.26% of GDP, the fourth-highest in the OECD.\nIndustry contributes to French exports: as of 2018, the Observatory of Economic Complexity estimates that France's largest exports \"are led by planes, helicopters, and spacecraft ($43.8 billion), cars ($26 billion), packaged medicaments ($25.7 billion), vehicle parts ($16.5 billion), and gas turbines ($14.4 billion).\"\nIn December 2023, industrial production in France experienced its most significant change since May of the same year, with a notable increase of 1.1%.\nEnergy.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Pie chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nFrance is the world-leading country in nuclear energy, home of global energy giants Areva, EDF and GDF Suez: nuclear power now accounts for about 78% of the country's electricity production, up from only 8% in 1973, 24% in 1980, and 75% in 1990. Nuclear waste is stored on site at reprocessing facilities. Due to its heavy investment in nuclear power, France is the smallest emitter of carbon dioxide among the seven most industrialised countries in the world. Due to its overwhelming reliance on nuclear power, renewable energies have seen relatively little growth compared to other Western countries.\nIn 2006, electricity generated in France amounted to 548.8 TWh, of which:\nIn November 2004, EDF (which stands for Electricit\u00e9 de France), one of the world's largest utility company and France's largest electricity provider, was floated with huge success on the French stock market. However, the French state still retains 70% of the capital. Other electricity providers include Compagnie nationale du Rh\u00f4ne (CNR) and Endesa (through SNET).\nAgriculture.\nFrance is the world's sixth-largest agricultural producer and EU's leading agricultural power, accounting for about one-third of all agricultural land within the EU. In the early 1980s, France was the leading producer of the three principal grains of wheat, barley, and maize. Back in 1983, France produced around 24.8\u00a0million tonnes, ahead of the United Kingdom and West Germany, the next two largest wheat producers.\nNorthern France is characterised by large wheat farms. Dairy products, pork, poultry, and apple production are concentrated in the western region. Beef production is located in central France, while the production of fruits, vegetables, and wine ranges from central to southern France. France is a large producer of many agricultural products and is currently expanding its forestry and fishery industries. The implementation of the Common Agricultural Policy (CAP) and the Uruguay Round of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) have resulted in reforms in the agricultural sector of the economy.\nAs the world's second-largest agricultural exporter, France ranks just after the United States. The destination of 49% of its exports is other EU members states. France also provides agricultural exports to many poor African countries (including its former colonies) which face serious food shortages. Wheat, beef, pork, poultry, and dairy products are the principal exports.\nExports from the United States face stiff competition from domestic production, other EU member states, and third-world countries in France. US agricultural exports to France, totaling some $600\u00a0million annually, consist primarily of soybeans and soybean products, feeds and fodders, seafood, and consumer products, especially snack foods and nuts. French exports to the United States are much more high-value products such as its cheese, processed products and its wine.\nThe French agricultural sector receives almost \u20ac11\u00a0billion in EU subsidies. France produced in 2018 39.5\u00a0million tons of sugar beet (2nd largest producer in the world, just behind Russia), which serves to produce sugar and ethanol; 35.8\u00a0million tons of wheat (5th largest producer in the world); 12.6\u00a0million tons of maize (11th largest producer in the world); 11.2\u00a0million tons of barley (2nd largest producer in the world, only behind Russia); 7.8\u00a0million tons of potato (8th largest producer in the world); 6.2\u00a0million tons of grape (5th largest producer in the world); 4.9\u00a0million tons of rapeseed (4th largest producer in the world, behind Canada, China and India); 2.2\u00a0million tons of sugarcane; 1.7\u00a0million tons of apple (9th largest producer in the world); 1.3\u00a0million tons of triticale (4th largest producer in the world, only behind Poland, Germany and Belarus); 1.2\u00a0million tons of sunflower seed (9th largest producer in the world); 712 thousand tons of tomatoes; 660 thousand tons of linen; 615 thousand tons of dry pea; 535 thousand tons of carrot; 427 thousand tons of oats; 400 thousand tons of soy; in addition to smaller productions of other agricultural products.\nTourism.\nFrance is the world's most popular tourist destination with more than 83.7\u00a0million foreign tourists in 2014, ahead of Spain (58.5\u00a0million in 2006) and the United States (51.1\u00a0million in 2006). This figure excludes people staying less than 24 hours in France, such as northern Europeans crossing France on their way to Spain or Italy during the summer.\nAccording to figures from 2003, some popular tourist sites include (in visitors per year): Eiffel Tower (6.2\u00a0million), Louvre Museum (5.7\u00a0million), Palace of Versailles (2.8\u00a0million), Cit\u00e9 des Sciences et de l'Industrie (2.6\u00a0million), Mus\u00e9e d'Orsay (2.1\u00a0million), Arc de Triomphe (1.2\u00a0million), Centre Pompidou (1.2\u00a0million), Mont-Saint-Michel (1\u00a0million), Ch\u00e2teau de Chambord (711,000), Sainte-Chapelle (683,000), Ch\u00e2teau du Haut-K\u0153nigsbourg (549,000), Puy de D\u00f4me (500,000), Mus\u00e9e Picasso (441,000), Carcassonne (362,000). However, the most popular site in France is Disneyland Paris, with 9.7\u00a0million visitors in 2017\nArms industry.\nThe French government is the French arms industry's main customer, mainly buying warships, guns, nuclear weapons and equipment.\nDuring the 2000\u20132015 period, France was the fourth largest weapons exporter in the world.\nFrench manufacturers export great quantities of weaponry to Saudi Arabia, the United Arab Emirates, Brazil, Greece, India, Pakistan, Taiwan, Singapore and many others. It was reported that in 2015, French arms sales internationally amounted to 17.4\u00a0billion U.S. dollars, more than double the figure of 2014.\nFashion and luxury goods.\nAccording to 2017 data compiled by Deloitte, Louis Vuitton Moet Hennessey (LVMH), a French brand, is the largest luxury company in the world by sales, selling more than twice the amount of its nearest competitor. Moreover, France also possesses 3 of the top 10 luxury goods companies by sales (LVMH, Kering SA, L'Or\u00e9al), more than any other country in the world.\nParis is considered one of the world's foremost fashion capitals, or even \"the world's fashion capital\". The French tradition for haute couture has been estimated to start as early as the era of Louis XIV, the Sun King.\nEducation.\nEducation in France is organised in a highly centralised manner, with many subdivisions. It is divided into the three stages of primary education (\"enseignement primaire\"), secondary education (\"enseignement secondaire\"), and higher education (\"enseignement sup\u00e9rieur\"). In French higher education, the following degrees are recognised by the Bologna Process (EU recognition): \"Licence\" and \"Licence Professionnelle\" (bachelor's degrees), and the comparably named \"Master\" and \"Doctorat\" degrees.\nThe Programme for International Student Assessment coordinated by the OECD currently ranks the overall knowledge and skills of French 15-year-olds as 26th in the world in reading literacy, mathematics, and science, near the OECD average of 493. France's performance in mathematics and science at the middle school level was ranked 23 in the 1995 Trends in International Math and Science Study. The OECD also found that students in France reported greater concern about discipline and behaviour at school and in classrooms, much more than the rest of Europe. This was higher than all OECD countries. School principals reported higher staff and material shortage in France, higher than OECD averages. About 7% of French teachers believe the teaching profession is highly valued in France and in society. School principals noted regular acts of violence and bullying among their students, higher than averages. The time spent of teaching time spent on keeping classes in good order is one of the largest in France, among all OECD countries studied. France also has a high drop out rate. \nPupils can take apprenticeships to enter the labour market with the Baccalaur\u00e9at Technologique. It allows pupils pursue short and technical studies (laboratory, design and applied arts, hotel and restaurant, management etc).\nHigher education in France was reshaped by the student revolts of May 1968. During the 1960s, French public universities responded to a massive explosion in the number of students (280,000 in 1962\u201363 to 500,000 in 1967\u201368) by stuffing approximately one-third of their students into hastily developed campus annexes (roughly equivalent to American satellite campuses) which lacked decent amenities, resident professors, academic traditions, or the dignity of university status. This is why the French higher education economy performs poorly compared with other high-performing countries such as England or Australia. France also hosts various catholic universities recognised by the state, the largest one being Lille Catholic University, as well branch colleges of foreign universities. They include Baruch College, the University of London Institute in Paris, Parsons Paris School of Art and Design and the American University of Paris. Eighteen million pupils and students are in the education system, over 2.4 million of whom are in higher education.\nTransport.\nTransportation in France relies on one of the densest networks in the world with 146\u00a0km of road and 6.2\u00a0km of rail lines per 100\u00a0km2. It is built as a web with Paris at its centre. The highly subsidised rail transport network makes up a relatively small portion of travel, most of which is done by car. However, the high-speed TGV trains make up a large proportion of long-distance travel, partially because intercity buses were prevented from operating until 2015.\nWith 3,220 kilometers of high-speed train lines, France boast the 2nd most expansive network in the world, only after China. Charles de Gaulle Airport is one of the busiest airports in the world by passenger traffic. Charles de Gaulle airport is third globally in the number of destinations served, and first in the number of countries served with non-stop flights.\nFrance also boasts a number of seaports and harbours, including Bayonne, Bordeaux, Boulogne-sur-Mer, Brest, Calais, Cherbourg-Octeville, Dunkerque, Fos-sur-Mer, La Pallice, Le Havre, Lorient, Marseille, Nantes, Nice, Paris, Port-la-Nouvelle, Port-Vendres, Roscoff, Rouen, Saint-Nazaire, Saint-Malo, S\u00e8te, Strasbourg and Toulon. There are approximately 470 airports in France and by a 2005 estimate, there are three heliports. 288 of the airports have paved runways, with the remaining 199 being unpaved. The national carrier of France is Air France, a full service global airline which flies to 20 domestic destinations and 150 international destinations in 83 countries (including Overseas France) across all 6 major continents.\nForeign investment.\nAccording to a study conducted by Ernst &amp; Young, France was in 2020 the largest Foreign Direct Investment recipient in Europe, ahead of the UK and Germany. EY attributed this as a \"direct result of President Macron\u2019s reforms of labor laws and corporate taxation, which were well received by domestic and international investors alike.\"\nFrance scored 5th in the 2019 AT Kearney FDI Confidence Index, up 2 notches from its 2017 ranking.\nLabour market.\nAccording to a 2011 report by the American Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS), France's GDP per capita at purchasing power parity is similar to that of the UK, with just over US$35,000 per head. To explain why French per capita GDP is lower than that of the United States, the economist Paul Krugman stated that \"French workers are roughly as productive as US workers\", but that the French have a \"lower workforce participation rate,\" and \"when they work, they work fewer hours\". According to Krugman, the difference is due to the French making \"different choices about retirement and leisure\".\nFrance has long suffered a relatively high unemployment rate, even during the years when its macroeconomic performances compared favourably with other advanced economies. The employment rate of the French working-age population is one of the lowest of the OECD countries: in 2020, only 64.4% of the French working-age population were in employment, compared to 77% in Japan, 76.1% in Germany, 75.4% in the UK, but the French employment rate was higher than that of the US, which stood at 62.5%. This gap is due to the low employment rate of those 15\u201324 years old: 38% in 2012, compared to 47% in the OECD.\nSince his election in 2017, Emmanuel Macron has introduced several labour market reforms which proved successful in decreasing the unemployment rate before the global COVID-19 recession struck. In late 2019, the French unemployment rate, though still high compared to other developed economies, was the lowest in a decade.\nDuring the 2000s and 2010s, classical liberal and Keynesian economists sought out different solutions to the unemployment issue in France. Keynesian economists's theories led to the introduction of the 35-hour workweek law in 1999. Between 2004 and 2008, the government attempted to combat unemployment with supply-side reforms, but was met with fierce resistance; the \"contrat nouvelle embauche\" and the \"contrat premi\u00e8re embauche\" (which allowed more flexible contracts) were of particular concern, and both were eventually repealed. The Sarkozy government used the \"revenu de solidarit\u00e9 active\" (in-work benefits) to redress the \"negative effect\" of the \"revenu minimum d'insertion\" (unemployment benefits which do not depend on previous contributions, unlike normal unemployment benefits in France) on the incentive to accept even jobs which are insufficient to earn a living. Neoliberal economists attribute the low employment rate, particularly evident among young people, to high minimum wages that would prevent low productivity workers from easily entering the labour market.\nA December 2012 \"New York Times\" article reported on a \"floating generation\" in France that formed part of the 14 million unemployed young Europeans documented by the Eurofound research agency. This \"floating generation\" was attributed to a dysfunctional system: \"an elitist educational tradition that does not integrate graduates into the work force, a rigid labour market that is hard to enter for newcomers, and a tax system that makes it expensive for companies to hire full-time employees and both difficult and expensive to lay them off\". In July 2013, the unemployment rate for France was 11%.\nIn early April 2014, employers' federations and unions negotiated an agreement with technology and consultancy employers, as employees had been experiencing an extension of their work time through smartphone communication outside of official working hours. Under a new, legally binding labour agreement, around 250,000 employees will avoid handling work-related matters during their leisure time and their employers will, in turn, refrain from engaging with staff during this time.\nEvery day, about 80,000 French citizens commute to work in neighbouring Luxembourg, making it the biggest cross-border workforce group in the whole of the European Union. They are attracted by much higher wages for the different job groups than in their own country and the lack of skilled labour in the booming Luxembourgish economy.\nThe background of the 2023 pension reform was about 14% of GDP pension spending in France compared to OECD average of just over 9%. The aim of the pension reform was to reduce cost by increasing the minimum legal retirement age from 62 years to 64 years in 2030. In April 2023, president Emmanuel Macron signed the pension reforms into law.\nExternal trade.\nIn 2018, France was the 5th largest trading nation in the world, as well as the second-largest trading nation in Europe (after Germany). Its foreign trade balance for goods had been in surplus from 1992 until 2001, reaching $25.4 billion (25.4 G$) in 1998; however, the French balance of trade was hit by the economic downturn, and went into the red in 2000, reaching a US$15bn deficit in 2003. Total trade for 1998 amounted to $730\u00a0billion, or 50% of GDP\u2014imports plus exports of goods and services. Trade with European Union countries accounts for 60% of French trade.\nIn 1998, US\u2013France trade stood at about $47\u00a0billion \u2013 goods only. According to French trade data, US exports accounted for 8.7% \u2013 about $25\u00a0billion \u2013 of France's total imports. US industrial chemicals, aircraft and engines, electronic components, telecommunications, computer software, computers and peripherals, analytical and scientific instrumentation, medical instruments and supplies, broadcasting equipment, and programming and franchising are particularly attractive to French importers.\nThe principal French exports to the US are aircraft and engines, beverages, electrical equipment, chemicals, cosmetics, luxury products and perfume. France is the ninth-largest trading partner of the US.\nIn August 2023, the French current account deficit shrank by \u20ac29.7 billion in the past six months, from \u2212\u20ac39.3 billion to \u2212\u20ac9.6 billion, primarily due to a fall in energy prices.\nRegional economy.\nThe economic disparity between French regions is not as high as that in other European countries such as the UK or Italy and higher than in countries like Sweden or Denmark, or even Spain. However, Europe's wealthiest and second-largest regional economy, Ile-de-France (the region surrounding Paris), has long profited from the capital city's economic hegemony.\nThe most important \"r\u00e9gions\" are \u00cele-de-France (Europe's 4th regional economy), Rh\u00f4ne-Alpes (Europe's 5th largest regional economy thanks to its services, high-technologies, chemical industries, wines, tourism), Provence-Alpes-C\u00f4te d'Azur (services, industry, tourism and wines), Nord-Pas-de-Calais (European transport hub, services, industries) and Pays de la Loire (green technologies, tourism). Regions like Alsace, which has a rich past in industry (machine tool) and currently stands as a high income service-specialised region, are very wealthy without ranking very high in absolute terms.\nThe rural areas are mainly in Auvergne, Limousin, and Centre-Val de Loire, and wine production accounts for a significant proportion of the economy in Aquitaine (Bordeaux (or claret)), Burgundy, and champagne produced in Champagne-Ardennes.\nDepartments economy and cities.\nDepartmental income inequalities.\nIn terms of income, important inequalities can be observed among the French d\u00e9partements.\nAccording to the 2008 statistics of the INSEE, the Yvelines is the highest income department of the country with an average income of \u20ac4,750 per month. Hauts-de-Seine comes second, Essonne third, Paris fourth, Seine-et Marne fifth. \u00cele-de-France is the wealthiest region in the country with an average income of \u20ac4,228 per month (and is also the wealthiest region in Europe) compared to \u20ac3,081 at the national level. Alsace comes second, Rh\u00f4ne-Alpes third, Picardy fourth, and Upper Normandy fifth.\nThe poorest parts of France are the French overseas departments, French Guiana being the poorest department with an average household income of \u20ac1,826. In Metropolitan France it is Creuse in the Limousin region which comes bottom of the list with an average household income of \u20ac1,849 per month.\nUrban income inequalities.\nHuge inequalities can also be found among cities.\nIn the Paris metropolitan area, significant differences exist between the higher standard of living of \"Paris Ouest\" and lower standard of living in areas in the northern \"banlieues\" of Paris such as Seine-Saint-Denis.\nFor cities of over 50,000 inhabitants, Neuilly-sur-Seine, a western suburb of Paris, is the wealthiest city in France with an average household income of \u20ac5,939, and 35% earning more than \u20ac8,000 per month.\nBut within Paris, four arrondissements surpass wealthy Neuilly-sur-Seine in household income: the 6th, the 7th, the 8th and the 16th; the 8th arrondissement being the wealthiest district in France (the other three following it closely as 2nd, 3rd and 4th wealthiest ones).\nPoverty.\nOECD data from 2021 estimate that 8.4% of the French population lived in poverty, compared with 18% in the United States, 11.6% in Canada, and 9.8% in Germany. In 2016, the poverty rate in France stood at 14%, compared to 12.8% in 2004. The northern districts of Marseille represent one of the poorest and unequal areas in France, where poor neighbourhoods rub shoulders with wealthier pockets. The share of people living below the poverty line (949 euro per month) was 28.8% in 2008 in sensitive urban zones (ZUS) compared to 12% in the rest of the territory.\nIn comparison with the average French workers, foreign workers tended to be employed in the hardest and lowest-paid jobs. They also live in poor conditions. A 1972 study found that foreign workers earned 17% less than their French counterparts, although this national average concealed the extent of inequality. Foreign workers were more likely to be men in their prime working years in the industrial areas, which generally had higher rates of pay than elsewhere.\nWealth.\nOverview.\nIn 2010, the French had an estimated wealth of US$14.0\u00a0trillion for a population of 63 million.\nMillionaires.\nFrance has the third-highest number of millionaires in Europe as of 2017. There were 1.617\u00a0million millionaire households (measured in US dollars) living in France in 2017, behind the UK (2.225 million) and Germany (1.637 million).\nThe wealthiest man in France is the LVMH CEO and owner Bernard Arnault.\nBy 2022, the combined wealth of France's 500 richest people will be worth 1,170 billion euros, or 45% of GDP. In 2009, this figure was just 194 billion, representing 10% of GDP at the time.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "67475", "revid": "44271480", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=67475", "title": "Demographics of France", "text": "The demography of France is monitored by the Institut national d'\u00e9tudes d\u00e9mographiques (INED) and the (INSEE). As of 1 January 2025, 66,352,000 people lived in Metropolitan France, while 2,254,000 lived in overseas France, for a total of 68,606,000 inhabitants in the French Republic. In January 2022, the population of France officially reached the 68,000,000 mark. In the 2010s and until 2017, the population of France grew by 1\u00a0million people every three years - an average annual increase of 340,000 people, or +0.6%.\nFrance was historically Europe's most populous country. During the Middle Ages, more than one-quarter of Europe's total population was French; by the seventeenth century, this had decreased slightly to one-fifth. By the beginning of the nineteenth century, other European countries, such as Germany and Russia, had caught up with France and overtaken it in number of people. The country's population sharply increased with the baby boom following World War II, as it did in other European countries.\nAccording to INSEE, from the year 2004, 200,000 immigrants entered the country annually. One out of two was born in Europe and one in three in Africa. Between 2009 and 2012, the number of Europeans migrating to France increased sharply (an annual increase of 12%), but this percentage decreased steadily until 2022, supplanted by a rise in the number of immigrants from Africa.\nThe national birth rate, after dropping for a time, began to rebound in the 1990s, and the country's fertility rate was close to the replacement level until about 2014. According to a 2006 INSEE study, the natural increase was close to 300,000 people a year, a level that had \"not been reached in more than thirty years.\" With a total fertility rate of 1.59 (for \"France m\u00e9tropolitaine)\" in 2024, France remains one of the above-average fertile countries in the European Union, but it is now far from the replacement level.\nIn 2021, the total fertility rate of France was 1.82, and 7.7% was the percentage of births, where this was a women's 4th or more child.\nAmong the 802,000 babies born in metropolitan France in 2010, 80.1% had two French parents, 13.3% had one French parent, and 6.6% had two non-French parents.\nBetween 2006 and 2008, about 22% of newborns in France had at least one foreign-born grandparent (9% born in another European country, 8% born in the Maghreb and 2% born in another region of the world). Censuses on race and ethnic origin were banned by the French government in 1978.\nHistorical overview.\n1800 to 20th century.\nStarting around 1800, the historical evolution of the population in France has been atypical in Europe. Unlike the rest of Europe, there was no strong population growth in France in the 19th and first half of the 20th century. The birth rate in France diminished much earlier than in the rest of Europe in part because from the late 18th century inheritance laws dictated equal distribution of estates between heirs. The country's large population gave Napoleon a seemingly limitless supply of men for the Grande Arm\u00e9e, but the birth rate began to fall in the late 18th century; thus population growth was quite slow in the 19th century, and the nadir was reached in the first half of the 20th century when France, surrounded by the rapidly growing populations of Germany and the United Kingdom, had virtually zero growth. The slow growth of France's population in the 19th century was reflected in the country's very low emigration rate.\nThe French population only grew by 8.6% between 1871 and 1911, while Germany's grew by 60% and Britain's by 54%.\nFrench concerns about the country's slow population growth began after its defeat in the Franco-Prussian War. For four years in the 1890s, the number of deaths exceeded the number of births. The National Alliance for the Growth of the French Population (ANAPF) was formed in 1896, and the Cognacq-Jay and other prizes were created for the parents of large families. \u00c9mile Zola's 1899 novel \"F\u00e9condit\u00e9\u200a\" is representative of contemporary concerns about the birthrate. France lost 10% of its active male population in World War I; the 1.3 million French deaths, along with even more births forgone by potential fathers being off at war, caused a drop of 3 million in the French population, and helped make \"D\u00e9natalit\u00e9\" a national obsession; by 1920 ANAPF had 40,000 members, and in July that year a new law strictly regulated abortion and contraception.\nANAPF proposed that parents of large families receive extra votes, and the belief that women's suffrage in other countries caused birth rates to decline helped defeat proposals before World War II to permit women to vote. The birth rate declined again after a brief baby boom from 1920 to 1923, and reached an all-time low during peacetime in the late 1930s. During the \"hollow years\" of the decade, the number of new conscripts declined because of the lack of births during World War I. From 1935 deaths exceeded births; the press widely discussed the country's decreasing population. Both left and right supported pro-natalist policies; even the French Communist Party ended its opposition to anti-birth control and anti-abortion laws in 1936, and its leader, Maurice Thorez, advocated for the \"protection of family and childhood\".\nNew laws in November 1938 and July 1939, the , provided enough financial incentives for large families to double the income of a family with six children. The Vichy government approved of the laws and implemented them as part of its \"Travail, famille, patrie\" national motto, as did the postwar Provisional Government of the French Republic. Also, France encouraged immigration, chiefly from other European countries such as Italy, Poland, and Spain. (In fact, with its low birth rate, stagnating or declining native-born population, and role as a destination for migrants from other parts of Europe, France's situation before World War II was not unlike that of Germany today.)\nAfter World War II.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nFrance experienced a baby boom after 1945; it reversed a long-term record of low birth rates. The government's pro-natalist policy of the 1930s, however, does not explain this sudden recovery, which was often portrayed in France as a \"miracle\". It was also atypical of the Western world: although there was a baby boom in other Western countries after the war, the baby boom in France was much stronger, and lasted longer than in most other Western countries (the United States was one of the few exceptions). In the 1950s and 1960s, France's population grew at 1% per year: the highest growth in the history of France, higher even than the high growth rates of the 18th or 19th century.\nSince 1975, France's population growth rate has significantly diminished, but it still remains slightly higher than that of the rest of Europe, and much higher than at the end of the 19th century and during the first half of the 20th century. In the first decade of the third millennium, population growth in France was the highest in Europe, matched only by that of the Republic of Ireland, which, until recently, has also historically undergone stagnant growth and even decline relative to the rest of Europe. However, population growth of France is still lower than that of the United States, largely because of the latter's higher net migration rate.\nHistorical summary.\nThe following compares the past, present, and future size of the French population with other entities in Europe and in the world. All statements refer to France as understood in its modern borders; this pertains also to other countries. Historians suggest that France was the most populous state in Europe from at least the period of Charlemagne and the Frankish Empire, if not earlier, to the 19th century. Population statistics prior to the modern era are historical estimates as official counts were not made.\nIn the above list, Turkey is not considered a European country. Turkey was less populous than metropolitan France until 1992 but in 2024 was more populous than France, the UK and Germany.\n&lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;/includeonly&gt;\n&lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;/includeonly&gt;\n&lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;/includeonly&gt;\nPopulation.\nHistorical population figures.\nDemographic statistics according to the CIA World Factbook, unless otherwise indicated.\nPlease note:\nSource:\nPopulation growth over time.\nSource: Louis Henry and Yves Blayo.\nLife expectancy and mortality.\nLife expectancy in Metropolitan France from 1818 to 1950. Source: Our World In Data.\nDeath rate 9.6 deaths/1,000 population (2021 est.)\nAge structure.\nAge structures of the France m\u00e9tropolitaine from the year 1740 to 2021. Source: Louis Henry and Yves Blayo.\ntotal: 41.1 years. Country comparison to the world: 40th\nmale: 39.6 years\nfemale: 42.6 years\n\"at birth:\" 1.05 male(s)/female\n\"0\u201314 years:\" 1.05 male(s)/female\n\"15\u201324 years:\" 1.05 male(s)/female\n\"25\u201354 years:\" 1.02 male(s)/female\n\"55\u201364 years:\" 0.93 male(s)/female\n\"65 years and over:\" 0.77 male(s)/female\n\"total population:\" 0.96 male(s)/female (2020 est.))\n total dependency ratio: 62.4\n youth dependency ratio: 28.7\n elderly dependency ratio: 33.7\n potential support ratio: 3 (2020 est.)\nFertility.\nFrance has a high fertility rate compared to other European countries; this rate has increased after reaching a historic low in the early 1990s.\nThe table below gives the average number of children according to the place of birth of women. An immigrant woman is a woman who was born outside France and who did not have French citizenship at birth.\nIn 2021 there was 11.8 births/1,000 population. Total fertility rate (2020 data by INSEE) 1.83 children born/woman.\n28.5 years (2015)\nTotal fertility rate in the 19th century.\nThe total fertility rate is the number of children born per woman. It is based on fairly good data for the entire period. Sources: Our World In Data and Gapminder Foundation.\nBirths by country of birth of the parents.\nAbout 22% of newborns in France between 2006 and 2008 had at least one foreign-born grandparent (9% born in another European country, 8% born in the Maghreb and 2% born in another region of the world).\nAs of 2022, 32.4% of newborns in France had at least one foreign-born parent and 28.5% had at least one parent born outside of Europe (EU 28) (parents born in overseas territories are considered as born in France).\nThe table below gives the number of children born in metropolitan France according to the place of birth of both parents.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Table alignment/tables.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Sort under/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBirths by citizenship of the parents.\nAs of 2022, 74.0% of newborns in France had two parents with French citizenship, 14.4% had one French parent, and 11.5% had two non-French parents.\nThe table below gives the number of children born in metropolitan France according to the citizenship of both parents.\nPopulation projections.\nThe population of France is projected to hit the 70 million mark between the year 2025/2030 and to overtake Germany's between 2050/2060, with 75.6 million French for 71 million Germans in 2060, while the UK is predicted to overtake France by 2030. By 2080, the population of France is estimated to reach 78.8 million (including the overseas departments, but not the overseas territories).\nFigures from eurostat for metropolitan France and the overseas departments:\nVital statistics.\nThe vital statistics below refer to Metropolitan France and do not include the Overseas France, territories and New Caledonia. Source: \nNotable events in French demographics:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"template:sticky header/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Sort under/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Table alignment/tables.css\" /&gt;\n\"For the purpose of compatibility, all data refers to Metropolitan France.\"\nAs of 2024, 435,196 (65.9%) newborn babies had both parents born in France, 15.2% had one foreign-born parent, and 19.0% had two foreign-born parents. In the same year, 476,334 (72.1%) newborn babies had both parents with French citizenship, 14.7% had one French and one foreign parent, and 13.2% had both parents with foreign citizenship.\nStructure of the population.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Hidden begin/styles.css\"/&gt;Population by Sex and Age Group (Census 01.I.2015):\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Hidden begin/styles.css\"/&gt;Population Estimates by Sex and Age Group (01.I.2021) (Excluding diplomatic personnel outside the country and including members of\nalien armed forces not living in military camps and foreign diplomatic personnel not living in embassies or consulates.):\nBirths in mainland France by place of birth of parents.\nINSEE counts individuals born alive in mainland France according to the detailed place of birth of the parents:\nNote: In 2010 some foreigners not declared country : father \u2013 17,536; mother \u2013 3,754\nSocial issues.\nMarriage, divorce and family types.\nIn 2020, there was a total of 154,581 marriages in France.\nCommunal housing and segregation.\nIn recent years, communitarianism has become more prevalent in France. Some suburbs, such as La Courneuve, Sarcelles, and Toulouse-Le Mirail, are almost exclusively populated by people from sub-Saharan Africa and North Africa. These housing projects, built by architects such as Le Corbusier, Aillaud, and Candilis, have become communal ghettos.\nEmployment and income.\nUnemployment, youth ages 15\u201324:\nTotal: 20.8%. Country comparison to the world: 61st.\nMale: 21.4%.\nFemale: 20% (2018 est.).\nEthnic groups.\nNote: people born outside of France (including the overseas departments) are referred to as immigrants regardless of their nationality (French or foreign). People without French nationality are referred to as foreigners regardless of their birthplace (France or abroad).\nData collection.\nThe last national census based on religion occurred in 1872 at the start of the Third Republic. After that, except for the antisemitic census of the Vichy government, the state of France stopped collecting data on people's religion or ethnicity. In 1978, a law banned the collection of individual data concerning someone's race, religion, trade union or political and philosophical opinion. However, estimates have been made of the ethnic and racial demography of the country in the present.\nSome organizations, such as the Representative Council of Black Associations of France (, CRAN), have argued in favour of the introduction of data collection on minority groups but this has been resisted by other organizations and ruling politicians, often on the grounds that collecting such statistics goes against France's secular principles and harks back to Vichy-era identity documents. During the 2007 presidential election, however, Nicolas Sarkozy, polled on the issue, stated that he favoured the collection of data on ethnicity. Part of a parliamentary bill that would have permitted the collection of data for the purpose of measuring discrimination was rejected by the Conseil Constitutionnel in November 2007.\nHowever, that law does not concern surveys and polls, which are free to ask those questions if they wish. The law also allows for an exception for public institutions such as the INED or the INSEE whose job it is to collect data on demographics, social trends and other related subjects, on condition that the collection of such data has been authorized by the National Commission for Computer-stocked data and Freedom (CNIL) and the National Council of Statistical Information (CNIS).\nStatistics.\nThe modern ethnic French are the descendants of Celts, Iberians, Ligurians, Italic peoples (including Romans), and Greeks in southern France, later mixed with large groups of Germanic peoples arriving at the end of the Roman Empire such as the Franks, Burgundians, Alamanni, and Goths, Moors and Saracens in the south, and Scandinavians, Vikings, who became, by mixing with the local population, the Normans and settled mostly in Normandy in the 9th century.\nHowever, genome-wide analyses of both ancient and present-day DNA indicate that the genetic make-up of modern French populations is overwhelmingly derived from groups already living in Gaul during the Late Bronze and Iron Ages; post-Roman inputs from Germanic, Scandinavian, North-African or other peoples account for only minor fractions, invalidating the notion of any massive later admixture.\nIn 1960 there was approximately 500,000 'coloured' people present in France, constituting 1.2% of the population. In 2004, French conservative think-tank \"Institut Montaigne\" estimated that there were 51 million (85%) people of European ethnic origin, 6 million (10%) North African people, 2 million (3.5%) West African and Central African peoples and 1 million (1.5%) people of Asian origin in Metropolitan France, including all generations of immigrant descendants. TIME magazine in 2009 estimated that there was an estimated range of 4 to 7 million Arabs, 3 to 5 million Africans, 1.5 million Asians and around 600,000 Jewish people. Solis, a marketing company, estimated the numbers for ethnic minorities (immigrants and 2nd generation) in France in 2009 as 3.26 million Maghrebis (5.23%), 1.83 million black people (2.94%) (1.08 million West Africans and 757,000 French from French West Indies), and 250,000 Turkish (0.71%).\nIn 2015, Mich\u00e8le Tribalat released a paper estimating population of ethnic minorities in France in 2011 to constitute 30% if ancestry retracted to 3 generations but with age limit of 60.\n15% were of other European origin and another 15% rest.\nNewly released figures from France\u2019s national statistical agency, which pulled census data from 2019\u20132020, revealed that nearly one-third of children aged four years and below are of non-European origin, a number which stands in sharp contrast with those recorded in older generations.\nThe data, published by the National Institute of Statistics and Economic Studies (INSEE), indicates that among those aged four and below living in ordinary housing (all residences excluding those for students, the elderly, and asylum seekers) in metropolitan France, 41.6% were born outside of France themselves, or are descendants of non-French parents or grandparents, with 29.6% having origins outside of Europe.\nBy comparison, a mere 7.6% of 60 to 64-year-olds and 3.1% of those over the age of 80 were of non-European origin over three generations, meaning they themselves, their parents, or grandparents were born outside of Europe.\nFigures also revealed that 16.2% of all children aged four and below living in France are of Maghreb descent\u2014a term used to describe the predominately Arab regions of northwest Africa, including Morocco, Libya, Algeria, Mauritania, and Tunisia. One in ten children in the same age group in France are immigrants or are the children of immigrants from elsewhere in Europe, with 7.3% having originated from sub-Saharan Africa, 4% from Asia, and 1.7% from the rest of the world.\nThe Paris region is a magnet for immigrants, hosting one of the largest concentrations of immigrants in Europe. As of 2006, about 45% of people (6 million) living in the region were either immigrant (25%) or born to at least one immigrant parent (20%).\nOf European ethnic groups not indigenous to France, the most numerous are people of Italian family origin and it is estimated that about 5 million citizens (8% of the population) are at least partly of Italian origin if their parentage is retraced over three generations. This is due to waves of Italian immigration, notably during the late 19th century and early 20th century. Other large European groups of non-native origin are Spaniards, Portuguese, Romanians, Poles, and Greeks. Also, due to more recent immigration, between five and six million people of Maghrebi origin and approximately 800,000 Turks inhabit France.\nAn influx of Maghrebi Jews immigrated to France in the 1950s and after the Algerian War due to the decline of the French empire. Subsequent waves of immigration followed the Six-Day War, when some Moroccan and Tunisian Jews settled in France. Hence, by 1968, Maghrebi Jews were about 500,000 and the majority in France. As the majority of these new immigrants were already culturally French, because of their cooperation with colonists, they needed little time to adjust to French society. Black people come from both the French overseas territories (French Guiana, Guadeloupe, Martinique, R\u00e9union, and former colony Haiti) and Sub-Saharan Africa (especially C\u00f4te d'Ivoire, Mali, and Senegal). France has the largest black population in Europe.\nThere is a substantial Romani population in France. There is approximately 400,000 Roma living in France.\nImmigration.\nSince the 19th century, France has continued being a country of immigration. During the \"Trente Glorieuses\" (1946\u20131975), the country's reconstruction and steady economic growth led to the labor-immigration of the 1960s, when many employers found manpower in villages located in Southern Europe and North Africa. In 2008, the French national institute of statistics INSEE estimated that 11.8 million foreign-born immigrants and their direct descendants (second generation) lived in France representing 19% of the country's population. About 5.5 million are of European origin and 4 million of Maghrebi origin.\n&lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;/includeonly&gt; Proportion of immigrant population of France 1921\u20132021 Immigration to France exceeded 200,000 in recent years, as shown in table below.\nBefore World War II.\nIn the 20th century, France experienced a high rate of immigration from other countries. The immigration rate was particularly high during the 1920s and 1930s. France was the European country which suffered the most from World War I, with respect to the size of its population, losing 1.3 million young men out of a total population of 40 million. France was also at the time the European country with the lowest fertility rate, which meant that the country had a very hard time recovering from the heavy losses of the war. France had to open its doors to immigration, which was the only way to prevent population decline between the two world wars.\nAt the time, France was the only European country to permit mass immigration. The other major European powers, such as the UK or Germany, still had high fertility rates, so immigration was seen as unnecessary, and it was also undesirable to the vast majority of their populations. The majority of immigrants in the 1920s came from Italy and Poland, though from the 1930s, some also came from elsewhere in southern and eastern Europe, and the first wave of colonial French subjects from Africa and Asia. This mass immigration was ended and partially reversed by the economic problems of the 1930s. By the end of the Spanish Civil War, some half-million Spanish Republican refugees had crossed\nthe border into France.\nLocal populations often opposed immigrant manpower, leading to occasional outbursts of violence. The most violent was a pogrom against Italian workers who worked in the salt evaporation ponds of Peccais, erupted in Aigues-Mortes in 1893, killing at least nine and injuring hundreds on the Italian side.\nAfter World War II.\nAfter World War II, the French fertility rate rebounded considerably, as noted above, but economic growth in France was so high that new immigrants had to be brought into the country. Most immigrants were Portuguese as well as Arabs and Berbers from North Africa. The first wave arrived in the 1950s, but the major arrivals happened in the 1960s and 1970s. One million European \"pieds-noirs\" also migrated from Algeria in 1962 and the following years during the chaotic independence of Algeria. France has over three million French of Algerian descent, a small percentage of whom are third-or fourth-generation French.\nFrench law facilitated the immigration of thousands of French settlers (\"colons\" in French language), ethnic or national French from former colonies of North and West Africa, India and Indochina, to mainland France. 1.6 million European \"pieds noirs\" settlers migrated from Algeria, Tunisia and Morocco. In the 1970s, over 30,000 French settlers left Cambodia during the Khmer Rouge regime as the Pol Pot government confiscated their farms and land properties. However, after the 1973 energy crisis, laws limiting immigration were passed. In addition, the country's birth rate dropped significantly during this time.\nBetween 1956 and 1967, about 235,000 Sephardic North African Jews from Algeria, Tunisia and Morocco also immigrated to France because of the decline of the French colonial empire and following the Six-Day War. Hence, by 1968, Sephardic North African Jews were the majority of the Jews in France. As the new immigrants were already culturally French, they needed little time to adjust to French society.\nIn the late 1970s, the end of high economic growth in France caused immigration policies to be considerably tightened, starting with laws by Charles Pasqua passed in 1986 and 1993. New immigrants were allowed only through the family reunion schemes (wives and children moving to France to live with husbands or fathers already living in France), or as asylum seekers. Illegal immigration thus developed as immigration policy became more rigid. In 2006, The French Ministry of the Interior estimated clandestine immigrants in France amounted to anywhere between 200,000 and 400,000 and expected between 80,000 and 100,000 people to enter the country illegally each year.\nThe Pasqua laws are a significant landmark in the shift in France's immigration policy through the course of the 20th century.\nThey are a sign of the securitization aspect of immigration, giving more power to the police, allowing them to perform random identity checks and deport immigrants without legal papers. The rise in anti-immigration sentiments was reinforced by a series of terrorist bombs in Paris in 1986, linked to Muslim immigrants in France.\nTightening immigration laws, as well as notions of \"zero immigration\", reflected national views that arose within the discussion around immigrant family reunification and national identity. Institut fran\u00e7ais des relations internationales\n(IFRI) immigration expert, Christophe Bertossi, states that stigmatized as both a challenge to social cohesion and a \"burden\" for the French economy, family immigration is increasingly restricted and constructed as a racial issue. The \"immigration choisie\" policy strives consequently to select migrants according to their profile, skills and, still indirectly, origins.\nNonetheless, immigration rates in the 1980s and 1990s were much lower than in the 1960s and 1970s, especially compared to other European countries. The regions of emigrations also widened, with new immigrants now coming from sub-Saharan Africa and Asia. In the 1970s, a small but well-publicized wave of Chilean and Argentine political refugees from their countries' dictatorships found asylum in France.\nEthnic Vietnamese started to become a visible segment of society after the massive influx of refugees after the end of the Vietnam War in 1975. The expulsions of ethnic Chinese from Vietnam in the 1970s led to a wave of immigration and the settlement of the high-rise neighbourhood near the \"Porte d'Italie\", where the Chinatown of Paris is located. Located in the 13th arrondissement, the area contains many ethnic Chinese inhabitants.\nAccording to the distinguished French historian of immigration G\u00e9rard Noiriel, in 1989 one third of the population currently living in France was of \"foreign\" descent.\nAccording to Mich\u00e8le Tribalat, researcher at INED, there were, in 1999, approximately 14 million persons of foreign ancestry (about a quarter of the population), defined as either immigrants or people with at least one immigrant parent or grandparent. Half of them were of European ancestry (including 5.2 million from South Europe (Italy, Spain, Portugal and former Yugoslavia)). The rest were from Maghreb (3 million), Sub-Saharan Africa (680,000), Turkey (320,000) and other parts of the world (2.5 million). Immigrants from the Maghreb are commonly referred to as \"beur\", a verlan slang term derived from the word \"arabe\" (French for Arab).\nThe large-scale immigration from Islamic countries has sparked controversy in France. Nevertherless, according to Justin Va\u00efsse, in spite of challenges and setbacks like the riots in November 2005, in Parisian suburbs, where many immigrants live secluded from society with very few capabilities to live in better conditions, the integration of Muslim immigrants is happening as part of a background evolution and recent studies confirmed the results of their assimilation, showing that \"North Africans seem to be characterized by a high degree of cultural integration reflected in a relatively high propensity to exogamy\" with rates ranging from 20% to 50%. According to Emmanuel Todd, the relatively high exogamy among French Algerians can be explained by the colonial link between France and Algeria. One illustration of this growing resentment and job insecurity can be drawn from related events, such as the 2005 riots, which ensued in former President Chirac declaring a state of emergency. Massive demonstrations to express frustration over unemployment took place in March 2009. The importance of integration was brought to the forefront of the political agenda in Sarkozy's 2007 presidential campaign. Upon being elected, he symbolically created the French Ministry of Immigration, Integration, National Identity and Codevelopment. Integration is one of the pillars of its political aims.\nToday.\nIn 2014, the National Institute of Statistics (INSEE is its acronym in French) published a study, according to which the numbers of Spanish, Portuguese and Italians in France had doubled between 2009 and 2012.\nAccording to the French Institute, the increase due to the euro area crisis pushed up the number of Europeans in France.\nStatistics on Spanish immigrants in France show a growth of 107% between 2009 and 2012, from 5300 to 11,000 people.\nOf 229,000 foreigners in France in 2012, nearly 8% were Portuguese, British 5%, Spanish 5%, Italians 4%, Germans 4%, Romanians 3%, Belgians 3% and Dutch 2%.\nWith the increase of Spanish, Portuguese and Italians in France, in 2012 46% of immigrants were European, while the percentage for Francophone African immigrants reached 30%, of which Moroccans were 7%, Algerians 7%, and Tunisians 3%. Meanwhile, 14% of all immigrants who settled in France in that year were from Asian countries: 3% from China, 2% from Turkey, 10% from America and Oceania, Americans and Brazilians accounting for 2% each.\nAs of 2008, the French national institute of statistics INSEE estimated that 11.8 million foreign-born immigrants and their direct descendants (limited to second-generation born in France) lived in France representing 19% of the country's population. More than 5.5 million are of European origin and about 4 million of Maghrebi origin (20% of Algerian origin and 15% of Moroccan or Tunisian origin). Immigrants aged 18 to 50 count for 2.7 million (10% of population age 18\u201350) and 5 million for all ages (8% of population). The second-generation immigrants aged 18 to 50 make up 3.1 million (12% of 18\u201350) and 6.5 million for all ages (11% of population). Without considering citizenship at birth, people not born in metropolitan France and their direct descendants made up 30% of the population aged 18\u201350 in metropolitan France as of 2008.\nThe region with the largest proportion of immigrants is the \u00cele-de-France (Greater Paris), where 40% of immigrants live. Other important regions are Rh\u00f4ne-Alpes (Lyon) and Provence-Alpes-C\u00f4te d'Azur (Marseille). The most important individual countries of origin as of 2007 were Algeria (702,000), Morocco (645,000), Portugal (576,000), Italy (323,000), Spain (262,000) and Turkey (234,000). However, immigration from Asia (especially China), as well as from Francophone Sub-Saharan Africa (Senegal, Mali) is gaining in importance.\n42% of the immigrants are from Africa (30% from Maghreb and 12% from Francophone Sub-Saharan Africa), 38% from Europe (mainly from Portugal, Italy and Spain), 14% from Asia and 5% from America and Oceania. Outside Europe and North Africa, the highest rate of immigration is from Vietnam, Cambodia and Senegal.\nThe following table shows immigrants and second-generation immigrants by origin as of 2008 according to a study published by Insee in 2012. Third-generation immigrants, illegal immigrants, as well as ethnic minorities like black people from the French overseas territories residing in metropolitan France (800,000), Roms (500,000) or people born in Maghreb with French citizenship at birth (1 million Maghrebi Jews, Harkis and pieds-noirs) and their descendants, who are French by birth and not considered as immigrants or immigrant descendants, are not taken into account.\nNet migration rate 1.06 migrant(s)/1,000 population (2021 est.) Country comparison to the world: 61st\nNet migration of Metropolitan France, 1946\u2013present.\nImmigrants by country of birth as of 2022:\nIn 2004, a total of 140,033 people immigrated to France. Of them, 90,250 were from Africa and 13,710 from Europe. In 2005, immigration levels fell slightly to 135,890. The European Union allows free movement between the member states. While the UK (along with Ireland and Sweden and non-EU members Norway and Switzerland) did not impose restrictions, France put in place controls to curb Eastern European migration.\nAs at 1 January 2006, INSEE estimated that there were 3.5 million foreigners living in metropolitan France. Two out of five foreigners are from Portugal, Algeria or Morocco. Thus, EU nationals immigrating to France account for 1.2 million people, and 1.1 million people are from the three Maghreb countries of Morocco, Algeria and Tunisia. Immigrants are concentrated in \u00cele-de-France, Rhone-Alpes, Provence and C\u00f4te d'Azur regions, accounting for 60% of the total immigrant population. Furthermore, there appears to be a lower rate of immigrants arriving from the EU since 1975 as opposed to an increase in African immigrants.\nIn the first decade of the 21st century, the net migration rate was estimated to be 0.66 migrants per 1,000 population a year. This is a very low rate of immigration compared to other European countries, the United States or Canada. Since the beginning of the 1990s, France has been attempting to curb immigration, first with the Pasqua laws, followed by both right-wing and socialist-issued laws. This trend is also demonstrated in anti-immigrant sentiments among the public. For example, the Pew Research Center in Washington, D.C. conducted a public opinion poll in February 2004 among French nationals. This poll measured the extent of support for restricting immigration among French nationals, by age cohort. 24% of individuals 18 to 29 were restricting immigration, with 33% of individuals 30 to 49 and 53% for both 50 to 64 and 65 and over. Nearly nine years later, a January 2013 poll conducted in France by Ipsos found that 70% of respondents said that there were \"too many immigrants in France\".\nThe immigration rate is currently lower than in other European countries such as United Kingdom and Spain; however, some say it is unlikely that the policies in themselves account for such a change. Again, as in the 1920s and 1930s, France stands in contrast with the rest of Europe. Back in the 1920s and 1930s, when other European countries had a high fertility rate, France had a low fertility rate and opened its doors to immigration to avoid a population decline. Today, it is the rest of Europe that has very low fertility rates, and countries like Germany or Spain avoid population decline only through immigration. In France, however, the fertility rate is still fairly high for European standards. It is, in fact, the highest in Europe after Ireland (the EU) and Albania (perhaps higher than Ireland's) and so most population growth is due to natural increase, unlike in the other European countries.\nThe difference in immigration trends is also because the labour market in France is currently less dynamic than in other countries such as the UK, Ireland or Spain. One reason for this could be France's relatively high unemployment, which the country has struggled to reduce for the past two decades. There is also a parallel dynamic between immigration and unemployment. Immigrants tend to be subjected to higher rates of unemployment. In 2008, the immigrant unemployment rate in France was a startling 13%, twice as high as for the national population (6%). One can further analyse the trend in relation to education. In the ministry's 2010 report on professional inclusion for immigrants, 19.6% of immigrants without any education were unemployed while 16.1% of immigrants who had graduated high school were unemployed. Only 11.4% of immigrants with an undergraduate degree or higher were unemployed.\nFor example, according to the UK Office for National Statistics, between July 2001 and July 2004, the population of the UK increased by 721,500 inhabitants, of which 242,800 (34%) was due to natural increase, 478,500 (66%) to immigration. According to the INSEE, between January 2001 and January 2004 the population of Metropolitan France increased by 1,057,000 inhabitants of which 678,000 (64%) was due to natural increase, 379,500 (36%) from immigration.\nThe latest 2008 demographic statistics have been released, and France's birth and fertility rates have continued to rise. The fertility rate increased to 2.01 in 2012 and, for the first time, surpasses the fertility rate of the United States.\nNorth and South Americans in France.\nAmericans total more than 100,000 permanent residents in France, Canadians 11,931, followed by Latin Americans, a growing subgroup, the most numerous of which are Brazilians, at 44,622, followed by Colombians, at 40,000, Venezuelans, at 30,000, Peruvians, at 22,002, Argentineans, at 11,899, and Chileans, 15,782.\nEuropeans in France.\nIn 2014 The National Institute of Statistics (INSEE, for its acronym in French) published a study, according to which has doubled the number of Spanish immigrants, Portuguese and Italians in France between 2009 and 2012.\nAccording to the French Institute, the increase due to the euro area crisis pushed up the number of Europeans installed in France.\nStatistics on Spanish immigrants in France show a growth of 107% between 2009 and 2012, i.e. in this period went from 5300 to 11,000 people.\nOf the total of 229,000 foreigners in France in 2012, nearly 8% were Portuguese, British 5%, Spanish 5%, Italians 4%, Germans 4%, Romanians 3%, 3% Belgians.\nWith the increase of Spanish, Portuguese and Italian in France, the weight of European immigrants arrived in 2012 to 46%, while this percentage for African reached 30%, with a presence in Morocco (7%), Algeria (7%) and Tunisia (3%).\nMeanwhile, 14% of all immigrants who settled in France that year were from Asian countries: 3% of China and 2% in Turkey, while in America and Oceania constitute 10% of Americans and Brazilians accounted for higher percentage, 2% each.\nMaghrebis in France.\nPeople of Maghrebi origin form the largest ethnic group in the country after those of European origin.\nAccording to Mich\u00e8le Tribalat, a researcher at INED, there were 3.5 million people of Maghrebi origin (with at least one grandparent from Algeria, Morocco or Tunisia) living in France in 2005 corresponding to 5.8% of the total French metropolitan population (60.7 million in 2005). Maghrebis have settled mainly in the industrial regions in France, especially in the Paris region. Many famous French people like Edith Piaf, Isabelle Adjani, Arnaud Montebourg, Alain Bashung, Dany Boon and many others have Maghrebi ancestry.\nBelow is a table of population of Maghrebi origin in France, numbers are in thousands:\nIn 2005, the percentage of young people under 18 of Maghrebi origin (at least one immigrant parent) was about 7% in Metropolitan France, 12% in Greater Paris and above 20% in French d\u00e9partement of Seine-Saint-Denis.\nAccording to other sources, between 5 and 6 million people of Maghrebin origin live in France corresponding to about 7\u20139% of the total French metropolitan population.\nImmigration policy.\nAs mentioned above, the French Ministry of Immigration, Integration, National Identity and Codevelopment was created immediately following the appointment of Nicolas Sarkozy as president of France in 2007. Immigration has been a relevant political dimension in France's agenda in recent years. Sarkozy's agenda has sharpened the focus placed on integration of immigrants living in France as well as their acquisition of national identity. The state of immigration policy in France is fourfold. Its pillars of immigration policy are to regulate migratory flows in and out of France, facilitate immigrants' integration and promote French identity, honor the French tradition's principle of welcoming political asylum and promote solidarity within the immigrant population (principle of co-development). In its 2010 Budget report, the Ministry of Immigration declared it would fund \u20ac600 million for its immigration policy objectives, a figure representing 60 million more than in 2009 (otherwise an 11.5% increase from 2009 figures).\nIn July 2006, President Sarkozy put into effect a law on immigration based upon the notion of \"chosen immigration\", which allows immigration into France to a restricted field of employment sectors, notably the hotel and restaurant industries, construction and seasonal employment. The following summer of 2007, Sarkozy amended the law to require the acquisition of the French language as a pre-condition. According to Christophe Bertossi, immigration expert in France's Institut fran\u00e7ais des relations internationales (IFRI), \"there is a dominant trend in the French policy to stem family migration, notably conditioned after the 2007 law by a minimum level of French language tested and by the demonstration that he/she endorses the main French constitutional principles\".\nDespite Sarkozy's law, immigration from former colonies in the Maghreb and West Africa would end up steadily increasing under the presidencies of Nicolas Sarkozy, Fran\u00e7ois Hollande and Emmanuel Macron.\nFrance, along with other EU countries, have still not signed their agreement to the United Nations Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families of 1990. This convention is a treaty to protect migrant workers' rights, in recognition of their human rights.\nAlternative policies have been discussed in formulating immigration policy, such as a quota system. At the beginning of 2008, as the government was rethinking its orientation on immigration policy with the creation of the new ministry, the idea of a quota system was introduced as a possible alternative. In early 2008, a proposal was made to Parliament to decide each year how many immigrants to accept, based on skill and origin. However, this quota policy contradicts the French Constitution. A commission was formed in February 2008 to study how the Constitution could be changed to allow for a quota system. The main difficulty is the origin principle of establishing a quota \"constituting a breach in the universalistic ideology of the French Republic\".\nOn 18 January 2008, the government published a list of 150 job titles that were encountering difficult supply of labour. Most immigrants living in France today are reported to cover the following sectors: agriculture, service to persons in need (childcare, the elderly), construction, education, health and services to businesses. Thus, the government is seeking to match immigrants with the economic makeup of France. The current administration could also seek to integrate migrants and their families through education and training, making them more competitive in the job market. To tackle critical labour shortages, France also decided to participate in the EU Blue Card.\nTherefore, the outlook towards immigrants in France is shifting as unemployment continues to dominate the political agenda, along with political incentives to strengthen French national identity. Recent incidents, such as the 2005 civil unrest and Romani repatriation have shed light on France's immigration policies and how these are viewed globally, especially in congruence or discontinuity with the EU. A longitudinal study has been conducted since March 2010 to provide qualitative research regarding the integration of new immigrants. The report is being finalized at the end of December 2010 and will be most relevant to provide insight into further immigration policy analysis for the French government.\nLanguages.\nFrench is the only official language of France, and is constitutionally required to be the language of government and administration. There is a rising cultural awareness of the regional languages of France, which enjoy no official status. These regional languages include the Langues d'o\u00efl, Occitan, Franco-Proven\u00e7al, Corsican, Catalan, Basque, Breton, Germanic languages like Alsatian, and several languages spoken in Overseas France. Immigrant groups from former French colonies and elsewhere have also brought their own languages.\nReligion.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Pie chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nFrance has not collected religious or ethnic data in its censuses since the beginning of the Third Republic, but the country's predominant faith has been Catholicism since the early Middle Ages. Church attendance is fairly low, however, and the proportion of the population that is not religious has grown over the past century. A 2004 IFOP survey tallied that 44% of the French people did not believe in God; contrasted to 20% in 1947. A study by the CSA Institute conducted in 2003 with a sample of 18,000 people found that 65.3% considered themselves Catholic, while 27% considered themselves atheists, and 12.7% (8,065,000 people) belonged to a religion other than Catholicism.\nIn the early 21st century there were an estimated 5 million Muslims in France, one million Protestants, 600,000 Buddhists, 491,000 Jews, and 150,000 Orthodox Christians. The US State Department's \"International Religious Freedom Report 2004\" estimated the French Hindu population at 181,312. These studies did not ask the respondents if they were practicing or how often they did practice if they were active in the laity.\nAccording to a poll conducted in 2001 for French Catholic magazine \"La Croix\", 69% of respondents were Catholic, 22% agnostic or atheist, 2% Protestant (Calvinist, Lutheran, Anglican and Evangelical), and 7% belonged to other religions.\nAccording to a 2015 estimate of CIA World Factbook the numbers were: Christian (overwhelmingly Catholic) 63\u201366%, Muslim 7\u20139%, Jewish 0.5\u20130.75%, Buddhist 0.5\u20130.75%, other 0.5\u20131.0%, none 23\u201328%. Six years later (2021), the numbers were: Christian (Catholic, Protestant, Orthodox) 50%, Muslim 4%, Jewish 1%, other 1%, unspecified 9%, none 33%.\nList of France's largest \"aires urbaines\" (metropolitan areas).\nThe following is a list of the twenty largest \"aires urbaines\" (metropolitan areas) in France, based on their population at the 2015 census. Population at the 2006 census is indicated for comparison.\nBetween 2006 and 2011, Toulouse, Rennes, Montpellier, Nantes, Bordeaux and Lyon had the fastest-growing metropolitan areas in France.\n urban population: 81% of total population (2020)\n rate of urbanization: 0.72% annual rate of change (2015\u201320 est.)\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "67476", "revid": "35138333", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=67476", "title": "Political history of France", "text": "National political history\nThe political history of France covers the history of political movements and systems of government in the nation of France, from the earliest stages of the history of France until the present day. This political history might be considered to start with the formation of the Kingdom of France, and continue until the present day.\nPolitical history is the narrative and survey of political events, ideas, movements, organs of government, voters, parties and leaders. It is closely related to other fields of history, including diplomatic history, constitutional history, social history, people's history, and public history. Political history studies the organization and operation of power in large societies.\nMonarchy of France.\nThe Kingdom of France is the historiographical name or umbrella term given to various political entities of France in the medieval and early modern period. It was one of the most powerful states in Europe since the High Middle Ages. It was also an early colonial power, with colonies in Asia and Africa, and the largest being New France in North America.\nOrigins.\nFrance originated as West Francia (\"Francia Occidentalis\"), the western half of the Carolingian Empire, with the Treaty of Verdun (843). A branch of the Carolingian dynasty continued to rule until 987, when Hugh Capet was elected king and founded the Capetian dynasty. The territory remained known as \"Francia\" and its ruler as \"rex Francorum\" (\"king of the Franks\") well into the High Middle Ages. The first king calling himself \"rex Francie\" (\"King of France\") was Philip II, in 1190, and officially from 1204. From then, France was continuously ruled by the Capetians and their cadet lines under the Valois and Bourbon until the monarchy was abolished in 1792 during the French Revolution. The Kingdom of France was also ruled in personal union with the Kingdom of Navarre over two time periods, 1284\u20131328 and 1572\u20131620, after which the institutions of Navarre were abolished and it was fully annexed by France (though the King of France continued to use the title \"King of Navarre\" through the end of the monarchy).\nFrance in the Middle Ages was a decentralised, feudal monarchy. In Brittany and Catalonia (now a part of Spain), as well as Aquitaine, the authority of the French king was barely felt. Lorraine and Burgundy were states of the Holy Roman Empire and not yet a part of France. West Frankish kings were initially elected by the secular and ecclesiastical magnates, but the regular coronation of the eldest son of the reigning king during his father's lifetime established the principle of male primogeniture, which became codified in the Salic law.\nDuring the Late Middle Ages, rivalry between the Capetian dynasty, rulers of the Kingdom of France and their vassals the House of Plantagenet, who also ruled the Kingdom of England as part of their so-called competing Angevin Empire, resulted in many armed struggles. The most notorious of them all are the series of conflicts known as the Hundred Years' War (1337\u20131453) in which the kings of England laid claim to the French throne. Emerging victorious from said conflicts, France subsequently sought to extend its influence into Italy, but was defeated by Spain and the Holy Roman Empire in the ensuing Italian Wars (1494\u20131559).\nCapetian dynasty.\nThe Capetian dynasty, also known as the \"House of France\", is a dynasty of European origin, and a branch of the Robertians and the Karlings. It is among the largest and oldest royal houses in Europe and the world, and consists of Hugh Capet, the founder of the dynasty, and his male-line descendants, who ruled in France without interruption from 987 to 1792, and again from 1814 to 1848. The senior line ruled in France as the House of Capet from the election of Hugh Capet in 987 until the death of Charles IV in 1328. That line was succeeded by cadet branches, the Houses of Valois and then Bourbon, which ruled without interruption until the French Revolution abolished the monarchy in 1792. The Bourbons were restored in 1814 in the aftermath of Napoleon's defeat, but had to vacate the throne again in 1830 in favour of the last Capetian monarch of France, Louis Philippe I, who belonged to the House of Orl\u00e9ans.\nCadet branches of the Capetian House of Bourbon are still reigning over Spain and Luxembourg.\nThe dynasty had a crucial role in the formation of the French state. Initially obeyed only in their own demesne, the \u00cele-de-France, the Capetian kings slowly but steadily increased their power and influence until it grew to cover the entirety of their realm. For a detailed narration on the growth of French royal power, see \"Crown lands of France\".\nMembers of the dynasty were traditionally Catholic, and the early Capetians had an alliance with the Church. The French were also the most active participants in the Crusades, culminating in a series of five Crusader kings \u2013 Louis VII, Philip Augustus, Louis VIII, Louis IX, and Philip III. The Capetian alliance with the papacy suffered a severe blow after the disaster of the Aragonese Crusade. Philip III's son and successor, Philip IV, humiliated Pope Boniface VIII and brought the papacy under French control. The later Valois, starting with Francis I, ignored religious differences and allied with the Ottoman sultan to counter the growing power of the Holy Roman Empire. Henry IV was a Protestant at the time of his accession, but realized the necessity of conversion after four years of religious warfare.\nThe Capetians generally enjoyed a harmonious family relationship. By tradition, younger sons and brothers of the king of France were given appanages for them to maintain their rank and to dissuade them from claiming the French crown itself. When Capetian cadets did aspire for kingship, their ambitions were directed not at the French throne, but at foreign thrones. As a result, the Capetians have reigned at different times in the kingdoms of Portugal, Sicily and Naples, Navarre, Hungary and Croatia, Poland, Spain and Sardinia, grand dukedoms of Lithuania and Luxembourg, and in Latin and Brazilian empires.\nIn modern times, King Felipe VI of Spain is a member of this family, while Grand Duke Henri of Luxembourg is related to the family by agnatic kinship; both through the Bourbon branch of the dynasty. Along with the House of Habsburg, arguably its greatest historic rival, it was one of the two oldest European royal dynasties. It was also one of the most powerful royal family in European history, having played a major role in its politics for much of its existence. According to Oxford University, 75% of all royal families in European history, are related to the Capetian dynasty.\nAncien R\u00e9gime.\nThe Ancien R\u00e9gime also known as the Old Regime, was the political and social system of the Kingdom of France from the Late Middle Ages (c.\u20091500) until 1789 and the French Revolution which abolished the feudal system of the French nobility (1790) and hereditary monarchy (1792). The Valois dynasty ruled during the Ancien R\u00e9gime up until 1589 and was subsequently replaced by the Bourbon dynasty. The term is occasionally used to refer to the similar feudal systems of the time elsewhere in Europe such as that of Switzerland.\nFrance in the early modern era was increasingly centralised; the French language began to displace other languages from official use, and the monarch expanded his absolute power in the administrative system of the Ancien R\u00e9gime, complicated by historic and regional irregularities in taxation, legal, judicial, and ecclesiastic divisions, and local prerogatives. Religiously France became divided between the Catholic majority and a Protestant minority, the Huguenots, which led to a series of civil wars, the Wars of Religion (1562\u20131598). The Wars of Religion crippled France, but triumph over Spain and the Habsburg monarchy in the Thirty Years' War made France the most powerful nation on the continent once more. The kingdom became Europe's dominant cultural, political and military power in the 17th century under Louis XIV. In parallel, France developed its first colonial empire in Asia, Africa, and in the Americas.\nThe administrative and social structures of the Ancien R\u00e9gime in France evolved across years of state-building, legislative acts (like the Ordinance of Villers-Cotter\u00eats), and internal conflicts. The Valois dynasty's attempts at reform and at re-establishing control over the scattered political centres of the country were hindered by the Wars of Religion from 1562 to 1598. During the Bourbon dynasty, much of the reigns of Henry IV (r.\u20091589\u00a0\u2013\u00a01610) and Louis XIII (r.\u20091610\u00a0\u2013\u00a01643) and the early years of Louis XIV (r.\u20091643\u00a0\u2013\u00a01715) focused on administrative centralization. Despite the notion of \"absolute monarchy\" (typified by the king's right to issue orders through \"lettres de cachet\") and efforts to create a centralized state, Ancien R\u00e9gime France remained a country of systemic irregularities: administrative, legal, judicial, and ecclesiastic divisions and prerogatives frequently overlapped, while the French nobility struggled to maintain their rights in the matters of local government and justice, and powerful internal conflicts (such as The Fronde) protested against this centralization.\nFrench Wars of Religion.\nThe French Wars of Religion were a series of civil wars between French Catholics and Protestants (called Huguenots) from 1562 to 1598. Between two and four million people died from violence, famine or disease directly caused by the conflict, and it severely damaged the power of the French monarchy. One of its most notorious episodes was the St. Bartholomew's Day massacre in 1572. The fighting ended with a compromise in 1598, when Henry of Navarre, who had converted to Catholicism in 1593, was proclaimed King Henry IV of France and issued the Edict of Nantes, which granted substantial rights and freedoms to the Huguenots. However, Catholics continued to disapprove of Protestants and of Henry, and his assassination in 1610 triggered a fresh round of Huguenot rebellions in the 1620s.\nTensions between the two religions had been building since the 1530s, exacerbating existing regional divisions. The death of Henry II of France in July 1559 initiated a prolonged struggle for power between his widow Catherine de' Medici and powerful nobles. These included a fervently Catholic faction led by the Guise and Montmorency families, and Protestants headed by the House of Cond\u00e9 and Jeanne d'Albret. Both sides received assistance from external powers, with Spain and Savoy supporting the Catholics, and England and the Dutch Republic backing the Protestants.\nModerates, also known as Politiques, hoped to maintain order by centralising power and making concessions to Huguenots, rather than the policies of repression pursued by Henry II and his father Francis\u00a0I. They were initially supported by Catherine de' Medici, whose January 1562 Edict of Saint-Germain was strongly opposed by the Guise faction and led to an outbreak of widespread fighting in March. The Edict of Amboise' also known as the Edict of Pacification, was signed at the Ch\u00e2teau of Amboise on 19 March 1563 by Catherine de' Medici, acting as regent for her son Charles IX of France. The Edict ended the first stage of the French Wars of Religion, inaugurating a period of official peace in France by guaranteeing the Huguenots religious privileges and freedoms. However, it was gradually undermined by continuing religious violence at a regional level and hostilities renewed in 1567. Catherine de' Medici later hardened her stance and backed the 1572 St. Bartholomew's Day massacre in Paris, which resulted in Catholic mobs killing between 5,000 and 30,000 Protestants throughout France.\nThe wars threatened the authority of the monarchy and the last Valois kings, Catherine's three sons Francis\u00a0II, Charles\u00a0IX, and Henry\u00a0III.\nTheir Bourbon successor Henry IV of France responded by creating a strong central state and extending toleration to Huguenots. Henry IV successfully ended the civil wars. He and his ministers appeased Catholic leaders using bribes of about 7 million \u00e9cus, a sum greater than France's annual revenue. Huguenot leaders were placated by the Edict of Nantes, which had four separate sections. The articles laid down the tolerance which would be accorded to the Huguenots including the exact places where worship may or may not take place, the recognition of three Protestant universities, and the allowance of Protestant synods. The king also issued two personal documents (called \"brevets\") which recognized the Protestant establishment. The Edict of Nantes signed religious tolerance into law, and the brevets were an act of benevolence that created a Protestant state within France.\nDespite this, it would take years to restore law and order to France. The Edict was met by opposition from the \"parlements\", which objected to the guarantees offered to Protestants. The Parlement de Rouen did not formally register the edict until 1609, although it begrudgingly observed its terms.\nThe latter policy would last until 1685, when Henry's grandson Louis XIV revoked the Edict of Nantes.\nHouse of Bourbon.\nThe House of Bourbon is a dynasty that originated in the Kingdom of France as a branch of the Capetian dynasty, the royal House of France. Bourbon kings began to rule France and Navarre in 1589. A branch descended from the French Bourbons came to rule Spain in the 18th century and is the current Spanish royal family.\nThe royal Bourbons originated in 1272, when Robert, the youngest son of King Louis IX of France, married the heiress of the lordship of Bourbon. The house continued for three centuries as a cadet branch, serving as nobles under the direct Capetian and Valois kings. The senior line of the House of Bourbon became extinct in the male line in 1527 with the death of Duke Charles III of Bourbon. This made the junior Bourbon-Vend\u00f4me branch the genealogically senior branch of the House of Bourbon.\nIn 1589, at the death of Henry III of France, the House of Valois became extinct in the male line. Under the Salic law, the head of the House of Bourbon, as the senior representative of the senior-surviving branch of the Capetian dynasty, became King of France as Henry IV. Bourbon monarchs then united to France the part of the Kingdom of Navarre north of the Pyrenees, which Henry's father had acquired by marriage in 1555, ruling both until the 1792 overthrow of the monarchy during the French Revolution.\nRestored briefly in 1814 and definitively in 1815 after the fall of the First French Empire, the senior line of the Bourbons was finally overthrown in the July Revolution of 1830. A cadet Bourbon branch, the House of Orl\u00e9ans, then ruled for 18 years (1830\u20131848), until it too was overthrown\nCivil War and the reign of Henry IV.\nThe first Bourbon king of France was Henry IV. He was born on 13 December 1553 in the Kingdom of Navarre. Antoine de Bourbon, his father, was a ninth-generation descendant of King Louis IX of France. Jeanne d'Albret, his mother, was the Queen of Navarre and niece of King Francis I of France. He was baptized Catholic, but raised Calvinist. After his father was killed in 1562, he became Duke of Vend\u00f4me at the age of 10, with Admiral Gaspard de Coligny (1519\u20131572) as his regent. Seven years later, the young duke became the nominal leader of the Huguenots after the death of his uncle the Prince de Cond\u00e9 in 1569.\nIn 1572, Catherine de' Medici, mother of King Charles IX of France, arranged for the marriage of her daughter, Margaret of Valois, to Henry, ostensibly to advance peace between Catholics and Huguenots. Many Huguenots gathered in Paris for the wedding on 24 August, but were ambushed and slaughtered by Catholics in the St. Bartholomew's Day Massacre. Henry saved his own life by converting to Catholicism. He repudiated his conversion in 1576 and resumed his leadership of the Huguenots. The period from 1576 to 1584 was relatively calm in France, with the Huguenots consolidating control of much of the south with only occasional interference from the royal government.\nA major civil war erupted in 1584, when Fran\u00e7ois, Duke of Anjou, younger brother of King Henry III of France, died, leaving Navarre next in line for the throne. Thus began the War of the Three Henrys, as Henry of Navarre, Henry III, and the ultra-Catholic leader, Henry of Guise, fought a confusing three-cornered struggle for dominance. After Henry III was assassinated on 31 July 1589, Navarre claimed the throne as the first Bourbon king of France, Henry IV.\nMuch of Catholic France, organized into the Catholic League, refused to recognize a Protestant monarch and instead recognized Henry IV's uncle, Charles, Cardinal de Bourbon, as rightful king, and the civil war continued. Henry won a crucial victory at Ivry on 14 March 1590 and, following the death of the Cardinal the same year, the forces of the League lacked an obvious Catholic candidate for the throne and divided into various factions. Nevertheless, as a Protestant, Henry IV was unable to take Paris, a Catholic stronghold, or to decisively defeat his enemies, now supported by the Spanish. He reconverted to Catholicism in 1593 and was crowned king retroactively to 1589 at the Cathedral of Chartres on 27 February 1594.\nHuguenot rebellions.\nThe Huguenot rebellions, sometimes called the Rohan Wars'after the Huguenot leader Henri de Rohan, were a series of rebellions of the 1620s in which French Calvinist Protestants (Huguenots), mainly located in southwestern France, revolted against royal authority. The uprising occurred a decade after the death of Henry IV who, himself originally a Huguenot before converting to Catholicism, had protected Protestants through the Edict of Nantes. His successor Louis XIII, under the regency of his Italian Catholic mother Marie de' Medici, became more intolerant of Protestantism. The Huguenots responded by establishing independent political and military structures, establishing diplomatic contacts with foreign powers, and openly revolting against central power. The Huguenot rebellions came after two decades of internal peace under Henry IV, following the intermittent French Wars of Religion of 1562\u20131598.\nLouis XIV.\nLouis XIV (Louis-Dieudonn\u00e9; 5 September 1638\u00a0\u2013 1 September 1715), also known as Louis the Great () or the Sun King (), was King of France from 1643 until his death in 1715. His verified reign of 72 years and 110 days is the longest of any sovereign. Although LouisXIV's France was emblematic of the Age of Absolutism in Europe, the King surrounded himself with a variety of significant political, military, and cultural figures, such as Bossuet, Colbert, Louvois, Le Brun, Le N\u00f4tre, Lully, Mazarin, Moli\u00e8re, Racine, Turenne, Cond\u00e9, and Vauban.\nLouis began his personal rule of France in 1661, after the death of his chief minister Cardinal Mazarin, when the King famously declared that he would take over the job himself. An adherent of the divine right of kings, Louis continued his predecessors' work of creating a centralised state governed from the capital. He sought to eliminate the remnants of feudalism persisting in parts of France; by compelling many members of the nobility to reside at his lavish Palace of Versailles, he succeeded in pacifying the aristocracy, many of whom had participated in the Fronde rebellions during his minority. He thus became one of the most powerful French monarchs and consolidated a system of absolute monarchy in France that endured until the French Revolution. Louis also enforced uniformity of religion under the Catholic Church. His revocation of the Edict of Nantes abolished the rights of the Huguenot Protestant minority and subjected them to a wave of dragonnades, effectively forcing Huguenots to emigrate or convert, virtually destroying the French Protestant community.\nDuring Louis's long reign, France emerged as the leading European power and regularly asserted its military strength. A conflict with Spain marked his entire childhood, while during his personal rule, Louis fought three major continental conflicts, each against powerful foreign alliances: the Franco-Dutch War, the Nine Years' War, and the War of the Spanish Succession. In addition, France also contested shorter wars, such as the War of Devolution and the War of the Reunions. Warfare defined Louis's foreign policy and his personal ambition shaped his approach. Impelled by \"a mix of commerce, revenge, and pique\", he sensed that war was the ideal way to enhance his glory. His wars strained France's resources to the utmost, while in peacetime, he concentrated on preparing for the next war. He taught his diplomats that their job was to create tactical and strategic advantages for the French military. Upon his death in 1715, LouisXIV left his great-grandson and successor, Louis\u00a0XV, a powerful kingdom, albeit in major debt after the War of the Spanish Succession that had raged on since 1701.\nSignificant achievements during LouisXIV's reign which would go on to have a wide influence on the early modern period, well into the Industrial Revolution and until today, include the construction of the Canal du Midi, the patronage of artists, and the founding of the French Academy of Sciences.\nCivil wars 1648\u20131653.\nThe Fronde was a series of civil wars in the Kingdom of France between 1648 and 1653, occurring in the midst of the Franco-Spanish War, which had begun in 1635. King Louis XIV confronted the combined opposition of the princes, the nobility, the law courts (\"parlements\"), as well as most of the French people, and managed to subdue them all. The dispute started when the government of France issued seven fiscal edicts, six of which were to increase taxation. The \"parlements\" resisted and questioned the constitutionality of the King's actions and sought to check his powers.\nThe Fronde was divided into two campaigns, the Parlementary Fronde and the Fronde of the Princes. The timing of the outbreak of the Parlementary Fronde, directly after the Peace of Westphalia (1648) that ended the Thirty Years' War, was significant. The nuclei of the armed bands that terrorized parts of France under aristocratic leaders during that period had been hardened in a generation of war in Germany, where troops still tended to operate autonomously. Louis XIV, impressed as a young ruler with the experience of the Fronde, came to reorganize French fighting forces under a stricter hierarchy, whose leaders ultimately could be made or unmade by the King. Cardinal Mazarin blundered into the crisis but came out well ahead at the end.\nThe Fronde represented the final attempt of the French nobility to do battle with the king, and they were humiliated. In the long term, the Fronde served to strengthen royal authority, but weakened the economy. The Fronde facilitated the emergence of absolute monarchy.\nThe Spanish Empire, which had promoted the Fronde to the point that without its support, it would have had a more limited character, benefited from the internal upheaval in France since it contributed to the Spanish military's renewed success in its war against the French between 1647 and 1656, so much so that the year 1652 could be considered a Spanish \"annus mirabilis\". Only the later English intervention in the form of the Anglo-Spanish War (1654\u20131660) in favor of France would change the situation.\n16th to 18th centuries.\nIn the 16th to the 17th centuries, the First French colonial empire stretched from a total area at its peak in 1680 to over , the second-largest empire in the world at the time behind the Spanish Empire. Colonial conflicts with Great Britain led to the loss of much of its North American holdings by 1763.\nSeven Years' War.\nThe Seven Years' War (1756\u20131763) was a global conflict that involved most of the European great powers, and was fought primarily in Europe, the Americas, and Asia-Pacific. Other concurrent conflicts include the French and Indian War (1754\u20131763), the Carnatic Wars (1744\u20131763), and the Anglo-Spanish War (1762\u20131763). The opposing alliances were led by Great Britain and France respectively, both seeking to establish global pre-eminence at the expense of the other. Along with Spain, France fought Britain both in Europe and overseas with land-based armies and naval forces, while Britain's ally Prussia sought territorial expansion in Europe and consolidation of its power. Long-standing colonial rivalries pitted Britain against France and Spain in North America and the West Indies. They fought on a grand scale with consequential results. Prussia sought greater influence in the German states, while Austria wanted to regain Silesia, captured by Prussia in the previous war, and to contain Prussian influence.\nIn a realignment of traditional alliances, known as the Diplomatic Revolution of 1756, Prussia became part of a coalition led by Britain, which also included long-time Prussian competitor Hanover, at the time in personal union with Britain. At the same time, Austria ended centuries of conflict between the Bourbon and Habsburg families by allying with France, along with Saxony, Sweden, and Russia. Spain aligned formally with France in 1761, joining France in the Third Family Compact between the two Bourbon monarchies. Smaller German states either joined the Seven Years' War or supplied mercenaries to the parties involved in the conflict.\nAnglo-French conflicts broke out in their North American colonies in 1754, when British and French colonial militias and their respective Native American allies engaged in small skirmishes, and later full-scale colonial warfare. The colonial conflicts would become a theatre of the Seven Years' War when war was officially declared two years later, and it effectively ended France's presence as a land power on that continent. It was \"the most important event to occur in eighteenth-century North America\" prior to the American Revolution. Spain entered the war on the French side in 1762, unsuccessfully attempting to invade Britain's ally Portugal in what became known as the Fantastic War.\nThe alliance with France was a disaster for Spain, with the loss to Britain of two major ports, Havana in Cuba and Manila in the Philippines, returned in the 1763 Treaty of Paris between France, Spain and Great Britain. In Europe, the large-scale conflict that drew in most of the European powers was centred on the desire of Austria (long the political centre of the Holy Roman Empire of the German nation) to recover Silesia from Prussia. The Treaty of Hubertusburg ended the war between Saxony, Austria and Prussia, in 1763.\nBritain began its rise as the world's predominant colonial and naval power. France's supremacy in Europe was halted until after the French Revolution and the emergence of Napoleon Bonaparte. Prussia confirmed its status as a great power, challenging Austria for dominance within the German states, thus altering the European balance of power.\nLater developments.\nFrench intervention in the American Revolutionary War helped the United States secure independence from King George III and the Kingdom of Great Britain, but was costly and achieved little for France.\nFollowing the French Revolution, which began in 1789, the Kingdom of France adopted a written constitution in 1791, but the Kingdom was abolished a year later and replaced with the First French Republic. The monarchy was restored by the other great powers in 1814 and, with the exception of the Hundred Days in 1815, lasted until the French Revolution of 1848.\nFrench Revolution.\nBackground.\nThe underlying causes of the French Revolution were the \"Ancien R\u00e9gime's\" inability to manage rising social and economic inequality. Population growth and interest payments on government debt led to economic depression, unemployment, and high food prices. Combined with a regressive tax system and resistance to reform by the ruling elite, the result was a crisis Louis XVI proved unable to resolve.\nBetween 1700 and 1789, the French population grew from an estimated 21 to 28 million, while Paris alone had over 600,000 inhabitants, of whom roughly one third had no regular work. Food production failed to keep up with these numbers, and although wages increased by 22% between 1770 and 1790, in the same period prices rose by 65%, which many blamed on government inaction. Combined with a series of poor harvests, by 1789 the result was a rural peasantry with nothing to sell, and an urban proletariat whose purchasing power had collapsed.\nHigh levels of state debt, which acted as a drag on the wider economy, are often attributed to the 1778\u20131783 Anglo-French War. However, one economic historian argues \"neither [its] level in 1788, or previous history, can be considered an explanation for the outbreak of revolution in 1789\". In 1788, the ratio of debt to gross national income in France was 55.6%, compared to 181.8% in Britain, and although French borrowing costs were higher, the percentage of revenue devoted to interest payments was roughly the same in both countries.\nThe problem lay in the assessment and collection of the taxes used to fund government expenditure. Rates varied widely from one region to another, were often different from the official amounts, and collected inconsistently. Complexity, as much as the financial burden, caused resentment among all taxpayers; although the nobility paid significantly less than other classes, they complained just as much. Attempts to simplify the system were blocked by the regional \"Parlements\" which controlled financial policy. The resulting impasse in the face of widespread economic distress led to the calling of the Estates-General, which became radicalised by the struggle for control of public finances.\nAlthough willing to consider reforms, Louis XVI often backed down when faced with opposition from conservative elements within the nobility. The court became the target for popular anger, particularly Queen Marie-Antoinette, who was viewed as a spendthrift Austrian spy, and blamed for the dismissal of 'progressive' ministers like Jacques Necker. For their opponents, Enlightenment ideas on equality and democracy provided\nSocietal conditions.\nThe French Revolution was a period of radical political and societal change in France that began with the Estates General of 1789 and ended with the formation of the French Consulate in November 1799. Many of its ideas are considered fundamental principles of liberal democracy, while the values and institutions it created remain central to French political discourse.\nIts causes are generally agreed to be a combination of social, political and economic factors, which the \"Ancien R\u00e9gime\" proved unable to manage. In May 1789, widespread social distress led to the convocation of the Estates General, which was converted into a National Assembly in June. Continuing unrest culminated in the Storming of the Bastille on 14 July, which led to a series of radical measures by the Assembly, including the abolition of feudalism, the imposition of state control over the Catholic Church in France, and extension of the right to vote.\nThe next three years were dominated by the struggle for political control, exacerbated by economic depression and civil disorder. Austria, Britain, Prussia and other external powers sought to restore the \"Ancien R\u00e9gime\" by force, while many French politicians saw war as the best way to unite the nation and preserve the revolution by exporting it to other countries. These factors resulted in the outbreak of the French Revolutionary Wars in April 1792, abolition of the French monarchy and proclamation of the French First Republic in September 1792, followed by the execution of Louis XVI in January 1793.\nFollowing the Paris-based Insurrection of 31 May \u2013 2 June 1793 the constitution was suspended and effective political power passed from the National Convention to the more radical Committee of Public Safety. An estimated 16,000 \"counter-revolutionaries\" were executed during the subsequent Reign of Terror, which ended with the so-called Thermidorian Reaction in July 1794. Weakened by a combination of external threats and internal opposition, in November 1795 the Republic was replaced by the Directory. Four years later in November 1799, the Consulate seized power in a military coup led by Napoleon Bonaparte. This is generally seen as marking the end of the Revolutionary period.\nNational Convention.\nThe National Convention () was the constituent assembly of the Kingdom of France for one day and the French First Republic for its first three years during the French Revolution, following the two-year National Constituent Assembly and the one-year Legislative Assembly. Created after the great insurrection of 10 August 1792, it was the first French government organized as a republic, abandoning the monarchy altogether. The Convention sat as a single-chamber assembly from 20 September 1792 to 26 October 1795 (4 Brumaire IV under the Convention's adopted calendar).\nThe Convention came about when the Legislative Assembly decreed the provisional suspension of King Louis XVI and the convocation of a National Convention to draw up a new constitution with no monarchy. The other major innovation was to decree that deputies to that Convention should be elected by all Frenchmen twenty-one years old or more, domiciled for a year and living by the product of their labor. The National Convention was, therefore, the first French assembly elected by a suffrage without distinctions of class.\nAlthough the Convention lasted until 1795, power was effectively delegated by the convention and concentrated in the small Committee of Public Safety from April 1793. The eight months from the fall of 1793 to the spring of 1794, when Maximilien Robespierre and his allies dominated the Committee of Public Safety, represent the most radical and bloodiest phase of the French Revolution, known as the Reign of Terror. After the fall of Robespierre, the Convention lasted for another year until a new constitution was written, ushering in the French Directory.\nThe Directory.\nThe Directory (also called Directorate) was the governing five-member committee in the French First Republic from 26 October 1795 (4 Brumaire an IV) until 10 November 1799, when it was overthrown by Napoleon Bonaparte in the Coup of 18 Brumaire and replaced by the Consulate. \"Directoire\" is the name of the final four years of the French Revolution. Mainstream historiography also uses the term in reference to the period from the dissolution of the National Convention on 26 October 1795 to Napoleon's coup d\u2019\u00e9tat.\nThe Directory was continually at war with foreign coalitions, including Britain, Austria, Prussia, the Kingdom of Naples, Russia and the Ottoman Empire. It annexed Belgium and the left bank of the Rhine, while Bonaparte conquered a large part of Italy. The Directory established 29 short-lived sister republics in Italy, Switzerland and the Netherlands. The conquered cities and states were required to send France huge amounts of money, as well as art treasures, which were used to fill the new Louvre museum in Paris. An army led by Bonaparte tried to conquer Egypt and marched as far as Saint-Jean-d'Acre in Syria. The Directory defeated a resurgence of the War in the Vend\u00e9e, the royalist-led civil war in the Vend\u00e9e region, but failed in its venture to support the Irish Rebellion of 1798 and create an Irish Republic.\nThe French economy was in continual crisis during the Directory. At the beginning, the treasury was empty; the paper money, the Assignat, had fallen to a fraction of its value, and prices soared. The Directory stopped printing assignats and restored the value of the money, but this caused a new crisis; prices and wages fell, and economic activity slowed to a standstill.\nIn its first two years, the Directory concentrated on ending the excesses of the Jacobin Reign of Terror; mass executions stopped, and measures taken against exiled priests and royalists were relaxed. The Jacobin political club was closed on 12 November 1794 and the government crushed an armed uprising planned by the Jacobins and an early socialist revolutionary, Fran\u00e7ois-No\u00ebl Babeuf, known as \"\"Gracchus\" Babeuf\". But after the discovery of a royalist conspiracy including a prominent general, Jean-Charles Pichegru, the Jacobins took charge of the new Councils and hardened the measures against the Church and \u00e9migr\u00e9s. They took two additional seats in the Directory, hopelessly dividing it.\nIn 1799, after several defeats, French victories in the Netherlands and Switzerland restored the French military position, but the Directory had lost all the political factions' support, including some of its Directors. Bonaparte returned from Egypt in October, and was engaged by Abb\u00e9 Siey\u00e8s and others to carry out a parliamentary coup d'\u00e9tat on 9\u201310 November 1799. The coup abolished the Directory and replaced it with the French Consulate led by Bonaparte.\nWar with European powers.\nThe French Revolutionary Wars were a series of sweeping military conflicts lasting from 1792 until 1802 and resulting from the French Revolution. They pitted France against Britain, Austria, Prussia, Russia, and several other monarchies. They are divided in two periods: the War of the First Coalition (1792\u20131797) and the War of the Second Coalition (1798\u20131802). Initially confined to Europe, the fighting gradually assumed a global dimension. After a decade of constant warfare and aggressive diplomacy, France had conquered territories in the Italian Peninsula, the Low Countries and the Rhineland. French success in these conflicts ensured the spread of revolutionary principles over much of Europe.\nInitially, the rulers of Europe viewed the French Revolution as a dispute between the French king and his subjects, and not something in which they should interfere. As revolutionary rhetoric grew more strident, they declared the interest of the monarchs of Europe as one with the interests of Louis XVI and his family; this Declaration of Pillnitz (27 August 1791) threatened ambiguous, but quite serious, consequences if anything should happen to the royal family. The position of the revolutionaries became increasingly difficult. Compounding their problems in international relations, French \u00e9migr\u00e9s continued to agitate for support of a counter-revolution. Finally, on 20 April 1792, the French National Convention declared war on Austria. In this War of the First Coalition (1792\u201398), France ranged itself against most of the European states sharing land or water borders with her, plus Portugal and the Ottoman Empire.\nDespite some victories in 1792, by early 1793, France was in terrible crisis: French forces had been pushed out of Belgium; also there was revolt in the Vend\u00e9e over conscription; widespread resentment of the Civil Constitution of the Clergy; and the French king had just been executed. The armies of the French Republic were in a state of disruption; the problems became even more acute following the introduction of mass conscription, the \"lev\u00e9e en masse\", which saturated an already distressed army with thousands of illiterate, untrained men.\nThe Committee of Public Safety was formed (6 April 1793) and the \"lev\u00e9e en masse\" drafted all potential soldiers aged 18 to 25 (August 1793). The new French armies had better results. In several campaigns during 1794, the French won the battles of Kortrijk, Tourcoing and Fleurus in June. The French armies drove the Austrians, British, and Dutch beyond the Rhine, occupying Belgium, the Rhineland, and the south of the Netherlands.\nIn the 1795 military campaigns, although the Rhine Campaign of 1795 proved to be disastrous, the French achieved success in other theaters of war such as the War of the Pyrenees (1793\u201395). The French established the Batavian Republic as a sister republic (May 1795) and gained Prussian recognition of French control of the Left Bank of the Rhine by the first Peace of Basel. With the Treaty of Campo Formio, Austria ceded the Austrian Netherlands to France and Northern Italy was turned into several French sister republics. Spain made a separate peace accord with France, the Second Treaty of Basel, and the French Directory annexed more of the Holy Roman Empire.\nIn the 1796 military campaigns, Napoleon Bonaparte, at the time serving as a commander in the French Army, was successful in a daring invasion of Italy. In the Montenotte Campaign, he separated the armies of Sardinia and Austria, defeating each one in turn, and then forced a peace on Sardinia. Following this, his army captured Milan and started the Siege of Mantua. Bonaparte defeated successive Austrian armies sent against him under Johann Peter Beaulieu, Dagobert Sigmund von Wurmser and J\u00f3zsef Alvinczi while continuing the siege.\nIn the 1797 military campaigns, Bonaparte carried all before him against Sardinia and Austria in northern Italy (1796\u20131797) near the Po Valley, culminating in the Peace of Leoben and the Treaty of Campo Formio (October 1797). The First Coalition collapsed, leaving only Britain in the field fighting against France.\nThe Consulate.\nThe consulate was the top-level Government of France from the fall of the Directory in the coup of 18 Brumaire on 10 November 1799 until the start of the Napoleonic Empire on 18 May 1804. By extension, the term \"The Consulate\" also refers to this period of French history.\nDuring this period, Napoleon Bonaparte, as First Consul (), established himself as the head of a more authoritarian, autocratic, and centralized republican government in France while not declaring himself sole ruler. Due to the long-lasting institutions established during these years, historian Robert B. Holtman has called the Consulate \"one of the most important periods of all French history.\" By the end of this period, Napoleon had engineered authoritarian personal rule which has been viewed as military dictatorship.\nNineteenth Century.\nReign of Napoleon.\nThe First French Empire, officially the French Republic, then the French Empire after 1809 and also known as Napoleonic France, was the empire ruled by Napoleon Bonaparte, who established French hegemony over much of continental Europe at the beginning of the 19th century. It lasted from 18 May 1804 to 3 May 1814 and again briefly from 20 March 1815 to 7 July 1815.\nAlthough France had already established a colonial empire overseas since the early 17th century, the French state had remained a kingdom under the Bourbons and a republic after the French Revolution. Historians refer to Napoleon's regime as the \"First Empire\" to distinguish it from the restorationist \"Second Empire\" (1852\u20131870) ruled by his nephew Napoleon III. The First French Empire is considered by some to be a \"Republican empire.\"\nOn 18 May 1804, Napoleon was granted the title Emperor of the French () by the French and was crowned on 2 December 1804, signifying the end of the French Consulate and of the French First Republic. Despite his coronation, the state continued to be formally called the \"French Republic\" until October 1808. The Empire achieved military supremacy in mainland Europe through notable victories in the War of the Third Coalition against Austria, Prussia, Russia, Britain and allied states, notably at the Battle of Austerlitz in 1805. French dominance was reaffirmed during the War of the Fourth Coalition, at the Battle of Jena\u2013Auerstedt in 1806 and the Battle of Friedland in 1807, before Napoleon's final defeat at the Battle of Waterloo in 1815.\nA series of wars, known collectively as the Napoleonic Wars, extended French influence to much of Western Europe and into Poland. At its height in 1812, the French Empire had 130 departments, ruled over 44 million subjects, maintained an extensive military presence in Germany, Italy, Spain, and Poland, and counted Austria and Prussia as nominal allies. Early French victories exported many ideological features of the Revolution throughout Europe: the introduction of the Napoleonic Code throughout the continent increased legal equality, established jury systems and legalized divorce, and seigneurial dues and seigneurial justice were abolished, as were aristocratic privileges in all places except Poland.\nFrance's defeat in 1814 (and then again in 1815), marked the end of the First French Empire and the beginning of the Bourbon Restoration.\nNapoleonic Wars.\nThe Napoleonic Wars (1803\u20131815) were a series of conflicts fought between the First French Empire under Napoleon (1804\u20131815), and a fluctuating array of European coalitions. The wars originated in political forces arising from the French Revolution (1789\u20131799) and from the French Revolutionary Wars (1792\u20131802) (the War of the First Coalition (1792\u20131797) and the War of the Second Coalition (1798\u20131802)), and produced a period of French domination over Continental Europe. There were seven Napoleonic Wars, five named after the coalitions that fought Napoleon, plus two named for their respective theatres: (i) the War of the Third Coalition (1803\u20131806), (ii) the War of the Fourth Coalition (1806\u20131807), (iii) the War of the Fifth Coalition (1809), (iv) the War of the Sixth Coalition (1813\u20131814), (v) the War of the Seventh Coalition (1815), (vi) the Peninsular War (1807\u20131814), and (vii) the French invasion of Russia (1812).\nUpon realising the Coup of 18 Brumaire, whereby he became the First Consul of France in 1799, Napoleon assumed control of the politically chaotic French First Republic. He then organised a financially stable French state with a strong bureaucracy and a professional army. War broke out soon after, with Britain declaring war on France on 18 May 1803, ending the Peace of Amiens, and forming a coalition made up of itself, Sweden, Russia, Naples, and Sicily. Frank McLynn argues that Britain went to war in 1803 out of a \"mixture of economic motives and national neuroses\u2014an irrational anxiety about Napoleon's motives and intentions.\" The British fleet under Admiral Nelson decisively crushed the joint Franco-Spanish navy in the Battle of Trafalgar in October 1805. This victory secured British control of the seas and prevented a planned invasion of Britain. In December 1805, Napoleon defeated the allied Russo-Austrian army at Austerlitz, effectively ending the Third Coalition and forcing Austria to make peace. Concerned about increasing French power, Prussia led the creation of the Fourth Coalition with Russia, Saxony, and Sweden, which resumed war in October 1806. Napoleon soon defeated the Prussians at Jena-Auerstedt and the Russians at Friedland, bringing an uneasy peace to the continent. The treaty failed to end the tension, and war broke out again in 1809, with the badly prepared Fifth Coalition, led by Austria. At first, the Austrians won a significant victory at Aspern-Essling, but were quickly defeated at Wagram.\nHoping to isolate and weaken Britain economically through his Continental System, Napoleon launched an invasion of Portugal, the only remaining British ally in continental Europe. After occupying Lisbon in November 1807, and with the bulk of French troops present in Spain, Napoleon seized the opportunity to turn against his former ally, depose the reigning Spanish royal family and declare his brother King of Spain in 1808 as Jos\u00e9 I. The Spanish and Portuguese revolted with British support and expelled the French from Iberia in 1814 after six years of fighting.\nConcurrently, Russia, unwilling to bear the economic consequences of reduced trade, routinely violated the Continental System, prompting Napoleon to launch a massive invasion of Russia in 1812. The resulting campaign ended in disaster for France and the near-destruction of Napoleon's .\nEncouraged by the defeat, Austria, Prussia, Sweden, and Russia formed the Sixth Coalition and began a new campaign against France, decisively defeating Napoleon at Leipzig in October 1813 after several inconclusive engagements. The Allies then invaded France from the east, while the Peninsular War spilled over into southwestern France. Coalition troops captured Paris at the end of March 1814 and forced Napoleon to abdicate in April. He was exiled to the island of Elba, and the Bourbons were restored to power. However, Napoleon escaped in February 1815, and reassumed control of France for around One Hundred Days. The allies formed the Seventh Coalition, defeated him at Waterloo in June 1815, and exiled him to the island of Saint Helena, where he died six years later.\nThe wars had profound consequences on global history, including the spread of nationalism and liberalism, advancements in civil law, the rise of Britain as the world's foremost naval and economic power, the appearance of independence movements in Spanish America and subsequent decline of the Spanish and Portuguese Empires, the fundamental reorganization of German and Italian territories into larger states, and the introduction of radically new methods of conducting warfare. After the end of the Napoleonic Wars, the Congress of Vienna redrew Europe's borders and brought a relative peace to the continent, lasting until the Crimean War in 1853.\nBourbon Restoration.\nThe Bourbon Restoration was the period of French history during which the House of Bourbon returned to power after the first fall of Napoleon on 3 May 1814. Briefly interrupted by the Hundred Days in 1815, the Restoration continued until the July Revolution of 26 July 1830. The monarchy was again restored after the July Revolution, and continued until 1848.\nLouis XVIII and Charles X, brothers of the executed King Louis XVI, successively mounted the throne and instituted a conservative government intended to restore the proprieties, if not all the institutions, of the Ancien R\u00e9gime. Exiled supporters of the monarchy returned to France but were unable to reverse most of the changes made by the French Revolution. Exhausted by decades of war, the nation experienced a period of internal and external peace, stable economic prosperity and the preliminaries of industrialization.\nJuly Monarchy.\nAfter the July Revolution of 1830, royal power was once again secured and the July Monarchy was established. The July Monarchy governed under principles of moderate conservatism, and improved relations with the UK. The July Revolution was a second French Revolution. It led to the overthrow of King Charles X, the French Bourbon monarch, and the ascent of his cousin Louis Philippe, Duke of Orl\u00e9ans. After 18 precarious years on the throne, Louis-Philippe was overthrown in the French Revolution of 1848.\nThe 1830 Revolution marked a shift from one constitutional monarchy, under the restored House of Bourbon, to another, the July Monarchy; the transition of power from the House of Bourbon to its cadet branch, the House of Orl\u00e9ans; and the replacement of the principle of hereditary right by that of popular sovereignty. Supporters of the Bourbons would be called Legitimists, and supporters of Louis Philippe were known as Orl\u00e9anists. In addition, there continued to be Bonapartists supporting the return of Napoleon's descendants.\nThe July Monarchy, officially the Kingdom of France, was a liberal constitutional monarchy in France under , starting on 26 July 1830, with the July Revolution of 1830, and ending 23 February 1848, with the Revolution of 1848. It marks the end of the Bourbon Restoration (1814\u20131830). It began with the overthrow of the conservative government of Charles X, the last king of the main line House of Bourbon.\n, a member of the more liberal Orl\u00e9ans branch of the House of Bourbon, proclaimed himself as (\"King of the French\") rather than \"King of France\", emphasizing the popular origins of his reign. The king promised to follow the \"juste milieu\", or the middle-of-the-road, avoiding the extremes of both the conservative supporters of Charles X and radicals on the left.\nThe July Monarchy was dominated by wealthy bourgeoisie and numerous former Napoleonic officials. It followed conservative policies, especially under the influence (1840\u201348) of . The king promoted friendship with the United Kingdom and sponsored colonial expansion, notably the French conquest of Algeria. By 1848, a year in which many European states had a revolution, the king's popularity had collapsed, and he abdicated.\nFrench Second Republic.\nThe French Second Republic, officially the French Republic, was the second republican government of France. It existed from 1848 until its dissolution in 1852.\nIn 1848, Europe erupted into a mass revolutionary wave in which many citizens challenged their royal leaders. Caught up in the revolutionary wave, France underwent the February Revolution that overthrew the July Monarchy of King Louis-Phillipe, Radical and liberal factions of the population convened the French Second Republic in 1848. Attempting to restore the First French Republic's values on human rights and constitutional government, they adopted the motto of the First Republic; . The republic was plagued with tribalist tendencies of its leading factions: royalists, proto-socialists, liberals, and conservatives. In this environment, the nephew of Napoleon, Louis-Napol\u00e9on Bonaparte, established himself as a popular anti-establishment figure. He was elected as president in 1848. Under the Second Republic's constitution, the president was restricted to a single term.\nLouis-Napol\u00e9on overthrew the republic in an 1851 coup d'\u00e9tat, proclaimed himself Emperor Napoleon III, and created the Second French Empire.\nCoup of 1851.\nThe coup d'\u00e9tat of 2 December 1851 was a self-coup staged by Louis-Napol\u00e9on Bonaparte (later Napoleon III), at the time President of France under the Second Republic. Code-named Operation Rubicon and timed to coincide with the anniversary of Napoleon I's coronation and victory at Austerlitz, the coup dissolved the National Assembly, granted dictatorial powers to the president and preceded the establishment of the Second French Empire a year later, which lasted until 1870.\nFaced with the prospect of having to leave office in 1852, Louis-Napol\u00e9on Bonaparte (nephew of Napoleon Bonaparte) staged the coup in order to stay in power and implement his reform programs; these included the restoration of universal male suffrage previously abolished by the legislature. The continuation of his authority and the power to produce a new constitution were approved days later by a constitutional referendum, resulting in the Constitution of 1852, which greatly increased the powers and the term length of the president. A year after the coup, Bonaparte proclaimed himself \"Emperor of the French\" under the regnal name Napoleon III.\nThe Second French Empire, officially the \"French Empire,\" was an Imperial Bonapartist regime of Napoleon III from 14 January 1852 to 27 October 1870, between the Second and the Third Republic of France. The Second French Empire oversaw some of the most significant achievements in infrastructure and economy, and reasserted itself as the dominant power in Europe for a decade.\nHistorians in the 1930s and 1940s often disparaged the Second Empire as a precursor of fascism, but by the late 20th century it emerged as an example of a modernising regime.\nHistorians have generally given the Second Empire negative evaluations on its foreign policy, and somewhat more positive evaluations of domestic policies, especially after Napoleon III liberalised his rule after 1858. He promoted French business and exports. The greatest achievements included a grand railway network that facilitated commerce and tied the nation together with Paris as its hub. This stimulated economic growth and brought prosperity to most regions of the country. The Second Empire is given high credit for the rebuilding of Paris with broad boulevards, striking public buildings and elegant residential districts for higher class Parisians.\nIn international policy, Napoleon III tried to emulate his uncle Napoleon I, engaging in numerous imperial ventures around the world as well as several wars in Europe. He began his reign with French victories in Crimea and in Italy, gaining Savoy and Nice.\nUsing very harsh methods, he built up the French Empire in French North Africa and in French Indochina in Southeast Asia. Napoleon III also launched an intervention in Mexico seeking to erect a Second Mexican Empire and bring it into the French orbit, but this ended in a fiasco.\nHe badly mishandled the threat from Prussia, and by the end of his reign, the French emperor found himself without allies in the face of overwhelming German force. His rule was ended during the Franco-Prussian War, when he was captured by the Prussian Army at Sedan in 1870, and dethroned by French republicans. He died in exile in 1873 in England.\nThird Republic (1870 \u2013 1940).\nThe French Third Republic was the system of government adopted in France from 4 September 1870, when the Second French Empire collapsed during the Franco-Prussian War, until 10 July 1940, after the Fall of France during World War II led to the formation of the Vichy government.\nThe early days of the Third Republic were dominated by political disruptions caused by the Franco-Prussian War of 1870\u20131871, which the Republic continued to wage after the fall of Emperor Napoleon III in 1870. Harsh reparations exacted by the Prussians after the war resulted in the loss of the French regions of Alsace (keeping the ) and Lorraine (the northeastern part, i.e. present-day department of Moselle), social upheaval, and the establishment of the Paris Commune. The early governments of the Third Republic considered re-establishing the monarchy, but disagreement as to the nature of that monarchy and the rightful occupant of the throne could not be resolved. Consequently, the Third Republic, originally envisioned as a provisional government, instead became the permanent form of government of France.\nThe French Constitutional Laws of 1875 defined the composition of the Third Republic. It consisted of a Chamber of Deputies and a Senate to form the legislative branch of government and a president to serve as head of state. Calls for the re-establishment of the monarchy dominated the tenures of the first two presidents, and , but growing support for the republican form of government among the French populace and a series of republican presidents in the 1880s gradually quashed prospects of a monarchical restoration.\nThe Third Republic established many French colonial possessions, including French Indochina, French Madagascar, French Polynesia, and large territories in West Africa during the Scramble for Africa, all of them acquired during the last two decades of the 19th century. The early years of the 20th century were dominated by the Democratic Republican Alliance, which was originally conceived as a centre-left political alliance, but over time became the main centre-right party.\nThe period from the start of World War I to the late 1930s featured sharply polarized politics, between the Democratic Republican Alliance and the Radicals. The government fell less than a year after the outbreak of World War II, when Nazi forces occupied much of France, and was replaced by the rival governments of Charles de Gaulle's Free France () and Philippe P\u00e9tain's French State ().\nDuring the 19th and 20th centuries, the French colonial empire was the second largest colonial empire in the world only behind the British Empire; it extended over of land at its height in the 1920s and 1930s. In terms of population however, on the eve of World War II, France and its colonial possessions totaled only 150 million inhabitants, compared with 330 million for British India alone.\n called republicanism in the 1870s \"the form of government that divides France least\"; however, politics under the Third Republic were sharply polarized. On the left stood reformist France, heir to the French Revolution. On the right stood conservative France, rooted in the peasantry, the Roman Catholic Church, and the army. In spite of France's sharply divided electorate and persistent attempts to overthrow it, the Third Republic endured for seventy years, which as of 2023[ [update]] makes it the longest lasting system of government in France since the collapse of the in 1789.\nFourth Republic.\nThe French Fourth Republic was the republican government of France from 27 October 1946 to 4 October 1958, governed by the fourth republican constitution of 13 October 1946. It was in many ways a revival of the Third Republic, which governed from 1870 during the Franco-Prussian War to 1940 during World War II, and it suffered many of the same problems.\nDespite political dysfunction, the Fourth Republic saw an era of great economic growth in France and the rebuilding of the nation's social institutions and industry after World War II, with assistance from the United States through the Marshall Plan. It also saw the beginning of the rapprochement with France's longtime enemy Germany, which led to Franco-German co-operation and eventually to the European Union.\nThe new constitution made some attempts to strengthen the executive branch of government to prevent the unstable situation before the war, but instability remained and the Fourth Republic saw frequent changes of government \u2013 there were 21 administrations in its 12-year history. Moreover, the government proved unable to make effective decisions regarding decolonization of the numerous remaining French colonies. After a series of crises culminating in the Algerian crisis of 1958, the Fourth Republic collapsed. Wartime leader Charles de Gaulle returned from retirement to preside over a transitional administration empowered to design a new French constitution. The Fourth Republic was dissolved on 5 October 1958 following a public referendum which established the current Fifth Republic with a strengthened presidency.\nCoup of May 1958.\nPolitical background.\nThe May 1958 crisis, also known as the \"Algiers putsch\" or \"the coup of 13 May\" was a political crisis in France during the turmoil of the Algerian War of Independence (1954\u20131962) which led to the collapse of the Fourth Republic and its replacement by the Fifth Republic led by Charles de Gaulle who returned to power after a twelve-year absence. It started as a political uprising in Algiers on 13 May 1958 and then became a military coup d'\u00e9tat led by a coalition headed by Algiers deputy and reserve airborne officer Pierre Lagaillarde, French Generals Raoul Salan, Edmond Jouhaud, Jean Gracieux, and Jacques Massu, and by Admiral Philippe Auboyneau, commander of the Mediterranean fleet. The coup was supported by former Algerian Governor General Jacques Soustelle and his activist allies.\nThe coup had as its aim to oppose the formation of Pierre Pflimlin's new government and to impose a change of policies in favor of the right-wing partisans of French Algeria.\nInitial events.\nAfter his tour as Governor General, Jacques Soustelle had returned to France to organize support for de Gaulle's return to power, while retaining close ties to the army and the settlers. By early 1958, he had organized a coup d'\u00e9tat, bringing together dissident army officers and colonial officials with sympathetic Gaullists. On 13 May, right-wing elements seized power in Algiers and called for a Government of Public Safety under General de Gaulle. Massu became chairman of the Public Safety Committee and one of the leaders of the revolt. General Salan assumed leadership of a Committee of Public Safety formed to replace the civil authority and pressed the junta's demands that de Gaulle be named by French president Ren\u00e9 Coty to head a government of national union invested with extraordinary powers to prevent the \"abandonment of Algeria\".\nSalan announced on radio that the Army had \"provisionally taken over responsibility for the destiny of French Algeria\". Under the pressure of Massu, Salan declared \"Vive de Gaulle!\" from the balcony of the Algiers Government-General building on 15 May. De Gaulle answered two days later that he was ready to \"assume the powers of the Republic\". Many worried as they saw this answer as support for the army. At a 19 May press conference, de Gaulle asserted again that he was at the disposal of the country. When a journalist expressed the concerns of some who feared that he would violate civil liberties, de Gaulle retorted vehemently:\nHave I ever done that? Quite the opposite, I have reestablished them when they had disappeared. Who honestly believes that, at age 67, I would start a career as a dictator?\nOn 24 May, French paratroopers from Algeria landed on Corsica by aircraft, taking the French island in a bloodless action called \"Op\u00e9ration Corse.\" Subsequently, preparations were made in Algeria for \"Operation Resurrection,\" which had as objectives the seizure of Paris and the removal of the French government, through the use of paratroopers and armoured forces based at Rambouillet. \"Operation Resurrection\" was to be implemented if one of three scenarios occurred: if de Gaulle was not approved as leader of France by Parliament, if de Gaulle asked for military assistance to take power, or if it seemed that the French Communist Party was making any move to take power in France.\nPolitical leaders on many sides agreed to support the General's return to power with the notable exceptions of Fran\u00e7ois Mitterrand, who was a minister in Guy Mollet's Socialist government, Pierre Mend\u00e8s-France (a member of the Radical-Socialist Party, former Prime Minister), Alain Savary (also a member of the French Section of the Workers' International (SFIO)), and the Communist Party. The philosopher Jean-Paul Sartre, a noted atheist, said, \"I would rather vote for God\", as he would at least be more modest than de Gaulle. Mend\u00e8s-France and Savary, opposed to their respective parties' support of de Gaulle, would form together, in 1960, the \"Parti socialiste autonome\" (PSA, Socialist Autonomous Party), ancestor of the \"Parti socialiste unifi\u00e9\" (PSU, Unified Socialist Party).\nDe Gaulle's return to power (29 May 1958).\nOn 29 May President Ren\u00e9 Coty told parliament that the nation was on the brink of civil war, so he was \"turning towards the most illustrious of Frenchmen, towards the man who, in the darkest years of our history, was our chief for the reconquest of freedom and who refused dictatorship in order to re-establish the Republic. I ask General de Gaulle to confer with the head of state and to examine with him what, in the framework of Republican legality, is necessary for the immediate formation of a government of national safety and what can be done, in a fairly short time, for a deep reform of our institutions.\"\nDe Gaulle accepted Coty's proposal under the precondition that a new constitution would be introduced creating a powerful presidency in which a sole executive, the first of which was to be himself, ruled for seven-year periods. Another condition was that he be granted extraordinary powers for a period of six months.\nDe Gaulle's newly formed cabinet was approved by the National Assembly on 1 June 1958, by 329 votes against 224, while he was granted the power to govern by ordinances for a six-month period as well as the task to draft a new Constitution.\nThe May 1958 crisis indicated that the Fourth Republic by 1958 no longer had any support from the French army in Algeria, and was at its mercy even in civilian political matters. This decisive shift in the balance of power in civil-military relations in France in 1958 and the threat of force was the main immediate factor in the return of de Gaulle to power in France.\nThe Fifth Republic.\nOrigins and History (1958\u20131981).\nDuring the Fifth Republic, founded in 1958 amid the troubles brought by the Algerian War (1954\u201362), France was ruled by successive right-wing administrations until 1981.\nThe successive governments generally applied the Gaullist program of national independence, and modernization in a \"dirigiste\" fashion.\nThe political instability characteristic of the Fourth Republic was gone. The far-right extremists who had threatened military coups over the question of French Algeria largely receded after Algeria was granted independence. The French Communist Party's image gradually became less radical. Politics largely turned into a Gaullists vs left-wing opposition.\nThe Gaullist government, however, was criticized for its heavy-handedness: while elections were free, the state had a monopoly on radio and TV broadcasting and sought to have its point of view on events imposed (this monopoly was not absolute, however, since there were radio stations transmitting from nearby countries specifically for the benefit of the French).\nAlthough Gaullism, which had gained legitimacy during World War II, initially also attracted several left-wing individuals, Gaullism in government became decidedly conservative.\nIn 1962, de Gaulle had the French citizens vote in a referendum concerning the election of the president at universal suffrage, something which had been discredited since Napoleon III's 1851 coup.\n3/5 of the voters approved however the referendum, and thereafter the President of the French Republic was elected at universal suffrage, giving him increased authority on the Parliament. De Gaulle won the 1965 presidential election, opposed on his left by Fran\u00e7ois Mitterrand who had taken the lead of the Federation of the Democratic and Socialist Left, a coalition of most left-wing parties (apart from the French Communist Party, then led by Waldeck Rochet who did call to vote for Mitterrand).\nMay 1968 failed revolution, and De Gaulle resignation.\nIn May 1968, a series of worker strikes and student riots rocked France. These did not, however, result in an immediate change of government, with a right-wing administration being triumphantly reelected in the snap election of June 1968.\nHowever, in 1969 the French electorate turned down a referendum on the reform of the French Senate proposed by de Gaulle. Since the latter had always declared that in the eventuality of a \"NO\" to a referendum he would resign, the referendum was also a plebiscite.\nThus, the rejection of the reform by more than 52% of the voters was widely considered to be mostly motivated by weariness with de Gaulle, and ultimately provoked his resignation that year.\nMay '68 and its aftermaths saw the occupation of the LIP factory in Besan\u00e7on, one of the major social conflict of the 1970s, during which the CFDT and the Unified Socialist Party, of which Pierre Mend\u00e8s-France was a member, theorized workers' self-management.\nA part of the PSU, the autonomist movement, inspired by Italian \"operaismo\", made its first appearance on the political scene.\nGeorges Pompidou, de Gaulle's Prime Minister, was elected in 1969, remaining President until his death in 1974.\nIn 1972, 3/5 of the French approved by referendum the enlargement of the European Economic Community (CEE) to the United Kingdom, Denmark, Ireland, and Norway.\nAfter Pompidou's sudden death, Val\u00e9ry Giscard d'Estaing managed to overhaul the remaining Gaullist barons \u2013 with the help of Jacques Chirac \u2014, and won the subsequent election against Fran\u00e7ois Mitterrand on the left.\nGiscard transformed the ORTF, the state organism in charge of media, and created several different channels, including Radio France.\nHowever, it was not until Fran\u00e7ois Mitterrand's accession to the \u00c9lys\u00e9e Palace in 1981 that media were liberalized.\nMitterrand Presidency (1981\u20131995).\nIn 1981, Fran\u00e7ois Mitterrand, a Socialist, was elected president, on a program of far-reaching reforms (110 Propositions for France). This was enabled by the 1972 Common Program between the PS, the PRG and the PCF \u2013 which had remained, just as in Italy, a strong party throughout the Cold War. Mitterrand served until 1995.\nAfter securing a majority in parliament through a snap election, his government ran a program of social and economic reforms:\nHowever, in 1983, high inflation and economic woes forced a dramatic turnaround with respect to economic policies, known as \"rigueur\" (rigor) \u2013 the Socialist-Communist government then embarked on policies of fiscal and spending restraint.\nThough the nationalizations were subsequently reversed by both subsequent left-wing and right-wing governments, the social reforms undertaken have remained standing.\nFurthermore, the end of the \"Trente Glorieuses\" (Thirty Glorious) period of growth witnesses the beginning of a structural unemployment, which became an important political issue.\nSince the 1980s, unemployment has remained permanently high, at about 10% of the population, regardless of the policies applied to fight it.\nIn 1986, Jacques Chirac's neo-Gaullist Rally for the Republic (RPR) party won the legislative election.\nLarger patterns and trends.\nFor the first time in the Fifth Republic, a left-wing President was forced to work together with a right-wing Prime minister, leading to the first cohabitation. Although many commentators were surprised at the time, and considered it to be an institutional crisis, some claiming the Fifth Republic could not accommodate itself of such rivalry at the head of the state, cohabitation repeated itself after the 1993 elections, when the RPR again won the elections, and then after the 1997 elections, when the Socialist Party won, leading to the constitution of Lionel Jospin's Plural Left government while Chirac was only at the beginning of his first presidential term.\nThe tradition in periods of \"cohabitation\" (a President of one party, prime minister of another) is for the President to exercise the primary role in foreign and security policy, with the dominant role in domestic policy falling to the prime minister and his government. Jospin stated, however, that he would not \"a priori\" leave any domain exclusively to the President, as that was a tradition issued from de Gaulle.\nSince then, the government alternated between a left-wing coalition (composed of the French Socialist Party (PS), the French Communist Party (PCF) and more recently \"Les Verts\", the Greens) and a right-wing coalition (composed of Jacques Chirac's Rally for the Republic (RPR), later replaced by the Union for a Popular Movement (UMP), and the Union for French Democracy, UDF).\nThose two coalitions are fairly stable; there have been none of the mid-term coalition reorganizations and governments frequently overthrown which were commonplace under the Fourth Republic.\nThe 1980s and 1990s saw also the rise of Jean-Marie Le Pen's National Front (FN), a far-right party which blames immigration, more particularly immigration from North African countries such as Algeria, for increased unemployment and crime.\nThe social situation in the French suburbs (\"banlieues\": literally, \"suburbs\", but in France a euphemism for large suburban housing projects for the poor, with a high proportion of the population of North African descent) still have to be successfully tackled.\nJean-Marie Le Pen's relative success at the French Presidential election, 2002 has been attributed in part to concerns about juvenile criminality.\nMassive general strikes followed by all the trade-unions were triggered in November\u2013December 1995, paralyzing France, in protest against the Jupp\u00e9 plan of \"lib\u00e9ral\" (in French, free market) reforms.\nThese strikes were generally considered a turning point in the French social movement.\nIt remains to be seen how much of these reforms will now be enacted by Sarkozy's first government, as Sarkozy was elected president on a similar platform in May 2007.\nChirac coalition with the Left (1995\u20132002).\nDuring his first two years in office, President Jacques Chirac's prime minister was Alain Jupp\u00e9, who served contemporaneously as leader of Chirac's neo-Gaullist Rally for the Republic (RPR). Chirac and Jupp\u00e9 benefited from a very large, if rather unruly, majority in the National Assembly (470 out of 577 seats).\nMindful that the government might have to take politically costly decisions in advance of the legislative elections planned for spring 1998 in order to ensure that France met the Maastricht criteria for the single currency of the EU, Chirac decided in April 1997 to call early elections.\nThe Left, led by Socialist Party leader Lionel Jospin, whom Chirac had defeated in the 1995 presidential race, unexpectedly won a solid National Assembly majority (319 seats, with 289 required for an absolute majority). President Chirac named Jospin prime minister on 2 June, and Jospin went on to form a Plural Left government composed primarily of Socialist ministers, along with some ministers from allied parties of the left, such as the Communist Party and the Greens.\nJospin stated his support for continued European integration and his intention to keep France on the path towards Economic and Monetary Union, albeit with greater attention to social concerns.\nChirac and Jospin worked together, for the most part, in the foreign affairs field with representatives of the presidency and the government pursuing a single, agreed French policy. Their \"cohabitation\" arrangement was the longest-lasting in the history of the Fifth Republic.\nThe right in power 2002\u20132012.\nHowever, it ended subsequent to the legislative elections that followed Chirac's decisive defeat of Jospin (who failed even to make it through to the runoff) in the 2002 presidential election.\nThis led to President Chirac's appointment of Jean-Pierre Raffarin (UMP) as the new prime minister.\nOn 29 May 2005, French voters in the referendum on the Treaty establishing a Constitution for Europe turned down the proposed charter by a wide margin.\nThis was generally regarded as a rebuke to Chirac and his government as well as the PS leadership, the majority save for the leftist faction and Laurent Fabius \u2013 had supported the proposed constitution.\nTwo days later, Raffarin resigned and Chirac appointed Dominique de Villepin, formerly Foreign Minister as Prime Minister of France.\nAn enduring force is Jean-Marie Le Pen's National Front party, whose anti-immigration, isolationist policies have been described by critics as inspired by xenophobia. Le Pen's survival into the runoff of 2002 had many observers worried this time, but in the 2007 first round Le Pen finished a distant fourth.\nThe 23 February 2005 French law on colonialism was met by a public uproar on the left-wing. Voted by the UMP majority, it was charged with advocating historical revisionism, and after long debates and international opposition (from Abdelaziz Bouteflika or Aim\u00e9 C\u00e9saire, founder of the \"N\u00e9gritude\" movement), was repealed by Jacques Chirac himself.\nIn Autumn 2005, civil unrest erupted in a number of lower classes suburbs due to the violence of the police. As a result, the government invoked a state of emergency which lasted until January 2006.\nIn 2006, Prime Minister Dominique de Villepin enacted amendments that established a First Employment Contract, known as the CPE, a special kind of employment contract under which workers under the age of 26 could be hired and fired liberally.\nProponents of the measure argued that French workforce laws, which put the burden of proof on the employer for dismissing employees, dissuaded employers from hiring new employees; according to them, this is one reason while the unemployment rate of those under 26 is 23% and that of youngsters from some lower classes neighbourhoods as high as 40%, and not the refusal of exploitation to enrich the wealthy class.\nHowever, the plan backfired, with criticism both on the way the law was passed (using an exceptional legislative procedure) and on the law itself, which was criticized both for weakening workers' rights in general, and for singling out the young disfavourably instead of attempting to cure more general issues. Following the 2006 protests against the CPE, the government had to withdraw the legislation.\nFollowing from these events, Villepin lost all hopes of winning the presidency, and his government no longer tried to enact reforms.\nConservative Nicolas Sarkozy was elected and took office on 16 May 2007. The problem of high unemployment has yet to be resolved. Sarkozy was very actively involved in the military operation in Libya to oust the Gaddafi government in 2011.\nSocialists in power (2012-2017).\nIn 2012 election for president, Socialist Fran\u00e7ois Hollande defeated Sarkozy's try for reelection. Hollande advocated a growth policy in contrast to the austerity policy advocated by Germany's Angela Merkel as a way of tackling the European sovereign debt crisis. In 2014, Hollande stood with Merkel and US President Obama in imposing sanctions on Russia for its actions against Ukraine. In December 2016, Hollande announced he will not seek re-election as president of France.\nMacron's presidency (2017- present).\nIn the 2017 election for president the winner was Emmanuel Macron, the founder of a new party \"La R\u00e9publique En Marche!\". It declared itself above left and right. He called parliamentary elections that brought him the absolute majority of d\u00e9put\u00e9s. He appointed a prime minister from the centre right, and ministers from both the centre left and centre right.\nIn the 2022 presidential election president Macron was re-elected after beating his far-right rival, Marine Le Pen, in the runoff. He was the first re-elected incumbent French president since 2002.\nIn May 2022, President Emmanuel Macron's centrist party, La R\u00e9publique en Marche, changed its name to Renaissance. However, Macron's coalition lost its parliamentary majority in June 2022 election, meaning the first time in 20 years that French president lost absolute majority in parliament. Macron's centre-right alliance won 234 seats, the leftist coalition 141 seats, the far-right National Rally 90 seats, and the conservative Les R\u00e9publicains and its allies 75 seats. The opposition left-wing coalition has been dominated by La France Insoumise (LFI) and its leader Jean-Luc M\u00e9lenchon. The other members of the left-wing alliance are the Socialist Party (PS), French Communist Party (PCF), and the Greens Europe Ecologie les Verts (EELV).\nIssues.\nThe issue of liberalism or socialism.\nOne of the great questions of current French politics is that of \"lib\u00e9ralisme\" \u2013 that is, economic liberalism, individualism society and the market system, as opposed to government intervention in the economy. Broadly speaking, supporters of \"lib\u00e9ralisme\" want to let the forces of the free market operate with less regulation. For example, they want little regulation of the workforce and repeal of French laws setting a 35-hour work week rather than leaving this to contract negotiations. Critics of \"lib\u00e9ralisme\" argue that governmental intervention is necessary for the welfare of workers; they point out that great gains in workers' rights were historically achieved by government intervention and social mobilization, as during the Popular Front. Similarly, proponents of \"lib\u00e9ralisme\" favour free markets and the free movement of goods, which critics contend benefit the wealthy class at the expense of the ordinary worker.\nAccording to historian Ren\u00e9 R\u00e9mond's famous classification of the right-wings in France, this \"lib\u00e9rale\" tradition belongs to the Orleanist inheritance, while Gaullists inherited from Bonapartism and a tradition of state intervention issued from the National Council of Resistance (CNR)'s welfare state program after the war. However, neo-Gaullists have since rallied economic liberalism, with the result that modern French conservatives \u2013 such as the UMP, or before that the RPR, the UDF or the Independent Republicans \u2013 all supported economic liberalism. The so-called right-wing of the Socialist Party: Fran\u00e7ois Hollande, Dominique Strauss-Kahn, S\u00e9gol\u00e8ne Royal have done likewise.\nSome rightists, such as Nicolas Sarkozy, favour radical change in the relationship between the government and the free-market. They argue that for the last 30 years, under both left-wing and right-wing governments, the French have been misled into believing that things could go on without real \"reforms\". One may say that they favour a Thatcherite approach. Others on the right (including Dominique de Villepin) as well as some on the left argue in favour of gradual reforms. In comparison, the 2005 refusal of the French electorate to vote for the proposed European Constitution was interpreted by some \u2013 in particular the French Communist Party and far-left parties such as LO or the LCR \u2013 as a popular refusal of \"lib\u00e9ralisme\", which the European Union is perceived to embody. Some such as Laurent Fabius have argued that the Socialist Party should thus have a more \"left-wing\" line.\nLibertarianism as such is rare in France; it is considered a form of ultra-liberalism or neo-liberalism and upheld only by very few right-wingers, such as Alain Madelin.\nMajor societal groups.\nUnions and leaders.\nWorkers' unions.\nMajor parties and groupings.\nLeft and Right in France and the main political parties.\nSince the 1789 French Revolution, the political spectrum in France has obeyed the left\u2013right distinction. However, due to the historical association of the term \"droite\" (right) with monarchism, conservative or right-wing parties have tended to avoid officially describing themselves as representing the \"right wing\".\nFrench politics was for a long time characterised by two politically opposed groupings: one left-wing, centred on the French Socialist Party, and the other right-wing, centred previously around the Rassemblement pour la R\u00e9publique (RPR) and its successor the Union for a Popular Movement (UMP), today called Les Republicains.\nLiberal and centrist political party, Renaissance (RE) (formerly known as En Marche! and later La R\u00e9publique En Marche!), has been the biggest political party in France since 2017.\nThe Left.\nAt the beginning of the 20th century, the French Left divided itself into:\nAfter World War I.\nThe Left was in power during:\nAfter World War II.\nThe Old Left.\nAfter 1959, both parties were in opposition until 1981. They had formed a coalition (with the Party Radical de Gauche) called the \"Union de la Gauche\" between 1972 and 1978.\nThe New Left (or Second Left).\nThe Old Left was contested on its left by the New Left parties including the:\nHowever, the emblem of the New Left was the Unified Socialist Party, or PSU.\nThe Right.\nThe right-wing has been divided into three broad families by historian Ren\u00e9 R\u00e9mond.\nLegitimists.\nCounter-revolutionaries who opposed all change since the French Revolution. Today, they are located on the far-right of the French political spectrum.\nThese included:\nOrleanists.\nOrleanists had rallied the Republic at the end of the 19th century and advocated economic liberalism (referred to in French simply as \"lib\u00e9ralisme\"). Today, they are broadly classified as centre-right or centrist parties.\nThese included:\nLarge majority of the politicians of Nicolas Sarkozy's then-ruling Union for a Popular Movement could have been classified in this family.\nBonapartists.\nThese included:\nthen the Union of Democrats for the Republic\nToday.\nThe Gaullist UDR was then transformed by Jacques Chirac in the Rally for the Republic (RPR) in 1976, a neo-Gaullist party which embraced economic liberalism.\nIn 2002, the Gaullist RPR and the Union for French Democracy merged into the Union for a Popular Movement(UMP), although some elements of the old UDF remained outside the new alliance. In 2015, the party's name was changed from Union for a Popular Movement (UMP) to The Republicans.\nIn 2007, a section of the remaining UDF, headed by Fran\u00e7ois Bayrou, refused to align themselves on Nicolas Sarkozy and created the MoDem in an attempt to make space for a center-right party.\nIn conclusion, Jean-Marie Le Pen managed to unify most of the French far-right in the National Front (FN), created in 1972 in the aftermaths of the Algerian War, which succeeded in gaining influence starting in the 1980s. Despite Le Pen's success in the 2002 presidential election, his party has been weakened by Bruno M\u00e9gret's spin-out, leading to the creation of the National Republican Movement, as well as by the concurrence of Philippe de Villiers' Movement for France, and also by the internal struggles concerning Le Pen's forthcoming succession. In 2018, far-right National Front party (FN), led by Marine Le Pen, changed its name to the National Rally (Rassemblement National, RN). Since then, the party has seen several electoral successes, including in the 2022 presidential election and the first round of the 2024 legislative snap elections.\nResidual monarchists movements, inheritors of Charles Maurras' \"Action fran\u00e7aise\", also managed to survive, although many of them joined Le Pen's FN in the 1980s. Some neo-fascists who considered Le Pen to be too moderate broke away in 1974 to form the Parti des forces nouvelles, which maintained close links to the far-right students' union \"Groupe Union D\u00e9fense\".\nAnother important theoretical influence in the far-right appeared in the 1980s with Alain de Benoist's \"Nouvelle Droite\" movement, organized into the GRECE.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWorks cited.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "67477", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=67477", "title": "Viaticum", "text": "Last Communion, received near death\nViaticum is a term used \u2013 especially in the Catholic Church \u2013 for the Eucharist (also called Holy Communion), administered, with or without Anointing of the Sick (also called Extreme Unction), to a person who is dying; viaticum is thus a part of the Last Rites.\nOrigins.\nThe word \"viaticum\" is a Latin word meaning \"provision for a journey\", from \"via\", or \"way\". Alternatively, \"viaticum\" can refer to an ancient Roman provision or allowance for traveling, originally of transportation and supplies, later of money, made to officials on public missions; mostly simply, the word, a haplology of \"vi\u0101 t\u0113cum\" (\"with you on the way\"), indicates money or necessities for any journey. \"Viaticum\" can also refer to the enlistment bonus received by a Roman legionary, auxiliary soldier or seaman in the Roman Imperial Navy.\nPractice.\nFor Communion as Viaticum, the Eucharist is given in its usual form, with the added words \"May the Lord Jesus Christ protect you and lead you to eternal life\". The Eucharist is seen as the ideal spiritual food to strengthen a dying person for the journey from this world to life after death. The desire to have the bread and wine consecrated in the Eucharist available for the sick and dying led to the reservation of the Blessed Sacrament, a practice which has endured from the earliest days of the Christian Church. Saint Justin Martyr, writing less than fifty years after the death of Saint John the Apostle, mentions that \"the deacons communicate each of those present, and carry away to the absent the consecrated Bread, and wine and water\".\nIf the dying person cannot take solid food, the Eucharist may be administered via the wine alone, since the Catholic Church holds that Christ exists in his entirety (body, blood, soul, and divinity) in both the consecrated solid and liquid elements.\nThe sacrament of Extreme Unction is often administered immediately before giving Viaticum if a priest is available to do so. Unlike the Anointing of the Sick, Viaticum may be administered by a priest, deacon or by an extraordinary minister, using the reserved Blessed Sacrament. The rite prescribed by the Second Vatican Council provides for a continuous action in which the sick person is anointed after their confession and before they receive viaticum.\nIn Late Antiquity and the Early Mediaeval period in the West, the host was sometimes placed in the mouth of a person already dead. Some claim that this could relate to a traditional practice which scholars have compared to the pre-Christian custom of Charon's obol, a small coin placed in the mouth of the dead for passage to the afterlife and sometimes also called a \"viaticum\" in Latin literary sources.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "67478", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=67478", "title": "Nepal/History", "text": ""}
{"id": "67479", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=67479", "title": "Nepal/People", "text": ""}
{"id": "67480", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=67480", "title": "Nepal/Government", "text": ""}
{"id": "67481", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=67481", "title": "Nepal/Economy", "text": ""}
{"id": "67482", "revid": "48523215", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=67482", "title": "Richard Strauss", "text": "German composer and conductor (1864\u20131949)\nRichard Georg Strauss (; ; 11 June 1864 \u2013 8 September 1949) was a German composer and conductor known for his tone poems and operas. A leading figure of the late Romantic and early Modern era, and a successor to Richard Wagner and Franz Liszt, he combined, along with his friend Gustav Mahler, subtleties of orchestration with an advanced harmonic style. \nHis compositional output began in 1870 when he was just six years old and lasted until his death nearly eighty years later. His first tone poem to achieve wide acclaim was \"Don Juan\", and this was followed by other lauded works of this kind, including \"Death and Transfiguration\", \"Till Eulenspiegel's Merry Pranks\", \"Also sprach Zarathustra\", \"Don Quixote\", \"Ein Heldenleben\", \"Symphonia Domestica\", and \"An Alpine Symphony\". His first opera to achieve international fame was \"Salome\", which used a libretto by Hedwig Lachmann that was a German translation of the French play \"Salom\u00e9\" by Oscar Wilde. This was followed by several critically acclaimed operas with librettist Hugo von Hofmannsthal: \"Elektra\", \"Der Rosenkavalier\", \"Ariadne auf Naxos\", \"Die Frau ohne Schatten\", \"Die \u00e4gyptische Helena\", and \"Arabella\". His last operas, \"Daphne\", \"Friedenstag\", \"Die Liebe der Danae\" and \"Capriccio\" used libretti written by Joseph Gregor, the Viennese theatre historian. Other well-known works by Strauss include two symphonies, lieder (especially the \"Four Last Songs\"), the Violin Concerto in D minor, the Horn Concerto No. 1, Horn Concerto No. 2, his Oboe Concerto and other instrumental works such as \"Metamorphosen\".\nA prominent conductor in Western Europe and the Americas, Strauss enjoyed quasi-celebrity status as his compositions became standards of orchestral and operatic repertoire. He was chiefly admired for his interpretations of the works of Liszt, Mozart, and Wagner in addition to his own works. A conducting disciple of Hans von B\u00fclow, Strauss began his conducting career as B\u00fclow's assistant with the Meiningen Court Orchestra in 1883. After B\u00fclow resigned in 1885, Strauss served as that orchestra's primary conductor for five months before being appointed to the conducting staff of the Bavarian State Opera where he worked as third conductor from 1886 to 1889. He then served as principal conductor of the Deutsches Nationaltheater und Staatskapelle Weimar from 1889 to 1894. In 1894 he made his conducting debut at the Bayreuth Festival, conducting Wagner's \"Tannh\u00e4user\" with his wife, soprano Pauline de Ahna, singing Elisabeth. He then returned to the Bavarian State Opera, this time as principal conductor, from 1894 to 1898, after which he was principal conductor of the Berlin State Opera from 1898 to 1913. From 1919 to 1924 he was principal conductor of the Vienna State Opera, and in 1920 he co-founded the Salzburg Festival. In addition to these posts, Strauss was a frequent guest conductor in opera houses and with orchestras internationally.\nIn 1933 Strauss was appointed to two important positions in the musical life of Nazi Germany: head of the Reichsmusikkammer and principal conductor of the Bayreuth Festival. The latter role he accepted after conductor Arturo Toscanini had resigned from the position in protest against the Nazi Party. These positions have led some to criticize Strauss for his seeming collaboration with the Nazis. However, Strauss's daughter-in-law, Alice Grab Strauss (n\u00e9e von Hermannsw\u00f6rth), was Jewish, and much of his apparent acquiescence to the Nazi Party was done to save her life and the lives of her children (his Jewish grandchildren). He was also apolitical, and took the Reichsmusikkammer post to advance copyright protections for composers, attempting as well to preserve performances of works by banned composers such as Mahler and Felix Mendelssohn. Further, Strauss insisted on using a Jewish librettist, Stefan Zweig, for his opera \"Die schweigsame Frau\" which ultimately led to his firing from the Reichsmusikkammer and Bayreuth. His opera \"Friedenstag\", which premiered just before the outbreak of World War II, was a thinly veiled criticism of the Nazi Party that attempted to persuade Germans to abandon violence for peace. Thanks to his influence, his daughter-in-law was placed under protected house arrest during the war, but despite extensive efforts he was unable to save dozens of his in-laws from being killed in Nazi concentration camps. In 1948, a year before his death, he was cleared of any wrongdoing by a denazification tribunal in Munich.\nLife.\nEarly life and career (1864\u20131886).\nStrauss was born on 11 June 1864 in Munich, the son of Josephine (n\u00e9e Pschorr) and Franz Strauss, who was the principal horn player at the Court Opera in Munich and a professor at the K\u00f6nigliche Musikschule. His mother was the daughter of Georg Pschorr, a financially prosperous brewer from Munich. \nA child prodigy in composition, Strauss began his musical studies at the age of four, studying piano with August Tombo who was the harpist in the Munich Court Orchestra. Soon after, he began attending the rehearsals of the orchestra, and began getting lessons in music theory and orchestration from the ensemble's assistant conductor. He wrote his first composition at the age of six, and continued to write music almost until his death. In 1872, he started receiving violin instruction from Benno Walter, the director of the Munich Court Orchestra and his father's cousin, and at 11 began five years of compositional study with Friedrich Wilhelm Meyer. In 1882 he graduated from the Ludwigsgymnasium and afterwards attended only one year at the University of Munich in 1882\u20131883.\nIn addition to his formal teachers, Strauss was profoundly influenced musically by his father who made instrumental music-making central to the Strauss home. The Strauss family was frequently joined in their home for music making, meals, and other activities by the orphaned composer and music theorist Ludwig Thuille who was viewed as an adopted member of the family. Strauss's father taught his son the music of Beethoven, Haydn, Mozart, and Schubert. His father further assisted his son with his musical composition during the 1870s and into the early 1880s, providing advice, comments, and criticisms. \nHis father also provided support by showcasing his son's compositions in performance with the Wilde Gung'l, an amateur orchestra he conducted from 1875 to 1896. Many of his early symphonic compositions were written for this ensemble. His compositions at this time were indebted to the style of Robert Schumann and Felix Mendelssohn, true to his father's teachings. His father undoubtedly had a crucial influence on his son's developing taste, not least in Strauss's abiding love for the horn. His Horn Concerto No. 1 is representative of this period and is a staple of the modern horn repertoire.\nIn 1874, Strauss heard his first Wagner operas, \"Lohengrin\" and \"Tannh\u00e4user\". In 1878 he attended performances of \"Die Walk\u00fcre\" and \"Siegfried\" in Munich, and in 1879 he attended performances of the entire \"Ring Cycle\", \"Die Meistersinger von N\u00fcrnberg\", and \"Tristan und Isolde\". The influence of Wagner's music on Strauss's style was to be profound, but at first his musically conservative father forbade him to study it. In the Strauss household, the music of Richard Wagner was viewed with deep suspicion, and it was not until the age of 16 that Strauss was able to obtain a score of \"Tristan und Isolde\". In 1882 he went to the Bayreuth Festival to hear his father perform in the world premiere of Wagner's \"Parsifal\"; after which surviving letters to his father and to Thuille detail his seemingly negative impression of Wagner and his music. In later life, Strauss said that he deeply regretted the conservative hostility to Wagner's progressive works.\nIn early 1882, in Vienna, Strauss gave the first performance of his Violin Concerto in D minor, playing a piano reduction of the orchestral part himself, with his teacher Benno Walter as soloist. The same year he entered Ludwig Maximilian University of Munich, where he studied philosophy and art history, but not music. He left a year later to go to Berlin, where he studied briefly before securing a post with the Meiningen Court Orchestra as assistant conductor to Hans von B\u00fclow, who had been enormously impressed by the young composer's \"Serenade (Op. 7)\" for wind instruments, composed when he was only 16 years of age.\nStrauss learned the art of conducting by observing B\u00fclow in rehearsal. B\u00fclow was very fond of the young man, and Strauss considered him as his greatest conducting mentor, often crediting him as teaching him \"the art of interpretation\". Notably, under B\u00fclow's baton he made his first major appearance as a concert pianist, performing Mozart's Piano Concerto No. 24, for which he composed his own cadenzas.\nIn December 1885, B\u00fclow unexpectedly resigned from his post, and Strauss was left to lead the Meiningen Court Orchestra as interim principal conductor for the remainder of the artistic season through April 1886. He notably helped prepare the orchestra for the world premiere performance of Johannes Brahms's Symphony No. 4, which Brahms himself conducted. He also conducted his Symphony No. 2 for Brahms, who advised Strauss: \"Your symphony contains too much playing about with themes. This piling up of many themes based on a triad, which differ from one another only in rhythm, has no value.\" \nBrahms' music, like Wagner's, also left a tremendous impression upon Strauss, and he often referred to this time of his life as his 'Brahmsschw\u00e4rmerei' ('Brahms adoration') during which several his compositions clearly show Brahms' influence, including the Piano Quartet in C minor, Op. 13 (1883\u201384), \"Wandrers Sturmlied\" (1884) and \"Burleske\" (1885\u201386).\"\nSuccess in conducting and tone poems (1885\u20131898).\nIn 1885, Strauss met the composer Alexander Ritter who was a violinist in the Meiningen orchestra and the husband of one of Richard Wagner's nieces. An avid champion of the ideals of Wagner and Franz Liszt, Ritter had a tremendous impact on the trajectory of Strauss's work as a composer from 1885 onward. Ritter convinced Strauss to abandon his more conservative style of composing and embrace the \"music of the future\" by modeling his compositional style on Wagner and Liszt. He further influenced Strauss by engaging him in studies and conversations on the writings of Arthur Schopenhauer, Wagner, and Friedrich von Hausegger. All of this together gave a new aesthetic anchor to Strauss which first became evident in his embrace of the tone poem genre.\nIn 1886, after leaving his post in Meiningen, Strauss spent several weeks traveling throughout Italy before assuming a new post as third conductor at the Bavarian State Opera, then known as the Munich Hofoper. While traveling he wrote down descriptions of the various sites he was seeing along with tonal impressions that went with those descriptions. These he communicated in a letter to his mother, and they ultimately were used as the beginning of his first tone poem, \"Aus Italien\" (1886). Shortly after Strauss assumed his opera conducting duties in Munich, Ritter himself moved to the city in September 1886. For the next three years the two men met regularly, often joined by Thuille and Anton Seidl, to discuss music, particularly Wagner and Liszt, and discuss poetry, literature, and philosophy.\nStrauss's tenure at the Bavarian State Opera was not a happy one. With the death of Ludwig II of Bavaria in June 1886, the opera house was not as well financially supported by his successor Otto of Bavaria which meant that much of the more ambitious and expensive repertoire that he wanted to stage, such as Wagner's operas, were unfeasible. The opera assignments he was given, works by Boieldieu, Auber and Donizetti, bored him, and to make matters worse Hermann Levi, the senior conductor at the house, was often ill and Strauss was required to step in at the last minute to conduct performance for operas which he had never rehearsed. This caused problems for him, the singers, and the orchestra.\nDuring this time, Strauss found much more enjoyable conducting work outside Munich in Berlin, Dresden, and Leipzig. In Leipzig he met and befriended the composer Gustav Mahler in the autumn of 1887. Also happily, Strauss met his future wife, soprano Pauline de Ahna, in 1887. De Ahna was then a voice student at the Munich Musikschule, now the University of Music and Performing Arts Munich, but soon switched to private lessons with Strauss, who became her principal teacher.\nIn May 1889, Strauss left his post with the Bavarian State Opera after being appointed Kapellmeister to Charles Alexander, Grand Duke of Saxe-Weimar-Eisenach in Weimar, beginning in the autumn of 1889. During the summer of 1889 he served as the assistant conductor of the Bayreuth Festival during which time he befriended Cosima Wagner who became a longterm close friend. Pauline De Ahna went with Strauss to Weimar and he later married her on 10 September 1894. She was famous for being irascible, garrulous, eccentric and outspoken, but to all appearances the marriage was essentially happy, and she was a great source of inspiration to him. Throughout his life, from his earliest songs to the final \"Four Last Songs\" of 1948, he preferred the soprano voice to all others, and all his operas contain important soprano roles. In Weimar she created the role of Freihild in Strauss's first opera, \"Guntram\", in 1894. The opera was received with mixed reviews in Weimar, but its later production in Munich was met with scorn and was Strauss's first major failure.\nIn spite of the failure of his first opera, Strauss's tenure in Weimar brought about several important successes for his career. His tone poem \"Don Juan\" premiered in Weimar on 11 November 1889 to tremendous critical response, and the work quickly brought him international fame and success. This was followed by another lauded achievement, the premiere of his tone poem \"Death and Transfiguration\" in 1890. Both of these works, along with the earlier \"Burleske\", became internationally known and established him as a leading modernist composer. He also had much success as a conductor in Weimar, particularly with the symphonic poems of Liszt and an uncut production of \"Tristan und Isolde\" in 1892.\nIn the summer of 1894 Strauss made his conducting debut at the Bayreuth Festival, conducting Wagner's \"Tannh\u00e4user\" with Pauline singing Elisabeth. Just prior to their marriage the following September, Strauss left his post in Weimar when he was appointed Kapellmeister, or first conductor, of the Bavarian State Opera where he became responsible for the operas of Wagner.\nWhile working in Munich for the next four years he had his largest creative period of tone poem composition, producing \"Till Eulenspiegel's Merry Pranks\" (1895), \"Also sprach Zarathustra\" (1896), \"Don Quixote\" (1897), and \"Ein Heldenleben\" (1898). He also served as principal conductor of the Berlin Philharmonic in 1894\u20131895. In 1897, the Strausses' only child, their son Franz, was born. In 1906, Strauss purchased a block of land at Garmisch-Partenkirchen and had a villa (Strauss-Villa) built there with the down payments from the publisher Adolph F\u00fcrstner for his opera \"Salome\", residing there until his death.\nFame and success with operas (1898\u20131933).\nStrauss left the Bavarian State Opera in 1898 when he became principal conductor of the Staatskapelle Berlin at the Berlin State Opera in the fall of 1898; a position he remained in for 15 years. By this time in his career, he was in constant demand as a guest conductor internationally and enjoyed celebrity status as a conductor; particularly in the works of Wagner, Mozart, and Liszt in addition to his own compositions. He became president of the Allgemeiner Deutscher Musikverein in 1901, and that same year became leader of the Berliner Tonk\u00fcnstlerverein. He also served as editor of the book series \"Die Musik\". He used all of these posts to champion contemporary German composers like Mahler. His own compositions were becoming increasingly popular, and the first major orchestra to perform an entire concert of only his music was the Vienna Philharmonic in 1901. In 1903 Strauss Festivals dedicated to his music were established in London and Heidelberg. At the latter festival his cantata \"Taillefer\" was given its world premiere.\nIn 1904 Strauss embarked on his first North American tour, with stops in Boston, Chicago, Cleveland, Cincinnati, New York City, and Pittsburgh. At Carnegie Hall he conducted the world premiere of his \"Symphonia Domestica\" on 21 March 1904 with the Wetzler Symphony Orchestra. He also conducted several other works in collaboration with composer Hermann Hans Wetzler and his orchestra that year at Carnegie Hall, and also performed a concert of lieder with his wife. During this trip he was working intensively on composing his third opera, \"Salome\", based on Oscar Wilde's 1891 play \"Salome\". The work, which premiered in Dresden in 1905, became Strauss's greatest triumph in his career up to that point, and opera houses all over the world quickly began programing the opera.\nAfter \"Salome\", Strauss had a string of critically successful operas which he created with the librettist and poet Hugo von Hofmannsthal. These operas included \"Elektra\" (1909), \"Der Rosenkavalier\" (1911), \"Ariadne auf Naxos\" (1912, rev. 1916), \"Die Frau ohne Schatten\" (1919), \"Die \u00e4gyptische Helena\" (1928), and \"Arabella\" (1933). While all of these works remain part of the opera repertoire, his opera \"Der Rosenkavalier\" is generally considered his finest achievement. During this time he continued to work internationally as a celebrity conductor, and from 1919 to 1924 he was principal conductor of the Vienna State Opera. \nIn 1920, he co-founded the Salzburg Festival with Max Reinhardt and the set designer Alfred Rolle. In 1924 Strauss's opera \"Intermezzo\" premiered at the Dresden Semperoper with both the music and libretto by Strauss. For this opera, Strauss wanted to move away from post-Wagnerian metaphysics which had been the philosophical framework of Hofmannsthal's libretti, and instead embrace a modern domestic comedy to Hofmannsthal's chagrin. The work proved to be a success.\nAt the outbreak of World War I Strauss was invited to sign the Manifesto of German artists and intellectuals supporting the German role in the conflict. Several colleagues, including Max Reinhardt, signed, but Strauss refused, and his response was recorded with approval by the French critic Romain Rolland in his diary for October 1914: \"Declarations about war and politics are not fitting for an artist, who must give his attention to his creations and his works.\"\nIn 1924 Strauss's son Franz married Alice von Grab-Hermannsw\u00f6rth, daughter of a Jewish industrialist, in a Roman Catholic ceremony. Franz and Alice had two sons, Richard and Christian.\nNazi Germany (1933\u20131945).\n\"Reichsmusikkammer\".\nIn March 1933, when Strauss was 68, Adolf Hitler rose to power. Strauss never joined the Nazi Party, and studiously avoided Nazi forms of greeting. For reasons of expediency, however, he was initially drawn into cooperating with the early Nazi regime in the hope that Hitler\u2014an ardent Wagnerian and music lover who had admired Strauss's work since viewing \"Salome\" in 1907\u2014would promote German art and culture. Strauss's need to protect his Jewish daughter-in-law and Jewish grandchildren also motivated his behavior, in addition to his determination to preserve and conduct the music of banned composers such as Gustav Mahler and Claude Debussy.\nIn 1933, Strauss wrote in his private notebook:\nI consider the Streicher\u2013Goebbels Jew-baiting as a disgrace to German honour, as evidence of incompetence\u2014the basest weapon of untalented, lazy mediocrity against a higher intelligence and greater talent.\nMeanwhile, far from being an admirer of Strauss's work, Joseph Goebbels maintained expedient cordiality with Strauss only for a period. Goebbels wrote in his diary:\nUnfortunately we still need him, but one day we shall have our own music and then we shall have no further need of this decadent neurotic.\nNevertheless, because of Strauss's international eminence, in November 1933 he was appointed to the post of president of the newly founded \"Reichsmusikkammer\", the Reich Music Chamber. Strauss, who had lived through numerous political regimes and had no interest in politics, decided to accept the position but to remain apolitical, a decision which would eventually become untenable. He wrote to his family, \"I made music under the Kaiser, and under Ebert. I'll survive under this one as well.\" He later wrote in his journal:\nIn November 1933, the minister Goebbels nominated me president of the \"Reichsmusikkammer\" without obtaining my prior agreement. I was not consulted. I accepted this honorary office because I hoped that I would be able to do some good and prevent worse misfortunes, if from now onwards German musical life were going to be, as it was said, \"reorganized\" by amateurs and ignorant place-seekers.\nStrauss privately scorned Goebbels and called him \"a pipsqueak\". However, in 1933 he dedicated an orchestral song, \"Das B\u00e4chlein\" (\"The Little Brook\"), to Goebbels, to gain his cooperation in extending German music copyright laws from 30 years to 50 years. Also in 1933, he replaced Arturo Toscanini as director of the Bayreuth Festival after Toscanini had resigned in protest against the Nazi regime. That year, he also replaced Jewish conductor Bruno Walter after Walter was forced by Goebbels to withdraw from a concert at the Berlin Philharmonic.\nStrauss attempted to ignore Nazi bans on performances of works by Debussy, Mahler, and Mendelssohn. He also continued to work on a comic opera, \"Die schweigsame Frau\", with his Jewish friend and librettist Stefan Zweig. When the opera was premiered in Dresden in 1935, Strauss insisted that Zweig's name appear on the theatrical billing, much to the ire of the Nazi regime. Hitler and Goebbels avoided attending the opera, and it was halted after three performances and subsequently banned by the Third Reich.\nOn 17 June 1935, Strauss wrote a letter to Stefan Zweig, in which he stated:\nDo you believe I am ever, in any of my actions, guided by the thought that I am 'German'? Do you suppose Mozart was consciously 'Aryan' when he composed? I recognise only two types of people: those who have talent and those who have none.\nThis letter to Zweig was intercepted by the Gestapo and sent to Hitler. Strauss was subsequently dismissed from his post as \"Reichsmusikkammer\" president in 1935. The 1936 Berlin Summer Olympics nevertheless used Strauss's \"Olympische Hymne\", which he had composed in 1934. In 1940, Strauss was chosen by Goebbels to compose the \"Japanese Festival Music\" to celebrate the 2600th anniversity of the founding of the Japanese Empire. \nStrauss's seeming relationship with the Nazis in the 1930s attracted criticism from some noted musicians, including Toscanini, who in 1933 had said, \"To Strauss the composer I take off my hat; to Strauss the man I put it back on again\", when Strauss had accepted the presidency of the \"Reichsmusikkammer\". Much of Strauss's motivation in his conduct during the Third Reich was, however, to protect his Jewish daughter-in-law Alice and his Jewish grandchildren from persecution. Both of his grandsons were bullied at school, but Strauss used his considerable influence to prevent the boys or their mother being sent to concentration camps.\nLate operas and family tragedy.\nFrustrated that he could no longer work with Zweig as his librettist, Strauss turned to Joseph Gregor, a Viennese theatre historian, at Gregor's request. The first opera they worked on together was \"Daphne\", but it ultimately became the second of their operas to be premiered. Their first work to be staged was in 1938, when the entire nation was preparing for war, they presented \"Friedenstag\" (\"Peace Day\"), a one-act opera set in a besieged fortress during the Thirty Years' War. The work is essentially a hymn to peace and a thinly veiled criticism of the Third Reich. With its contrasts between freedom and enslavement, war and peace, light and dark, this work has a close affinity with Beethoven's \"Fidelio\". Productions of the opera ceased shortly after the outbreak of war in 1939. The two men collaborated on two more operas which proved to be Strauss's last: \"Die Liebe der Danae\" (1940) and \"Capriccio\" (1942).\nWhen his Jewish daughter-in-law Alice was placed under house arrest in Garmisch-Partenkirchen in 1938, Strauss used his connections in Berlin, including opera-house General Intendant Heinz Tietjen, to secure her safety. He drove to the Theresienstadt concentration camp to argue, albeit unsuccessfully, for the release of Alice's grandmother, Paula Neumann. In the end, Neumann and 25 other relatives were murdered in the camps. While Alice's mother, Marie von Grab, was safe in Lucerne, Switzerland, Strauss also wrote several letters to the SS pleading for the release of her children who were also held in camps; his letters were ignored.\nIn 1942, Strauss moved with his family back to Vienna, where Alice and her children could be protected by Baldur von Schirach, the Gauleiter of Vienna. However, Strauss was unable to protect his Jewish relatives completely; in early 1944, while Strauss was away, Alice and her son Franz were abducted by the Gestapo and imprisoned for two nights. Strauss's personal intervention at this point saved them, and he was able to take them back to Garmisch, where the two remained under house arrest until the end of the war.\n\"Metamorphosen\" and end of the war.\nStrauss completed the composition of \"Metamorphosen\", a work for 23 solo strings, in 1945. The title and inspiration for the work comes from a profoundly self-examining poem by Goethe, which Strauss had considered setting as a choral work. Generally regarded as one of the masterpieces of the string repertoire, \"Metamorphosen\" contains Strauss's most sustained outpouring of tragic emotion. Conceived and written during the blackest days of World War II, the piece expresses Strauss's mourning of, among other things, the destruction of German culture\u2014including the bombing of every great opera house in the nation. At the end of the war, Strauss wrote in his private diary:\nThe most terrible period of human history is at an end, the twelve year reign of bestiality, ignorance and anti-culture under the greatest criminals, during which Germany's 2000 years of cultural evolution met its doom.\nIn April 1945, American soldiers occupying Germany at the end of the war arrived at Strauss's Garmisch estate. As Strauss descended the staircase, he announced to Lieutenant Milton Weiss of the U.S. Army, \"I am Richard Strauss, the composer of \"Rosenkavalier\" and \"Salome\".\" Lt. Weiss, who was also a musician, nodded in recognition. An \"Off Limits\" sign was subsequently placed on the lawn to protect Strauss. The American oboist John de Lancie, who knew Strauss's orchestral writing for oboe thoroughly, was in the army unit, and asked Strauss to compose an oboe concerto. Initially dismissive of the idea, Strauss completed this late work, his \"Oboe Concerto\", before the end of the year.\n\"Indian Summer\", final years and death (1942\u20131949).\nThe metaphor \"Indian summer\" has been used by journalists, biographers, and music critics, notably Norman Del Mar in 1964, to describe Strauss's late creative upsurge from 1942 to the end of his life. The events of World War II seemed to bring the composer \u2013 who had grown old, tired, and a little jaded \u2013 into focus. The major works of the last years of Strauss's life, written in his late 70s and 80s, include, among others, his \"Horn Concerto No. 2\", \"Metamorphosen\", his \"Oboe Concerto\", his \"Duet concertino for clarinet and bassoon\", and his \"Four Last Songs\".\nIn June 1945, after finishing \"Metamorphosen\", Strauss completed his Sonatina No 2 in E-flat major (\"Fr\u00f6hliche Werkstatt\") for 16 wind instruments, which he had begun in early 1944; at the end of the score he wrote \"To the Manes of the divine Mozart at the end of a life full of thankfulness\". \nLike those of most Germans, Strauss's bank accounts were frozen, and many of his assets seized by American forces. Now elderly and with very few resources left, Strauss and his wife left Germany for Switzerland in October 1945 where they settled in a hotel outside Zurich, and later at the Montreux Palace hotel in Montreux. There they met the Swiss music critic Willy Schuh, who became Strauss's biographer. Short of money, in 1947 Strauss embarked on his last international tour, a three-week trip to London, in which he conducted several of his tone poems and excerpts of his operas, and was present during a complete staging of \"Elektra\" by the BBC. The trip was a critical success and provided him and his wife with some much-needed money.\nFrom May to September 1948, just before his death, Strauss composed the \"Four Last Songs\", which deal with the subject of dying. The last one, \"Im Abendrot\" (At Sunset), ends with the line \"Is this perhaps death?\" The question is not answered in words, but instead Strauss quotes the \"transfiguration theme\" from his earlier tone poem \"Death and Transfiguration\" \u2014 meant to symbolize the transfiguration and fulfilment of the soul after death. In June 1948, he was cleared of any wrong-doing by a denazification tribunal in Munich. That same month he orchestrated \"Ruhe, meine Seele!\", a song that he had originally composed in 1894.\nIn December 1948, Strauss was hospitalized for several weeks after undergoing bladder surgery. His health rapidly deteriorated after that, and he conducted his last performance, the end of Act 2 of \"Der Rosenkavalier\" at the Prinzregententheater in Munich, during celebrations of his 85th birthday on 10 June 1949. On 15 August, he suffered a heart attack and he quietly died of kidney failure in his sleep shortly after 2 PM on 8 September 1949, in Garmisch-Partenkirchen, West Germany. From his death-bed, he remarked to his daughter-in-law Alice, \"dying is just as I composed it in \"Tod und Verkl\u00e4rung\"\". \nGeorg Solti, who had arranged Strauss's 85th birthday celebration, also directed an orchestra during Strauss's burial. The conductor later described how, during the singing of the famous trio from \"Rosenkavalier\", \"each singer broke down in tears and dropped out of the ensemble, but they recovered themselves and we all ended together\". Strauss's wife, Pauline de Ahna, died eight months later on 13 May 1950, at the age of 88. \nStrauss himself declared in 1947 with characteristic self-deprecation: \"I may not be a first-rate composer, but I am a first-class second-rate composer.\" The Canadian pianist Glenn Gould described Strauss in 1962 as \"the greatest musical figure who has lived in this century\".\nMusic.\nSolo and chamber works.\nSome of Strauss's first compositions were solo instrumental and chamber works. These pieces include early compositions for piano solo in a conservative harmonic style, many of which are lost: two piano trios (1877 and 1878), a string quartet (1881), a piano sonata (1882), a cello sonata (1883), a piano quartet (1885), a violin sonata (1888), as well as a serenade (1882) and a longer suite (1884), both scored for double wind quintet plus two additional horns and contrabassoon.\nAfter 1890, Strauss composed very infrequently for chamber groups, his energies being almost completely absorbed with large-scale orchestral works and operas. Four of his chamber pieces are actually arrangements of portions of his operas, including the \"Daphne-Etude\" for solo violin and the String Sextet, which is the overture to his final opera \"Capriccio\". His last independent chamber work, an Allegretto in E major for violin and piano, dates from 1948.\nHe also composed two large-scale works for wind ensemble during this period: Sonatina No. 1 \"From an Invalid's Workshop\" (1943) and Sonatina No. 2 \"Happy Workshop\" (1946)\u2014both scored for double wind quintet plus two additional horns, a third clarinet in C, bassett horn, bass clarinet, and contrabassoon.\nTone poems and other orchestral works.\nStrauss wrote two early symphonies: Symphony No. 1 (1880) and Symphony No. 2 (1884). However, Strauss's style began to truly develop and change when, in 1885, he met Alexander Ritter, a noted composer and violinist, and the husband of one of Richard Wagner's nieces. It was Ritter who persuaded Strauss to abandon the conservative style of his youth and begin writing tone poems. He also introduced Strauss to the essays of Wagner and the writings of Arthur Schopenhauer. Strauss went on to conduct one of Ritter's operas, and at Strauss's request Ritter later wrote a poem describing the events depicted in Strauss's tone poem \"Death and Transfiguration\".\nThe new influences from Ritter resulted in what is widely regarded as Strauss's first piece to show his mature personality, the tone poem \"Don Juan\" (1888), which displays a new kind of virtuosity in its bravura orchestral manner. Strauss went on to write a series of increasingly ambitious tone poems: \"Death and Transfiguration\" (1889), \"Till Eulenspiegel's Merry Pranks\" (1895), \"Also sprach Zarathustra\" (1896), \"Don Quixote\" (1897), \"Ein Heldenleben\" (1898), \"Symphonia Domestica\" (1903) and \"An Alpine Symphony\" (1911\u20131915). One commentator has observed of these works that \"no orchestra could exist without his tone poems, written to celebrate the glories of the post-Wagnerian symphony orchestra.\"\nJames Hepokoski notes a shift in Strauss's technique in the tone poems, occurring between 1892 and 1893. It was after this point that Strauss rejected the philosophy of Schopenhauer and began more forcefully critiquing the institution of the symphony and the symphonic poem, thereby differentiating the second cycle of tone poems from the first.\nConcertos.\nStrauss's output of works for solo instrument or instruments with orchestra was fairly extensive. The most famous include two concertos for horn, which are still part of the standard repertoire of most horn soloists\u2014Horn Concerto No. 1 (1883) and Horn Concerto No. 2 (1942); the Romanze for cello and orchestra (1883); a Violin Concerto in D minor (1882); the \"Burleske\" for piano and orchestra (1885, revised 1889); the tone poem \"Don Quixote\" for cello, viola and orchestra (1897); the well-known late Oboe Concerto in D major (1945); and the Duet concertino for clarinet and bassoon with string orchestra, which was one of his last works (1948).\nOpera.\nAround the end of the 19th century, Strauss turned his attention to opera. His first two attempts in the genre, \"Guntram\" (1894) and \"Feuersnot\" (1901), were controversial works; \"Guntram\" was the first significant critical failure of Strauss's career, and \"Feuersnot\" was considered obscene by some critics.\nIn 1905, Strauss produced \"Salome\", a somewhat dissonant modernist opera based on the play by Oscar Wilde, which produced a passionate reaction from audiences. The premiere was a major success, with the artists taking more than 38 curtain calls. Many later performances of the opera were also successful, not only with the general public but also with Strauss's peers: Maurice Ravel said that \"Salome\" was \"stupendous\"; Gustav Mahler described it as \"a live volcano, a subterranean fire\". Strauss reputedly financed his house in Garmisch-Partenkirchen completely from the revenues generated by the opera. As with the later \"Elektra\", \"Salome\" features an extremely taxing lead soprano role. Strauss often remarked that he preferred writing for the female voice, which is apparent in these two sister operas\u2014the male parts are almost entirely smaller roles, included only to supplement the soprano's performance.\nStrauss's next opera was \"Elektra\" (1909), which took his use of dissonance even further, in particular with the Elektra chord. \"Elektra\" was also the first opera in which Strauss collaborated with the poet Hugo von Hofmannsthal as his librettist. The two subsequently worked together on numerous occasions. For his later works with Hofmannsthal, Strauss moderated his harmonic language: he used a more lush, melodic late-Romantic style based on Wagnerian chromatic harmonies that he had used in his tone poems, with much less dissonance, and exhibiting immense virtuosity in orchestral writing and tone color. This resulted in operas such as \"Der Rosenkavalier\" (1911) having great public success. Strauss continued to produce operas at regular intervals until 1942. With Hofmannsthal he created \"Ariadne auf Naxos\" (1912), \"Die Frau ohne Schatten\" (1919), \"Die \u00e4gyptische Helena\" (1928), and \"Arabella\" (1933). For \"Intermezzo\" (1924) Strauss provided his own libretto. \"Die schweigsame Frau\" (1935) was composed with Stefan Zweig as librettist; \"Friedenstag\" (1935\u201336) and \"Daphne\" (1937) both had a libretto by Joseph Gregor and Stefan Zweig; and \"Die Liebe der Danae\" (1940) was with Joseph Gregor. Strauss's final opera, \"Capriccio\" (1942), had a libretto by Clemens Krauss, although the genesis for it came from Stefan Zweig and Joseph Gregor.\nLieder.\nStrauss was a prolific composer of lieder. He often composed them with the voice of his wife in mind. His lieder were written for voice and piano, and he orchestrated several of them after the fact. In 1894\u20131895, around the age of 30, he published several well-known songs including \"Ruhe, meine Seele!\", \"C\u00e4cilie\", \"Morgen!\", \"Heimliche Aufforderung\", and \"Traum durch die D\u00e4mmerung\". In 1918, after a long hiatus devoted to opera, he wrote \"Sechs Lieder\", Op. 68, also called \"Brentano Lieder\". He completed his works in the genre in 1948 with \"Four Last Songs\" for soprano and orchestra. He reportedly composed these with Kirsten Flagstad in mind and she gave the first performance, which was recorded. Strauss's songs have always been popular with audiences and performers, and are generally considered by musicologists\u2014along with many of his other compositions\u2014to be masterpieces.\nLegacy.\nTIME magazine suggested in 1927 that he wrote music to test how much \"cacophony, dissonance, exaggeration, and clowning\" his audiences would applaud. Early in Strauss's career, eminent musicologist Hugo Riemann reflected \"His last works only too clearly reveal his determination to make a sensation at all costs\".\nUntil the 1980s, Strauss was regarded by some post-modern musicologists as a conservative, backward-looking composer, but re-examination of and new research on the composer has re-evaluated his place as that of a modernist, albeit one who still utilized and sometimes revered tonality and lush orchestration. Strauss is noted for his pioneering subtleties of orchestration, combined with an advanced harmonic style; when he first played Strauss at a university production of \"Ariadne auf Naxos\", the conductor Mark Elder \"was flabbergasted. I had no idea music could do the things he was doing with harmony and melody.\"\nStrauss's music had a considerable influence on composers at the start of the 20th century. B\u00e9la Bart\u00f3k heard \"Also sprach Zarathustra\" in 1902, and later said that the work \"contained the seeds for a new life\"; a Straussian influence is clearly present in his works of that period, including his First String Quartet, \"Kossuth\", and \"Bluebeard's Castle\". Similarly, Strauss had a huge impact on Arnold Sch\u00f6nberg and Anton Webern. Karol Szymanowski was also greatly influenced by Strauss, reflected in such pieces as his \"Concert Overture\" and his first and second symphonies, and his opera \"Hagith\" which was modeled after \"Salome\". English composers were also influenced by Strauss, from Edward Elgar in his concert overture \"In the South (Alassio)\" and other works to Benjamin Britten in his opera writing. Many contemporary composers recognise a debt to Strauss, including John Adams and John Corigliano.\nStrauss's musical style played a major role in the development of film music in the middle of the 20th century. The style of his musical depictions of character (Don Juan, Till Eulenspiegel, the Hero) and emotions found their way into the lexicon of film music. Film music historian Timothy Schuerer wrote, \"The elements of post (late) romantic music that had greatest impact on scoring are its lush sound, expanded harmonic language, chromaticism, use of program music and use of Leitmotifs. Hollywood composers found the post-romantic idiom compatible with their efforts in scoring film\". Max Steiner and Erich Korngold came from the same musical world as Strauss and were quite naturally drawn to write in his style. As film historian Roy Prendergast wrote, \"When confronted with the kind of dramatic problem films presented to them, Steiner, Korngold and Newman ... looked to Wagner, Puccini, Verdi and Strauss for the answers to dramatic film scoring.\" Later, the opening to \"Also sprach Zarathustra\" became one of the best-known pieces of film music when Stanley Kubrick used it in his 1968 movie \"\". The film music of John Williams has continued the Strauss influence, in scores for mainstream hits such as \"Superman\" and \"Star Wars\".\nStrauss has always been popular with audiences in the concert hall and continues to be so. He has consistently been in the top 10 composers most performed by symphony orchestras in the US and Canada over the period 2002\u20132010. He is also in the top 5 of 20th-century composers (born after 1860) in terms of the number of currently available recordings of his works.\nRecordings as a conductor.\nStrauss, as conductor, made a large number of recordings, both of his own music as well as music by German and Austrian composers. His 1929 performances of \"Till Eulenspiegel's Merry Pranks\" and \"Don Juan\" with the Berlin State Opera Orchestra have long been considered the best of his early electrical recordings. In the first complete performance of his \"An Alpine Symphony\", made in 1941 and later released by EMI, Strauss used the full complement of percussion instruments required in this work.\nKoch Legacy has also released Strauss's recordings of overtures by Gluck, Carl Maria von Weber, Peter Cornelius, and Wagner. The preference for German and Austrian composers in Germany in the 1920s through the 1940s was typical of the German nationalism that existed after World War I. Strauss clearly capitalized on national pride for the great German-speaking composers.\nThere were many other recordings, including some taken from radio broadcasts and concerts during the 1930s and early 1940s. The sheer volume of recorded performances would undoubtedly yield some definitive performances from a very capable and rather forward-looking conductor.\nIn 1944, Strauss celebrated his 80th birthday and conducted the Vienna Philharmonic in recordings of his own major orchestral works, as well as his seldom-heard \"Schlagobers\" (\"Whipped Cream\") ballet music. Some find more feeling in these performances than in Strauss's earlier recordings, which were recorded on the Magnetophon tape recording equipment. Vanguard Records later issued the recordings on LPs. Some of these recordings have been reissued on CD by Preiser. The last recording made by Strauss was on 19 October 1947 live at the Royal Albert Hall in London, where he conducted the Philharmonia Orchestra in his \"Burleske\" for piano and orchestra (Alfred Blumen piano), \"Don Juan\" and \"Sinfonia Domestica\".\nStrauss also made live-recording player piano music rolls for the Hupfeld system and in 1906 ten recordings for the reproducing piano Welte-Mignon all of which survive today. Strauss was also the composer of the music on the first CD to be commercially released: Deutsche Grammophon's 1983 release of their 1980 recording of Herbert von Karajan conducting the \"Alpine Symphony\".\nPierre Boulez said that Strauss the conductor was \"a complete master of his trade\". Music critic Harold C. Schonberg writes that, while Strauss was a very fine conductor, he often put scant effort into his recordings. Schonberg focused primarily on Strauss's recordings of Mozart's Symphony No. 40 and Beethoven's Symphony No. 7, as well as noting that Strauss played a breakneck version of Beethoven's 9th Symphony in about 45 minutes. Concerning Beethoven's 7th Symphony, Schonberg wrote, \"There is almost never a \"ritard\" or a change in expression or nuance. The slow movement is almost as fast as the following \"vivace\"; and the last movement, with a big cut in it, is finished in 4 minutes, 25 seconds. (It should run between 7 and 8 minutes.)\" He also complained that the Mozart symphony had \"no force, no charm, no inflection, with a metronomic rigidity\".\nPeter Gutmann's 1994 review for \"ClassicalNotes.com\" says the performances of the Beethoven 5th and 7th symphonies, as well as Mozart's last three symphonies, are actually quite good, even if they are sometimes unconventional. Gutmann wrote:\nIt is true, as the critics suggest, that the readings forego overt emotion, but what emerges instead is a solid sense of structure, letting the music speak convincingly for itself. It is also true that Strauss's tempos are generally swift, but this, too, contributes to the structural cohesion and in any event is fully in keeping with our modern outlook in which speed is a virtue and attention spans are defined more by MTV clips and news sound bites than by evenings at the opera and thousand page novels.\nHonors.\nHis honors included:\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCited sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;"}
{"id": "67483", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=67483", "title": "Nepal/Communications", "text": ""}
{"id": "67484", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=67484", "title": "Nepal/Transportation", "text": ""}
{"id": "67485", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=67485", "title": "Nepal/Military", "text": ""}
{"id": "67486", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=67486", "title": "Nepal/Transnational issues", "text": ""}
{"id": "67487", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=67487", "title": "Foreign Relations of Nepal", "text": ""}
{"id": "67488", "revid": "96897", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=67488", "title": "Well drilling", "text": "Method of extracting a natural resource\nWell drilling is the process of drilling a hole in the ground for the extraction of a natural resource such as ground water, brine, natural gas, or petroleum, for the injection of a fluid from surface to a subsurface reservoir or for subsurface formations evaluation or monitoring. Drilling for the exploration of the nature of the material underground (for instance in search of metallic ore) is best described as \"borehole\" drilling.\nThe earliest wells were water wells, shallow pits dug by hand in regions where the water table approached the surface, usually with masonry or wooden walls lining the interior to prevent collapse. Modern drilling techniques utilize long drill shafts, producing holes much narrower and deeper than could be produced by digging.\nWell drilling can be done either manually or mechanically and the nature of required equipment varies from extremely simple and cheap to very sophisticated.\nIn many jurisdictions, drilling activities are regulated to protect groundwater sources from contamination.\nManaged Pressure Drilling (MPD) is defined by the International Association of Drilling Contractors (IADC) as \u201can adaptive drilling process used to more precisely control the annular pressure profile throughout the wellbore.\" The objectives of MPD are \u201cto ascertain the downhole pressure environment limits and to manage the annular hydraulic pressure profile accordingly.\"\nHistory.\nEarliest Record.\nThe earliest record of well drilling dates from 347 AD in China. Petroleum was used in ancient China for \"lighting, as a lubricant for cart axles and the bearings of water-powered drop hammers, as a source of carbon for inksticks, and as a medical remedy for sores on humans and mange in animals.\" In ancient China, deep well drilling machines were in the forefront of brine well production by the 1st century BC. The ancient Chinese developed advanced sinking wells and were the first civilization to use a well-drilling machine and to use bamboo well casings to keep the holes open.\nModern era.\nIn the modern era, the first roller cone patent was for the rotary rock bit and was issued to American businessman and inventor Howard Hughes Sr. in 1909. It consisted of two interlocking cones. American businessman Walter Benona Sharp worked very closely with Hughes in developing the rock bit. The success of this bit led to the founding of the Sharp-Hughes Tool Company. In 1933 two Hughes engineers, one of whom was Ralph Neuhaus, invented the tricone bit, which has three cones. The Hughes patent for the tricone bit lasted until 1951, after which other companies made similar bits. However, Hughes still held 40% of the world's drill bit market in 2000. The superior wear performance of polycrystalline diamond compact (PDC) bits gradually eroded the dominance of roller cone bits and early in this century PDC drill bit revenues overtook those of roller cone bits. The technology of both bit types has advanced significantly to provide improved durability and rate of penetration of the rock. This has been driven by the economics of the industry, and by the change from the empirical approach of Hughes in the 1930s, to modern day domain Finite Element codes for both the hydraulic and cutter placement software.\nDrill bits in mechanical drilling.\nThe factors affecting drill bit selection include the type of geology and the capabilities of the rig. Due to the high number of wells that have been drilled, information from an adjacent well is most often used to make the appropriate selection. Two different types of drill bits exist: fixed cutter and roller cone. A fixed cutter bit is one where there are no moving parts, but drilling occurs due to shearing, scraping or abrasion of the rock. Fixed cutter bits can be either polycrystalline diamond compact (PDC) or grit hot-pressed inserts (GHI) or natural diamond. Roller cone bits can be either tungsten carbide inserts (TCI) for harder formations or milled tooth (MT) for softer rock. The manufacturing process and composites used in each type of drill bit make them ideal for specific drilling situations. Additional enhancements can be made to any bit to increase the effectiveness for almost any drilling situation.\nA major factor in drill bit selection is the type of formation to be drilled. The effectiveness of a drill bit varies by formation type. There are three types of formations: soft, medium and hard. A soft formation includes unconsolidated sands, clays, soft limestones, red beds and shale. Medium formations include dolomites, limestones, and hard shale. Hard formations include hard shale, calcites, mudstones, cherty lime stones and hard and abrasive formations.\nUntil 2006, market share was divided primarily among Hughes Christensen, Security-DBS (Halliburton Drill Bits and Services), Smith Bits (a subsidiary of Schlumberger), and ReedHycalog (acquired by National Oilwell Varco in 2008).\nBy 2014, Ulterra (then a subsidiary of ESCO Corp.) and Varel International (a subsidiary of Swedish engineering group Sandvik) had together gained nearly 30% of the U.S. bit market and eroded the historical dominance of the Smith, Halliburton, and Baker Hughes. By 2018, Schlumberger, which acquired Smith in 2010, became dominant in international markets thanks to packaging drill bits with their other tools and services, while Ulterra (owned by private equity firms Blackstone Energy Partners and American Securities) continued a Stark growth trend, becoming the market share leader in drill bits in the US according to Spears Research and Kimberlite Research.\nEvaluation of the dull bit grading is done by a uniform system promoted by the International Association of Drilling Contractors (IADC). See Society of Petroleum Engineers / IADC Papers SPE 23938 &amp; 23940. See also http://\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nQ* https:// \"Popular Science\", June 1942, pp.\u00a094\u201395"}
{"id": "67490", "revid": "1830371", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=67490", "title": "Unbinillium", "text": ""}
{"id": "67491", "revid": "34997143", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=67491", "title": "Unbinilium", "text": "element with atomic number 120 (Ubn)\nUnbinilium, also known as eka-radium or element 120, is a hypothetical chemical element; it has symbol Ubn and atomic number 120. \"Unbinilium\" and \"Ubn\" are the temporary systematic IUPAC name and symbol, which are used until the element is discovered, confirmed, and a permanent name is decided upon. In the periodic table of the elements, it is expected to be an s-block element, an alkaline earth metal, and the second element in the eighth period. It has attracted attention because of some predictions that it may be in the island of stability.\nUnbinilium has not yet been synthesized, despite multiple attempts from German and Russian teams. Experimental evidence from these attempts shows that the period 8 elements would likely be far more difficult to synthesise than the previous known elements. New attempts by American, Russian, and Chinese teams to synthesize unbinilium are planned to begin in the mid-2020s; in particular, an attempt to synthesize the element was ongoing as of September 2025[ [update]], at Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory in the United States.\nUnbinilium's position as the seventh alkaline earth metal suggests that it would have similar properties to its lighter congeners; however, relativistic effects may cause some of its properties to differ from those expected from a straight application of periodic trends. For example, unbinilium is expected to be less reactive than barium and radium, be closer in behavior to strontium, and while it should show the characteristic +2 oxidation state of the alkaline earth metals, it is also predicted to show the +4 and +6 oxidation states, which are unknown in any other alkaline earth metal.\nHistory.\nElements 114 to 118 (flerovium through oganesson) were discovered in \"hot fusion\" reactions bombarding the actinides plutonium through californium with calcium-48, a quasi-stable neutron-rich isotope which could be used as a projectile to produce more neutron-rich isotopes of superheavy elements. This cannot easily be continued to elements 119 and 120, because it would require a target of the next actinides einsteinium and fermium. Tens of milligrams of these would be needed to create such targets, but only micrograms of einsteinium and picograms of fermium have so far been produced. More practical production of further superheavy elements would require bombarding actinides with projectiles heavier than 48Ca, but this is expected to be more difficult. Attempts to synthesize elements 119 and 120 push the limits of current technology, due to the decreasing cross sections of the production reactions and their probably short half-lives, expected to be on the order of microseconds.\nSynthesis attempts.\nPast.\nFollowing their success in obtaining oganesson by the reaction between 249Cf and 48Ca in 2006, the team at the Joint Institute for Nuclear Research (JINR) in Dubna started experiments in March\u2013April 2007 to attempt to create unbinilium with a 58Fe beam and a 244Pu target. The attempt was unsuccessful, and the Russian team planned to upgrade their facilities before attempting the reaction again.\nPu + Fe \u2192 Ubn* \u2192 no atoms\nIn April 2007, the team at the GSI Helmholtz Centre for Heavy Ion Research in Darmstadt, Germany attempted to create unbinilium using a 238U target and a 64Ni beam:\nU + Ni \u2192 Ubn* \u2192 no atoms\nNo atoms were detected. The GSI repeated the experiment with higher sensitivity in three separate runs in April\u2013May 2007, January\u2013March 2008, and September\u2013October 2008, all with negative results, reaching a cross section limit of 90 fb.\nIn 2011, after upgrading their equipment to allow the use of more radioactive targets, scientists at the GSI attempted the rather asymmetrical fusion reaction:\nCm + Cr \u2192 Ubn* \u2192 no atoms\nIt was expected that the change in reaction would quintuple the probability of synthesizing unbinilium, as the yield of such reactions is strongly dependent on their asymmetry. Although this reaction is less asymmetric than the 249Cf+50Ti reaction, it also creates more neutron-rich unbinilium isotopes that should receive increased stability from their proximity to the shell closure at \"N\" = 184. Three signals were observed in May 2011; a possible assignment to 299Ubn and its daughters was considered, but could not be confirmed, and a different analysis suggested that what was observed was simply a random sequence of events.\nIn August\u2013October 2011, a different team at the GSI using the TASCA facility tried a new, even more asymmetrical reaction:\nCf + Ti \u2192 Ubn* \u2192 no atoms\nBecause of its asymmetry, the reaction between 249Cf and 50Ti was predicted to be the most favorable practical reaction for synthesizing unbinilium, though it produces a less neutron-rich isotope of unbinilium than any other reaction studied. No unbinilium atoms were identified.\nThis reaction was investigated again in April to September 2012 at the GSI. This experiment used a 249Bk target and a 50Ti beam to produce element 119, but since 249Bk decays to 249Cf with a half-life of about 327\u00a0days, both elements 119 and 120 could be searched for simultaneously:\nBk + Ti \u2192 Uue* \u2192 no atoms\nCf + Ti \u2192 Ubn* \u2192 no atoms\nNeither element 119 nor element 120 was observed.\nPlanned.\nThe JINR's plans to investigate the 249Cf+50Ti reaction in their new facility were disrupted by the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine, after which collaboration between the JINR and other institutes completely ceased due to sanctions. Thus, 249Cf could no longer be used as a target, as it would have to be produced at the Oak Ridge National Laboratory (ORNL) in the United States. Instead, the 248Cm+54Cr reaction will be used. In 2023, the director of the JINR, Grigory Trubnikov, stated that he hoped that the experiments to synthesise element 120 will begin in 2025. In preparation for this, the JINR reported success in the 238U+54Cr reaction in late 2023, making a new isotope of livermorium, 288Lv. This was an unexpectedly good result; the aim had been to experimentally determine the cross-section of a reaction with 54Cr projectiles and prepare for the synthesis of element 120. It is the first successful reaction producing a superheavy element using an actinide target and a projectile heavier than 48Ca.\nThe team at the Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory (LBNL) in Berkeley, California, United States plans to use the 88-inch cyclotron to make new elements using 50Ti projectiles. (Such a plan had already been made before the Russian invasion of Ukraine, in response to theoretical predictions that an attempt to produce element 120 would be feasible.) First, the 244Pu+50Ti reaction was tested, successfully creating two atoms of 290Lv in 2024. Since this was successful, an attempt to make element 120 in the 249Cf+50Ti reaction was planned to begin in late 2025. The Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory (LLNL), which previously collaborated with the JINR, will collaborate with the LBNL on this project. By June 2025, updates were underway at the LBNL in preparation for the search for element 120, and by September, the search had begun.\nThe team at the Heavy Ion Research Facility in Lanzhou, which is operated by the Institute of Modern Physics (IMP) of the Chinese Academy of Sciences, also plans to synthesise elements 119 and 120. The reactions used will involve actinide targets (e.g. 243Am, 248Cm) and first-row transition metal projectiles (e.g. 50Ti, 51V, 54Cr, 55Mn).\nNaming.\nMendeleev's nomenclature for unnamed and undiscovered elements would call unbinilium \"eka-radium\". The 1979 IUPAC recommendations temporarily call it \"unbinilium\" (symbol \"Ubn\") until it is discovered, the discovery is confirmed and a permanent name chosen. Although the IUPAC systematic names are widely used in the chemical community on all levels, from chemistry classrooms to advanced textbooks, scientists who work theoretically or experimentally on superheavy elements typically call it \"element 120\", with the symbol \"E120\", \"(120)\" or \"120\".\nPredicted properties.\nNuclear stability and isotopes.\nThe stability of nuclei decreases greatly with the increase in atomic number after curium, element 96, whose half-life is four orders of magnitude longer than that of any currently known higher-numbered element. All isotopes with an atomic number above 101 undergo radioactive decay with half-lives of less than 30 hours. No elements with atomic numbers above 82 (after lead) have stable isotopes. Nevertheless, because of reasons not yet well understood, there is a slight increase of nuclear stability around atomic numbers 110\u2013114, which leads to the appearance of what is known in nuclear physics as the \"island of stability\". This concept, proposed by University of California professor Glenn Seaborg, explains why superheavy elements last longer than predicted.\nIsotopes of unbinilium are predicted to have alpha decay half-lives of the order of microseconds. In a quantum tunneling model with mass estimates from a macroscopic-microscopic model, the alpha-decay half-lives of several unbinilium isotopes (292\u2013304Ubn) have been predicted to be around 1\u201320 microseconds. Some heavier isotopes may be more stable; Fricke and Waber predicted 320Ubn to be the most stable unbinilium isotope in 1971. Since unbinilium is expected to decay via a cascade of alpha decays leading to spontaneous fission around copernicium, the total half-lives of unbinilium isotopes are also predicted to be measured in microseconds. This has consequences for the synthesis of unbinilium, as isotopes with half-lives below one microsecond would decay before reaching the detector. Nevertheless, new theoretical models show that the expected gap in energy between the proton orbitals 2f7/2 (filled at element 114) and 2f5/2 (filled at element 120) is smaller than expected, so that element 114 no longer appears to be a stable spherical closed nuclear shell, and this energy gap may increase the stability of elements 119 and 120. The next doubly magic nucleus is now expected to be around the spherical 306Ubb (element 122), but the expected low half-life and low production cross section of this nuclide makes its synthesis challenging.\nGiven that element 120 fills the 2f5/2 proton orbital, much attention has been given to the compound nucleus 302Ubn* and its properties. Several experiments have been performed between 2000 and 2008 at the Flerov Laboratory of Nuclear Reactions in Dubna studying the fission characteristics of the compound nucleus 302Ubn*. Two nuclear reactions have been used, namely 244Pu+58Fe and 238U+64Ni. The results have revealed how nuclei such as this fission predominantly by expelling closed shell nuclei such as 132Sn (\"Z\"\u00a0=\u00a050, \"N\"\u00a0=\u00a082). It was also found that the yield for the fusion-fission pathway was similar between 48Ca and 58Fe projectiles, suggesting a possible future use of 58Fe projectiles in superheavy element formation.\nIn 2008, the team at GANIL, France, described the results from a new technique which attempts to measure the fission half-life of a compound nucleus at high excitation energy, since the yields are significantly higher than from neutron evaporation channels. It is also a useful method for probing the effects of shell closures on the survivability of compound nuclei in the super-heavy region, which can indicate the exact position of the next proton shell (\"Z\"\u00a0=\u00a0114, 120, 124, or 126). The team studied the nuclear fusion reaction between uranium ions and a target of natural nickel:\nU + Ni \u2192 Ubn* \u2192 fission\nThe results indicated that nuclei of unbinilium were produced at high (\u224870\u00a0MeV) excitation energy which underwent fission with measurable half-lives just over 10\u221218 s. Although very short (indeed insufficient for the element to be considered by IUPAC to exist, because a compound nucleus has no internal structure and its nucleons have not been arranged into shells until it has survived for 10\u221214\u00a0s, when it forms an electronic cloud), the ability to measure such a process indicates a strong shell effect at \"Z\"\u00a0=\u00a0120. At lower excitation energy (see neutron evaporation), the effect of the shell will be enhanced and ground-state nuclei can be expected to have relatively long half-lives. This result could partially explain the relatively long half-life of 294Og measured in experiments at Dubna. Similar experiments have indicated a similar phenomenon at element 124 but not for flerovium, suggesting that the next proton shell does in fact lie beyond element 120. In September 2007, the team at RIKEN began a program utilizing 248Cm targets and have indicated future experiments to probe the possibility of 120 being the next proton magic number (and 184 being the next neutron magic number) using the aforementioned nuclear reactions to form 302Ubn*, as well as 248Cm+54Cr. They also planned to further chart the region by investigating the nearby compound nuclei 296Og*, 298Og*, 306Ubb*, and 308Ubb*.\nThe most likely isotopes of unbinilium to be synthesised in the near future are 295Ubn through 299Ubn, because they can be produced in the 3n and 4n channels of the 249\u2013251Cf+50Ti, 245Cm+54Cr, and 248Cm+54Cr reactions.\nAtomic and physical.\nBeing the second period 8 element, unbinilium is predicted to be an alkaline earth metal, below beryllium, magnesium, calcium, strontium, barium, and radium. Each of these elements has two valence electrons in the outermost s-orbital (valence electron configuration \"n\"s2), which is easily lost in chemical reactions to form the +2 oxidation state: thus the alkaline earth metals are rather reactive elements, with the exception of beryllium due to its small size. Unbinilium is predicted to continue the trend and have a valence electron configuration of 8s2. It is therefore expected to behave much like its lighter congeners; however, it is also predicted to differ from the lighter alkaline earth metals in some properties.\nThe main reason for the predicted differences between unbinilium and the other alkaline earth metals is the spin\u2013orbit (SO) interaction\u2014the mutual interaction between the electrons' motion and spin. The SO interaction is especially strong for the superheavy elements because their electrons move faster\u2014at velocities comparable to the speed of light\u2014than those in lighter atoms. In unbinilium atoms, it lowers the 7p and 8s electron energy levels, stabilizing the corresponding electrons, but two of the 7p electron energy levels are more stabilized than the other four. The effect is called subshell splitting, as it splits the 7p subshell into more-stabilized and the less-stabilized parts. Computational chemists understand the split as a change of the second (azimuthal) quantum number \"l\" from 1 to 1/2 and 3/2 for the more-stabilized and less-stabilized parts of the 7p subshell, respectively. Thus, the outer 8s electrons of unbinilium are stabilized and become harder to remove than expected, while the 7p3/2 electrons are correspondingly destabilized, perhaps allowing them to participate in chemical reactions. This stabilization of the outermost s-orbital (already significant in radium) is the key factor affecting unbinilium's chemistry, and causes all the trends for atomic and molecular properties of alkaline earth metals to reverse direction after barium.\nDue to the stabilization of its outer 8s electrons, unbinilium's first ionization energy\u2014the energy required to remove an electron from a neutral atom\u2014is predicted to be 6.0\u00a0eV, comparable to that of calcium. The electron of the hydrogen-like unbinilium atom\u2014oxidized so it has only one electron, Ubn119+\u2014is predicted to move so quickly that its mass is 2.05 times that of a non-moving electron, a feature coming from the relativistic effects. For comparison, the figure for hydrogen-like radium is 1.30 and the figure for hydrogen-like barium is 1.095. According to simple extrapolations of relativity laws, that indirectly indicates the contraction of the atomic radius to around 200\u00a0pm, very close to that of strontium (215\u00a0pm); the ionic radius of the Ubn2+ ion is also correspondingly lowered to 160\u00a0pm. The trend in electron affinity is also expected to reverse direction similarly at radium and unbinilium.\nUnbinilium should be a solid at room temperature, with melting point 680\u00a0\u00b0C: this continues the downward trend down the group, being lower than the value 700\u00a0\u00b0C for radium. The boiling point of unbinilium is expected to be around 1700\u00a0\u00b0C, which is lower than that of all the previous elements in the group (in particular, radium boils at 1737\u00a0\u00b0C), following the downward periodic trend. The density of unbinilium has been predicted to be 7\u00a0g/cm3, continuing the trend of increasing density down the group: the value for radium is 5.5\u00a0g/cm3.\nChemical.\nThe chemistry of unbinilium is predicted to be similar to that of the alkaline earth metals, but it would probably behave more like calcium or strontium than barium or radium. Like strontium, unbinilium should react vigorously with air to form an oxide (UbnO) and with water to form the hydroxide (Ubn(OH)2), which would be a strong base, and releasing hydrogen gas. It should also react with the halogens to form salts such as UbnCl2. While these reactions would be expected from periodic trends, their lowered intensity is somewhat unusual, as ignoring relativistic effects, periodic trends would predict unbinilium to be even more reactive than barium or radium. This lowered reactivity is due to the relativistic stabilization of unbinilium's valence electron, increasing unbinilium's first ionization energy and decreasing the metallic and ionic radii; this effect is already seen for radium. On the other hand, the ionic radius of the Ubn2+ ion is predicted to be larger than that of Sr2+, because the 7p orbitals are destabilized and are thus larger than the p-orbitals of the lower shells.\nUnbinilium may also show the +4 oxidation state, which is not seen in any other alkaline earth metal, in addition to the +2 oxidation state that is characteristic of the other alkaline earth metals and is also the main oxidation state of all the known alkaline earth metals: this is because of the destabilization and expansion of the 7p3/2 spinor, causing its outermost electrons to have a lower ionization energy than what would otherwise be expected. The +6 state involving all the 7p3/2 electrons has been suggested in a hexafluoride, UbnF6. The +1 state may also be isolable. Many unbinilium compounds are expected to have a large covalent character, due to the involvement of the 7p3/2 electrons in the bonding: this effect is also seen to a lesser extent in radium, which shows some 6s and 6p3/2 contribution to the bonding in radium fluoride (RaF2) and astatide (RaAt2), resulting in these compounds having more covalent character. The standard reduction potential of the Ubn2+/Ubn couple is predicted to be \u22122.9\u00a0V, which is almost exactly the same as that for the Sr2+/Sr couple of strontium (\u22122.899\u00a0V).\nIn the gas phase, the alkaline earth metals do not usually form covalently bonded diatomic molecules like the alkali metals do, since such molecules would have the same number of electrons in the bonding and antibonding orbitals and would have very low dissociation energies. Thus, the M\u2013M bonding in these molecules is predominantly through van der Waals forces. The metal\u2013metal bond lengths in these M2 molecules increase down the group from Ca2 to Ubn2. On the other hand, their metal\u2013metal bond-dissociation energies generally increase from Ca2 to Ba2 and then drop to Ubn2, which should be the most weakly bound of all the group 2 homodiatomic molecules. The cause of this trend is the increasing participation of the p3/2 and d electrons as well as the relativistically contracted s orbital. From these M2 dissociation energies, the enthalpy of sublimation (\u0394\"H\"sub) of unbinilium is predicted to be 150\u00a0kJ/mol.\nThe Ubn\u2013Au bond should be the weakest of all bonds between gold and an alkaline earth metal, but should still be stable. This gives extrapolated medium-sized adsorption enthalpies (\u2212\u0394\"H\"ads) of 172\u00a0kJ/mol on gold (the radium value should be 237\u00a0kJ/mol) and 50\u00a0kJ/mol on silver, the smallest of all the alkaline earth metals, that demonstrate that it would be feasible to study the chromatographic adsorption of unbinilium onto surfaces made of noble metals. The \u0394\"H\"sub and \u2212\u0394\"H\"ads values are correlated for the alkaline earth metals.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "67492", "revid": "196446", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=67492", "title": "Ununennium", "text": "element with atomic number 119 (Uue)\nUnunennium, also known as eka-francium or element 119, is a hypothetical chemical element; it has symbol Uue and atomic number 119. \"Ununennium\" and \"Uue\" are the temporary systematic IUPAC name and symbol respectively, which are used until the element has been discovered, confirmed, and a permanent name is decided upon. In the periodic table of the elements, it is expected to be an s-block element, an alkali metal, and the first element in the eighth period. It is the lightest element that has not yet been synthesized.\nAn attempt to synthesize the element has been ongoing since 2018 in RIKEN in Japan. The Joint Institute for Nuclear Research in Dubna, Russia, plans to make an attempt at some point in the future, but a precise date has not been released to the public. The Heavy Ion Research Facility in Lanzhou, China (HIRFL) also plans to make an attempt. Theoretical and experimental evidence has shown that the synthesis of ununennium will likely be far more difficult than that of the previous elements.\nUnunennium's position as the seventh alkali metal suggests that it would have similar properties to its lighter congeners. However, relativistic effects may cause some of its properties to differ from those expected from a straight application of periodic trends. For example, ununennium is expected to be less reactive than caesium and francium and closer in behavior to potassium or rubidium, and while it should show the characteristic +1 oxidation state of the alkali metals, it is also predicted to show the +3 and +5 oxidation states, which are unknown in any other alkali metal.\nHistory.\nSynthesis attempts.\nElements 114 to 118 (flerovium through oganesson) were discovered in \"hot fusion\" reactions at the Joint Institute for Nuclear Research (JINR) in Dubna, Russia. This involved bombarding the actinides plutonium through californium with calcium-48, a quasi-stable neutron-rich isotope which could be used as a projectile to produce more neutron-rich isotopes of superheavy elements. (The term \"hot\" refers to the high excitation energy of the resulting compound nucleus.) This cannot easily be continued to element 119, because it would require a target of the next actinide einsteinium. Tens of milligrams of einsteinium would be needed for a reasonable chance of success, but only micrograms have so far been produced. An attempt to make element 119 from calcium-48 and less than a microgram of einsteinium was made in 1985 at the superHILAC accelerator at Berkeley, California, but did not succeed.\nEs + Ca \u2192 Uue* \u2192 no atoms\nMore practical production of further superheavy elements requires projectiles heavier than 48Ca, but this makes the reaction more symmetric and gives it a smaller chance of success. Attempts to synthesize element 119 push the limits of current technology, due to the decreasing cross sections of the production reactions and the probably short half-lives of produced isotopes, expected to be on the order of microseconds.\nFrom April to September 2012, an attempt to synthesize 295Uue and 296Uue was made by bombarding a target of berkelium-249 with titanium-50 at the GSI Helmholtz Centre for Heavy Ion Research in Darmstadt, Germany. This reaction between 249Bk and 50Ti was predicted to be the most favorable practical reaction for formation of ununennium, as it is the most asymmetric reaction available. Moreover, as berkelium-249 decays to californium-249 (the next element) with a short half-life of 327\u00a0days, this allowed elements 119 and 120 to be searched for simultaneously. Due to the predicted short half-lives, the GSI team used new \"fast\" electronics capable of registering decay events within microseconds.\nBk + Ti \u2192 Uue* \u2192 no atoms\nCf + Ti \u2192 Ubn* \u2192 no atoms\nNeither element 119 nor element 120 was observed. The experiment was originally planned to continue to November 2012, but was stopped early to make use of the 249Bk target to confirm the synthesis of tennessine (thus changing the projectile to 48Ca).\nThe team at RIKEN in Wak\u014d, Japan began bombarding curium-248 targets with a vanadium-51 beam in January 2018 to search for element 119. Curium was chosen as a target, rather than heavier berkelium or californium, as these heavier targets are difficult to prepare. The 248Cm targets were provided by Oak Ridge National Laboratory. RIKEN developed a high-intensity vanadium beam. The experiment began at a cyclotron while RIKEN upgraded its linear accelerators; the upgrade was completed in 2020. Bombardment may be continued with both machines until the first event is observed. The RIKEN team's efforts are being financed by the Emperor of Japan.\nCm + V \u2192 Uue* \u2192 no atoms yet\nThe produced isotopes of ununennium are expected to undergo two alpha decays to known isotopes of moscovium, 287Mc and 288Mc. This would anchor them to a known sequence of five or six further alpha decays, respectively, and corroborate their production.\nAs of September 2023, the team at RIKEN had run the 248Cm+51V reaction for 462 days. A report by the RIKEN Nishina Center Advisory Committee noted that this reaction was chosen because of the availability of the target and projectile materials, despite predictions favoring the 249Bk+50Ti reaction, because the 50Ti projectile is closer to doubly magic 48Ca and has an even atomic number (22); reactions with even-\"Z\" projectiles have generally been shown to have greater cross-sections. (With that said, 249Bk has the disadvantage of a short half-life.) The report recommended that if the 5\u00a0fb cross-section limit is reached without any events observed, then the team should \"evaluate and eventually reconsider the experimental strategy before taking additional beam time.\" As of August 2024, the team at RIKEN was still running this reaction \"24/7\".\nThe team at the JINR plans to attempt synthesis of element 119 in the future, but a precise timeframe has not been publicly released. In late 2023, the JINR reported the first successful synthesis of a superheavy element with a projectile heavier than 48Ca: 238U was bombarded with 54Cr to make a new isotope of livermorium (element 116), 288Lv. Successful synthesis of a superheavy nuclide in this experiment was an unexpectedly good result; the aim was to experimentally determine the cross-section of a reaction with 54Cr projectiles and prepare for the synthesis of element 120. The JINR has also alluded to a future attempt to synthesize element 119 with the same projectile, bombarding 243Am with 54Cr. The team at the Heavy Ion Research Facility in Lanzhou (HIRFL), which is operated by the Institute of Modern Physics (IMP) of the Chinese Academy of Sciences, also plans to try the 243Am+54Cr reaction.\nNaming.\nUsing Mendeleev's nomenclature for unnamed and undiscovered elements, ununennium should be known as \"eka-francium\". Using the 1979 IUPAC recommendations, the element should be temporarily called \"ununennium\" (symbol \"Uue\") until it is discovered, the discovery is confirmed, and a permanent name chosen. Although widely used in the chemical community on all levels, from chemistry classrooms to advanced textbooks, the recommendations are mostly ignored among scientists who work theoretically or experimentally on superheavy elements, who call it \"element 119\", with the symbol \"E119\", \"(119)\" or \"119\".\nPredicted properties.\nNuclear stability and isotopes.\nThe stability of nuclei decreases greatly with the increase in atomic number after curium, element 96, whose half-life is four orders of magnitude longer than that of any currently known higher-numbered element. All isotopes with an atomic number above 101 undergo radioactive decay with half-lives of less than 30 hours. No elements with atomic numbers above 82 (after lead) have stable isotopes. Nevertheless, for reasons not yet well understood, there is a slight increase of nuclear stability around atomic numbers 110\u2013114, which leads to the appearance of what is known in nuclear physics as the \"island of stability\". This concept, proposed by University of California professor Glenn Seaborg, explains why superheavy elements last longer than predicted.\nThe alpha-decay half-lives predicted for 291\u2013307Uue are on the order of microseconds. The longest alpha-decay half-life predicted is ~485 microseconds for the isotope 294Uue. When factoring in all decay modes, the predicted half-lives drop further to only tens of microseconds. Some heavier isotopes may be more stable; Fricke and Waber predicted 315Uue to be the most stable ununennium isotope in 1971. This has consequences for the synthesis of ununennium, as isotopes with half-lives below one microsecond would decay before reaching the detector, and the heavier isotopes cannot be synthesised by the collision of any known usable target and projectile nuclei. Nevertheless, new theoretical models show that the expected gap in energy between the proton orbitals 2f7/2 (filled at element 114) and 2f5/2 (filled at element 120) is smaller than expected, so that element 114 no longer appears to be a stable spherical closed nuclear shell, and this energy gap may increase the stability of elements 119 and 120. The next doubly magic nucleus is now expected to be around the spherical 306Ubb (element 122), but the expected low half-life and low production cross section of this nuclide makes its synthesis challenging.\nThe most likely isotopes of ununennium to be synthesised in the near future are 293Uue through 296Uue, because they are populated in the 3n and 4n channels of the 243Am+48Cr and 249Bk+50Ti reactions.\nAtomic and physical.\nBeing the first period 8 element, ununennium is predicted to be an alkali metal, taking its place in the periodic table below lithium, sodium, potassium, rubidium, caesium, and francium. Each of these elements has one valence electron in the outermost s-orbital (valence electron configuration \"n\"s1), which is easily lost in chemical reactions to form the +1 oxidation state: thus, the alkali metals are very reactive elements. Ununennium is predicted to continue the trend and have a valence electron configuration of 8s1. It is therefore expected to behave much like its lighter congeners; however, it is also predicted to differ from the lighter alkali metals in some properties.\nThe main reason for the predicted differences between ununennium and the other alkali metals is the spin\u2013orbit (SO) interaction\u2014the mutual interaction between the electrons' motion and spin. The SO interaction is especially strong for the superheavy elements because their electrons move faster\u2014at speeds comparable to the speed of light\u2014than those in lighter atoms. In ununennium atoms, it lowers the 7p and 8s electron energy levels, stabilizing the corresponding electrons, but two of the 7p electron energy levels are more stabilized than the other four. The effect is called subshell splitting, as it splits the 7p subshell into more-stabilized and the less-stabilized parts. Computational chemists understand the split as a change of the second (azimuthal) quantum number \"\u2113\" from 1 to &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20442 and &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;3\u20442 for the more-stabilized and less-stabilized parts of the 7p subshell, respectively. Thus, the outer 8s electron of ununennium is stabilized and becomes harder to remove than expected, while the 7p3/2 electrons are correspondingly destabilized, perhaps allowing them to participate in chemical reactions. This stabilization of the outermost s-orbital (already significant in francium) is the key factor affecting ununennium's chemistry, and causes all the trends for atomic and molecular properties of alkali metals to reverse direction after caesium.\nDue to the stabilization of its outer 8s electron, ununennium's first ionization energy\u2014the energy required to remove an electron from a neutral atom\u2014is predicted to be 4.53\u00a0eV, higher than those of the known alkali metals from potassium onward. This effect is so large that unbiunium (element 121) is predicted to have a lower ionization energy of 4.45\u00a0eV, so that the alkali metal in period 8 would not have the lowest ionization energy in the period, as is true for all previous periods. Ununennium's electron affinity is expected to be far greater than that of caesium and francium; indeed, ununennium is expected to have an electron affinity higher than all the alkali metals lighter than it at about 0.662\u00a0eV, close to that of cobalt (0.662\u00a0eV) and chromium (0.676\u00a0eV). Relativistic effects also cause a very large drop in the polarizability of ununennium to 169.7\u00a0a.u. Indeed, the static dipole polarisability (\u03b1\"D\") of ununennium, a quantity for which the impacts of relativity are proportional to the square of the element's atomic number, has been calculated to be small and similar to that of sodium.\nThe electron of the hydrogen-like ununennium atom\u2014oxidized so it has only one electron, Uue118+\u2014is predicted to move so quickly that its mass is 1.99 times that of a non-moving electron, a consequence of relativistic effects. For comparison, the figure for hydrogen-like francium is 1.29 and the figure for hydrogen-like caesium is 1.091. According to simple extrapolations of relativity laws, that indirectly indicates the contraction of the atomic radius to around 240\u00a0pm, very close to that of rubidium (247\u00a0pm); the metallic radius is also correspondingly lowered to 260\u00a0pm. The ionic radius of Uue+ is expected to be 180\u00a0pm.\nUnunennium is predicted to have a melting point between 0\u00a0\u00b0C and 30\u00a0\u00b0C: thus it may be a liquid at room temperature. It is not known whether this continues the trend of decreasing melting points down the group, as caesium's melting point is 28.5\u00a0\u00b0C and francium's is estimated to be around 8.0\u00a0\u00b0C. The boiling point of ununennium is expected to be around 630\u00a0\u00b0C, similar to that of francium, estimated to be around 620\u00a0\u00b0C; this is lower than caesium's boiling point of 671\u00a0\u00b0C. The density of ununennium has been variously predicted to be between 3 and 4\u00a0g/cm3, continuing the trend of increasing density down the group: the density of francium is estimated at 2.48\u00a0g/cm3, and that of caesium is known to be 1.93\u00a0g/cm3.\nChemical.\nThe chemistry of ununennium is predicted to be similar to that of the alkali metals, but it would probably behave more like potassium or rubidium than caesium or francium. This is due to relativistic effects, as in their absence periodic trends would predict ununennium to be even more reactive than caesium and francium. This lowered reactivity is due to the relativistic stabilization of ununennium's valence electron, increasing ununennium's first ionization energy and decreasing the metallic and ionic radii; this effect is already seen for francium.\nThe chemistry of ununennium in the +1-oxidation state should be more similar to the chemistry of rubidium than to that of francium. On the other hand, the ionic radius of the Uue+ ion is predicted to be larger than that of Rb+, because the 7p orbitals are destabilized and are thus larger than the p-orbitals of the lower shells. Ununennium may also show the +3 oxidation state, which is not seen in any other alkali metal, in addition to the +1 oxidation state that is characteristic of the other alkali metals and is also the main oxidation state of all the known alkali metals: this is because of the destabilization and expansion of the 7p3/2 spinor, causing its outermost electrons to have a lower ionization energy than what would otherwise be expected. The 7p3/2 spinor's chemical activity has been suggested to make the +5 oxidation state possible in [UueF6]\u2212, analogous to [SbF6]\u2212 or [BrF6]\u2212. The analogous francium(V) compound, [FrF6]\u2212, might also be achievable, but is not experimentally known.\nMany ununennium compounds are expected to have a large covalent character, due to the involvement of the 7p3/2 electrons in the bonding: this effect is also seen to a lesser extent in francium, which shows some 6p3/2 contribution to the bonding in francium superoxide (FrO&lt;2). Thus, instead of ununennium being the most electropositive element, as a simple extrapolation would seem to indicate, caesium retains this position, with ununennium's electronegativity most likely being close to sodium's (0.93 on the Pauling scale). The standard reduction potential of the Uue+/Uue couple is predicted to be \u22122.9\u00a0V, the same as that of the Fr+/Fr couple and just over that of the K+/K couple at \u22122.931\u00a0V.\nIn the gas phase, and at very low temperatures in the condensed phase, the alkali metals form covalently bonded diatomic molecules. The metal\u2013metal bond lengths in these M2 molecules increase down the group from Li2 to Cs2, but then decrease after that to Uue2, due to the aforementioned relativistic effects that stabilize the 8s orbital. The opposite trend is shown for the metal\u2013metal bond-dissociation energies. The Uue\u2013Uue bond should be slightly stronger than the K\u2013K bond. From these M2 dissociation energies, the enthalpy of sublimation (\u0394\"H\"sub) of ununennium is predicted to be 94\u00a0kJ/mol (the value for francium should be around 77\u00a0kJ/mol).\nThe UueF molecule is expected to have a significant covalent character owing to the high electron affinity of ununennium. The bonding in UueF is predominantly between a 7p orbital on ununennium and a 2p orbital on fluorine, with lesser contributions from the 2s orbital of fluorine and the 8s, 6d\"z\"2, and the two other 7p orbitals of ununennium. This is very different from the behaviour of s-block elements, as well as gold and mercury, in which the s-orbitals (sometimes mixed with d-orbitals) are the ones participating in the bonding. The Uue\u2013F bond is relativistically expanded due to the splitting of the 7p orbital into 7p1/2 and 7p&lt;3/2 spinors, forcing the bonding electrons into the largest orbital measured by radial extent: a similar expansion in bond length is found in the hydrides AtH and TsH. The Uue\u2013Au bond should be the weakest of all bonds between gold and an alkali metal, but should still be stable. This gives extrapolated medium-sized adsorption enthalpies (\u2212\u0394\"H\"ads) of 106\u00a0kJ/mol on gold (the francium value should be 136\u00a0kJ/mol), 76\u00a0kJ/mol on platinum, and 63\u00a0kJ/mol on silver, the smallest of all the alkali metals, that demonstrate that it would be feasible to study the chromatographic adsorption of ununennium onto surfaces made of noble metals. The enthalpy of adsorption of ununennium on a Teflon surface is predicted to be 17.6\u00a0kJ/mol, which would be the lowest among the alkali metals. The \u0394\"H\"sub and \u2212\u0394\"H\"ads values for the alkali metals change in opposite directions as atomic number increases.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "67495", "revid": "1311599582", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=67495", "title": "Hugo von Hofmannsthal", "text": "Austrian novelist, librettist, poet, dramatist (1874\u20131929)\nHugo Laurenz August Hofmann von Hofmannsthal (; 1 February 1874 \u2013 15 July 1929) was an Austrian novelist, librettist, poet, dramatist, narrator, and essayist.\nEarly life.\nHofmannsthal was born in Landstra\u00dfe, Vienna, the son of an upper-class Christian Austrian mother, Anna Maria Josefa Fohleutner (1852\u20131904), and a Christian Austrian\u2013Italian bank manager, Hugo August Peter Hofmann, Edler von Hofmannsthal (1841\u20131915).\nHis grandfather was Augustin Emil Hofmann von Hofmannsthal and his great-grandfather was Isaak L\u00f6w Hofmann, Edler von Hofmannsthal, from whom his family inherited the noble title \"Edler von Hofmannsthal\", was a Jewish tobacco farmer ennobled by the Austrian emperor.\nHe was schooled in Vienna at Akademisches Gymnasium, where he studied the works of Ovid, later a major influence on his work. He began to write poems and plays from an early age. Some of his early works were written under pseudonyms, such as \"Loris Melikow\" and \"Theophil Morren\", because he was not allowed to publish as a student. He met the German poet Stefan George at the age of seventeen and had several poems published in George's journal, \"Bl\u00e4tter f\u00fcr die Kunst\". He studied law and later philology at the University of Vienna but decided to devote himself to writing upon graduating in 1901. Along with Peter Altenberg and Arthur Schnitzler, he was a member of the avant garde group Young Vienna (\"Jung\u2013Wien\").\nCareer.\nIn 1900 Hofmannsthal met the composer Richard Strauss for the first time. He later wrote libretti for several of his operas, including \"Elektra\" (1909), \"Der Rosenkavalier\" (1911), the plot of which he developed together with Harry Graf Kessler, \"Ariadne auf Naxos\" (1912, rev. 1916), \"Die Frau ohne Schatten\" (1919), \"Die \u00e4gyptische Helena\" (1928), and \"Arabella\" (1929, but first performed in 1933).\nBetween 1891 and 1899 Hofmannsthal wrote a number of short verse plays, influenced by the static dramas of the Belgian writer Maurice Maeterlinck, the dramatic monologues of the English Romantic poet Robert Browning, and the \"proverbes dramatiques\" of the French poet Alfred de Musset.\nIn 1911 he adapted the 15th century English morality play \"Everyman\" as \"Jedermann\", and Einar Nilson wrote the music for it. The play later became a staple at the Salzburg Festival.\nDuring World War I Hofmannsthal held a government post. He wrote speeches and articles supporting the war effort, and emphasizing the cultural tradition of Austria-Hungary. The end of the war spelled the end of the Habsburg monarchy in Austria; this was a blow from which the patriotic and conservative-minded Hofmannsthal never fully recovered.\nNevertheless, the years after the war were very productive ones for Hofmannsthal; he continued with his earlier literary projects, almost without a break. He wrote several new libretti for Richard Strauss operas. In 1920, Hofmannsthal, along with Max Reinhardt, founded the Salzburg Festival. His later plays revealed a growing interest in religious, particularly Roman Catholic, themes. Among his writings was a screenplay for a film version of \"Der Rosenkavalier\" (1925) directed by Robert Wiene.\nThought.\nOn 18 October 1902 Hofmannsthal published a fictive letter in the Berlin Daily, \"Der Tag\" (\"The Day\") titled simply \"Ein Brief\" (\"A Letter\"). It was purportedly written in 1603 by Philip, Lord Chandos, to Francis Bacon. In this letter Chandos says that he has stopped writing because he has \"lost completely the ability to think or to speak of anything coherently\"; he has given up on the possibility of language to describe the world. This letter reflects the growing distrust of and dissatisfaction with language that so characterizes the Modern era, and Chandos's dissolving personality is not only individual but societal.\nGrowing up the son of a wealthy merchant who was well connected with the major artists of the time, Hofmannsthal was raised in what Carl Schorske refers to as \"the temple of art\". This perfect setting for aesthetic isolation allowed Hofmannsthal the unique perspective of the privileged artist, but also allowed him to see that art had become a flattened documenting of humanity, which took our instincts and desires and framed them for viewing without acquiring any of the living, passionate elements. Because of this realization, Hofmannsthal's idea of the role of the artist began to take shape as someone who created works that would inspire or inflame the instinct, rather than merely preserving it in a creative form. He also began to think that the artist should not be someone isolated and left to his art, but rather a man of the world, immersed in both politics and art.\nHofmannsthal saw in English culture the ideal setting for the artist. This was because the English simultaneously admired Admiral Nelson, a war hero, and John Milton, a poet, while still maintaining a solid national identity. \"In [Hofmannsthal's] view, the division between artist (writer) and man of action (politician, explorer, soldier) does not exist in England. Britain provides her subjects with a common base of energy which functions as equilibrium, a force lacking in fragmented Germany\" (Weiss). This singular and yet pragmatic identity must have appealed to Hofmannsthal to a certain degree due to the large scale fragmentation of Austria at the time, which was witnessing the birth of radical nationalism and anti-Semitism, a nation in which the progressive artist and the progressive politician were growing more different and hostile to each other by the day.\nInfluence.\nThe Austrian author Stefan Zweig wrote in his memoirs \"The World of Yesterday\" (1942) on Hofmannsthal's early accomplishments and their influence on Zweig's generation:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The appearance of the young Hofmannsthal is and remains notable as one of the greatest miracles of accomplishment early in life; in world literature, except for Keats and Rimbaud, I know no other youthful example of a similar impeccability in the mastering of language, no such breadth of spiritual buoyancy, nothing more permeated with poetic substance even in the most casual lines, than in this magnificent genius, who already in his sixteenth and seventeenth year had inscribed himself in the eternal annals of the German language with unextinguishable verses and prose which today has still not been surpassed. His sudden beginning and simultaneous completion was a phenomenon that hardly occurs more than once in a generation.\u2014\u200a\nPersonal life.\nIn 1901 he married Gertrud \"Gerty\" Schlesinger, the daughter of a Viennese Jewish banker. Gerty converted to Christianity before their marriage, and they settled in Rodaun (now part of Liesing), not far from Vienna, and had three children:\nTwo days after his elder son Franz committed suicide, Hugo himself died of a stroke while dressing for the funeral at Rodaun. He was buried wearing the habit of a Franciscan tertiary, as he had requested. His widow, who acquired Schloss Prielau in 1932, died in London in 1959.\nBibliography.\nPlays&lt;templatestyles src=\"Hlist/styles.css\"/&gt;*\"Der Tor und der Tod\" (1893)\nLibretti&lt;templatestyles src=\"Hlist/styles.css\"/&gt;*\"Elektra\" (1909)\nNarrations and fictitious conversations&lt;templatestyles src=\"Hlist/styles.css\"/&gt;*\"Das M\u00e4rchen der 672. Nacht\" (1895)\nNovel (fragment)&lt;templatestyles src=\"Hlist/styles.css\"/&gt;*\"Andreas oder Die Vereinigten\" (1907\u20131927)\nEssays, speeches, prose&lt;templatestyles src=\"Hlist/styles.css\"/&gt;*\"Zur Physiologie der modernen Liebe\" (1891)\nPoetry&lt;templatestyles src=\"Hlist/styles.css\"/&gt;*\"Siehst du die Stadt?\" (1890)\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\nHugo von Hofmannsthal, Selected Poems: Rhymed and metered translation by Claude Neuman, with the original text opposite. Ressouvenances Editions, 2025 http://www.ressouvenances.fr/\nExternal links.\n\u00a0 Wikiquote has quotations related to: "}
{"id": "67497", "revid": "11952314", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=67497", "title": "Perfect fifth tuning", "text": ""}
{"id": "67500", "revid": "1455149", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=67500", "title": "Festival", "text": "Organised series of acts and performances\nA festival is an event celebrated by a community and centering on some characteristic aspect or aspects of that community and its religion or cultures. It is often marked as a local or national holiday, mela, or Eid. A festival constitutes typical cases of glocalization, as well as the high culture-low culture interrelationship. Next to religion and folklore, a significant origin is agricultural. Food is such a vital resource that many festivals are associated with harvest time. Religious commemoration and thanksgiving for good harvests are blended in events that take place in autumn, such as Halloween in the northern hemisphere and Easter in the southern.\nFestivals often serve to fulfill specific communal purposes, especially in regard to commemoration or thanking to the gods, goddesses or saints: they are called patronal festivals. They may also provide entertainment, which was particularly important to local communities before the advent of mass-produced entertainment. Festivals that focus on cultural or ethnic topics also seek to inform community members of their traditions; the involvement of elders sharing stories and experience provides a means for unity among families. Attendants of festivals are often motivated by a desire for escapism, socialization and camaraderie; the practice has been seen as a means of creating geographical connection, belonging and adaptability.\nEtymology.\nThe word \"festival\" was originally used as an adjective from the late fourteenth century, deriving from Latin via Old French. In Middle English, a \"festival dai\" was a religious holiday.\nThe first recorded used of the word \"festival\" as a noun was in 1589 (as \"Festifall\"). Feast first came into usage as a noun c.\u20091200, and its first recorded use as a verb was circa 1300.\nThe word gala comes from Arabic word \"khil'a\", meaning robe of honor. The word gala was initially used to describe \"festive dress\", but came to be a synonym of \"festival\" starting in the 18th century.\nHistory.\nFestivals have long been significant in human culture and history and are found in virtually all cultures. The importance of festivals, to the present, is found in private and public; secular and religious life. Ancient Greek and Roman societies relied heavily upon festivals, both communal and administrative. Saturnalia was likely influential to Christmas and Carnival. Celebration of social occasions, religion and nature were common. Specific festivals have century-long histories and festivals in general have developed over the last few centuries \u2013 some traditional festivals in Ghana, for example, predate European colonisation of the 15th century. Festivals prospered following the Second World War. Both established in 1947, Avignon Festival and the Edinburgh Festival Fringe have been notable in shaping the modern model of festivals. Art festivals became more prominent by the turn of the 21st century. In modern times, festivals are offered to public as a global tourist prospect although they are commonly public or not-for-profit.\nTraditions.\nMany festivals have religious origins and entwine cultural and religious significance in traditional activities. The most important religious festivals such as Christmas, Rosh Hashanah, Diwali, Holi, Eid-al-Fitr and Eid-al-Adha serve to mark out the year. Others, such as harvest festivals, celebrate seasonal change. Events of historical significance, such as important military victories or other nation-building events also provide the impetus for a festival. An early example is the festival established by Ancient Egyptian Pharaoh Ramesses III celebrating his victory over the Libyans. In many countries, royal holidays commemorate dynastic events just as agricultural holidays are about harvests. Festivals are often commemorated annually.\nThere are numerous types of festivals in the world and most countries celebrate important events or traditions with traditional cultural events and activities. Most culminate in the consumption of specially prepared food (showing the connection to \"feasting\") and they bring people together. Festivals are also strongly associated with national holidays. Lists of national festivals are published to make participation easier.\nTypes of festivals.\nThe scale of festivals varies; in location and attendance, they may range from a local to national level. Music festivals, for example, often bring together disparate groups of people, such that they are both localised and global. The \"vast majority\" of festivals are, however, local, modest and populist. The abundance of festivals significantly hinders quantifying the total there of. There exists significant variation among festivals, beyond binary dichotomies of sacred and secular, rural and urban, people and establishment.\nReligious festivals.\nAmong many religions, a feast is a set of celebrations in honour of God or various deities. A feast and a festival are historically interchangeable. Most religions have festivals that recur annually and some, such as Passover, Easter, and Eid al-Adha are moveable feasts \u2013 that is, those that are determined either by lunar or agricultural cycles or the calendar in use at the time. The Sed festival, for example, celebrated the thirtieth year of an Egyptian pharaoh's rule and then every three (or four in one case) years after that. Among the Ashantis, most of their traditional festivals are linked to gazette sites which are believed to be sacred with several rich biological resources in their pristine forms. Thus, the annual commemoration of the festivals helps in maintaining the buoyancy of the conserved natural site, assisting in biodiversity conservation. Vodoun days is also one of the religious festivals of Benin which invites surrounding countries like Togo and Ghana because of the almost identical culture and tradition. Vodoun days is a festival of Vodoun. Even in Togo Godogbe za of Gblinkomegan is a traditional celebration based on ancestor worship.\nIn the Christian liturgical calendar, there are two principal feasts, properly known as the Feast of the Nativity of our Lord (Christmas) and the Feast of the Resurrection (Easter), but minor festivals in honour of local patron saints are celebrated in almost all countries influenced by Christianity. In the Catholic, Eastern Orthodox, Evangelical Lutheran and Anglican liturgical calendars there are a great number of lesser feasts throughout the year commemorating saints, sacred events or doctrines. Within Evangelical Lutheranism, \"festival\" is part of the ranking of feast days. In the Philippines, each day of the year has at least one specific religious festival, either from Catholic, Islamic, or indigenous origins.\nHindus celebrate many festivals, such as Navaratri, Holi, Rama Navami, Karva Chauth, Diwali, Pongal, Kartika Purnima; among others. Most Hindu festivals are not celebrated by all Hindus. One example of a Hindu festival is Ganesh Chaturthi, which is dedicated to the god Ganesha and is celebrated throughout India, but especially in Maharashtra.237 During the festival, idols of the god Ganesha, traditionally made of clay, are worshipped, and on the same day or after 1, 3, 5, 7, 10 or 11 days, are immersed in water. The public celebration of the festival, which includes a public procession, was promoted by Bal Gangadhar Tilak as a means of asserting and celebrating a Hindu nationalist identity and to provide a sense of Hindu solidarity during the British Raj in India.\nBuddhist religious festivals, such as Esala Perahera are held in Sri Lanka and Thailand. The Sikh community celebrates the Vaisakhi festival marking the new year and birth of the Khalsa.\nArts festivals.\nAmong the many offspring of general arts festivals are also more specific types of festivals, including ones that showcase intellectual or creative achievement such as science festivals, literary festivals and music festivals. Sub-categories include comedy festivals, rock festivals, jazz festivals and buskers festivals; poetry festivals, theatre festivals, and storytelling festivals; and re-enactment festivals such as Renaissance fairs. In the Philippines, aside from numerous art festivals scattered throughout the year, February is known as national arts month, the culmination of all art festivals in the entire archipelago. The modern model of music festivals began in the 1960s-70s and have become a lucrative global industry. Predecessors extend back to the 11th century and some, such as the Three Choirs Festival, remain to this day.\nFilm festivals involve the screenings of several different films, and are usually held annually. Some of the most significant film festivals include the Berlin International Film Festival, the Venice Film Festival and the Cannes Film Festival.\nA food festival is an event celebrating food or drink. These often highlight the output of producers from a certain region. Some food festivals are focused on a particular item of food, such as the National Peanut Festival in the United States, or the Galway International Oyster Festival in Ireland. There are also specific beverage festivals, such as the famous Oktoberfest in Germany for beer. Many countries hold festivals to celebrate wine. One example is the global celebration of the arrival of Beaujolais nouveau, which involves shipping the new wine around the world for its release date on the third Thursday of November each year. Both Beaujolais nouveau and the Japanese rice wine sake are associated with harvest time. In the Philippines, there are at least two hundred festivals dedicated to food and drinks.\nSeasonal and harvest festivals.\nSeasonal festivals, such as Beltane, are determined by the solar and the lunar calendars and by the cycle of the seasons, especially because of its effect on food supply, as a result of which there is a wide range of ancient and modern harvest festivals. Ancient Egyptians relied upon the seasonal inundation caused by the Nile River, a form of irrigation, which provided fertile land for crops. In the Alps, in autumn the return of the cattle from the mountain pastures to the stables in the valley is celebrated as \"Almabtrieb\". A recognized winter festival, the Chinese New Year, is set by the lunar calendar, and celebrated from the day of the second new moon after the winter solstice. Dree Festival of the Apatanis living in Lower Subansiri District of Arunachal Pradesh is celebrated every year from July 4 to 7 by praying for a bumper crop harvest.\nMidsummer or St John's Day, is an example of a seasonal festival, related to the feast day of a Christian saint as well as a celebration of the time of the summer solstice in the northern hemisphere, where it is particularly important in Sweden. Winter carnivals also provide the opportunity to utilise to celebrate creative or sporting activities requiring snow and ice. In the Philippines, each day of the year has at least one festival dedicated to harvesting of crops, fishes, crustaceans, milk, and other local goods.\nPolitics.\nScholarly literature notes that festivals functionally disseminate political values and meaning, such as ownership of place, which undergoes transformation in accordance with the festival. Furthermore, a festival may act as an artefact which allows citizens to achieve \"certain ideals\", including those of identity and ideology. Festivals may be used to rehabilitate or elevate the image of a city; the ephemerality of festivals means that their impact is often incorporeal, of name, memory and perception. In deviating from routine, festivals may reinforce the convention, be it social, cultural or economic.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "67502", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=67502", "title": "Werwolf", "text": "Nazi plan to create a resistance force operating behind enemy lines\nWerwolf (, German for \"werewolf\") was a Nazi plan which began development in 1944, to create a resistance force which would operate behind enemy lines as the Allies advanced through Germany in parallel with the \"Wehrmacht\" fighting in front of the lines. There is some argument that the plan, and subsequent reports of guerrilla activities, were created by Joseph Goebbels through propaganda disseminated in the waning weeks of the war through his \"Radio Werwolf\", something that was not connected in any way with the military unit.\nNomenclature.\nHow and by whom the name was chosen is unknown. It is similar to the title of Hermann L\u00f6ns' novel \"The Warwolf\" (), first published in 1910, but there is nothing that confirms a direct inspiration. While L\u00f6ns was not himself a Nazi (he died in 1914), his work became popular with the German far right, and some Nazis had promoted it.\nIn 1942, Adolf Hitler named the OKW and OKH field headquarters, at Vinnytsia in Ukraine, \"Werwolf\", and Hitler on a number of occasions had used \"Wolf\" as a pseudonym for himself. The etymology of the name \"Adolf\" itself carries connotations of noble (\"adal\"; Modern German \"Adel\") wolf, while Hitler referred to his first World War II Eastern Front military headquarters as \"Wolfsschanze,\" commonly rendered in English as \"Wolf's Lair\" (literally \"Wolf's Sconce\").\nOperations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Stack/styles.css\"/&gt;\nIn late summer to early autumn 1944, Heinrich Himmler initiated \"Unternehmen Werwolf\" (Operation Werwolf), ordering \"SS Obergruppenf\u00fchrer\" Hans-Adolf Pr\u00fctzmann to begin organizing an elite troop of volunteer forces to operate secretly behind enemy lines. As initially conceived, these Werwolf units were intended to be legitimate uniformed military or paramilitary formations trained to engage in clandestine operations behind enemy lines in the same manner as Allied Special Forces such as Commandos. They were never intended to act outside of the control of the German High Command (OKW), or to fight in civilian clothes, and they expected to be treated as soldiers if they were captured.\nPr\u00fctzmann was named \"Generalinspekteur f\u00fcr Spezialabwehr\" (General Inspector of Special Defence) and assigned the task of setting up the force's headquarters in Berlin and organising and instructing the force. Pr\u00fctzmann had studied the guerrilla tactics used by Soviet partisans while he was stationed in the occupied territories of Ukraine, and the idea was to teach these tactics to the members of Operation Werwolf.\nAccording to German officers who were interrogated after the war, those who were familiar with Pr\u00fctzmann's central office said that it was, like its commanding officer, inefficient, weak, and uninspired, and that Pr\u00fctzmann himself was, in addition, \"vain, idle and boastful\". Walter Schellenberg, Heinrich Himmler's head of foreign intelligence, claimed to have told Himmler that the whole operation was \"criminal and stupid\".\nPropaganda and Radio Werwolf.\nRumors of a secret Nazi guerrilla organization began to surface soon after the Allied invasion of Normandy. \"Time\" ran an article containing speculation that the Germans would try to prolong the war indefinitely by going underground after their defeat.\nThe 27 January 1945 issue of \"Collier's Weekly\" featured a detailed article by Major Edwin Lessner, stating that elite SS and Hitler Youth were being trained to attack Allied forces and opening with a 1944 quote from Joseph Goebbels: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"The enemy (invading German territory) will be taken in the rear by the fanatical population, which will ceaselessly worry him, tie down strong forces and allow him no rest or exploitation of any possible success.\"\nOn 23 March 1945 Goebbels gave a speech known as the \"Werwolf speech\", in which he urged every German to fight to the death. The partial dismantling of the organised Werwolf, combined with the effects of the Werwolf speech, caused considerable confusion about which subsequent attacks were carried out by Werwolf members, as opposed to solo acts by fanatical Nazis or small groups of SS.\nThe Werwolf propaganda station \"Radio Werwolf\" broadcast from Nauen near Berlin, beginning on 1 April 1945. Broadcasts began with the sound of a wolf howling, and a song featuring the lyrics, \"My werewolf teeth bite the enemy / And then he's done and then he's gone / Hoo, hoo hoo.\" The initial broadcast stated that the Nazi Party was ordering every German to \"stand his ground and do or die against the Allied armies, who are preparing to enslave Germans.\" Every Bolshevik, every Englishman, every American on our soil must be a target for our movement ... Any German, whatever his profession or class, who puts himself at the service of the enemy and collaborates with him will feel the effect of our avenging hand ... A single motto remains for us: 'Conquer or die.' \"\nHistorian Hugh Trevor-Roper, writing not long after the end of the war, asserts that Radio Werwolf had no actual connection to the Werwolf military unit, and was instead organized and run by Propaganda Minister Joseph Goebbels, possibly in the hope of seizing control of the unit, which Goebbels deemed to be not radical enough. Trevor-Roper assesses Goebbels' Radio Werwolf as propagating \"an ideological nihilism\" which was not consonant with the limited aims of the actual unit. This disconnect between the broadcasts of Radio Werwolf and the purpose and actions of the military unit is, according to Trevor-Roper, the reason for popular misconceptions about the actual purpose of the unit, which was to attack the Allies from behind their lines, in parallel with the Germany Army fighting the Allies from the front, not to be a guerrilla-style resistance unit once Germany was defeated.\nBritish and American newspapers widely reported the text of Radio Werwolf broadcasts, fueling rumors among occupation forces. Armed Forces Radio claimed:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAccording to Belgian Resistance operatives, the Werwolf name held clout in the general population in Northern Austria. Using an alleged link with the group as cover they were able to reroute a train of \"refugees\" (Belgian and French Nazi collaborators running away from justice) from Innsbruck back to Switzerland and then Brussels.\nRecruits.\n\"Gauleiters\" were to suggest suitable recruits, who would then be trained at secret locations in the Rhineland and Berlin. The chief training centre in the West was at H\u00fclchrath Castle near Erkelenz, which by early 1945 was training around 200 recruits mostly drawn from the Hitler Youth.\nWerwolf originally had about five thousand members recruited from the SS and the Hitler Youth. These recruits were specially trained in guerrilla tactics. Operation Werwolf went so far as to establish front companies to ensure continued fighting in those areas of Germany that were occupied (all of the \"front companies\" were discovered and shut down within eight months). However, as it became clear that the reputedly impregnable Alpine Fortress, from which operations were to be directed by the Nazi leadership if the rest of Germany was occupied, was yet another delusion, Werwolf was converted into a terrorist organisation in the last few weeks of the war.\nWeaponry and tactics.\nWerwolf agents were supposed to have at their disposal a vast assortment of weapons, from fire-proof coats to silenced Walther pistols but in reality, this was merely on paper; Werwolf never actually had the necessary equipment, organisation, morale or coordination. Given the dire supply situation German forces were facing in 1945, the commanding officers of existing \"Wehrmacht\" and SS units were unwilling to turn over what little equipment they still had for the sake of an organization whose actual strategic value was doubtful.\nAttempts were made to bury explosives, ammunition and weapons around the country (mainly in the pre-1939 German\u2013Polish border region) to be used by Werwolf in resistance fighting after the defeat of Germany, but not only were the quantities of material to be buried very low, by that point the movement itself was so disorganised that few actual members or leaders knew where the materials were. A large portion of these \"depots\" were found by the Soviets, and little of the material was actually used by Werwolf.\nIn the early months of 1945, SS Obersturmbannf\u00fchrer Otto Skorzeny was involved in training recruits for the Werwolfs, but he soon discovered that the number of Werwolf cells had been greatly exaggerated and that they would be ineffective as a fighting force. Knowing, like many other Nazi leaders, that the war was lost, he decided that the Werwolfs would instead be used as part of a Nazi \"underground railroad,\" facilitating travel along escape routes called \"ratlines\" that allowed thousands of SS officers and other Nazis to flee Germany after the fall of the Third Reich.\nWartime capture of Werwolf personnel.\nOn 28 April 1945, Staff Sergeant Ib Melchior of the US Counter-Intelligence Corps captured six German officers and 25 enlisted men dressed in civilian clothes, who claimed to constitute a Werwolf cell under the command of Colonel Paul Kr\u00fcger, operating in Sch\u00f6nsee, Bavaria. The group was captured while hiding in a tunnel network which contained communications equipment, weapons, explosives and several months' food supplies. Two vehicles were hidden in the forest nearby. Documents discovered in the tunnels listed US military commanders as targets for assassination, including General Dwight D. Eisenhower. Kr\u00fcger stated that in 1943 a school was created in Poland to train men in guerrilla warfare. On 16 September 1944, it was relocated to the town of Th\u00fcrenberg, Czechoslovakia. Kr\u00fcger claimed that a total of 1,200 men completed Werwolf training in the school in less than two years. On 1 April 1945, the school was moved to Sch\u00f6nsee and a subterranean base was constructed. The students were instructed to \"stay behind, evade capture, and then harass and destroy supply lines of United States troops\u00a0... Special emphasis was put on gasoline and oil supplies.\" According to the G-2 report:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe following day a CIC unit led by Captain Oscar M. Grimes of the 97th Infantry Division captured about two hundred Gestapo officers and men in hiding near Hof, Bavaria. They were in possession of American army uniforms and equipment but had decided to surrender.\nIn May 1945 CIC Major John Schwartzwalder arrested members of a Werwolf cell in Bremen whose leader had fled. Schwartzwalder believed that the Werwolf never constituted a threat to Allied personnel:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"...the Bremen group of the Jugend had received its orders to organize as a Werwolf cell only about four days before the fall of the city. By that time the Wehrmacht had taken all but the halt and the lame, and the Volkssturm had taken most of the rest. Nevertheless an organization had been started using the younger boys but it had not progressed to accumulating either weapons or supplies before the entry of the Allied troops...The only remaining fraction of the Werwolf that was of any importance was a residue of veterans of the last war who were physically ineligible for service in this one and who had weapons concealed here and there. These were not too hard to dispose of.\"\nAssessment by historians.\nHistorians Antony Beevor and Earl F. Ziemke have argued that Werwolf never amounted to a serious threat, and furthermore propose that the plan barely existed. According to a study by former ambassador James Dobbins and a team of RAND Corporation researchers, there were no American combat casualties after the German surrender.\nGerman historian Golo Mann, in his \"The History of Germany Since 1789\" (1984) stated: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"The [Germans'] readiness to work with the victors, to carry out their orders, to accept their advice and their help was genuine; of the resistance which the Allies had expected in the way of 'werwolf' units and nocturnal guerrilla activities, there was no sign.\"\nHistorian Richard Bessel concurs that \"'Werewolf' resistance to Allied occupation never really materialized,\" noting one exception in the form of the assassination of the American-installed mayor of Aachen, Franz Oppenhoff, on 28 March 1945, probably the most successful Werwolf operation. He highlights that the threat was nonetheless taken seriously by the Allies and that fear of the Werwolf among the Americans may have had hysterical characteristics, pointing to the \"Intelligence Information Bulletins\" issued by the American 6th Army Group which anticipated a guerrilla war and warned American soldiers of concealed explosives and hidden strongholds. Similarly, he observes that the NKVD appear to have believed that such an organization existed and posed a real threat to the Soviet occupation forces, with the Soviets using unfounded suspicions of Werwolf activity as a pretext to tighten police control and secure forced labor.\nPerry Biddiscombe has offered a somewhat different view. In his books \"Werwolf!: The History of the National Socialist Guerrilla Movement, 1944\u20131946\" (1998) and \"The Last Nazis: SS Werwolf Guerrilla Resistance in Europe, 1944\u20131947\" (2000), Biddiscombe asserts that after retreating to the Black Forest and the Harz mountains, the Werwolf continued resisting the occupation until at least 1947, possibly until 1949\u201350. However, he characterizes German post-surrender resistance as \"minor\", and calls the post-war Werwolfs \"desperadoes\" and \"fanatics living in forest huts\". He further cites U.S. Army intelligence reports that characterized Nazi partisans as \"nomad bands\" and judged them as less serious threats than attacks by foreign slave laborers and considered their sabotage and subversive activities to be insignificant. He also notes that: \"The Americans and British concluded, even in the summer of 1945, that, as a nationwide network, the original Werwolf was irrevocably destroyed, and that it no longer posed a threat to the occupation.\"\nBiddiscombe also says that Werwolf violence failed to mobilize a spirit of popular national resistance, that the group was poorly led, poorly armed, and poorly organized, and that it was doomed to failure given the war-weariness of the populace and the hesitancy of young Germans to sacrifice themselves on the funeral pyre of the former Nazi regime. He concludes that the only significant achievement of the Werwolfs was to spark distrust of the German populace in the Allies as they occupied Germany, which caused them in some cases to act more repressively than they might have done otherwise, which in turn fostered resentments that helped to enable far right ideas to survive in Germany, at least in pockets, into the post-war era.\nNevertheless, says Biddiscombe, \"The Werewolves were no bit players\"; they caused tens of millions of dollars of property damage at a time when the European economies were in an already desperate state, and were responsible for the killing of thousands of people.\nAlleged Werwolf actions.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Stack/styles.css\"/&gt;\nA number of instances of resistance have been attributed to Werwolf activity:\nAllied reprisals.\nAccording to Biddiscombe \"the threat of Nazi partisan warfare had a generally unhealthy effect on broad issues of policy among the occupying powers. As well, it prompted the development of draconian reprisal measures that resulted in the destruction of much German property and the deaths of thousands of civilians and soldiers\". Fear of fanatics willing to die for Nazi ideology contributed to strict anti-fraternization rules for Allied forces. Ian Kershaw states that fear of Werwolf activities may have motivated atrocities against German civilians by Allied troops during and immediately after the war.\nThe German resistance movement was successfully suppressed in 1945. However, collective punishment for acts of resistance, such as fines and curfews, was still being imposed as late as 1948. Biddiscombe estimates the total death toll as a direct result of Werewolf actions and the resulting reprisals as 3,000\u20135,000.\nSoviet reprisals.\nIn the Soviet occupation zone, thousands of youths were arrested as \"Werwolves\". Evidently, arrests were arbitrary and in part based on denunciations. The arrested boys were either executed or interned in NKVD special camps. On 22 June 1945, Deputy Commissar of the NKVD Ivan Serov reported to the head of the NKVD Lavrentiy Beria the arrest of \"more than 600\" alleged Werwolf members, mostly aged 15 to 17 years.\nThe report, though referring to incidents where Soviet units came under fire from the woods, asserts that most of the arrested had not been involved in any action against the Soviets, which Serov explained with interrogation results allegedly showing that the boys had been \"waiting\" for the right moment and in the meantime focused on attracting new members. In October 1945, Beria reported to Joseph Stalin the \"liquidation\" of 359 alleged Werwolf groups. Of those, 92 groups with 1,192 members were \"liquidated\" in Saxony alone. On 5 August 1946, Soviet minister for internal affairs Sergei Nikiforovich Kruglov reported that in the Soviet occupation zone, 332 \"terrorist diversion groups and underground organizations\" had been disclosed and \"liquidated\". A total of about 10,000 youths were interned in NKVD special camps, half of whom did not return. Parents as well as the East German administration and political parties, installed by the Soviets, were denied any information on the whereabouts of the arrested youths. The Red Army's torching of Demmin, which resulted in the suicide of hundreds of people, was blamed on alleged preceding Werwolf activities by the East German regime.\nAmerican reprisals.\nEisenhower believed he would be faced with extensive guerrilla warfare, based on the Alpine Redoubt. The fear of Werwolf activity believed to be mustering around Berchtesgaden in the Alps also led to the switch in U.S. operational targets in the middle of March 1945 away from the drive towards Berlin and instead shifted the thrust towards the south and on linking up with the Russians first. An intelligence report stated \"We should\u00a0... be prepared to undertake operations in Southern Germany in order to overcome rapidly any organised resistance by the German Armed Forces or by guerrilla movements which may have retreated to the inner zone and to this redoubt\". On 31 March Eisenhower told Roosevelt, \"I am hopeful of launching operations that should partially prevent a guerrilla control of any large area such as the southern mountain bastions\".\nEisenhower had previously also requested that the occupation directive JCS 1067 not make him responsible for maintaining living conditions in Germany under the expected circumstances; \"...\u00a0probably guerrilla fighting and possibly even civil war in certain districts\u00a0... If conditions in Germany turn out as described, it will be utterly impossible effectively to control or save the economic structure of the country\u00a0... and we feel we should not assume the responsibility for its support and control.\" The British were \"mortified by such a suggestion\", but the War Department took considerable account of Eisenhower's wishes. In addition, civilians held by the U.S. climbed from 1,000 in late March to 30,000 in late June, and more than 100,000 by the end of 1945. Conditions were often poor in the camps for civilians.\nBritish reprisals.\nIn April 1945 Churchill announced that the Allies would incarcerate all captured German officers for as long as a guerrilla threat existed. Hundreds of thousands of German last-ditch troops were kept in the makeshift Rheinwiesenlager for months, \"mainly to prevent Werwolf activity\". \nPrior to the occupation SHAEF investigated the reprisal techniques the Germans had used in order to maintain control over occupied territories since they felt the Germans had had good success. Directives were loosely defined and implementation of reprisal was largely left to the preferences of the various armies, with the British seeming uncomfortable with those involving bloodshed. Rear-Admiral H.T. Baillie Grohman for example stated that killing hostages was \"not in accordance with our usual methods\". Thanks to feelings such as this, and relative light guerrilla activity in their area, relatively few reprisals took place in the UK zone of operations.\nSimilar organizations.\nIn Germany.\nFrom 1946 onward, Allied intelligence officials noted resistance activities by an organisation which had appropriated the name of the anti-Nazi resistance group, the \"Edelweiss Piraten\" (Edelweiss Pirates). The group was reported to be composed mainly of former members and officers of Hitler Youth units, ex-soldiers and drifters, and was described by an intelligence report as \"a sentimental, adventurous, and romantically anti-social [movement]\". It was regarded as a more serious menace to order than the Werwolf by US officials.\nA raid in March 1946 captured 80 former German officers who were members, and who possessed a list of 400 persons to be liquidated, including Wilhelm Hoegner, the prime minister of Bavaria. Further members of the group were seized with caches of ammunition and even anti-tank rockets. In late 1946 reports of activities gradually died away.\nIn Denmark.\nIn 2015, Danish police uncovered files in their archives outlining the Danish part of Operation Werwolf under the command of Horst Paul Issel. Issel was arrested in Germany in 1949 and handed over to Denmark. A total of 130 stashes of weapons and explosives were placed around Denmark and personnel were inserted into strategically important parts of society.\nIn Yugoslavia.\nThe remains of some military organizations which collaborated with Axis forces continued with\nraid activities like Crusaders (guerrilla) (until 1950),\nBalli Komb\u00ebtar (until 1950).\nComparison to Second Iraq War.\nThe Iraqi insurgency was initially compared to the history of Werwolf by the Bush Administration and other Iraq War supporters. In speeches given on 25 August 2003 to the Veterans of Foreign Wars by National Security Advisor Condoleezza Rice and Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld parallels were drawn between the resistance faced by the Multi-National Force \u2013 Iraq's occupation forces in Iraq to that encountered by occupation forces in post-World War II Germany, asserting that the Iraqi insurgency would ultimately prove to be as futile in realizing its objectives as had the Werwolfs.\nFormer Clinton-era National Security Council staffer Daniel Benjamin published a riposte in \"Slate\" magazine on 29 August 2003, entitled \"Condi's Phony History: Sorry, Dr. Rice, postwar Germany was nothing like Iraq\" in which he took Rice and Rumsfeld to task for mentioning Werwolf, writing that the reality of postwar Germany bore no resemblance to the occupation of Iraq, and made reference to Antony Beevor's \"\" and the US Army's official history, \"The U.S. Army in the Occupation of Germany 1944\u20131946\", where the Werwolf were only mentioned twice in passing. This did not prevent his political opponents from disagreeing with him, using Biddiscombe's book as a source.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography\nFurther reading"}
{"id": "67503", "revid": "33327119", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=67503", "title": "Zuiderzee Works", "text": "Land reclamation in the Netherlands\nThe Zuiderzee Works () is a system of dams and dikes, land reclamation and water drainage work, which was the largest hydraulic engineering project undertaken by the Netherlands during the twentieth century. The project involved the damming of the Zuiderzee, a large, shallow inlet of the North Sea, and the reclamation of land in the newly enclosed water using polders. Its main purposes are to improve flood protection and create additional land for agriculture.\nThe enormous scale of the works required the creation of a joint venture company comprising several large dredging contractors, known as the Maatschappij tot Uitvoering van Zuiderzeewerken. The American Society of Civil Engineers declared the works, together with the Delta Works in the South-West of the Netherlands, as among the Seven Wonders of the Modern World.\nBackground.\nThe Low Countries have low flat topography, with half the land area below or less than above sea level, and have for centuries been subject to periodic flooding by the sea. The seventeenth century saw early proposals to tame and enclose the Zuiderzee, but the ambitious ideas were impractical given the technology then available.\nFrom 1200 to 1900 AD the Dutch reclaimed of land from the sea and by draining lakes, a total of , but lost of land to the Zuiderzee. Hendrik Stevin in 1667 was the first to publish a study (\"How the Fury of the North Sea may be stopped and Holland may be protected against it\") proposing to drain the Zuiderzee. After the IJ and Haarlemmermeer were drained in the mid-19th century, van Diggelen, Kloppenburg, and Faddegon proposed that the Zuiderzee also be drained. Test drilling by the \"\" found that about three quarters of the Zuiderzee would be useful land. Plans were developed during the second half of the nineteenth century to protect areas from the force of the open sea and creating new agricultural land. Cornelis Lely (after whom Lelystad is named) was an ardent supporter, an engineer, and later government minister. A group called the \"Zuider Zee Society\" began a thorough investigation as to the best means of closing and draining the Zuider Zee in 1886, and in 1891 Lely introduced his plan, which formed the basis for the development of what were to become the Zuiderzee Works. It consisted of a large dam connecting the northern tip of North Holland with the western coast of Friesland and the creation of initially four polders in the northwest, the northeast, southeast (later split in two), and southwest of what would be renamed the IJsselmeer (IJssel-lake). Two major lanes of open water were defined for shipping and drainage. The initial body of water affected by the project was . Opposition came from fishermen along the Zuiderzee who would lose their livelihood, and from others in coastal areas along the more northerly Wadden Sea. They feared higher water levels as a result of the closure. Other critics doubted whether the project was feasible financially.\nQueen Wilhelmina's speech from the throne in 1913, urged reclamation of the Zuiderzee, and the requisite bill was introduced. When Lely became Minister of Transport and Public Works that year, he used his position to promote the Zuiderzee Works and gained support. The government started developing official plans to enclose the Zuiderzee. On 13 and 14 January 1916 the dikes at several places along the Zuiderzee broke under the stress of a winter storm, and the land behind them flooded, as had often happened in previous centuries. This flooding provided the decisive impetus to implement the existing plans to tame the Zuiderzee. In addition, a threatening food shortage during the other stresses of World War I added to widespread support for the project. Lely stressed the importance of extending the area of arable land, and estimated that of good land would be reclaimed from the clay soil, while the regions with a sand bottom would eventually become the IJsselmeer.\nOn 14 June 1918, the Zuiderzee Act was passed.\nThe goals of the Act were threefold:\nUnlike earlier proposals the act intended to preserve part of the Zuiderzee and create large islands, as Lely warned that rerouting the rivers directly to the North Sea might cause inland flooding if storms raised the sea's level. He also wanted to preserve the Zee's fisheries, and for the new land to be accessible by water. The \"Dienst der Zuiderzeewerken\" (Zuiderzee Works Department), the government body responsible for overseeing the construction and initial management, was set up in May 1919. In the initial stages of the work heavy clay was dredged out of the open sea and deposited along the track to be followed by the dam. The cost of the undertaking was calculated in 1914, in UK currency, at about \u00a319,000,000 but it soon seemed likely to be very much more. At the time, ten years were allowed for the construction of the main dam and another 20 years for the completion of the four inner enclosures.\nThe department decided against building the main dam first, proceeding to construct a smaller dam, the \"Amsteldiepdijk\", across the Amsteldiep. This was the first step in rejoining the island of Wieringen to the North Holland mainland. The dike, with a length of , was built between 1920 and 1924. As with dike building, polder construction was tested on a small scale at the experimental polder at Andijk.\nConstruction phase.\nEnclosure.\nA new study, commissioned after doubts arose over the financial feasibility of the project, recommended that work should continue and be accelerated. The Zuiderzee Works Department initiated the next two major projects at the same time, in 1927. The most important of these was the main dam, the \"Afsluitdijk\" (enclosure dam), running from Den Oever on Wieringen to the village of Zurich in Friesland. It was to be 32\u00a0km long and 90 meters wide, rising to 7.25 meters above sea-level, with an incline of 25% on each side.\nExperience showed that glacial till, rather than just sand or clay, was the best primary material for a structure like the Afsluitdijk. An added benefit was that it was easily available; it could be retrieved in large quantities by dredging it from the bottom of the Zuiderzee. Work started at four points: on both sides of the mainland and on two purpose-made construction-islands (Kornwerderzand and Breezanddijk) along the line of the future dam.\nFrom these points, the dam was expanded as ships deposited till into the open sea in two parallel lines. Sand was poured between these two lines; as the fill emerged above the surface of the water, it was covered by another layer of till. The nascent dam was strengthened with basalt rocks and mats of willow switch at its base. The dam was finished by raising it with sand and finally clay for the upper surface of the dam, which was planted with grass.\nConstruction progressed better than expected. At three points along the line of the dam were underwater gullies, where the tidal current was much stronger than elsewhere. These had been considered major obstacles to completing the dam but proved not to be so. On 28 May 1932, two years earlier than forecast, the Zuiderzee was closed when the last tidal trench of the \"Vlieter\" was filled with a bucket of till. The IJsselmeer was born, though the lake still contained salt water at the time.\nThe dam was not finished. It still needed to be brought up to its full height, and a road linking Friesland and North Holland remained to be built. In addition to completing the dam, work needed was the construction of shipping locks and discharge sluices at the ends of the dam. The complex at Den Oever includes the \"Stevin\" lock and three series of five sluices for discharging the IJsselmeer into the Wadden Sea. The other complex at Kornwerderzand is composed of the \"Lorentz\" locks and two series of five sluices, making a total of 25 discharge sluices. Periodically discharging the lake is necessary since it is continually fed by rivers and streams (most notably the IJssel River, for which the lake is named) and polders draining excess water into the IJsselmeer.\nThe Afsluitdijk was opened 25 September 1933, with a monument marking the spot where the dam was finished. It used 23\u00a0million m3 of sand and 13.5\u00a0million m3 of till. An average of 4,000 to 5,000 workers were employed in the dam's construction, relieving unemployment during the Great Depression. The total cost of the dam was about \u20ac700 million (2004 equivalent).\nLand reclamation.\nAfter damming off the sea, the next step involved creating new land, known as polders. This was achieved by damming off portions of the IJsselmeer, and then pumping all the water out. The first polder, Wieringermeer, was dammed in 1929 and fully drained in 1930. The third, the Noordoostpolder, was not fully drained until 1942. It was an area much used by the Dutch Underground resistance during World War II, as the fresh polder offered numerous hiding places.\nAfter the war, work was started on draining the Flevolands, a massive project totalling almost 1000\u00a0km2. This area is now home to Lelystad and Almere; the latter is the fastest growing city in the Netherlands (in part because of its proximity to Amsterdam). Another large polder was originally planned in the Markermeer. This project was extensively debated until plans were abandoned in the early 2000s, as environmental issues were viewed differently than in the 1920s. A new province, Flevoland, was created out of the Noordoostpolder and the Flevolands in 1986, thereby completing the Works.\nThis new land led to an identity change for towns including Lemmer, Vollenhove, Blokzijl due to losing their direct access to the sea and Kuinre was completely cut off from open water. The former islands of Urk and Schokland, and Wieringen got connected to the mainland.\nThe other major project started in 1927 was the construction of the polder in the northwest, the first and the smallest of the five projected polders. It replaced the Wieringermeer, the body of water south of Wieringen, and also the name of the new polder. It was the only polder reclaimed from the Zuiderzee itself (the others were reclaimed after the Afsluitdijk was finished), but it wasn't entirely the first. A small test polder of some 0.4\u00a0km2 was constructed in 1926\u20141927 near Andijk in North Holland to research the effects drainage would have on the soil of the Zuiderzee and how best to configure the new polders.\nBuilding the encircling dike for the Wieringermeer was harder than it was for the later polders, because the Wieringermeer dikes were built before the completion of the Afsluitdijk. That meant the tidal currents of the Zuiderzee were still present. As a consequence, they were somewhat higher. Construction started on the dike from Den Oever on Wieringen and the new construction-island of Oude Zeug and progressed satisfactorily. The Wieringermeer was closed off from the Zuiderzee in July 1929. The next step was draining all the water from the future polder.\nDrainage of a polder is performed by a pumping station or mill (\"gemaal\" in Dutch). Two were built for the Wieringermeer, the \"Leemans\", a diesel powered station, near Den Oever and the \"Lely\", an electrically powered one, near Medemblik. Different power systems were used in the stations as a safety mechanism. If one station lost power, the other one would still be able to keep the polder dry. The pumping mechanism itself was based on a variation of Archimedes' screw, as designed by A. Baldwin Wood. The stations, completed in February 1930, managed to drain the polder after six months of continuous pumping. \"Drained\" in this context does not mean the land was wholly dry; extensive pools of shallow water still littered the muddy landscape. To make the soil usable it had to be further drained by a network of drainage canals. Small ditches were dug leading to larger watercourses, which in turn transported their water to the main drainage canals. These canals, dredged when the polder was still filled with water, conducted surplus water to the pumping stations. The resulting dehydration caused the former seabed to sink by over a metre in some places. Once the ground had settled, the smaller ditches were replaced with underground drainage tubes, which would be used for the normal drainage of the polder.\nWith the hydrological infrastructure in place, the virgin land was developed to prepare for its later cultivation. The first plant to establish itself, though more so in the later polders than in the Wieringermeer, was reed, sown from the air by plane onto the muddy flats while the polder was still being drained. This sturdy plant helped evaporate the water and bring air into the soil, thereby solidifying its structure and further preventing the emergence of unwanted weeds.\nAfter the first infrastructure was put in place, the reed was burnt and replaced by rapeseed, turning the newborn polder into a yellow sea of flowers in spring. These crops were succeeded by various grains. In the Wieringermeer the first was rye, but the later polders plant wheat, then barley, and finally oats. This process took years, but once finished allowed planting other crops. At the same time, other infrastructures such as roads and housing were built.\nThe Wieringermeer and later polders were divided into plots of about . The best land is used for vegetables; the next best for rye and other grain; and the worst land is forested. Each plot has a paved road in the front and a canal in the back to make it accessible by land and water. A terp in the center of the polder is built higher than the highest recorded flood level of the North Sea to protect people if the dike fails; the Wieringermeer terp is large enough to hold the population of Amsterdam.\nDuring the German occupation of the Netherlands in World War II the invading forces at first did not interfere; their engineers inspected the project as a model for reclaiming the Frische Haff. In 1945 retreating Germans ordered the inundation of the Wieringermeer, but it was drained again afterwards and the damage repaired.\nPolders.\nWieringermeer.\nThe Wieringermeer, as the first of the envisioned five polders, served as a major testbed for ideas and techniques for the following projects. It is closest to the original concept of the new land being primarily used as agricultural land and it has retained a strong rural character. Four villages eventually were formed in the polder: Slootdorp (1931), Middenmeer (1933), Wieringerwerf (1936), and Kreileroord (1957).\nLocal governance presented a new problem. The area was divided among the mainland municipalities according to the boundaries used when it was water-covered. This configuration was not always practical on the ground and unnecessarily split responsibilities among several bodies. The first solution was a form of government called an \"openbaar lichaam\" or \"public body\", a complicated arrangement which incorporated both the government body in charge of the actual development and an appointed committee responsible for public governance. As the polder became more populated, the demand for representation increased until finally on 1 July 1941, the municipality of Wieringermeer was established.\nOn 17 April 1945, in the closing days of World War II, the Wehrmacht breached the Wieringermeer dike with explosives to flood the polder and prevent allied advance. No casualties were incurred, but the high water and a subsequent storm destroyed most of the infrastructure built in the previous decade as well as all crops. Reconstruction followed quickly, and by the end of 1945 the polder was declared drained again.\nNoordoostpolder.\nThe original 1891 plan called for the largest, southeastern polder to be built after the Wieringermeer, but it was decided in 1932 to give precedence to the northeastern one, which was smaller and therefore considered easier. This would be the Noordoostpolder (\"Northeast-polder\"). Due to initial financial difficulties, construction did not begin until 1936. Two dikes, totaling 55\u00a0km in length, steadily grew in the IJsselmeer, one from Lemmer in Friesland to the island of Urk, the other from Vollenhove in Overijssel to Urk. Construction of these dikes and the necessary pumping stations was disrupted during World War II during the 1940 German conquest of the Netherlands. The encircling dikes were both closed in December 1940, and the pumping stations started draining in early 1941. The Noordoostpolder was considered to be sufficiently drained in September 1942, and the developmental process was started for the 480\u00a0km2 of new land.\nThe task of building the Noordoostpolder was eased by the earlier experience, the now placid waters of the IJsselmeer, and the mechanisation of the construction process. Machines, sometimes made specifically for the Zuiderzee Works, were increasingly used for this and the final polders. Land usage was much the same as in the Wieringermeer, again focusing on farming. Less fertile areas were designated to be planted as forest land. Land in the polders was state-owned during the entire developmental process. Several years after this was completed, the various plots were distributed among private parties, with priority given to the early pioneers who had been in the polder since the start. Later, farmers from all over the Netherlands became eligible for the remainder. Candidates were put through a selection process before receiving their own pieces of new land.\nThe North Sea flood of 1953 made the government change its priorities. Instead of granting the new land only to farmers selected for their skill, the government granted land to a large number of farmers from the flooded province of Zeeland.\nThe polder contains two former islands: the glacial moraine hill of Urk, and the elongated strip of peat land known as Schokland, largely abandoned in the 19th century. Urk was then and is still today a fishing community and it served as a natural construction-island for both dikes as well as a base of operations for the later exploitation of the polder. Both ceased to be islands: Urk on 3 October 1939, when the dike reaching from Lemmer was closed and Schokland when the surrounding water was consequently drained. Both islands stand out in the new land, physically and figuratively. The community of Urk in particular has remained an entity somewhat distinct from the \"mainland\". It is a separate municipality from the rest of the polder, which was organized as the municipality of Noordoostpolder in 1962. The town of Kuinre was cut off from the open water, losing businesses and status.\nAt the heart of the Noordoostpolder, where the three main drainage canals intersect, is the town of Emmeloord (1943). Planned to be the first and the only major town of the polder, it serves as the local governmental and services center. Ten smaller villages, conceived more as agricultural communities, were planned in a wide circle around Emmeloord, at a distance chosen to be easily covered by bicycle. The first settlements were Ens, Marknesse and Kraggenburg (1949), followed by Luttelgeest (1950), Bant (1951), then Creil and Rutten (1953), and finally Espel, Tollebeek, and Nagele (1956). From Emmeloord three canals carry their water to three pumping stations, the \"Buma\" near Lemmer, the \"Smeenge\" at Vollenhove, and finally the \"Vissering\" in Urk. The first two are electrically powered (though connected to different power-plants), while the latter one has diesel power. Like all pumping stations of the Zuiderzee Works, they are named for individuals who made significant contributions to the project.\nThe Flevolands.\nEastern Flevoland.\nThe period following World War II was spent restoring the Wieringermeerpolder and catching up with work on the Noordoostpolder. Soon attention turned towards the next project: Eastern Flevoland (Oostelijk Flevoland), which at 540\u00a0km2 was the largest of the new polders. In 1950 work commenced on several construction-islands in the middle of the IJsselmeer, the largest of which would be Lelystad-Haven, which initially housed a community of dike-builders.\nThe experience of the Noordoostpolder had shown that groundwater from the higher old mainland would flow to the lower new land, causing subsidence and dehydration in the old land. It was decided to use geohydrology to detach the new polders from the mainland. A string of peripheral lakes have been left between the two, requiring a much longer dike of to encircle the polder.\nThe plans for a single south-eastern polder were changed to construct two separate polders with a joint hydrological infrastructure. They were divided by a dike in the middle, the \"Knardijk\", which would keep one polder safe should the other be flooded. The two main drainage canals to traverse the dike could be closed by weirs in such a flooding event. The eastern polder was planned to be the first, and the encircling dike began to take form in 1951. It progressed until the North Sea flood of 1953 struck the south-western Netherlands. Workers and machinery were transferred there for repair work (additional work here was part of the Delta Works).\nWork on Eastern Flevoland resumed in 1954 and the dike was closed on 13 September 1956. The pumping stations started draining the polder that same day, completing the task in June 1957. Three pumping stations were built: the \"Wortman\" (diesel powered) at Lelystad-Haven, the \"Lovink\" near Harderwijk and the \"Colijn\" (both electrically powered) along the northern dike beside the Ketelmeer. All three were built with extra capacity with the future southern polder in mind.\nA new element in the design of this polder was the intention to establish a larger city to serve as a regional centre for all the polders and perhaps the capital of a potential new province. This city, located in the centre of the reclaimed lands, was developed as Lelystad (1966), named after the man who had played a crucial role in the design and realisation of the Zuiderzee Works. Other more conventional settlements had already developed by then; Dronten, the local major town, was founded in 1962, followed in 1963 by two smaller satellite villages, Swifterbant and Biddinghuizen. These last three were incorporated into the new municipality of Dronten on 1 January 1972. Lelystad was large enough to be organized as a separate municipality on 1 January 1980.\nThough agriculture was initially the main purpose of the polder, needs of the post-war period changed the design goals of the new polders. Changing agricultural needs and increased motorised mobility meant many farming villages were unnecessary and the number of towns was eventually reduced to two. Work on the village of Larsen was just about to start when it was cancelled. The amount of agricultural land did not increase; it diminished as a result of the building of Lelystad (a city envisioned to eventually house at least 100,000 inhabitants.) By 2005 it had 70,000 residents. In addition, more area was assigned for development as forests and nature reserves, a trend that would continue in the next polder.\nSouthern Flevoland.\nSouthern Flevoland (Zuidelijk Flevoland) was the fourth polder of the Zuiderzee Works, built adjacent to its larger sibling, Eastern Flevoland. Since its northeastern dike, the aforementioned Knardijk, already existed, only of the dike remained to be built. Starting in early 1959, this was finished in October 1967.\nOnly one pumping station ('gemaal'), the diesel powered \"De Blocq van Kuffeler\", needed to be built because of the hydrological union of the two Flevolands; once the polder was finished it would simply join the previous three in maintaining the water-level of both polders. Before it could do that however the newest \"gemaal\" had to first drain the polder of its water all by itself, completing its job in May 1968.\nDue to the geographically favourable location of the southern polder to the heavily urbanised centre of the Netherlands and in particular Amsterdam, the planners devised a design that would include a large new urban area, to be called Almere, in order to relieve the housing shortage and increasing overcrowding on the old land. Almere was to be divided into 3 major settlements, initially; the first, Almere-Haven (1976), situated along the Gooimeer (one of the peripheral lakes), the second and largest, Almere-Stad (\"Almere City\") (1980), which was to fulfil the role of city centre, and the third, Almere-Buiten (1984), to the northeast towards Lelystad.\nThe area between Lelystad and Almere was designated for heavy industries, but since enough space was still available on the old land for those industries this part of the polder was left alone for the mean time. After only a couple of years this landscape of shallow pools, islets and swamps became a popular resting and foraging area for many species of waterfowl, to the extent that it rapidly turned into a nature reserve of national significance. Although accidental in origin, the \"Oostvaardersplassen\" as they are known became by the 1970s the definitive destination for this section of the polder.\nThe centre of the polder most closely resembles the pre-war polders in that it is almost exclusively agricultural. In contrast, the south-eastern part is dominated by extensive forests. It is also home to the only other settlement of the polder, Zeewolde (1984), again a more conventional town acting as the local centre. Zeewolde became a municipality at the same time as Almere, on 1 January 1984, which in the case of Zeewolde meant that the municipality existed before the town itself, with only farms in the surrounding land to be governed until the town started to grow.\nMarkerwaard.\nMarkerwaard was a planned fifth polder that has never been completed. It was intended to build a south-western polder, to be called the Markerwaard, at several times during the project, but other polders took precedence. Parts of it have been built; in 1941 it was decided to begin work on the first section of dike, but the German occupiers stopped construction that same year. This dike originated on Marken, the last of the IJsselmeer islands, and went north for some where it ends abruptly today. After World War II, the eastern polder was chosen as the next project, but Marken was not wholly ignored; on 17 October 1957, a long dike was closed, running south of the now former island to the North Holland mainland.\nWhen construction started in 1959 on a new dike it had not yet been decided whether this would be the northern dike of Southern Flevoland or the southern dike of the Markerwaard, but the choice eventually fell to the former and another chance for the Markerwaard had passed. A minor flood near Amsterdam in 1960 had demonstrated the danger a large IJsselmeer still presented. A further planned element of the Markerwaard was subsequently executed: a 28\u00a0km dike between Lelystad and Enkhuizen, including two complexes of locks and discharge sluices at either end, was to split the IJsselmeer in two, with the largest portion () continuing as the IJsselmeer and the smaller lake () being named the Markermeer. Construction of this dike, known later as the \"Houtribdijk\" or Markerwaarddijk, progressed slowly, lasting from 1963 to 1975, after which it also served as an important road connection between the north of North Holland and the eastern Netherlands. The Houtribdijk did not, however, result in the construction of the rest of the Markerwaard, as many had hoped.\nThe debate on whether to build the Markerwaard continued for years. The need for new agricultural land had mostly disappeared by this time and extra space for housing was unnecessary in this region. The existing ecological and recreational value of the Markermeer was considered by many to be equal or superior to any potential such value the Markerwaard would offer. Doubts began to surface about the cost-effectiveness of the polder. The original post-war designs had called for a polder, yet many different proposals were later put forth in an effort to combine the benefits of both the Markerwaard and Markermeer, all to no avail. Although cabinets had intended to proceed with the Markerwaard, it was decided to indefinitely postpone the project in September 1986. A proposed alternative was to use the lake as a water reservoir for hydropower combined with wind-power from windmills on the dikes, eliminating the unpredictability of the latter\u00a0\u2013 when there is an overcapacity of wind, use that to fill the lake and when there is not enough, use the high water level for hydro power.\nIn 2012, plans emerged to create the Marker Wadden, a group of islands designed to establish nature reserves in the north of the Markermeer. Contrary to the Markerwaard, no permanent human occupation is planned, although it will be accessible to tourists and birdwatchers. The creation process started in April 2016 with the first new island being inaugurated on 24 September 2016.\nProvince of Flevoland.\nThe loss of the Markerwaard did not affect plans to create a new province out of the polders. The older Wieringermeer in the north, long since part of North Holland, would not become a part of it, but the municipalities of the other three and the islands of the Noordoostpolder would together form the 12th province of the Netherlands, called Flevoland. The need for a new province was not immediately clear; Urk and the Noordoostpolder had been part of Overijssel up to that point and Dronten fell under Gelderland. After the new municipalities of Southern Flevoland were established in 1984, belonging to no province as was the case with Lelystad, the provincial issue required renewed attention. With only six municipalities and without the Markerwaard, the area was considered by opponents to be insufficiently populous and developed for an entire province, but the polder municipalities were unanimous in their desire: on 1 January 1986, the province of Flevoland was inaugurated. With a population of 356,400 (2004) it was the least populous province, but the province of Zeeland had only 378,300 and Flevoland has a higher population density than four other provinces. By 2015, Flevoland had surpassed Zeeland in population (403,380, compared to 380,620) and had a density of 280 persons per square kilometre.\nCriticism.\nIn 1971, the dutch artist Joseph Beuys created the performance-work \"Bog action\" in order to criticize the Zuiderzee Works, in particular the draining and exploitation of peatland. For this art work, the artist immersed himself in the water. \nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "67504", "revid": "7523687", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=67504", "title": "Zuiderzee project", "text": ""}
{"id": "67505", "revid": "43843819", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=67505", "title": "Palais Garnier", "text": "Opera house in Paris, France\n \n}} Chauss\u00e9e d'Antin\u2013La Fayette, \n}} Madeleine, \n}} Auber, \n}} 20, 21, 22, 27, 29, 42, 52, 66, 68, 81, 95\nThe ' (, Garnier Palace), also known as ' (, Garnier Opera), is a historic 1,979-seat opera house at the Place de l'Op\u00e9ra in the 9th arrondissement of Paris, France. It was built for the Paris Opera from 1861 to 1875 at the behest of Emperor Napoleon III. Initially referred to as \"le nouvel Op\u00e9ra de Paris\" (the new Paris Opera), it soon became known as the Palais Garnier, \"in acknowledgment of its extraordinary opulence\" and the architect Charles Garnier's plans and designs, which are representative of the Napoleon III style. It was the primary theatre of the Paris Opera and its associated Paris Opera Ballet until 1989, when a new opera house, the Op\u00e9ra Bastille, opened at the Place de la Bastille. The company now uses the Palais Garnier mainly for ballet. The theatre has been a of France since 1923.\nThe Palais Garnier has been called \"probably the most famous opera house in the world, a symbol of Paris like Notre Dame Cathedral, the Louvre, or the Sacr\u00e9 Coeur Basilica\". This is at least partly due to its use as the setting for Gaston Leroux's 1910 novel \"The Phantom of the Opera\" and, especially, the novel's subsequent adaptations in films and the popular 1986 musical. Another contributing factor is that among the buildings constructed in Paris during the Second Empire, besides being the most expensive, it has been described as the only one that is \"unquestionably a masterpiece of the first rank\".\nThe Palais Garnier also houses the Biblioth\u00e8que-Mus\u00e9e de l'Op\u00e9ra de Paris (Paris Opera Library-Museum), which is managed by the and is included in unaccompanied tours of the Palais Garnier.\nDimensions and technical details.\nThe Palais Garnier is from ground level to the apex of the stage flytower; to the top of the fa\u00e7ade.\nThe building is long; wide at the lateral galleries; wide at the east and west pavilions; from ground level to bottom of the cistern under the stage.\nThe structural system is made of masonry walls; concealed iron floors, vaults, and roofs.\nArchitecture and style.\nThe opera was constructed in what Charles Garnier (1825\u20131898) is said to have told the Empress Eugenie was \"Napoleon III\" style The Napoleon III style was highly eclectic, and borrowed from many historical sources; the opera house included elements from the Baroque, the classicism of Palladio, and Renaissance architecture blended together. These were combined with axial symmetry and modern techniques and materials, including the use of an iron framework, which had been pioneered in other Napoleon III buildings, including the Biblioth\u00e8que Nationale and the markets of Les Halles.\nThe fa\u00e7ade and the interior followed the Napoleon III style principle of leaving no space without decoration. Garnier used polychromy, or a variety of colors, for theatrical effect, achieved different varieties of marble and stone, porphyry, and gilded bronze. The fa\u00e7ade of the Opera used seventeen different kinds of material, arranged in very elaborate multicolored marble friezes, columns, and lavish statuary, many of which portray deities of Greek mythology.\nExterior.\nMain fa\u00e7ade.\nThe principal fa\u00e7ade is on the south side of the building, overlooking the Place de l'Op\u00e9ra and terminates the perspective along the Avenue de l'Op\u00e9ra. Fourteen painters, mosaicists and seventy-three sculptors participated in the creation of its ornamentation.\nThe two gilded figural groups, Charles Gumery's \"L'Harmonie\" (Harmony) and \"La Po\u00e9sie\" (Poetry), crown the apexes of the principal fa\u00e7ade's left and right avant-corps. They are both made of gilt copper electrotype.\nBelow Gumery's \"L'Harmonie\", in the left (west) pediment, is a sculpted relief of two women sitting down representing Architecture and Industry by Jean Claude Petit. The women surround an escutcheon with the words \"ARCHITECTURE\" and \"INDUSTRIE\" in gold. The woman who represents architecture holds a compass and a plan of the Op\u00e9ra Nouvel, at her feet is a winged genius holding a torch. The woman representing industry holds a lead pig and a hammer, while a winged genius stands at her feet, carrying a cup full of jewels.\nIn the right (east) pediment a sculpture of two women sitting down representing Painting and Sculpture by Th\u00e9odore Gruy\u00e8re. The women surround an escutcheon with the words \"PEINTURE\" (painting) and \"SCULPTURE\" in gold. The woman who represents painting holds a brush and a palette, at her feet is a putto holding a pencil.\nThe woman representing sculpture holds a hammer and a chisel, at her feet is a putto sculpturing a bust with a mallet and a gouge.\nThe bases of the two avant-corps are decorated (from left to right) with four major multi-figure groups sculpted by Fran\u00e7ois Jouffroy (\"Poetry\", also known as \"Harmony\"), Jean-Baptiste Claude Eug\u00e8ne Guillaume (\"Instrumental Music\"), Jean-Baptiste Carpeaux (\"The Dance\", criticised for indecency), and Jean-Joseph Perraud (\"Lyrical Drama\"). The fa\u00e7ade also incorporates other work by Gumery, Alexandre Falgui\u00e8re and others.\nGilded galvanoplastic bronze busts of many of the great composers are located between the columns of the theatre's front fa\u00e7ade and depict, from left to right, Rossini, Auber, Beethoven, Mozart, Spontini, Meyerbeer, and Hal\u00e9vy. On the left and right lateral returns of the front fa\u00e7ade are busts of the librettists Eug\u00e8ne Scribe and Philippe Quinault, respectively.\nThe attic storey fa\u00e7ade is decorated with low and high reliefs with the letters \"N\" and \"E\", the imperial monogram (Napol\u00e9on Empereur). The low reliefs are by Louis Villeminot, and the high reliefs are by Jacques-L\u00e9onard Maillet. The high reliefs consist of four sets of ornamental figures. Each group has two winged women on either side of a putto holding up a medallion bearing the letter (\"E\") and the imperial crown. One woman has a trumpet and a palm, the other, a torch and a palm. There were four repetitions of these themes. Two groups have a globe and a lyre on the ground, and the two other groups have two scrolls, a mask, and a laurel wreath. There are seven low reliefs with medallions surrounded by scrolls with two children on either side holding up a garland of flowers and fruits. Five are in the central part of the attic storey having the letter (\"N\") in the medallion and alternate the high reliefs, and the other two are on the east and west returns of the avant-corps.\nA frieze running along the top of the attic storey has fifty-three comic and tragic antique masks in gilt cast iron by Jean-Baptiste Klagmann.\nStage flytower.\nThe sculptural group \"Apollo, Poetry, and Music\", located at the apex of the south gable of the stage flytower, is the work of Aim\u00e9 Millet, and the two smaller bronze Pegasus figures at either end of the south gable are by Eug\u00e8ne-Louis Lequesne.\nPavillon de l'Empereur.\nAlso known as the Rotonde de l'Empereur, this group of rooms is located on the left (west) side of the building and was designed to allow secure and direct access by the Emperor via a double ramp to the building. When the Empire fell, work stopped, leaving unfinished dressed stonework. It now houses the Biblioth\u00e8que-Mus\u00e9e de l'Op\u00e9ra de Paris (Paris Opera Library-Museum) which is home to nearly 600,000 documents including 100,000 books, 1,680 periodicals, 10,000 programs, letters, 100,000 photographs, sketches of costumes and sets, posters and historical administrative records.\nPavillon des Abonn\u00e9s.\nLocated on the right (east) side of the building as a counterpart to the Pavillon de l'Empereur, this pavilion was designed to allow subscribers (\"abonn\u00e9s\") direct access from their carriages to the interior of the building. It is covered by a 13.5-metre (44-ft) diameter dome. Paired obelisks mark the entrances to the rotunda on the north and the south.\nInterior.\nThe interior consists of interweaving corridors, stairwells, alcoves and landings, allowing the movement of large numbers of people and space for socialising during intermission. Rich with velvet, gold leaf, and cherubim and nymphs, the interior is characteristic of Baroque sumptuousness.\nGrand staircase.\nThe building features a large ceremonial staircase of white marble with a balustrade of red and green marble, which divides into two divergent flights of stairs that lead to the Grand Foyer. Its design was inspired by Victor Louis's grand staircase for the Th\u00e9\u00e2tre de Bordeaux. The pedestals of the staircase are decorated with female torch\u00e8res, created by Albert-Ernest Carrier-Belleuse. The ceiling above the staircase was painted by Isidore Pils to depict \"The Triumph of Apollo\", \"The Enchantment of Music Deploying its Charms\", \"Minerva Fighting Brutality Watched by the Gods of Olympus\", and \"The City of Paris Receiving the Plan of the New Op\u00e9ra\". When the paintings were first fixed in place two months before the opening of the building, it was obvious to Garnier that they were too dark for the space. With the help of two of his students, Pils had to rework the canvases while they were in place overhead on the ceiling and, at the age of 61, he fell ill. His students had to finish the work, which was completed the day before the opening and the scaffolding was removed.\nCave of Pythia.\nAt the foot of the Grand staircase, Garnier wanted to place a white marble statue of Orpheus, but there weren't enough funds for this. Then there were talks about moving the La Danse (Carpeaux) from the main fa\u00e7ade, but instead Garnier chose the \"Pythia\" by Ad\u00e8le d'Affry (the artist also known by the pseudonym Marcello). There are two bronze lamps on each side of Pythia, made by Jules Corboz. The intrados of the staircase have plant motifs and musical instruments, masks and shells, the artist imagine it as a Nymphaeum.\nAccording to the Greek mythology, Pythia was the priestess of Apollo, the god of arts, and she delivered the oracles of the god. Marcello wanted her Pythia to look different from Pythias of other artists. She wrote: \"will be an Indian Pythia, the one whose tongue Alexander set wagging. A kind of gypsy.\" \"A poor woman of a rather strange and bestial type, illuminated by the spirit.\" She would be like the fortune tellers of India \"with tamed snakes curled around their forehand.\"\nAvant foyer or \"Foyer of Mosaics\".\nThe Avant foyer is twenty meters long with doors leading to an open salon at each end, in the east to the \"Sun\" and at the west side to the \"Moon\" salons. At its north it open to the Grand Escalier, while at its south is connected by three monumental doors to the Grand Foyer.\nChandeliers.\nThe Avant Foyer is lit by five big chandeliers designed by Charles Garnier in Byzantine style.\nGreek mosaic inscriptions.\nThere are two Greek mosaic inscription, written in the 8th century Byzantine style letters (Greek uncial), which read:\n\"Decorative mosaic was applied for the first time in France to the ornamentation of this vault and the popularisation of this art.\" (Greek inscription 1)\n\"The figures painted by Curzon, were executed by Salviati, the ornaments by Facchina. The architecture is by Charles Garnier.\" (Greek inscription 2)\nThe four pair mosaic panels.\nThe mosaic represent four couples from the Greek mythology (Hermes and Psyche, Artemis and Endymion, Orpheus and Eurydice, Eos and Cephalus). In two of the panels the scenes are more erotic (Artemis - Endymion, Eos - Cephalus), while the other two depict the couples leaving the underworld and are more about death than love (Hermes - Psyche, Orpheus - Eurydice). The theme of death and love alternate.\nThe decoration framing the mosaic panels with the mythological couples include theatre masks, musical instruments, birds, all surrounded by flowers, fruits and gold.\nThe four medallions.\nThere are four bronze gilt medallions representing musical instruments (sistrum for Egypt, lyre for Greece, tambourine and pan flute for Italy, ivory horn for France), encircled by leaf-work characteristic of each country and have the name of the countries in Greek (Egypt=\u0391\u0399\u0393\u03a5\u03a0\u03a4\u039f\u03a3, Greece=\u0395\u039b\u039b\u0391\u03a3, Italy=\u0399\u03a4\u0391\u039b\u0399\u0391 and France=\u0393\u0391\u039b\u039b\u0399\u0391).\nThe Salons of the Sun and Moon.\nAt the east and west end of the Avant foyer there are the \"Salon du Soleil\" (Salon of the Sun) and the \"Salon de la Lune\" (Salon of the Moon). They were designed as the entrance vestibules for the smoking room and the Galerie du Glacier. Their themes were heat for the smoking room and cold for the Glacier, but because they completed in haste in order to be ready for the inauguration of 1875, in the rush there was a mistake and the themes were reversed.\nGrand foyer.\nThis hall, high, long and wide, was designed to act as a drawing room for Paris society. It was restored in 2004. Its ceiling was painted by Paul-Jacques-Aim\u00e9 Baudry and represents various moments in the history of music. The foyer opens onto an outside loggia and is flanked by two octagonal salons with ceilings painted by Jules-\u00c9lie Delaunay in the eastern salon and F\u00e9lix-Joseph Barrias in the western salon. The octagonal salons open to the north into the Salon de la Lune at the western end of the Avant-Foyer and the Salon du Soleil at its eastern end.\nMuses and personifications.\nThere are eight canvases representing the Muses from the Greek mythology. In mythology, the Muses were nine, but because of lack of room, Polyhymnia was \"sacrificed\". Victorin de Jonci\u00e8res protested against this and wrote that it would be better if Urania was \"sacrificed\", since she was the Muse of Astronomy. Nuitter responded that Polyhymnia has a statue in the Grand Foyer among the Qualities. Polyhymnia is also depicted in the big Parnassus panel on the far right corner.\nAuditorium.\nThe auditorium has a traditional Italian horseshoe shape and can seat 1,979. The stage is the largest in Europe and can accommodate as many as 450 artists. The canvas house curtain was painted to represent a draped curtain, complete with tassels and braid.\nThe ceiling area which surrounds the chandelier was originally painted by Jules-Eug\u00e8ne Lenepveu.\nIn 1964 a new ceiling painted by Marc Chagall was installed on a removable frame over the original. It depicts scenes from operas by 14 composers \u2013 Mussorgsky, Mozart, Wagner, Berlioz, Rameau, Debussy, Ravel, Stravinsky, Tchaikovsky, Adam, Bizet, Verdi, Beethoven, and Gluck. Although praised by some, others feel Chagall's work creates \"a false note in Garnier's carefully orchestrated interior\".\nChandelier.\nThe seven-ton bronze and crystal chandelier was designed by Garnier. Jules Corboz prepared the model, and it was cast and chased by Lacari\u00e8re, Delatour &amp; Cie. The total cost came to 30,000 gold francs. The use of a central chandelier aroused controversy, and it was criticised for obstructing views of the stage by patrons in the fourth level boxes and views of the ceiling painted by Lenepveu. Garnier had anticipated these disadvantages but provided a lively defence in his 1871 book \"Le Th\u00e9\u00e2tre\": \"What else could fill the theatre with such joyous life? What else could offer the variety of forms that we have in the pattern of the flames, in these groups and tiers of points of light, these wild hues of gold flecked with bright spots, and these crystalline highlights?\"\nOn 20 May 1896, one of the chandelier's counterweights broke free and burst through the ceiling into the auditorium, killing a concierge. This incident inspired one of the more famous scenes in Gaston Leroux's classic 1910 gothic novel \"The Phantom of the Opera\".\nOriginally the chandelier was raised up through the ceiling into the cupola over the auditorium for cleaning, but now it is lowered. The space in the cupola was used in the 1960s for opera rehearsals, and in the 1980s was remodelled into two floors of dance rehearsal space. The lower floor consists of the Salle Nure\u00efev (Nureyev) and the Salle Balanchine, and the upper floor, the Salle Petipa.\nOrgan.\nThe grand organ was built by Aristide Cavaill\u00e9-Coll for use during lyrical works. It has been out of service for several decades.\nRestaurant.\nGarnier had originally planned to install a restaurant in the opera house; however, for budgetary reasons, it was not completed in the original design.\nOn the third attempt to introduce it since 1875, a restaurant was opened on the eastern side of the building in 2011. L'Op\u00e9ra Restaurant was designed by French architect Odile Decq. The chef was Christophe Aribert; in October 2015, Guillame Tison-Malth\u00e9 became the new head chef. The restaurant, which has three different spaces and a large outside terrace, is accessible to the general public.\nHistory.\nSelection of a site.\nIn 1821 the Op\u00e9ra de Paris had moved into the temporary building known as the Salle Le Peletier on the rue Le Peletier. Since then a new permanent building had been desired. Charles Rohault de Fleury, who was appointed the opera's official architect in 1846, undertook various studies in suitable sites and designs. By 1847, the Prefect of the Seine, Claude-Philibert de Rambuteau, had selected a site on the east side of the Place du Palais-Royal as part of an extension of the Rue de Rivoli. However, with the Revolution of 1848, Rambuteau was dismissed, and interest in the construction of a new opera house waned. The site was later used for the Grand H\u00f4tel du Louvre (designed in part by Charles Rohault de Fleury).\nWith the establishment of the Second Empire in 1852 and Georges-Eug\u00e8ne Haussmann's appointment as Prefect of the Seine in June 1853, interest in a new opera house revived. There was an attempted assassination of Emperor Napoleon III at the entrance to the Salle Le Peletier on 14 January 1858. The Salle Le Peletier's constricted street access highlighted the need for a separate, more secure entrance for the head of state. This concern and the inadequate facilities and temporary nature of the theatre gave added urgency to the building of a new state-funded opera house. By March, Haussmann settled on Rohault de Fleury's proposed site off the Boulevard des Capucines, although this decision was not announced publicly until 1860. A new building would help resolve the awkward convergence of streets at this location, and the site was economical in terms of the cost of land.\nOn 29 September 1860 an Imperial Decree officially designated the site for the new Op\u00e9ra, which would eventually occupy . By November 1860 Rohault de Fleury had completed the design for what he thought would be the crowning work of his career and was also working on a commission from the city to design the fa\u00e7ades of the other buildings lining the new square to ensure they were in harmony. However, that same month Achille Fould was replaced as Minister of State by Count Alexandre Colonna-Walewski. His wife Marie Anne de Ricci Poniatowska had used her position as mistress of Napoleon III to obtain her husband's appointment. Aware of competing designs and under pressure to give the commission to Viollet-le-Duc, who had the support of Empress Eug\u00e9nie, Walewski escaped the need to make a decision by proposing to mount an architectural design competition to select the architect.\nDesign competition.\nOn 30 December 1860 the Second Empire of Emperor Napoleon III officially announced an architectural design competition for the design of the new opera house.\nApplicants were given a month to submit entries. There were two phases to the competition. Charles Garnier's project was one of about 170 submitted in the first phase. Each of the entrants was required to submit a motto that summarised their design. Garnier's was the quote \"Bramo assai, poco spero\" (\"Hope for much, expect little\") from the Italian poet Torquato Tasso.\nGarnier's project was awarded the fifth-place prize, and he became one of seven finalists selected for the second phase. In addition to Garnier, among the others were his friend Leon Ginain, Alphonse-Nicolas Cr\u00e9pinet and Joseph-Louis Duc (who subsequently withdrew due to other commitments). To the surprise of many, both Viollet-le-Duc and Charles Rohault de Fleury missed out.\nThe second phase required the contestants to revise their original projects and was more rigorous, with a 58-page program, written by the director of the Op\u00e9ra, Alphonse Royer, which the contestants received on 18 April. The new submissions were sent to the jury in the middle of May, and on 29 May 1861 Garnier's project was selected for its \"rare and superior qualities in the beautiful distribution of the plans, the monumental and characteristic aspect of the fa\u00e7ades and sections\".\nGarnier's wife Louise later wrote that the French architect Alphonse de Gisors, who was on the jury, had commented to them that Garnier's project was \"remarkable in its simplicity, clarity, logic, grandeur, and because of the exterior dispositions which distinguish the plan in three distinct parts\u2014the public spaces, auditorium, and stage ... 'you have greatly improved your project since the first competition; whereas Ginain [the first-place winner in the first phase] has ruined his.'\"\nLegend has it that the Emperor's wife, the Empress Eug\u00e9nie, who was likely irritated that her own favoured candidate, Viollet-le-Duc, had not been selected, asked the relatively unknown Garnier: \"What is this? It's not a style; it's neither Louis Quatorze, nor Louis Quinze, nor Louis Seize!\" \"Why Ma'am, it's Napol\u00e9on Trois\" replied Garnier \"and you're complaining!\" Andrew Ayers has written that Garnier's definition \"remains undisputed, so much does the Palais Garnier seem emblematic of its time and of the Second Empire that created it. A giddy mixture of up-to-the-minute technology, rather prescriptive rationalism, exuberant eclecticism and astonishing opulence, Garnier's opera encapsulated the divergent tendencies and political and social ambitions of its era.\" Ayers goes on to say that the judges of the competition in particular admired Garnier's design for \"the clarity of his plan, which was a brilliant example of the \"beaux-arts\" design methods in which both he and they were thoroughly versed\".\nOp\u00e9ra Agence.\nAfter the initial funds to begin construction were voted on 2 July 1861, Garnier established the Op\u00e9ra \"Agence\", his office on the construction site, and hired a team of architects and draftsmen. He selected as his second-in-command, Louis-Victor Louvet, followed by Jean Jourdain and Edmond Le Deschault.\nLaying of the foundation.\nThe site was excavated between 27 August and 31 December 1861. On 13 January 1862 the first concrete foundations were poured, starting at the front and progressing sequentially toward the back, with the laying of the substructure masonry beginning as soon as each section of concrete was cast. The opera house needed a much deeper basement in the substage area than other building types, but the level of the groundwater was unexpectedly high. Wells were sunk in February 1862 and eight steam pumps installed in March, but despite operating continuously 24 hours a day, the site would not dry up. To deal with this problem Garnier designed a double foundation to protect the superstructure from moisture. It incorporated a water course and an enormous concrete cistern (\"cuve\") which would both relieve the pressure of the external groundwater on the basement walls and serve as a reservoir in case of fire. A contract for its construction was signed on 20 June. Soon a persistent legend arose that the opera house was built over a subterranean lake, inspiring Gaston Leroux to incorporate the idea into his novel \"The Phantom of the Opera\". On 21 July the cornerstone was laid at the southeast angle of the building's fa\u00e7ade. In October the pumps were removed, the brick vault of the \"cuve\" was finished by 8 November, and the substructure was essentially complete by the end of the year.\nModel.\nThe emperor expressed an interest in seeing a model of the building, and a plaster scale model (2\u00a0cm per meter) was constructed by Louis Villeminot between April 1862 and April 1863 at a cost of more than 8,000 francs. After previewing it, the emperor requested several changes to the design of the building, the most important of which was the suppression of a balustraded terrace with corner groups at the top of the fa\u00e7ade and its replacement with a massive attic story fronted by a continuous frieze surmounted by imperial \"quadrigae\" over the end bays.\nWith the incorporated changes, the model was transported over specially installed rails to the Palais de l'Industrie for public display at the 1863 exhibition. Th\u00e9ophile Gautier wrote of the model (\"Le Moniteur Universel\", 13 May 1863) that \"the general arrangement becomes intelligible to all eyes and already acquires a sort of reality that better permits one to prejudge the final effect ... it attracts the crowd's curiosity; it is, in effect, the new Op\u00e9ra seen through reversed opera glasses.\" The model is now lost, but it was photographed by J. B. Donas in 1863.\nThe emperor's quadrigae were never added, although they can be seen in the model. Instead Charles-Alphonse Gum\u00e9ry's gilded bronze sculptural groups \"Harmony\" and \"Poetry\" were installed in 1869. The linear frieze seen in the model was also redesigned with alternating low- and high-relief decorative medallions bearing the gilded letters from the imperial monogram (\"N\" for Napol\u00e9on, \"E\" for Empereur). The custom-designed letters were not ready in time for the unveiling and were replaced with commercially available substitutes. After the fall of the empire in 1870, Garnier was relieved to be able to remove them from the medallions. Letters in Garnier's original design were finally installed during the restoration of the building in 2000.\nChange in name.\nThe scaffolding concealing the fa\u00e7ade was removed on 15 August 1867 in time for the Paris Exposition of 1867. The official title of the Paris Opera was prominently displayed on the entablature of the giant Corinthian order of coupled columns fronting the main-floor loggia: \"ACADEMIE IMPERIALE DE MUSIQUE\". When the emperor was deposed on 4 September 1870 as a result of the disastrous Franco-Prussian War, the government was replaced by the Third Republic, and almost immediately, on 17 September 1870, the Opera was renamed Th\u00e9\u00e2tre National de l'Op\u00e9ra, a name it kept until 1939. In spite of this, when it came time to change the name on the new opera house, only the first six letters of the word IMPERIALE were replaced, giving the now famous \"ACADEMIE NATIONALE DE MUSIQUE\", an official title which had actually only been used during the approximately two-year period of the Second Republic which had preceded the Second Empire.\n1870\u20131871.\nAll work on the building came to a halt during the Franco-Prussian War due to the siege of Paris (September 1870 \u2013 January 1871). Construction had so advanced that parts of the building could be used as a food warehouse and a hospital. After France's defeat Garnier became seriously ill from the deprivations of the siege and left Paris from March to June to recover on the Ligurian coast of Italy, while his assistant Louis Louvet remained behind during the turmoil of the Paris Commune which followed. Louvet wrote several letters to Garnier, which document events relating to the building. Because of the theatre's proximity to the fighting at the Place Vend\u00f4me, troops of the National Guard bivouacked there and were in charge of its defence and distributing food to soldiers and civilians. The Commune authorities planned to replace Garnier with another architect, but this unnamed man had not yet appeared when Republican troops ousted the National Guard and gained control over the building on 23 May. By the end of the month the Commune had been severely defeated. The Third Republic had become sufficiently well established by the fall, that on 30 September construction work recommenced, and by late October a small amount of funds were voted by the new legislature for further construction.\n1872\u20131873.\nThe political leaders of the new government maintained an intense dislike of all things associated with the Second Empire, and many of them regarded the essentially apolitical Garnier as a holdover from that regime. This was especially true during the presidency of Adolphe Thiers who remained in office until May 1873, but also persisted under his successor Marshal MacMahon. Economies were demanded, and Garnier was forced to suppress the completion of sections of the building, in particular the Pavillon de l'Empereur (which later became the home of the Opera Library Museum). However, on 28\u201329 October an overwhelming incentive to complete the new theatre came when the Salle Le Peletier was destroyed by a fire which raged the entire night. Garnier was immediately instructed to complete the building as soon as possible.\nCompletion.\nThe cost of completion of the new house during 1874 was more than 7.5\u00a0million francs, a sum that greatly exceeded the amounts spent in any of the previous thirteen years. The cash-strapped government of the Third Republic resorted to borrowing 4.9\u00a0million gold francs at an interest rate of six percent from Fran\u00e7ois Blanc, the wealthy financier who managed the Monte Carlo Casino. Subsequently (from 1876 to 1879) Garnier would oversee the design and construction of the Monte Carlo Casino concert hall, the Salle Garnier, which later became the home of the Op\u00e9ra de Monte Carlo.\nDuring 1874 Garnier and his construction team worked feverishly to complete the new Paris opera house, and by 17 October the orchestra was able to conduct an acoustical test of the new auditorium, followed by another on 2 December which was attended by officials, guests, and members of the press. The Paris Opera Ballet danced on the stage on 12 December, and six days later the famous chandelier was lit for the first time.\nThe theatre was formally inaugurated on 5 January 1875 with a lavish gala performance attended by Marshal MacMahon, the Lord Mayor of London and King Alfonso XII of Spain. The program included the overtures to Auber's \"La muette de Portici\" and Rossini's \"William Tell\", the first two acts of Fromental Hal\u00e9vy's 1835 opera \"La Juive\" (with Gabrielle Krauss in the title role), along with \"The Consecration of the Swords\" from Meyerbeer's 1836 opera \"Les Huguenots\" and the 1866 ballet \"La source\" with music by Delibes and Minkus. As a soprano had fallen ill one act from Charles Gounod's \"Faust\" and one from Ambroise Thomas's \"Hamlet\" had to be omitted. During the intermission Garnier stepped out onto the landing of the grand staircase to receive the approving applause of the audience.\nHistory of the house since opening.\nIn 1881 electric lighting was installed. In the 1950s new personnel and freight elevators were installed at the rear of stage, to facilitate the movement of employees in the administration building and the moving of stage scenery.\nIn 1969, the theatre was given new electrical facilities and, during 1978, part of the original Foyer de la Danse was converted into new rehearsal space for the Ballet company by the architect Jean-Loup Roubert. During 1994, restoration work began on the theatre. This consisted of modernizing the stage machinery and electrical facilities, while restoring and preserving the opulent d\u00e9cor, as well as strengthening the structure and foundation of the building. This restoration was completed in 2007.\nInfluence.\nThe Palais Garnier inspired many other buildings over the following years.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "67506", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=67506", "title": "Hasely Crawford", "text": "Trinidadian sprinter"}
{"id": "67510", "revid": "2842084", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=67510", "title": "Archie Hahn (sprinter)", "text": "American athlete\nCharles Archibald Hahn (September 14, 1880 \u2013 January 21, 1955) was an American track athlete and is widely regarded as one of the best sprinters of the early 20th century. He is the first athlete to win both the 100 m and 200 m race at the same Olympic Games.\nBiography.\nHaving won sprint events at the 1903 American and Canadian championships, Hahn\u2014 born in Dodgeville, Wisconsin, but running for the University of Michigan\u2014 was among the favorites at the 1904 Olympic Games in St. Louis, which was poorly attended by European athletes.\nIn the first event at those Games, the 60 m, Hahn benefited from his quick start and won, making him a favorite for the remaining events he was entered in, the 100 m and 200 m. His run in the 200 m final delivered him the gold and a good time, although the latter was flattered, because the race was run on a straight course. In his third event, he again outclassed the field, thus winning all sprint events.\nIn 1906, the \"Milwaukee Meteor\" repeated his Olympic 100 m victory in Athens, a feat not equaled until 1988, when Carl Lewis won the 100 m twice in a row (after the disqualification of Ben Johnson). In 1910 he outran a racehorse in a 50-yard dash at the Wisconsin State Fair.\nAfter his running career, Hahn became a coach and wrote the classic book \"How to Sprint\" issued by the Spalding Athletic Library collection which was published by American Sports Publishing Co. He coached track and number of other sports at Pacific University in Forest Grove, Oregon, Monmouth College in Monmouth, Illinois, Whitman College, Brown University, Michigan, Princeton University, and the University of Virginia. At Virginia he led the Cavaliers to 12 state championships in 13 years. He died in 1955, in Charlottesville, Virginia.\nIn 1929 Hahn's book \"How to Sprint\" was issued by the Spalding Athletic Library.\nHahn was elected to the Wisconsin Athletic Hall of Fame in 1959. He was inducted into the University of Michigan Athletic Hall of Honor in 1984 and the Virginia Sports Hall of Fame in 1991.\nHe is the grandfather of the actor / comedian Archie Hahn.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "67511", "revid": "36652064", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=67511", "title": "Mammoth Cave National Park", "text": "National park in Kentucky, United States\nMammoth Cave National Park is a national park of the United States in south-central Kentucky. It encompasses portions of Mammoth Cave, the longest known cave system in the world. The park's are located primarily in Edmonson County, with small areas extending eastward into Hart and Barren counties. The Green River runs through the park, with a tributary called the Nolin River feeding into the Green just inside the park.\nThe cave system has formally been known as the Mammoth\u2013Flint Ridge Cave System since 1972, when a connection was discovered between Mammoth Cave and the even longer system under Flint Ridge to the north. As of 2025, more than of passageways had been surveyed, over 1.5 times longer than the second-longest cave system, Mexico's Sac Actun underwater cave.\nThe park was established as a national park on July 1, 1941, after oft-contentious eminent domain proceedings whose consequences still affect the region. It was named a World Heritage Site on October\u00a027, 1981; an international Biosphere Reserve on September\u00a026, 1990; and an International Dark Sky Park on October 28, 2021.\nMission.\nThe park's mission is stated in its foundation document:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The purpose of Mammoth Cave National Park is to preserve, protect, interpret, and study the internationally recognized biological and geologic features and processes associated with the longest known cave system in the world, the park\u2019s diverse forested karst landscape, the Green and Nolin rivers, and extensive evidence of human history; and to provide and promote public enjoyment, recreation, and understanding.\nGeology.\nMammoth Cave developed in thick Mississippian-aged limestone strata capped by a layer of sandstone, which has made the system remarkably stable. It is known to include more than of passageway. New discoveries and connections add several miles/kilometers to this figure each year.\nThe upper sandstone member is known as the Big Clifty Sandstone. Thin, sparse layers of limestone interspersed within the sandstone give rise to an epikarstic zone, in which tiny conduits (cave passages too small to enter) are dissolved by the natural acidity of groundwater. The epikarstic zone concentrates local flows of runoff into high-elevation springs which emerge at the edges of ridges. The resurgent water from these springs typically flows briefly on the surface before sinking underground again at the elevation of contact between the sandstone caprock and the underlying massive limestones. It is in these underlying massive limestone layers that the human-explorable caves of the region have naturally developed.\nThe limestone layers of the stratigraphic column beneath the Big Clifty, in increasing order of depth below the ridgetops, are the Girkin Formation, the Ste. Genevieve Limestone, and the St. Louis Limestone. The large Main Cave passage seen on the Historic Tour is located at the bottom of the Girkin and the top of the Ste. Genevieve Formation.\nEach of the primary layers of limestone is divided further into named geological units and sub-units. One area of cave research involves correlating the stratigraphy with the cave survey produced by explorers. This makes it possible to produce approximate three-dimensional maps of the contours of the various layer boundaries without the necessity for test wells and extracting core samples.\nThe upper sandstone caprock is relatively hard for water to penetrate: the exceptions are where vertical cracks occur. This protective layer means that many of the older, upper passages of the cave system are very dry, with no stalactites, stalagmites, or other formations which require flowing or dripping water to develop.\nHowever, the sandstone caprock layer has been dissolved and eroded at many locations within the park, such as the Frozen Niagara room. The contact between limestone and sandstone can be found by hiking from the valley bottoms to the ridgetops: typically, as one approaches the top of a ridge, one sees the outcrops of exposed rock change in composition from limestone to sandstone at a well-defined elevation.\nAt one valley bottom in the southern region of the park, a massive sinkhole has developed. Known as Cedar Sink, the sinkhole features a small river entering one side and disappearing back underground at the other side.\nVisiting.\nThe National Park Service offers several cave tours to visitors. Some notable features of the cave, such as Grand Avenue, Frozen Niagara, and Fat Man's Misery, can be seen on lighted tours ranging from one to six hours in length. Two tours, lit only by visitor-carried paraffin lamps, are popular alternatives to the electric-lit routes. Several \"wild\" tours venture away from the developed parts of the cave into muddy crawls and dusty tunnels.\nThe Echo River Tour, one of the cave's most famous attractions, took visitors on a boat ride along an underground river. The tour was discontinued for logistical and environmental reasons in the early 1990s.\nMammoth Cave headquarters and visitor center is located on Mammoth Cave Parkway. The park can be accessed directly from I-65 at Exit 48. The parkway connects with Kentucky Route 70 from the north and Kentucky Route 255 from the south within the park.\nHistory.\nPrehistory.\nHuman activity in Mammoth Cave traces back five thousand years. Several sets of Native American remains have been recovered from Mammoth Cave, or other nearby caves in the region, in both the 19th and 20th centuries. Most were mummies, representing examples of intentional burial, with ample evidence of pre-Columbian funerary practice.\nAn exception to purposeful burial was discovered when in 1935 the remains of an adult male were found under a large boulder. The boulder had shifted and settled onto the victim, a pre-Columbian miner, who had disturbed the rubble supporting it. The remains of the ancient victim were named \"Lost John\" and exhibited to the public into the 1970s, when they were interred in a secret location in Mammoth Cave for reasons of preservation as well as emerging political sensitivities with respect to the public display of Native American remains.\nResearch beginning in the late 1950s led by Patty Jo Watson, of Washington University in St. Louis has done much to illuminate the lives of the late Archaic and early Woodland peoples who explored and exploited caves in the region. Preserved by the constant cave environment, dietary evidence yielded carbon dates enabling Watson and others to determine the age of the specimens. An analysis of their content, also pioneered by Watson, allows determination of the relative content of plant and meat in the diet of either culture over a period spanning several thousand years. This analysis indicates a timed transition from a hunter-gatherer culture to plant domestication and agriculture.\nAnother technique employed in archaeological research, at Mammoth Cave, was \"experimental archaeology\" in which modern explorers were sent into the cave using the same technology as that employed by the ancient cultures whose leftover implements lie discarded in many parts of the cave. The goal was to gain insight into the problems faced by the ancient people who explored the cave, by placing the researchers in a similar physical situation.\nAncient human remains and artifacts within the caves are protected by various federal and state laws. One of the most basic facts to be determined about a newly discovered artifact is its precise location and situation. Even slightly moving a prehistoric artifact contaminates it from a research perspective. Explorers are properly trained not to disturb archaeological evidence, and some areas of the cave remain out-of-bounds for even seasoned explorers, unless the subject of the trip is archaeological research on that area.\nBesides the remains that have been discovered in the portion of the cave accessible through the historic entrance of Mammoth Cave, the remains of cane torches used by Native Americans as well as other artifacts such as drawings, gourd fragments, and woven grass moccasin slippers are found in the Salts Cave section of the system in Flint Ridge.\nEarliest written history.\nThe tract known as the \"Pollard Survey\" was sold by indenture on September\u00a010, 1791 in Philadelphia by William Pollard. of the \"Pollard Survey\" between the North bank of Bacon Creek and the Green River were purchased by Thomas Lang Jr., a British-American merchant from Yorkshire, England, on June\u00a03, 1796, for \u00a34,116/13s/0d (\u00a34,116.65). The land was lost to a local county tax claim during the War of 1812.\nLegend has it that the first European to visit Mammoth Cave was either John Houchin or his brother Francis Houchin, in 1797. While hunting, Houchin pursued a wounded bear to the cave's large entrance opening near the Green River. Some Houchin Family tales have John Decatur \"Johnny Dick\" Houchin as the discoverer of the cave, but this is highly unlikely because Johnny Dick was only 10 years old in 1797 and was unlikely to be out hunting bears at such an age. His father John is the more likely candidate from that branch of the family tree, but the most probable candidate for discoverer of Mammoth Cave is Francis \"Frank\" Houchin, whose land was much closer to the cave entrance than his brother John's. There is also the argument that their brother Charles Houchin, who was known as a great hunter and trapper, was the man who shot that bear and chased it into the cave. The shadow over Charles's claim is the fact that he was residing in Illinois until 1801. Contrary to this story is Brucker and Watson's \"The Longest Cave\", which asserts that the cave was \"certainly known before that time.\" Caves in the area were known before the discovery of the entrance to Mammoth Cave. Even Francis Houchin had a cave entrance on his land very near the bend in the Green River known as the Turnhole, which is less than a mile from the main entrance of Mammoth Cave.\nThe land containing this historic entrance was first surveyed and registered in 1798 under the name of Valentine Simon. Simon began exploiting Mammoth Cave for its saltpeter reserves.\n19th century.\nIn partnership with Valentine Simon, various other individuals would own the land through the War of 1812, when Mammoth Cave's saltpeter reserves became significant due to the Jefferson Embargo Act of 1807 which prohibited all foreign trade. The blockade starved the American military of saltpeter and therefore gunpowder. As a result, the domestic price of saltpeter rose and production based on nitrates extracted from caves such as Mammoth Cave became more lucrative.\nIn July 1812, the cave was purchased from Simon and other owners by Charles Wilkins and an investor from Philadelphia named Hyman Gratz. Soon the cave was being mined for calcium nitrate on an industrial scale, utilizing a labor force of 70 slaves to build and operate the soil leaching apparatus, as well as to haul the raw soil from deep in the cave to the central processing site.\nA half-interest in the cave changed hands for $10,000 (equivalent to over $150,000 in 2020). After the war when prices fell, the workings were abandoned and it became a minor tourist attraction centering on a Native American mummy discovered nearby.\nWhen Wilkins died his estate's executors sold his interest in the cave to Gratz. In the spring of 1838, the cave was sold by the Gratz brothers to Franklin Gorin, who intended to operate Mammoth Cave purely as a tourist attraction, the bottom long having since fallen out of the saltpeter market. Gorin was a slave owner, and used his slaves as tour guides. Stephen Bishop was one of these slaves and would make a number of important contributions to human knowledge of the cave, becoming one of Mammoth Cave's most celebrated historical figures.\nStephen Bishop was an African-American slave and a guide to the cave during the 1840s and 1850s, was one of the first people to make extensive maps of the cave, and named many of the cave's features.\nStephen Bishop was introduced to Mammoth Cave in 1838 by Franklin Gorin. Gorin wrote, after Bishop's death: \"I placed a guide in the cave \u2013 the celebrated and great Stephen, and he aided in making the discoveries. He was the first person who ever crossed the Bottomless Pit, and he, myself and another person whose name I have forgotten were the only persons ever at the bottom of Gorin's Dome to my knowledge.\"\n\"After Stephen crossed the Bottomless Pit, we discovered all that part of the cave now known beyond that point. Previous to those discoveries, all interest centered in what is known as the 'Old Cave' ... but now many of the points are but little known, although as Stephen was wont to say, they were 'grand, gloomy and peculiar'.\"\nIn 1839, John Croghan of Louisville bought the Mammoth Cave Estate, including Bishop and its other slaves from their previous owner, Franklin Gorin. Croghan briefly ran an ill-fated tuberculosis hospital in the cave in 1842\u201343, the vapors of which he believed would cure his patients. A widespread epidemic of the period, tuberculosis would ultimately claim the life of Dr. Croghan in 1849.\nIn 1866, the first photos from within the Mammoth Cave were taken by Charles Waldack, a photographer from Cincinnati, Ohio, using a very dangerous method of flash photography called magnesium flash photography.\nThroughout the 19th century, the fame of Mammoth Cave would grow so that the cave became an international sensation. At the same time, the cave attracted the attention of 19th century writers such as Robert Montgomery Bird, the Rev. Robert Davidson, the Rev. Horace Martin, Alexander Clark Bullitt, Nathaniel Parker Willis (who visited in June 1852), Bayard Taylor (in May 1855), William Stump Forwood (in spring 1867), the naturalist John Muir (early September 1867), the Rev. Horace Carter Hovey, and others. As a result of the growing renown of Mammoth Cave, the cave boasted famous visitors such as actor Edwin Booth (his brother, John Wilkes Booth, assassinated Abraham Lincoln in 1865), singer Jenny Lind (who visited the cave on April\u00a05, 1851), and violinist Ole Bull who together gave a concert in one of the caves. Two chambers in the caves have since been known as \"Booth's Amphitheatre\" and \"Ole Bull's Concert Hall\".\nEarly 20th century: The Kentucky Cave Wars.\nThe difficulties of farming life in the hardscrabble, poor soil of the cave-country influenced local owners of smaller nearby caves to see opportunities for commercial exploitation, particularly given the success of Mammoth Cave as a tourist attraction. The \"Kentucky Cave Wars\" was a period of bitter competition between local cave owners for tourist money. Broad tactics of deception were used to lure visitors away from their intended destination to other private show caves. Misleading signs were placed along the roads leading to the Mammoth Cave. A typical strategy during the early days of automobile travel involved representatives (known as \"cappers\") of other private show caves hopping aboard a tourist's car's running board, and leading the passengers to believe that Mammoth Cave was closed, quarantined, caved in or otherwise inaccessible.\nIn 1906, Mammoth Cave became accessible by steamboat with the construction of a lock and dam at Brownsville, Kentucky.\nIn 1908, Max K\u00e4mper, a young German mining engineer, arrived at the cave by way of New York. K\u00e4mper had just graduated from technical college and his family had sent him on a trip abroad as a graduation present. Originally intending to spend two weeks at Mammoth Cave, K\u00e4mper spent several months. With the assistance of Ed Bishop, a Mammoth Cave Guide, K\u00e4mper produced a remarkably accurate instrumental survey of many kilometers of Mammoth Cave, including many new discoveries. Reportedly, K\u00e4mper also produced a corresponding survey of the land surface overlying the cave: this information was to be useful in the opening of other entrances to the cave, as soon happened with the Violet City entrance.\nThe Croghan family suppressed the topographic element of K\u00e4mper's map, and it is not known to survive today, although the cave map portion of K\u00e4mper's work stands as a triumph of accurate cave cartography: not until the early 1960s and the advent of the modern exploration period would these passages be surveyed and mapped with greater accuracy. K\u00e4mper returned to Berlin, and from the point of the 1906 construction of the dam at Brownsville, pointing out that this made a full hydrologic study of the cave impossible. Among his precise descriptions of the hydrogeologic setting of Mammoth Cave, Martel offered the speculative conclusion that Mammoth Cave was connected to Salts and Colossal Caves: this would not be proven correct until 60 years after Martel's visit.\nIn the early 1920s, George Morrison created, via blasting, a number of entrances to Mammoth Cave on land not owned by the Croghan Estate. Absent the data from the Croghan's secretive surveys, performed by K\u00e4mper, Bishop, and others, which had not been published in a form suitable for determining the geographic extent of the cave, it was now conclusively shown that the Croghans had been for years exhibiting portions of Mammoth Cave which were not under land they owned. Lawsuits were filed and, for a time, different entrances to the cave were operated in direct competition with each other.\nIn the early 20th century, Floyd Collins spent ten years exploring the Flint Ridge Cave System (the most important legacy of these explorations was his discovery of Floyd Collins' Crystal Cave and exploration in Salts Cave) before dying at Sand Cave, Kentucky, in 1925. While exploring Sand Cave, he dislodged a rock onto his leg while in a tight crawlway and was unable to be rescued before dying of starvation. Attempts to rescue Collins created a mass media sensation; the resulting publicity would draw prominent Kentuckians to initiate a movement which would result in the formation of Mammoth Cave National Park in 1941.\nThe national park movement (1926\u20131941).\nAs the last of the Croghan heirs died, advocacy grew among wealthy citizens of Kentucky for the establishment of Mammoth Cave National Park. Private citizens formed the Mammoth Cave National Park Association in 1924. The park was authorized May\u00a025, 1926.\nDonated funds were used to purchase some farmsteads in the region, while other tracts within the proposed national park boundary were acquired by right of eminent domain. Unlike national parks in the sparsely populated American West, thousands of people were forced to move to form Mammoth Cave National Park. Eminent domain proceedings were often bitter, with landowners paid what were considered to be inadequate sums. The resulting acrimony still resonates within the region.\nFor legal reasons, the federal government was prohibited from restoring or developing the cleared farmsteads while the private Association held the land: this regulation was evaded by the operation of \"a maximum of four\" CCC camps from May\u00a022, 1933 to July 1942.\nAccording to the National Park Service, \"By May 22, 1936, of land had been acquired and accepted by the Secretary of the Interior. The area was declared a national park on July 1, 1941, when the minimum of (over 600 parcels) had been assembled.\"\nSuperintendent Hoskins later wrote of a summer tanager named Pete who arrived at the guide house on or around every April\u00a020, starting in 1938. The bird ate from food held in the hands of the guides, to the delight of visitors, and provided food to his less-tame mate.\nBirth of the national park (1941).\nMammoth Cave National Park was dedicated on July\u00a01, 1941. The same year saw the incorporation of the National Speleological Society. R. Taylor Hoskins, the second Acting Superintendent under the old Association, became the first official Superintendent, a position he held until 1951.\nThe New Entrance, closed to visitors since 1941, was reopened on December\u00a026, 1951, becoming the entrance used for the beginning of the Frozen Niagara tour.\nThe longest cave (1954\u20131972).\nBy 1954, Mammoth Cave National Park's land holdings encompassed all lands within its outer boundary with the exception of two privately held tracts. One of these, the old Lee Collins farm, had been sold to Harry Thomas of Horse Cave, Kentucky, whose grandson, William \"Bill\" Austin, operated Collins Crystal Cave as a show cave in direct competition with the national park, which was forced to maintain roads leading to the property.\nIn February 1954, a two-week expedition under the auspices of the National Speleological Society was organized at the invitation of Austin: this expedition became known as C-3, or the Collins Crystal Cave Expedition.\nThe C-3 expedition drew public interest, first from a photo essay published by Robert Halmi in the July 1954 issue of \"True Magazine\" and later from the publication of a double first-person account of the expedition, \"The Caves Beyond: The Story of the Collins Crystal Cave Expedition\" by Joe Lawrence Jr. (then president of the National Speleological Society) and Roger Brucker. The expedition proved conclusively that passages in Crystal Cave extended toward Mammoth Cave proper, at least exceeding the Crystal Cave property boundaries. However, this information was closely held by the explorers: it was feared that the National Park Service might forbid exploration were this known.\nIn 1955, Crystal Cave was connected by survey with Unknown Cave, the first connection in the Flint Ridge system.\nSome of the participants in the C-3 expedition wished to continue their explorations past the conclusion of the C-3 Expedition, and organized as the Flint Ridge Reconnaissance under the guidance of Austin, Jim Dyer, John J. Lehrberger and E. Robert Pohl. This organization was incorporated in 1957 as the Cave Research Foundation. The organization sought to legitimize the cave explorers' activity through the support of original academic and scientific research. Notable scientists who studied Mammoth Cave during this period include Patty Jo Watson (see section on prehistory).\nIn March 1961, the Crystal Cave property was sold to the National Park Service for $285,000. At the same time, the Great Onyx Cave property, the only other remaining private inholding, was purchased for $365,000. The Cave Research Foundation was permitted to continue their exploration through a Memorandum of Understanding with the National Park Service.\nColossal Cave was connected by survey to Salts Cave in 1960 and in 1961 Colossal-Salts cave was similarly connected to Crystal-Unknown cave, creating a single cave system under much of Flint Ridge. By 1972, the Flint Ridge Cave System had been surveyed to a length of , making it the longest cave in the world.\nFlint\u2013Mammoth connection (1972).\nDuring the 1960s, Cave Research Foundation (CRF) exploration and mapping teams had found passageways in the Flint Ridge Cave System that penetrated under Houchins Valley and came within of known passages in Mammoth Cave. In 1972, CRF Chief Cartographer John Wilcox pursued an aggressive program to finally connect the caves, fielding several expeditions from the Flint Ridge side as well as exploring leads in Mammoth Cave.\nOn a July 1972 trip, deep in the Flint Ridge Cave System, Patricia Crowther\u2014with her slight frame of crawled through a narrow canyon later dubbed the \"Tight Spot\", which acted as a filter for larger cavers. A subsequent trip past the Tight Spot on August 30, 1972, by Wilcox, Crowther, Richard Zopf, and Tom Brucker discovered the name \"Pete H\" inscribed on the wall of a river passage with an arrow pointing in the direction of Mammoth Cave. The name is believed to have been carved by Warner P. \"Pete\" Hanson, who was active in exploring the cave in the 1930s. Hanson had been killed in World War II. The passage was named Hanson's Lost River by the explorers.\nFinally, on September 9, 1972, a six-person CRF team of Wilcox, Crowther, Zopf, Gary Eller, Stephen Wells, and Cleveland Pinnix (a National Park Service ranger) followed Hanson's Lost River downstream to discover its connection with Echo River in Cascade Hall of Mammoth Cave. With this linking of the Flint Ridge and Mammoth Cave systems, the \"Everest of speleology\" had been climbed. The integrated cave system contained of surveyed passages and had fourteen entrances.\nRecent discoveries.\nFurther connections between Mammoth Cave and smaller caves or cave systems have followed, notably to Proctor/Morrison Cave beneath nearby Joppa Ridge in 1979. Proctor Cave was discovered by Jonathan Doyle, a Union Army deserter during the Civil War, and was later owned by the Mammoth Cave Railroad, before being explored by the CRF. Morrison cave was discovered by George Morrison in the 1920s. This connection pushed the frontier of Mammoth exploration southeastward.\nAt the same time, discoveries made outside the park by an independent group called the Central Kentucky Karst Coalition or CKKC resulted in the survey of tens of miles in Roppel Cave east of the park. Discovered in 1976, Roppel Cave was briefly on the list of the nation's longest caves before it was connected to the Proctor/Morrison's section of the Mammoth Cave System on September\u00a010, 1983. The connection was made by two mixed parties of CRF and CKKC explorers. Each party entered through a separate entrance and met in the middle before continuing in the same direction to exit at the opposite entrance. The resulting total surveyed length was near .\nOn March 19, 2005, a connection into the Roppel Cave portion of the system was surveyed from a small cave under Eudora Ridge, adding approximately three miles to the known length of the Mammoth Cave System. The newly found entrance to the cave, now termed the \"Hoover Entrance\", had been discovered in September 2003, by Alan Canon and James Wells. Incremental discoveries since then have pushed the total to more than .\nIt is certain that many more miles of cave passages await discovery in the region. Discovery of new natural entrances is a rare event: the primary mode of discovery involves the pursuit of side passages identified during routine systematic exploration of cave passages entered from known entrances.\nRelated and nearby caves.\nAt least two other massive cave systems lie short distances from Mammoth Cave: the Fisher Ridge Cave System and the Martin Ridge Cave System. The Fisher Ridge Cave System was discovered in January 1981 by a group of Michigan cavers associated with the Detroit Urban Grotto of the National Speleological Society. So far, the Fisher Ridge Cave System has been mapped to . In 1976, Rick Schwartz discovered a large cave south of the Mammoth Cave park boundary. This cave became known as the Martin Ridge Cave System in 1996, as new exploration connected the 3 nearby caves of Whigpistle Cave (Schwartz's original entrance), Martin Ridge Cave, and Jackpot Cave. As of 2018, the Martin Ridge Cave System had been mapped to a length of , and exploration continued.\nLocated from the visitors center is Diamond Caverns. On display there is a stagecoach used to ferry visitors from the nearby Bells Tavern train stop in Park City, Kentucky to both Diamond Caverns and Mammoth Cave.\nClimate.\nAccording to the K\u00f6ppen climate classification system, Mammoth Cave National Park has a Humid subtropical climate (\"Cfa\"). According to the United States Department of Agriculture, the Plant Hardiness zone at Mammoth Cave National Park Visitor Center at 722\u00a0ft (220 m) elevation is 6b with an average annual extreme minimum temperature of -3.2\u00a0\u00b0F (-19.6\u00a0\u00b0C).\nBiology and ecosystem.\nThe following species of bats inhabit the caverns: Indiana bat (\"Myotis sodalis\"), gray bat (\"Myotis grisescens\"), little brown bat (\"Myotis lucifugus\"), big brown bat (\"Eptesicus fuscus\"), and the tricolored bat (\"Perimyotis subflavus\").\nAll together, these and more rare bat species such as the eastern small-footed bat had estimated populations of 9\u201312 million just in the Historic Section. While these species still exist in Mammoth Cave, their numbers are now no more than a few thousand at best. Ecological restoration of this portion of Mammoth Cave, and facilitating the return of bats, is an ongoing effort. Not all bat species here inhabit the cave; the red bat (\"Lasiurus borealis\") is a forest-dweller, as found underground only rarely.\nOther animals that inhabit the caves include: three species of cave crickets (\"Hadenoecus subterraneus\", \"Ceuthophilus stygius\", and \"Ceuthophilus latens\"), a cave beetle (\"Pseudanophthalmus inexpectatus\"), various species of fishing spiders (\"Dolomedes\" spp.), a cave salamander (\"Eurycea lucifuga\"), two species of eyeless cavefish (\"Typhlichthys subterraneus\" and \"Amblyopsis spelaea\"), a cave crayfish (\"Orconectes pellucidus\"), and the Kentucky cave shrimp (\"Palaemonias ganteri\"). In addition, some surface animals may take refuge in the entrances of the caves but do not generally venture into the deep portions of the cavern system.\nThe section of the Green River that flows through the park is legally designated as \"Kentucky Wild River\" by the Kentucky General Assembly, through the Office of Kentucky Nature Preserves' Wild Rivers Program.\nAccording to the A. W. Kuchler U.S. Potential natural vegetation Types, Mammoth Cave National Park has an Oak/Hickory (\"100\") potential vegetation type with an Eastern Hardwood Temperate broadleaf and mixed forest (\"25\") potential vegetation form.\nCommon fossils of the cave include crinoids, blastoids, and gastropods. The Mississippian limestone has yielded fossils of more than a dozen species of shark. In 2020, scientists reported the discovery of part of a \"Saivodus striatus\", a species comparable in size to a modern great white shark. The fossil shark species \"Glikmanius careforum\" and \"Troglocladodus trimblei\" are known exclusively from within the cave.\nName.\nThe cave's name refers to the large width and length of the passages connecting to the Rotunda just inside the entrance. The name was used long before the extensive cave system was more fully explored and mapped, to reveal a mammoth length of passageways. No fossils of the woolly mammoth have ever been found in Mammoth Cave, and the name of the cave has nothing to do with this extinct mammal.\nPark superintendents.\nThe list is incomplete.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\nBrucker series.\nRoger W. Brucker has co-authored four nonfiction books and authored one historical novel on the history and exploration of the Mammoth Cave System. They are presented here not in the order of publication, but in the order in which the events of the books' major narratives took place:\nArchaeology.\nCarstens, Kenneth C (1980) Archaeological Investigations in the Central Kentucky Karst, 2 vols., Doctoral dissertation, Dep't of Anthropology, Washington University in St. Louis.\nCarstens, Kenneth C (1973) Archaeological Reconnaissance in Mammoth Cave National Park. Master's thesis, Department of Anthropology, Washington University in St. Louis."}
{"id": "67512", "revid": "842922", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=67512", "title": "Mammoth Cave", "text": ""}
{"id": "67513", "revid": "48646116", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=67513", "title": "Systematic element name", "text": "Temporary name assigned to predicted chemical elements\nA systematic element name is the temporary name assigned to an unknown or recently synthesized chemical element. A systematic symbol is also derived from this name.\nIn chemistry, a transuranic element receives a permanent name and symbol only after its synthesis has been confirmed. In some cases, such as the Transfermium Wars, controversies over the formal name and symbol have been protracted and highly political. In order to discuss such elements without ambiguity, the International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry (IUPAC) uses a set of rules, adopted in 1978, to assign a temporary systematic name and symbol to each such element. This approach to naming originated in the successful development of regular rules for the naming of organic compounds.\nIUPAC rules.\nThe temporary names derive systematically from the element's atomic number, and apply only to 101\u00a0\u2264\u00a0\"Z\"\u00a0\u2264\u00a0999. Each digit is translated into a \"numerical root\" according to the table. The roots are concatenated, and the name is completed by the suffix \"-ium\". Some of the roots are Latin and others are Greek, to avoid two digits starting with the same letter (for example, the Greek-derived \"pent\" is used instead of the Latin-derived \"quint\" to avoid confusion with \"quad\" for 4). There are two elision rules designed to prevent odd-looking names.\nTraditionally the suffix \"-ium\" was used only for metals (or at least elements that were expected to be metallic), and other elements used different suffixes: halogens used \"-ine\" and noble gases used \"-on\" instead. However, the systematic names use \"-ium\" for all elements regardless of group. Thus, elements 117 and 118 were \"ununseptium\" and \"ununoctium\", not \"ununseptine\" and \"ununocton\". This does not apply to the trivial names these elements receive once confirmed; thus, elements 117 and 118 are now \"tennessine\" and \"oganesson\", respectively. For these trivial names, all elements receive the suffix \"-ium\" except those in group 17, which receive \"-ine\" (like the halogens), and those in group 18, which receive \"-on\" (like the noble gases). (That being said, tennessine and oganesson are expected to behave quite differently from their lighter congeners.)\nThe systematic symbol is formed by taking the first letter of each root, converting the first to uppercase. This results in three-letter symbols instead of the one- or two-letter symbols used for named elements. The rationale is that any scheme producing two-letter symbols will have to deviate from full systematicity to avoid collisions with the symbols of the permanently named elements.\nThe Recommendations for the Naming of Elements of Atomic Numbers Greater than 100 can be found https://.\nAs of 2019[ [update]], all 118 discovered elements have received individual permanent names and symbols. Therefore, systematic names and symbols are now used only for the undiscovered elements beyond element 118, oganesson. When such an element is discovered, it will keep its systematic name and symbol until its discovery meets the criteria of and is accepted by the IUPAC/IUPAP Joint Working Party, upon which the discoverers are invited to propose a permanent name and symbol. Once this name and symbol is proposed, there is still a comment period before they become official and replace the systematic name and symbol.\nAt the time the systematic names were recommended (1978), names had already been officially given to all elements up to atomic number 103, lawrencium. While systematic names were given for elements 101 (mendelevium), 102 (nobelium), and 103 (lawrencium), these were only as \"minor alternatives to the trivial names already approved by IUPAC\". The following elements for some time only had systematic names as approved names, until their final replacement with trivial names after their discoveries were accepted.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "67514", "revid": "12190302", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=67514", "title": "Moscovium", "text": "element with atomic number 115 (Mc)\nMoscovium is a synthetic chemical element; it has symbol Mc and atomic number 115. It was first synthesized in 2003 by a joint team of Russian and American scientists at the Joint Institute for Nuclear Research (JINR) in Dubna, Russia. In December 2015, it was recognized as one of four new elements by the Joint Working Party of international scientific bodies IUPAC and IUPAP. On 28 November 2016, it was officially named after the Moscow Oblast, in which the JINR is situated.\nMoscovium is an extremely radioactive element: its most stable known isotope, moscovium-290, has a half-life of only 0.65 seconds. In the periodic table, it is a p-block transactinide element. It is a member of the 7th period and is placed in group 15 as the heaviest pnictogen. Moscovium is calculated to have some properties similar to its lighter homologues, nitrogen, phosphorus, arsenic, antimony, and bismuth, and to be a post-transition metal, although it should also show several major differences from them. In particular, moscovium should also have significant similarities to thallium, as both have one rather loosely bound electron outside a quasi-closed shell. Chemical experimentation on single atoms has confirmed theoretical expectations that moscovium is less reactive than its lighter homologue bismuth. Over a hundred atoms of moscovium have been observed to date, all of which have been shown to have mass numbers from 286 to 290.\nHistory.\nDiscovery.\nThe first successful synthesis of moscovium was by a joint team of Russian and American scientists in August 2003 at the Joint Institute for Nuclear Research (JINR) in Dubna, Russia. Headed by Russian nuclear physicist Yuri Oganessian, the team included American scientists of the Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory. The researchers on February 2, 2004, stated in \"Physical Review C\" that they bombarded americium-243 with calcium-48 ions to produce four atoms of moscovium. These atoms decayed by emission of alpha-particles to nihonium in about 100\u00a0milliseconds.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe Dubna\u2013Livermore collaboration strengthened their claim to the discoveries of moscovium and nihonium by conducting chemical experiments on the final decay product 268Db. None of the nuclides in this decay chain were previously known, so existing experimental data was not available to support their claim. In June 2004 and December 2005, the presence of a dubnium isotope was confirmed by extracting the final decay products, measuring spontaneous fission (SF) activities and using chemical identification techniques to confirm that they behave like a group 5 element (as dubnium is known to be in group 5 of the periodic table). Both the half-life and the decay mode were confirmed for the proposed 268Db, lending support to the assignment of the parent nucleus to moscovium. However, in 2011, the IUPAC/IUPAP Joint Working Party (JWP) did not recognize the two elements as having been discovered, because current theory could not distinguish the chemical properties of group 4 and group 5 elements with sufficient confidence. Furthermore, the decay properties of all the nuclei in the decay chain of moscovium had not been previously characterized before the Dubna experiments, a situation which the JWP generally considers \"troublesome, but not necessarily exclusive\".\nRoad to confirmation.\nTwo heavier isotopes of moscovium, 289Mc and 290Mc, were discovered in 2009\u20132010 as daughters of the tennessine isotopes 293Ts and 294Ts; the isotope 289Mc was later also synthesized directly and confirmed to have the same properties as found in the tennessine experiments.\nIn 2011, the Joint Working Party of international scientific bodies International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry (IUPAC) and International Union of Pure and Applied Physics (IUPAP) evaluated the 2004 and 2007 Dubna experiments, and concluded that they did not meet the criteria for discovery. Another evaluation of more recent experiments took place within the next few years, and a claim to the discovery of moscovium was again put forward by Dubna. In August 2013, a team of researchers at Lund University and at the Gesellschaft f\u00fcr Schwerionenforschung (GSI) in Darmstadt, Germany announced they had repeated the 2004 experiment, confirming Dubna's findings. Simultaneously, the 2004 experiment had been repeated at Dubna, now additionally also creating the isotope 289Mc that could serve as a cross-bombardment for confirming the discovery of the tennessine isotope 293Ts in 2010. Further confirmation was published by the team at the Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory in 2015.\nIn December 2015, the IUPAC/IUPAP Joint Working Party recognized the element's discovery and assigned the priority to the Dubna-Livermore collaboration of 2009\u20132010, giving them the right to suggest a permanent name for it. While they did not recognise the experiments synthesising 287Mc and 288Mc as persuasive due to the lack of a convincing identification of atomic number via cross-reactions, they recognised the 293Ts experiments as persuasive because its daughter 289Mc had been produced independently and found to exhibit the same properties.\nIn May 2016, Lund University (Lund, Scania, Sweden) and GSI cast some doubt on the syntheses of moscovium and tennessine. The decay chains assigned to 289Mc, the isotope instrumental in the confirmation of the syntheses of moscovium and tennessine, were found based on a new statistical method to be too different to belong to the same nuclide with a reasonably high probability. The reported 293Ts decay chains approved as such by the JWP were found to require splitting into individual data sets assigned to different tennessine isotopes. It was also found that the claimed link between the decay chains reported as from 293Ts and 289Mc probably did not exist. (On the other hand, the chains from the non-approved isotope 294Ts were found to be congruent.) The multiplicity of states found when nuclides that are not even\u2013even undergo alpha decay is not unexpected and contributes to the lack of clarity in the cross-reactions. This study criticized the JWP report for overlooking subtleties associated with this issue, and considered it \"problematic\" that the only argument for the acceptance of the discoveries of moscovium and tennessine was a link they considered to be doubtful.\nOn June 8, 2017, two members of the Dubna team published a journal article answering these criticisms, analysing their data on the nuclides 293Ts and 289Mc with widely accepted statistical methods, noted that the 2016 studies indicating non-congruence produced problematic results when applied to radioactive decay: they excluded from the 90% confidence interval both average and extreme decay times, and the decay chains that would be excluded from the 90% confidence interval they chose were more probable to be observed than those that would be included. The 2017 reanalysis concluded that the observed decay chains of 293Ts and 289Mc were consistent with the assumption that only one nuclide was present at each step of the chain, although it would be desirable to be able to directly measure the mass number of the originating nucleus of each chain as well as the excitation function of the 243Am+48Ca reaction.\nNaming.\nUsing Mendeleev's nomenclature for unnamed and undiscovered elements, moscovium is sometimes known as \"eka-bismuth\". In 1979, IUPAC recommended that the placeholder systematic element name \"ununpentium\" (with the corresponding symbol of \"Uup\") be used until the discovery of the element is confirmed and a permanent name is decided. Although widely used in the chemical community on all levels, from chemistry classrooms to advanced textbooks, the recommendations were mostly ignored among scientists in the field (for whom is was not created anyway), who called it \"element 115\", with the symbol of \"E115\", \"(115)\" or even simply \"115\".\nOn 30 December 2015, discovery of the element was recognized by the International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry (IUPAC). According to IUPAC recommendations, the discoverer(s) of a new element has the right to suggest a name. A suggested name was \"langevinium\", after Paul Langevin. Later, the Dubna team mentioned the name \"moscovium\" several times as one among many possibilities, referring to the Moscow Oblast where Dubna is located. This name had previously been considered by the JINR for element 116, but it was then decided to name that element livermorium.\nIn June 2016, IUPAC endorsed the latter proposal to be formally accepted by the end of the year, which it was on 28 November 2016. The naming ceremony for moscovium, tennessine, and oganesson was held on 2 March 2017 at the Russian Academy of Sciences in Moscow.\nOther routes of synthesis.\nIn 2024, the team at JINR reported the observation of one decay chain of 289Mc while studying the reaction between 242Pu and 50Ti, aimed at producing more neutron-deficient livermorium isotopes in preparation for synthesis attempts of elements 119 and 120. This was the first successful report of a charged-particle exit channel \u2013 the evaporation of a proton and two neutrons, rather than only neutrons, as the compound nucleus de-excites to the ground state \u2013 in a hot fusion reaction between an actinide target and a projectile with atomic number greater than or equal to 20. Such reactions have been proposed as a novel synthesis route for yet-undiscovered isotopes of superheavy elements with several neutrons more than the known ones, which may be closer to the theorized island of stability and have longer half-lives. In particular, the isotopes 291Mc\u2013293Mc may be reachable in these types of reactions within current detection limits.\nPredicted properties.\nVery few properties of moscovium or its compounds have been measured; due to its extremely limited and expensive production and the fact that it decays very quickly. A few singular properties have been measured, but for the most part, properties of moscovium remain unknown and only predictions are available.\nNuclear stability and isotopes.\nMoscovium is expected to be within an island of stability centered on copernicium (element 112) and flerovium (element 114). Due to the expected high fission barriers, any nucleus within this island of stability exclusively decays by alpha decay and perhaps some electron capture and beta decay. Although the known isotopes of moscovium do not actually have enough neutrons to be on the island of stability, they can be seen to approach the island as in general, the heavier isotopes are the longer-lived ones.\nThe hypothetical isotope 291Mc is an especially interesting case as it has only one neutron more than the heaviest known moscovium isotope, 290Mc. It could plausibly be synthesized as the daughter of 295Ts, which in turn could be made from the reaction 249Bk(48Ca,2n)295Ts. Calculations show that it may have a significant electron capture or positron emission decay mode in addition to alpha decay and also have a relatively long half-life of several seconds. This would produce 291Fl, 291Nh, and finally 291Cn which is expected to be in the middle of the island of stability and have a half-life of about 1200\u00a0years, affording the most likely hope of reaching the middle of the island using current technology. Possible drawbacks are that the cross section of the production reaction of 295Ts is expected to be low and the decay properties of superheavy nuclei this close to the line of beta stability are largely unexplored. The heavy isotopes from 291Mc to 294Mc might also be produced using charged-particle evaporation, in the 245Cm(48Ca,p\"x\"n) and 248Cm(48Ca,p\"x\"n) reactions.\nThe isotope 286Mc was found in 2021 at Dubna, in the 243Am(48Ca,5n)286Mc reaction: it decays into the already-known 282Nh and its daughters. The undiscovered light isotopes 284Mc and 285Mc could be synthesized in the 241Am+48Ca reaction. They are predicted to undergo a chain of alpha decays, ending at transactinide isotopes too light to be produced by hot fusion and too heavy to be produced by cold fusion. The yet-lighter 282Mc and 283Mc could be synthesized in the 243Am+44Ca, but the cross section would likely be lower.\nOther possibilities to synthesize nuclei on the island of stability include quasifission (partial fusion followed by fission) of a massive nucleus. Such nuclei tend to fission, expelling doubly magic or nearly doubly magic fragments such as calcium-40, tin-132, lead-208, or bismuth-209. It has been shown that the multi-nucleon transfer reactions in collisions of actinide nuclei (such as uranium and curium) might be used to synthesize the neutron-rich superheavy nuclei located at the island of stability, although formation of the lighter elements nobelium or seaborgium is more favored. One last possibility to synthesize isotopes near the island is to use controlled nuclear explosions to create a neutron flux high enough to bypass the gaps of instability at 258\u2013260Fm and at mass number 275 (atomic numbers 104 to 108), mimicking the r-process in which the actinides were first produced in nature and the gap of instability around radon bypassed. Some such isotopes (especially 291Cn and 293Cn) may even have been synthesized in nature, but would have decayed away far too quickly (with half-lives of only thousands of years) and be produced in far too small quantities (about 10\u221212 the abundance of lead) to be detectable as primordial nuclides today outside cosmic rays.\nPhysical and atomic.\nIn the periodic table, moscovium is a member of group 15, the pnictogens. It appears below nitrogen, phosphorus, arsenic, antimony, and bismuth. Every previous pnictogen has five electrons in its valence shell, forming a valence electron configuration of ns2np3. In moscovium's case, the trend should be continued and the valence electron configuration is predicted to be 7s27p3; therefore, moscovium will behave similarly to its lighter congeners in many respects. However, notable differences are likely to arise; a largely contributing effect is the spin\u2013orbit (SO) interaction\u2014the mutual interaction between the electrons' motion and spin. It is especially strong for the superheavy elements, because their electrons move much faster than in lighter atoms, at velocities comparable to the speed of light. In relation to moscovium atoms, it lowers the 7s and the 7p electron energy levels (stabilizing the corresponding electrons), but two of the 7p electron energy levels are stabilized more than the other four. The stabilization of the 7s electrons is called the inert-pair effect, and the effect \"tearing\" the 7p subshell into the more stabilized and the less stabilized parts is called subshell splitting. Computation chemists see the split as a change of the second (azimuthal) quantum number \"l\" from 1 to &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20442 and &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;3\u20442 for the more stabilized and less stabilized parts of the 7p subshell, respectively. For many theoretical purposes, the valence electron configuration may be represented to reflect the 7p subshell split as 7s7p7p. These effects cause moscovium's chemistry to be somewhat different from that of its lighter congeners.\nThe valence electrons of moscovium fall into three subshells: 7s (two electrons), 7p1/2 (two electrons), and 7p3/2 (one electron). The first two of these are relativistically stabilized and hence behave as inert pairs, while the last is relativistically destabilized and can easily participate in chemistry. (The 6d electrons are not destabilized enough to participate chemically.) Thus, the +1 oxidation state should be favored, like Tl+, and consistent with this the first ionization potential of moscovium should be around 5.58\u00a0eV, continuing the trend towards lower ionization potentials down the pnictogens. Moscovium and nihonium both have one electron outside a quasi-closed shell configuration that can be delocalized in the metallic state: thus they should have similar melting and boiling points (both melting around 400\u00a0\u00b0C and boiling around 1100\u00a0\u00b0C) due to the strength of their metallic bonds being similar. Additionally, the predicted ionization potential, ionic radius (1.5\u00a0\u00c5 for Mc+; 1.0\u00a0\u00c5 for Mc3+), and polarizability of Mc+ are expected to be more similar to Tl+ than its true congener Bi3+. Moscovium should be a dense metal due to its high atomic weight, with a density around 13.5\u00a0g/cm3. The electron of the hydrogen-like moscovium atom (oxidized so that it only has one electron, Mc114+) is expected to move so fast that it has a mass 1.82 times that of a stationary electron, due to relativistic effects. For comparison, the figures for hydrogen-like bismuth and antimony are expected to be 1.25 and 1.077 respectively.\nChemical.\nMoscovium is predicted to be the third member of the 7p series of chemical elements and the heaviest member of group 15 in the periodic table, below bismuth. Unlike the two previous 7p elements, moscovium is expected to be a good homologue of its lighter congener, in this case bismuth. In this group, each member is known to portray the group oxidation state of +5 but with differing stability. For nitrogen, the +5 state is mostly a formal explanation of molecules like N2O5: it is very difficult to have five covalent bonds to nitrogen due to the inability of the small nitrogen atom to accommodate five ligands. The +5 state is well represented for the essentially non-relativistic typical pnictogens phosphorus, arsenic, and antimony. However, for bismuth it becomes rare due to the relativistic stabilization of the 6s orbitals known as the inert-pair effect, so that the 6s electrons are reluctant to bond chemically. It is expected that moscovium will have an inert-pair effect for both the 7s and the 7p1/2 electrons, as the binding energy of the lone 7p3/2 electron is noticeably lower than that of the 7p1/2 electrons. Nitrogen(I) and bismuth(I) are known but rare and moscovium(I) is likely to show some unique properties, probably behaving more like thallium(I) than bismuth(I). Because of spin-orbit coupling, flerovium may display closed-shell or noble gas-like properties; if this is the case, moscovium will likely be typically monovalent as a result, since the cation Mc+ will have the same electron configuration as flerovium, perhaps giving moscovium some alkali metal character. Calculations predict that moscovium(I) fluoride and chloride would be ionic compounds, with an ionic radius of about 109\u2013114\u00a0pm for Mc+, although the 7p1/2 lone pair on the Mc+ ion should be highly polarisable. The Mc3+ cation should behave like its true lighter homolog Bi3+. The 7s electrons are too stabilized to be able to contribute chemically and hence the +5 state should be impossible and moscovium may be considered to have only three valence electrons. Moscovium would be quite a reactive metal, with a standard reduction potential of \u22121.5\u00a0V for the Mc+/Mc couple.\nThe chemistry of moscovium in aqueous solution should essentially be that of the Mc+ and Mc3+ ions. The former should be easily hydrolyzed and not be easily complexed with halides, cyanide, and ammonia. Moscovium(I) hydroxide (McOH), carbonate (Mc2CO3), oxalate (Mc2C2O4), and fluoride (McF) should be soluble in water; the sulfide (Mc2S) should be insoluble; and the chloride (McCl), bromide (McBr), iodide (McI), and thiocyanate (McSCN) should be only slightly soluble, so that adding excess hydrochloric acid would not noticeably affect the solubility of moscovium(I) chloride. Mc3+ should be about as stable as Tl3+ and hence should also be an important part of moscovium chemistry, although its closest homolog among the elements should be its lighter congener Bi3+. Moscovium(III) fluoride (McF3) and thiozonide (McS3) should be insoluble in water, similar to the corresponding bismuth compounds, while moscovium(III) chloride (McCl3), bromide (McBr3), and iodide (McI3) should be readily soluble and easily hydrolyzed to form oxyhalides such as McOCl and McOBr, again analogous to bismuth. Both moscovium(I) and moscovium(III) should be common oxidation states and their relative stability should depend greatly on what they are complexed with and the likelihood of hydrolysis.\nLike its lighter homologues ammonia, phosphine, arsine, stibine, and bismuthine, moscovine (McH3) is expected to have a trigonal pyramidal molecular geometry, with an Mc\u2013H bond length of 195.4\u00a0pm and a H\u2013Mc\u2013H bond angle of 91.8\u00b0 (bismuthine has bond length 181.7\u00a0pm and bond angle 91.9\u00b0; stibine has bond length 172.3\u00a0pm and bond angle 92.0\u00b0). In the predicted aromatic pentagonal planar Mc5- cluster, analogous to pentazolate (N5-), the Mc\u2013Mc bond length is expected to be expanded from the extrapolated value of 312\u2013316\u00a0pm to 329\u00a0pm due to spin\u2013orbit coupling effects.\nExperimental chemistry.\nThe isotopes 288Mc, 289Mc, and 290Mc have half-lives long enough for chemical investigation. A 2024 experiment at the GSI, producing 288Mc via the 243Am+48Ca reaction, studied the adsorption of nihonium and moscovium on SiO2 and gold surfaces. The adsorption enthalpy of moscovium on SiO2 was determined experimentally as \u2212\u0394\"H\"(Mc)\u00a0\n\u00a054\u00a0kJ/mol (68% confidence interval). Moscovium was determined to be less reactive with the SiO2 surface than its lighter congener bismuth, but more reactive than closed-shell copernicium and flerovium. This arises because of the relativistic stabilisation of the 7p1/2 shell.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "67516", "revid": "43059515", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=67516", "title": "Fourth International", "text": "Revolutionary socialist international organization\nThe Fourth International (FI) was a political international established in France in 1938 by Leon Trotsky and his supporters, having been expelled from the Soviet Union and the Communist International (also known as Comintern or the Third International).\nIn the \"Transitional Program\", which was drafted in 1938 during the founding congress of the Fourth International, Trotsky reiterated the need for the legalization of the Soviet parties and worker's control of production.\nThere is no longer a single, centralized cohesive Fourth International. Throughout most of its existence and history, the Fourth International was hunted by agents of the NKVD, subjected to political repression by countries such as France and the United States, and by supporters of the Soviet Union. The Fourth International struggled to maintain contact under these conditions of crackdowns and repression during World War II due to the fact that subsequent proletarian uprisings were often under the influence of Soviet-aligned pro-Stalin parties and militant nationalist groups, leading to defeats for the Fourth International and the Trotskyists, who subsequently never managed to obtain meaningful influence.\nDespite this, many parts of the world, including Latin America, Europe and Asia, continue to have large Trotskyist groupings who are attracted to its anti-Stalinist positions and its defense of proletarian internationalism. Several of these groups carry the label \"Fourth Internationalist\" either in their organization's name, important political position documents, or both. In line with Trotskyist theory and thought, the Fourth International tended to view the Soviet Union as a degenerated workers' state. However, although it regarded its own ideas as more advanced and thus superior to those of the Third International, it did not actively push for the Comintern's destruction. The current incarnation of the Fourth International does not operate as a cohesive entity in the manner of its predecessors.\nThe Fourth International suffered a major split in 1940 and an even more significant schism in 1953. A partial reunification of the schismatic factions occurred in 1963, but the organization never recovered sufficiently, and it failed to re-emerge as a single transnational grouping. The response of Trotskyists to such a situation has been in the form of forming multiple Internationals across the world, with some divided over which particular organization represents the true legacy and political continuity of the historical Fourth International.\nTrotskyism.\nTrotskyists regard themselves as working in opposition to both capitalism and Stalinism. Trotsky advocated proletarian revolution as set out in his theory of \"permanent revolution\", and believed that a workers' state would not be able to hold out against the pressures of a hostile capitalist world unless socialist revolutions quickly took hold in other countries as well. This theory was advanced in opposition to the view held by the Stalinists that \"Socialism in One Country\" could be built in the Soviet Union alone. Furthermore, Trotsky and his supporters harshly criticized the increasingly totalitarian nature of Joseph Stalin's rule. They argued that socialism without democracy is impossible. Thus, faced with the increasing lack of democracy in the Soviet Union, they concluded that it was no longer a socialist workers' state, but a degenerated workers' state.\nIn the \"Transitional Program\", which was drafted during the founding congress of the Fourth International, Trotsky called for the legalization of the Soviet parties and worker's control of production.\nTrotsky and his supporters had been organised since 1923 as the Left Opposition. They opposed the bureaucratization of the Soviet Union, which they analysed as being partly caused by the poverty and isolation of the Soviet economy. Stalin's theory of socialism in one country was developed in 1924 as an opposition to Trotsky's theory of permanent revolution, which argued that capitalism was a world system and required a world revolution to replace it with socialism. Prior to 1924, the Bolsheviks' international perspective had been guided by Trotsky's position. Trotsky argued that Stalin's theory represented the interests of bureaucratic elements in direct opposition to the working class.\nEventually, Trotsky was sent into internal exile and his supporters were jailed. However, the Left Opposition continued to work in secret within the Soviet Union. Trotsky was exiled to Turkey in 1928. He moved from there to France, Norway and finally to Mexico. He was assassinated on Stalin's orders in Mexico in August 1940.\nPolitical internationals.\nA political international is an organisation of political parties or activists with the aim of co-ordinating their activity for a common purpose. There had been a long tradition of socialists organising on an international basis, and Karl Marx had led the International Workingmen's Association, which later became known as the \"first international\".\nAfter the International Workingmen's Association disbanded in 1876, several attempts were made to revive the organisation, culminating in the formation of the Socialist International (Second International) in 1889. This was disbanded in 1916 following disagreements over World War I. Although the organisation reformed in 1923 as the Labour and Socialist International, supporters of the October Revolution and the Bolsheviks had already set up the Communist International (Comintern), which they regarded as the Third International. This was organised on a democratic centralist basis, with component parties required to fight for policies adopted by the body as a whole.\nBy declaring themselves the Fourth International, the \"World Party of Socialist Revolution\", the Trotskyists were publicly asserting their continuity with the Comintern, and with its predecessors. Their recognition of the importance of these earlier Internationals was coupled with a belief that they eventually degenerated. Although the Socialist International and Comintern were still in existence, the Trotskyists did not believe those organisations were capable of supporting revolutionary socialism and internationalism.\nThe foundation of the Fourth International was therefore spurred in part by a desire to form a stronger political current, rather than being seen as the communist opposition to the Comintern and the Soviet Union. Trotsky believed that its formation was all the more urgent for the role he saw it playing in the impending World War.\nDecision to form the International.\nIn the early 1930s, Trotsky and his supporters believed that Stalin's influence over the Third International could still be fought from within and slowly rolled back. They organised themselves into the International Left Opposition (ILO) in 1930, which was intended to be a group of anti-Stalinist dissenters \"within\" the Third International. Stalin's supporters, who dominated the International, would no longer tolerate dissent. All Trotskyists, and those suspected of being influenced by Trotskyism, were expelled.\nTrotsky claimed that the Third Period policies of the Comintern had contributed to the rise of Adolf Hitler in Germany, and that its turn to a popular front policy (aiming to unite all ostensibly anti-fascist forces) sowed illusions in reformism and pacifism and \"clear[ed] the road for a fascist overturn\". By 1935 he claimed that the Comintern had fallen irredeemably into the hands of the Stalinist bureaucracy. He and his supporters, expelled from the Third International, participated in a conference of the London Bureau of socialist parties outside both the Socialist International and the Comintern. Three of those parties joined the Left Opposition in signing a document written by Trotsky calling for a Fourth International, which became known as the \"Declaration of Four\". Of those, two soon distanced themselves from the agreement, but the Dutch Revolutionary Socialist Party worked with the International Left Opposition to declare the International Communist League.\nThis position was contested by Andr\u00e9s Nin and some other members of the League who did not support the call for a new International. This group prioritised regroupment with other communist oppositions, principally the International Communist Opposition (ICO), linked to the Right Opposition in the Soviet Party, a regroupment which eventually led to the formation of the International Bureau for Revolutionary Socialist Unity. Trotsky considered those organisations to be centrist. Despite Trotsky, the Spanish section merged with the Spanish section of ICO, forming the Workers' Party of Marxist Unification (POUM). Trotsky claimed the merger was to be a capitulation to centrism. The Socialist Workers' Party of Germany, a left split from the Social Democratic Party of Germany founded in 1931, co-operated with the International Left Opposition briefly in 1933 but soon abandoned the call for a new International.\nIn 1935, Trotsky wrote an \"Open Letter for the Fourth International\", reaffirming the \"Declaration of Four\", while documenting the recent course of the Comintern and the Socialist International. In the letter, he called for the urgent formation of a Fourth International. The \"First International Conference for the Fourth International\" was held in Paris in June 1936, reports giving its location as Geneva for security reasons. This meeting dissolved the International Communist League, founding in its place the Movement for the Fourth International on Trotsky's perspectives.\nThe foundation of the Fourth International was seen as more than just the simple renaming of an international tendency that was already in existence. It was argued that the Third International had now degenerated completely and was therefore to be seen as a counter-revolutionary organisation that would in time of crisis defend capitalism. Trotsky believed that the coming World War would produce a revolutionary wave of class and national struggles, rather as World War I had done.\nStalin reacted to the growing strength of Trotsky's supporters with a major political massacre of people within the Soviet Union, and the assassination of Trotsky's supporters and family abroad. He had agents go through historical documents and photos to attempt to erase Trotsky's memory from the history books. According to the historian Mario Ke\u00dfler, Stalin's supporters turned to antisemitism to whip up sentiment against Trotsky (as Trotsky was a Jew). Stalin's daughter later claimed that his fight with Trotsky laid the foundations for his later antisemitic campaigns.\nFounding Congress.\nThe International's rationale was to construct new mass revolutionary parties able to lead successful workers' revolutions. It saw these arising from a revolutionary wave which would develop alongside and as a result of the coming World War. Thirty delegates attended a founding conference, held in September 1938, in the home of Alfred Rosmer just outside Paris. Present at the meeting were delegates from all the major countries of Europe, and from North America (including three from the United States), although for reasons of cost and distance, few delegates attended from Asia or Latin America. An International Secretariat was established, with many of the day's leading Trotskyists and most countries in which Trotskyists were active represented. Among the resolutions adopted by the conference was the \"Transitional Programme\".\nThe \"Transitional Programme\" was the central programmatic statement of the congress, summarising its strategic and tactical conceptions for the revolutionary period that it saw opening up as a result of the war which Trotsky had been predicting for some years. It is not, however, the definitive programme of the Fourth International\u00a0\u2013 as is often suggested\u00a0\u2013 but instead contains a summation of the conjunctural understanding of the movement at that date and a series of transitional policies designed to develop the struggle for workers' power.\nWorld War II.\nAt the outbreak of World War II, in 1939, the International Secretariat was moved to New York City. The resident International Executive Committee failed to meet, largely because of a struggle in the U.S. Socialist Workers Party (SWP) between Trotsky's supporters and the tendency of Max Shachtman, Martin Abern and James Burnham. The secretariat was composed of those committee members who happened to be in the city, most of whom were co-thinkers of Shachtman. The disagreement centred on the Shachtmanites' disagreements with the SWP's internal policy, and over the FI's unconditional defence of the USSR.\nTrotsky opened a public debate with Shachtman and Burnham and developed his positions in a series of polemics written in 1939\u20131940 and later collected in \"In Defense of Marxism\". Shachtman and Burnham's tendency resigned from the International in early 1940, alongside almost 40% of the SWP's members, many of whom became founder members of the Workers Party.\nEmergency conference.\nIn May 1940, an emergency conference of the International met at a secret location \"somewhere in the Western Hemisphere\". It adopted a manifesto drafted by Trotsky shortly before his murder and a range of policies on the work of the International, including one calling for the reunification of the then-divided Fourth Internationalist groups in Britain.\nSecretariat members who had supported Shachtman were expelled by the emergency conference, with the support of Trotsky himself. While leader of the SWP James P. Cannon later said that he did not believe the split to be definitive and final, the two groups did not reunite. A new International Executive Committee was appointed, which came under the increasing influence of the Socialist Workers Party.\nThe Fourth International was hit hard during World War II. Trotsky was assassinated, many of the FI's European affiliates were destroyed by the Nazis and several of its Asian affiliates were destroyed by the Empire of Japan. The survivors, in Europe, Asia and elsewhere, were largely cut off from each other and from the International Secretariat. The new secretary, Jean Van Heijenoort (also known as Gerland), was able to do little more than publish articles in the SWP's theoretical journal \"Fourth International\". Despite this dislocation, the various groups sought to maintain links and some connections were kept up throughout the early part of the war by sailors enlisted in the U.S. Navy who had cause to visit Marseille. Contact was steady, if irregular, between the SWP and the British Trotskyists, with the result that the Americans exerted what influence they had to encourage the Workers' International League into the International through a fusion with the Revolutionary Socialist League, a union that had been requested by the Emergency Conference.\nIn 1942, a debate on the national question in Europe opened up between the majority of the SWP and a movement led by Van Heijenoort, Albert Goldman and Felix Morrow. This minority anticipated that the Nazi dictatorship would be replaced with capitalism rather than by a socialist revolution, leading to the revival of Stalinism and social democracy. In December 1943, they criticised the SWP's view as underestimating the rising prestige of Stalinism and the opportunities for the capitalists to use democratic concessions. The SWP's central committee argued that democratic capitalism could not revive, resulting in either military dictatorship by the capitalists or a workers' revolution. It held that this would reinforce the need for building the Fourth International, and adhered rigidly to their interpretation of Trotsky's works.\nEuropean Conference.\nThe wartime debate about post-war perspectives was accelerated by the resolution of the February 1944 European Conference of the Fourth International. The conference appointed a new European Secretariat and elected Michel Raptis, a Greek resident in France also known as Michel Pablo, the organisational secretary of its European Bureau. Raptis and other bureau members re-established contact between the Trotskyist parties. The European conference extended the lessons of a revolution then unfolding in Italy, and concluded that a revolutionary wave would cross Europe as the war ended. The SWP had a similar perspective. The British Revolutionary Communist Party (RCP) disagreed and held that capitalism was not about to plunge into massive crisis but rather that an upturn in the economy was already underway. A group of leaders of the French Internationalist Communist Party (PCI) around Yvan Craipeau argued a similar position until they were expelled from the PCI in 1948.\nInternational conference.\nIn April 1946 delegates from the principal European sections and a number of others attended a \"Second International Congress\". This set about rebuilding the International Secretariat of the Fourth International with Michel Raptis appointed Secretary and Ernest Mandel, a Belgian, taking a leading role.\nPablo and Mandel aimed to counter the opposition of the majorities inside the British Revolutionary Communist Party and French Internationalist Communist Party. Initially, they encouraged party members to vote out their leaderships. They supported Gerry Healy's opposition in the RCP. In France, they backed elements, including Pierre Frank and Marcel Bleibtreu, opposed to the new leadership of the PCI\u00a0\u2013 albeit for differing reasons.\nThe Stalinist occupation of Eastern Europe was the issue of prime concern, and it raised many problems of interpretation. At first, the International held that, while the USSR was a degenerated workers' state, the post-World War II East European states were still bourgeois entities, because revolution from above was not possible, and capitalism persisted.\nAnother issue that needed to be dealt with was the possibility that the economy would revive. This was initially denied by Mandel (who was quickly forced to revise his opinion, and later devoted his PhD dissertation to late capitalism, analysing the unexpected \"third age\" of capitalist development). Mandel's perspective mirrored uncertainty at that time about the future viability and prospects of capitalism, not just among \"all\" Trotskyist groups, but also among leading economists. Paul Samuelson had envisaged in 1943 the probability of a \"nightmarish combination of the worst features of inflation and deflation\", worrying that \"there would be ushered in the greatest period of unemployment and industrial dislocation which any economy has ever faced\". Joseph Schumpeter for his part claimed that \"[t]he general opinion seems to be that capitalist methods will be unequal to the task of reconstruction\". He regarded it as \"not open to doubt that the decay of capitalist society is very far advanced\".\nSecond World Congress.\nThe Second World Congress in April 1948 was attended by delegates from 22 sections. It debated a range of resolutions on the Jewish Question, Stalinism, the colonial countries and the specific situations facing sections in certain countries. By this point the FI was united around the view that the Eastern European \"buffer states\" were still capitalist countries.\nThe Congress was especially notable for bringing the International into much closer contact with Trotskyist groups from across the globe. These included such significant groups as the Revolutionary Workers' Party of Bolivia and the Lanka Sama Samaja Party in what was then Ceylon, but the previously large Vietnamese Trotskyist groups had mostly been eliminated or absorbed by the supporters of Ho Chi Minh.\nAfter the Second World Congress in 1948, the International Secretariat attempted to open communications with Josip Broz Tito's regime in Yugoslavia. In their analysis, it differed from the rest of the Eastern Bloc because it was established by the partisans of World War II who had fought against Nazi occupation, as opposed to by Stalin's invading armies. The British RCP, led by Jock Haston and supported by Ted Grant, were highly critical of this move.\nThird World Congress.\nThe Third World Congress in 1951 resolved that the economies of the East European states and their political regimes had come to resemble that of the USSR more and more. These states were then described as deformed workers states in an analogy with the degenerated workers state in Russia. The term \"deformed\" was used rather than \"degenerated\", because no workers' revolution had led to the foundation of these states.\nThe Third World Congress envisaged the real possibility of an \"international civil war\" in the near future. It argued that the mass Communist parties \"may, under certain favourable conditions, go beyond the aims set for them by the Soviet bureaucracy and project a revolutionary orientation\". Given the supposed closeness of war, the FI thought that the Communist Parties and social democratic parties would be the only significant force that could defend the workers of the world against the imperialist camp in those countries where there were mass forces.\nIn line with this geopolitical perspective, Pablo argued that the only way the Trotskyists could avoid isolation was for various sections of the Fourth International to undertake long-term entryism in the mass Communist or Social Democratic parties. This tactic was known as entryism \"sui generis\", to distinguish it from the short-term entry tactic employed before World War II. For example, it meant that the project of building an open and independent Trotskyist party was shelved in France, because it was regarded as not politically feasible alongside entry into the French Communist Party.\nThis perspective was accepted within the Fourth International, yet sowed the seeds for the split in 1953. At the Third World Congress, the sections agreed with the perspective of an international civil war. The French section disagreed with the associated tactic of entryism \"sui generis\", and held that Pablo was underestimating the independent role of the working class parties in the Fourth International. The leaders of the majority of the Trotskyist organisation in France, Marcel Bleibtreu and Pierre Lambert, refused to follow the line of the International. The International leadership had them replaced by a minority, leading to a permanent split in the French section.\nIn the wake of the World Congress, the line of the International Leadership was generally accepted by groups around the world, including the U.S. SWP whose leader, James P. Cannon, corresponded with the French majority to support the tactic of entryism \"sui generis\". At the same time, however, Cannon, Healy and Mandel were deeply concerned by Pablo's political evolution. Cannon and Healy were also alarmed by Pablo's intervention into the French section, and by suggestions that Pablo might use the International's authority in this way in other sections of the Fourth International that felt entryism \"\"sui generis\" was not a suitable tactic in their own countries. In particular, minority tendencies, exemplified in Britain by John Lawrence and in the U.S. by Bert Cochran, to support entryism \"sui generis\"\" hinted that Pablo's support for their views indicated that the International might also demand Trotskyists in those countries adopt that tactic.\nFormation of the International Committee of the Fourth International.\nIn 1953, the SWP's national committee issued an \"Open Letter to Trotskyists Throughout the World\" and organised the International Committee of the Fourth International (ICFI). This was a public faction which initially included, in addition to the SWP, Gerry Healy's British section The Club, the Internationalist Communist Party in France (then led by Lambert who had expelled Bleibtreu and his grouping), Nahuel Moreno's party in Argentina and the Austrian and Chinese sections of the FI. The sections of the ICFI withdrew from the International Secretariat, which suspended their voting rights. Both sides claimed they constituted a majority of the former International.\nSri Lanka's Lanka Sama Samaja Party, then the country's leading workers' party, took a middle position during this dispute. It continued to participate in the ISFI but argued for a joint congress, for reunification with the ICFI.\nAn excerpt from the \"Open Letter\" explains the split as follows:\nTo sum up: The lines of cleavage between Pablo's revisionism and orthodox Trotskyism are so deep that no compromise is possible either politically or organizationally. The Pablo faction has demonstrated that it will not permit democratic decisions truly reflecting majority opinion to be reached. They demand complete submission to their criminal policy. They are determined to drive all orthodox Trotskyists out of the Fourth International or to muzzle and handcuff them.\nTheir scheme has been to inject their Stalinist conciliationism piecemeal and likewise in piecemeal fashion, get rid of those who come to see what is happening and raise objections.\nFrom the Fourth World Congress to reunification.\nOver the following decade, the IC referred to the rest of the International as the \"International Secretariat of the Fourth International\", emphasising its view that the Secretariat did not speak for the International as a whole. The Secretariat continued to view itself as the leadership of the International. It held a Fourth World Congress in 1954 to regroup and to recognise reorganised sections in Britain, France and the U.S.\nParts of the International Committee were divided over whether the split with \"Pabloism\" was permanent or temporary, and it was perhaps as a result of this that it did not declare itself to be \"the\" Fourth International. Those sections that considered the split permanent embarked on a discussion about the history of the split and its meanings.\nThe sections of the International that recognised the leadership of the International Secretariat remained optimistic about the possibilities for increasing the International's political influence and extended the entryism into social democratic parties which was already underway in Britain, Austria and elsewhere. The 1954 Congress emphasised entryism into communist parties and nationalist parties in the colonies, pressing for democratic reforms, ostensibly to encourage the left-wing they perceived to exist in the communist parties to join with them in a revolution. Tensions developed between those who subscribed to the mainstream views of Pablo and a minority that argued unsuccessfully against open work. A number of these delegates walked out of the World Congress, and would eventually leave the International, including the leader of the new British section, John Lawrence, George Clarke, Michele Mestre (a leader of the French section), and Murray Dowson (a leader of the Canadian group).\nThe Secretariat organised a Fifth World Congress in October 1957. Mandel and Pierre Frank appraised the Algerian revolution and surmised that it was essential to reorient in the colonial states and neocolonies towards the emerging guerrilla-led revolutions. According to Robert Alexander, Ernest Mandel has written that an organisation in Indonesia, the Partai Acoma, was affiliate to the FI from 1959 until the 1965 coup in that country.\nThe Sixth World Congress in 1961 marked a lessening of the political divisions between the majority of supporters of the International Secretariat and the leadership of the SWP in the United States. In particular, the congress stressed support for the Cuban revolution and a growing emphasis on building parties in the imperialist countries. The sixth congress also criticised the Lanka Sama Samaja Party, its Sri Lankan section, for seeming to support the Sri Lanka Freedom Party, which they saw as bourgeois nationalists; the U.S. SWP made similar criticisms.\nIn 1962 the IC and IS formed a Parity Commission to organise a common World Congress. The supporters of Michel Pablo and Juan Posadas opposed the convergence. The supporters of Posadas left the International in 1962. At the 1963 reunification congress, the sections of the IC and IS reunified (with two exceptions: the British and French sections of the IC). This was largely a result of their mutual support for Ernest Mandel and Joseph Hansen's resolution \"Dynamics of World Revolution Today\" and for the Cuban Revolution. This document distinguished between different revolutionary tasks in the imperialist countries, the \"workers' states\", and the colonial and semi-colonial countries. In June 1963, the reunified Fourth International elected a United Secretariat of the Fourth International (USFI), by which name the organisation as a whole is often still referred.\nSince reunification.\nSince the 1963 reunification, a number of approaches have developed within international Trotskyism towards the Fourth International.\nImpact.\nIn uniting the large majority of Trotskyists in one organisation, the Fourth International created a tradition which has since been claimed by many Trotskyist organisations.\nEchoing Marx's \"Communist Manifesto\", the \"Transitional Programme\" ended with the declaration \"Workers\u00a0\u2013 men and women\u00a0\u2013 of all countries, place yourselves under the banner of the Fourth International. It is the banner of your approaching victory!\". It declared demands to be placed on capitalists, opposition to the bureaucracy in the Soviet Union, and support for workers' action against fascism. Most of the demands on capitalists remain unfulfilled. The collapse of the Soviet Union occurred, but through a social revolution leading to the restoration of capitalism, rather than the political revolution proposed by the Trotskyists. Many Trotskyist groups have been active in anti-fascist campaigns, but the Fourth International has never played a major role in the toppling of a regime.\nThose groups which follow traditions that left the Fourth International in its early years argue that, despite initially correct positions, it had little impact. Lutte Ouvriere claims that it \"did not survive the Second World War\". Workers Liberty, which follows in the third camp tradition established by the Workers Party, holds that \"Trotsky and everything he represented was defeated and\u00a0\u2013 as we have to recognise in retrospect\u00a0\u2013 defeated for a whole historical period.\"\nOther groups point to a positive impact. The ICFI claim that \"the [early] Fourth International consisted mainly of cadres who remained true to their aims\" and describes much of the Fourth International's early activity as \"correct and principled\". The reunified FI claim that \"the Fourth International refused to compromise with capitalism either in its fascist or democratic variants.\" In its view, \"many of the predictions made by Trotsky when he founded the Fourth International were proved wrong by history. But what was absolutely vindicated were his key political judgements.\"\nSee also.\nLeftist Internationals include:\nUnited left wing\nAnarchist\nSocialist and labour\nCommunist\nTrotskyist\nDemocratic socialism\nReunification efforts\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "67519", "revid": "1318362667", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=67519", "title": "Lionel Jospin", "text": "Prime Minister of France from 1997 to 2002\nLionel Robert Jospin (; born 12 July 1937) is a French politician who served as Prime Minister of France from 1997 to 2002.\nJospin was First Secretary of the Socialist Party from 1995 to 1997 and the party's candidate for President of France in the 1995 and 2002 elections. In 1995, he was narrowly defeated in the second round by Jacques Chirac. In 2002, he was eliminated in the first round after finishing behind both Chirac and Jean-Marie Le Pen, prompting him to announce his retirement from politics. In 2015, he was appointed to the Constitutional Council by National Assembly President Claude Bartolone.\nBiography.\nEarly life.\nLionel Robert Jospin was born to a Protestant family in Meudon, Seine (nowadays Hauts-de-Seine), a suburb of Paris, and is the son of Mireille Dandieu Aliette and Robert Jospin. He attended the Lyc\u00e9e Janson-de-Sailly before studying at Sciences Po and the \u00c9cole nationale d'administration (\u00c9NA). He was active in the UNEF students' union, protesting against the war in Algeria (1954\u20131962). He completed his military service as an officer in charge of armoured training in Trier, Germany. Throughout his career his public image was, \"dour, grumpy, rather cold, prone to temper and exasperation ('austere').\"\nCareer.\nAfter his graduation from the ENA in 1965, Jospin entered the Ministry of Foreign Affairs as secretary of Foreign Affairs. He became in charge of economic cooperation there, and worked with Ernest-Antoine Seilli\u00e8re, future leader of the MEDEF employers' union.\nRepresentative of a generation of left-wingers who criticized the old SFIO Socialist Party, he joined a Trotskyist group, the Internationalist Communist Organization (OCI) in the 1960s, before entering the renewed Socialist Party (PS) in 1971. Joining Fran\u00e7ois Mitterrand's circle, he became the second highest-ranking member of the party in 1979, then its First Secretary when Mitterrand was elected president of France in 1981. When President Mitterrand decided, in 1982\u201383, to change his economic policy to give priority to the struggle against inflation and for a hard currency, Jospin justified his choice. After Laurent Fabius was chosen as prime minister in 1984, a rivalry between these two political heirs of Mitterrand broke out when they competed for the leadership of the 1986 legislative campaign.\nIn 1988, after Mitterrand's reelection, Jospin left the PS leadership, and, though Mitterrand considered naming him prime minister, he was nominated for minister of education. Under Jospin's tenure as education minister, teacher training was consolidated, the lycees and universities were reformed, teachers' salaries improved, and technical and vocational education were reformed, which the socialists saw as a means of improving economic performance, tackling youth unemployment, and attaining social justice.\nJospin's rivalry with Fabius intensified and caused an internal crisis, notably during the Rennes Congress (1990). The party's \"mitterrandist\" faction split because Jospin's followers allied with the other factions to prevent Fabius's election as First Secretary. This damaged Jospin's relationship with Mitterrand and, after the Socialist Party's failure in the March 1992 local elections, Jospin was not included in the new government formed by Pierre B\u00e9r\u00e9govoy.\nAs a member of the National Assembly, Jospin served first as a representative of Paris (1978\u201386), and then of Haute-Garonne \"d\u00e9partement\" (1986\u201388). He lost his seat in the National Assembly in the Socialists' landslide defeat in the 1993 legislative election and announced his political retirement.\nIn 1993, Jospin was appointed \"ministre pl\u00e9nipotentiaire\", 2nd class (a rank of ambassador), a position he held until his appointment as prime minister in 1997, but he was not appointed to any embassy.\nIn 1995, Jospin claimed a necessity to \"take stock\" of the \"mitterrandist\" inheritance so as to restore the credibility of the Socialist Party. He was selected as the Socialist candidate for president against the PS leader Henri Emmanuelli. In the run-up to the election, Jospin made various policy proposals, such as a programme for the environment, an extension of social services, a housebuilding programme, the rebuilding of run-down parts of cities, and a 37-hour workweek.\nFollowing the Socialists' landslide defeats of 1992\u201394, Jospin was considered to have little chance of victory. But he did surprisingly well, leading in the first round and losing only very narrowly to Jacques Chirac in the final runoff election. His performance was seen to mark a revival of the Socialists as a strong force in French politics and he returned to being the party's First Secretary.\nJospin built a new coalition with the other left-wing parties: the French Communist Party, the Greens, the Left Radical Party and the dissident Citizen and Republican Movement. Two years later, Chirac decided to call an early election for the National Assembly, hoping for a personal endorsement. The move backfired: the \"Plural Left\" won a parliamentary majority and Jospin became prime minister.\nJospin is a Member of the Club of Madrid.\nPrime minister.\nJospin served as prime minister during France's third \"cohabitation\" government under President Chirac from 1997 to 2002.\nDespite his previous image as a rigid socialist, Jospin sold state-owned enterprises and lowered the VAT, income tax and company tax rates.\nJospin's government also introduced the 35-hour workweek, provided additional health insurance for those on the lowest incomes through the creation of Couverture maladie universelle (which made health care in France a universal right, and was regarded by Jospin and Martine Aubry as one of the \"beacons\" of their incumbency), promoted the representation of women in politics, expanded the social security system, and created the PACS \u2013 a civil partnership or union between two people of any genders. During his term, with the help of a favorable economic situation, unemployment fell by 900,000. There were several women but no ethnic minorities in Jospin's government.\nThe \"law against social exclusion\" (1998) extended social security and introduced various measures to combat poverty. These included:\n(1) The optimization of extra earnings for Revenu minimum d'insertion recipients.\n(2) The introduction of CMU.\n(3) Guaranteeing supplies of telephone, water, and electricity services for the impoverished, such as by paying off outstanding bills.\n(4) Increased housing allowances and subsidized housing \"concomitant with the introduction of a tax on unused apartments\".\n(5) Direct levels of assistance to groups with special problems in the labour market (including low-skilled persons, older unemployed persons, young people, and the long-term unemployed) through integration, internship, and continuing education programs, personal guidance and mentoring, and wage subsidies.\nContinuous improvements were made in social benefits during Jospin's time in office, together with increases in the minimum wage. A 3% increase was carried out in the RMI and two similar minimum income guarantees in 1998, backdated a year, while expenditure on healthcare and education was increased. A parity law was introduced that obliged every party to field an equal number of female and male candidates in national elections. A decree was issued immediately after the start of Jospin's time in office that boosted the bonus paid to parents at the start of the school year from 420 to 1,600 francs for households with a monthly income of less than 11,600 francs.\nReductions were made in employee's health-insurance contributions, with employee premiums reduced from 6.75 to 0.75%. To compensate for lost revenues, the CSG was raised from 3.5% to 7.5%, while income from rent and capital was taxed more. This almost complete shift of employee's health-insurance contributions to the welfare tax CGT resulted in the purchasing power of employees rising by about 1%. Various measures were also taken to make the tax system more progressive. The Jospin government began taxing capital assets by introducing a tax on savings, particularly life insurance. A major reform of the welfare tax CSG was carried out, which doubled the welfare state's percentage share of taxes and resulted in an almost 10% fall in the share of contributions. Other measures included an increase in revenues from the wealth tax, a reduction in the lower marginal tax rate from 10.5% to 7%, a rise in taxation on profits from stock options from 40% to 50%, a 1997 increase in the exemption for the lowest tax bracket, a reduction in taxes on apartment sales, housing, and other fees, and the abolition of taxes on cars and roadways. In addition, income tax cuts were introduced in March and September 2000 that disproportionately favoured low and non-earners.\nAn \"employment premium\" was introduced in 2002, similar to tax credits in the UK and US, providing a state subsidy to low-wage earners. Within a few years, eight million people had benefited from this scheme. Funds were provided for the renovation of public housing, while company pension savings plans were extended to cover small and medium enterprises. The Jospin government also made it possible for SMEs to jointly establish this kind of fund. A state-supervised reserve fund for old-age insurance was established, which created marginal capital coverage and was designed to protect pension levels from financial-market risks. Spending on education increased by 19% from 1997 to 2002, while spending on labour increased by 13% over that period. Social contributions for low-income workers were reduced, and a 5% increase in the RMI was carried out. A reform of women's rights and anonymous childbirth was carried out, together with a number of progressive educational reforms. These included the re-launching of the Educational Priority Zones, the establishment of the \"Tourism And The Handicapped\" (\"Tourisme et handicap\") programme, the implementation of language instruction as a priority in primary schools, the establishment of the \"Plan Handiscole\" for the education of disabled children and adolescents and their integration into life at school, the establishment of a national home-tutoring programme, and the introduction of local education and citizenship education contracts.\nA wide range of child-centred policies were also implemented. These included the introduction of mandatory civics instruction in secondary schools, the introduction of financial support for child illness care together with parental time-off obligations, the introduction of special education support (parents d'enfants handicaps), a law against paedophile pornography, the establishment of a government student lunch programme, the launching of \"Initiatives citoyennes\" to teach children how to live together, the launching of a campaign against \"hazing\" of children, the creation of programs for parental involvement in schools together with national campaigns for the elections of parent-representatives, the passage of a law designed to safeguard children's rights and campaign against violence in schools, a law against the prostitution of minors that included penalties for clients, the establishment of the \"Childhood and the Media\" association against violence in the media and the creation of 40,000 new child-care places.\nVarious measures were introduced to enhance facilities and benefits for people with disabilities. A turnaround of the justice system was carried out to ensure that a defendant really is innocent until proved guilty. The linking of benefit payments to the cost of living was introduced, together with a one billion franc emergency package for the unemployed. In 1998 a FRF 500 million budget was established to partly fund the training benefit payable to the unemployed.\nImprovements in the handicapped employment service COTOREP were carried out, while measures were introduced to upgrade handicapped access to public transport together with all types of buildings used by members of the general public.\nThe government established the right of an employee to take time off work if a child of the family was seriously ill. This was supported by a grant which replaced lost income to some extent and provided financial support to parents returning to work after a child's illness. A law was passed against discrimination (on sexual, racial, physical grounds, etc.) to bring French law into line with new EU anti-discrimination legislation. A campaign was launched against violence and racketeering, accompanied by the implementation of an \"SOS Violence\" telephone number. Various programmes for transportation were introduced, both mass and individual. An improved housing allowance was introduced, together with longer fixed contracts.\nA law passed in July 2000 on the organization and promotion of physical and sports activities emphasised the obligation to take into account the different types of disabilities in the organization of physical and sports education programs within educational and vocational training centers or special facilities. As a result of the legislation, sports specialists and teachers were required to receive an initial special training and continuing education to better facilitate the access of disabled persons to physical and sports activities. Laws were also passed in November 2001 and March 2002 that added to the list of grounds of discrimination physical appearance, sexual orientation, age, and genetic characteristics.\nA law was passed in 1999 which provided legal access to and development of palliative care, \"allowing legal leave to support a family member in the last stage of a terminal illness.\" The Solidarity and Urban Renewal Law (2000) required that at least 20% of the housing stock in all urban municipalities over 3,500 inhabitants should consist of social housing. while a law was passed on sexual equality in the workplace, including an article repealing the ban on night work for women, in order to comply with EU sex equality legislation. A law was passed in July 2001 that included various social, educational and cultural provisions that lay the legal foundation for the implementation of back to work assistance programs included in an unemployment insurance agreement from January that year. An anti-discrimination law was passed in November that same year which safeguarded employees from all forms of discrimination affecting training, such as access to recruitment procedures or in-company training.\nThe 'social modernisation' bill included work-related provisions such as measures to combat 'moral harassment' (bullying) at work, measures to combat precarious employment (through restrictions on fixed-term contracts), and improved accreditation of vocational skills and experience. The law also contained a wide range of redundancy provisions such as the requirement to convene negotiations on the 35-hour week prior to any redundancy plan, enhanced powers for works councils, a contribution to the regeneration of closed sites by companies with a workforce of over 1,000, nine-month redeployment leave for redundant workers, and the doubling of the minimum redundancy compensation. A law on 'new economic regulations' was passed which aimed at adding an 'ethical' aspect to financial practices, \"clarifying competition rules, improving social dialogue and enforcing the rights of consumers.\" In terms of industrial relations, the new law strengthened (to some extent) the powers of works councils in takeovers, mergers and proposed share exchanges. The Social and Medical Action Act, introduced in January 2002, provided additional protection for the rights of users of social and social/medical facilities.\nA wide range of new social benefits were introduced, including the Allocation Specifique d'attente (ASA), an additional benefit for unemployed persons under the age of 60 who had contributed or at least 40 years to the pension insurance, l'allocation sp\u00e9cifique d'attente (APA), a home care allowance for the over-60's which made it possible for beneficiaries to spend their old age at home rather than in a care home, a benefit for seriously injured or sick children, and a benefit to encourage women to re-enter the labour market. A new benefit was introduced called the Prime pour l'Emploi (PPE) which, as noted by one study, \"is presented as a means of 'compensating taxes on and contributions from workers income,' which aim both to 'aid return to work' and to provide 'maintenance in work'.\"\nAn enhancement of the universal CMU health scheme was carried out, through the abolition of the spending ceiling for dentistry and the extension of the 'direct settlement' system for former benefit recipients whose income now exceeded the statutory ceiling. Paid paternity leave was introduced, and a law was passed to reform employee savings schemes The main purpose of this legislation was to increase the duration and scope of employee savings schemes, by extending them to employees of small and medium-sized businesses and increasing the 'lock-in' period for employee savings from 5 to 10 years.\nThe Jospin Government also established (within the framework of a policy to improve coverage for industrial diseases) of a compensation fund for asbestos victims, and extended the right to asylum. A conditional amnesty for illegal immigrants was carried out, with some 75,000 obtaining legal residence as a result. Measures aimed at reintegrating the very long-term unemployed into the workforce were strengthened in 1998, and emergency groups were set up that same year in each d\u00e9partement coordinated by the senior local representatives of the government at d\u00e9partement level (pr\u00e9fets), with the objective of examining individual payments to those most in need. An overhaul of housing assistance scales was carried out, and a law on gender equality at work was introduced. This legislation removed the ban on night work for women, and introduced new regulations for this type of work, with covered all employees. A social security funding law for 2002 was passed which, amongst other measures, provided a general rise in pensions and increased paternity leave (from 3 to 11 days).\nSome structural barriers to employment were removed by making it easier to combine income from work with income from social transfers. Capital incomes were taxed more heavily, while various measures were introduced which benefited lower social strata and improved their purchasing power. Employees were the sole beneficiaries of lowered welfare contributions. Welfare benefits were raised, while income tax progression was increased, with tax cuts benefiting lower-income groups more strongly than higher-groups. Lower-income sections of the population received targeted support, and almost all tax measures introduced by the Jospin Government sought to stimulate demand and reduce inequality. Between 1997 and 2002, purchasing power as a proportion of household revenue from by 16%, the biggest five-year increase in over twenty years. In addition, total government spending rose 8.9% from 1997 to 2002. Altogether, the social and economic policies implemented by the Jospin Government helped to reduce social and economic inequalities, with income inequality in terms of the Gini coefficient falling between 1997 and 2001.\nIn international affairs, Jospin mostly steered clear of foreign policy, but in 2000 he denounced Hezbollah's \"terrorist attacks against Israeli soldiers and civilian populations\", a position markedly more pro-Israel than Chirac's. On 26 February, when Jospin visited Birzeit University, Palestinian students threw stones at him, causing a minor injury.\n2002 presidential campaign.\nJospin was a candidate in the presidential campaign of 2002. While he appeared to have momentum in the early stages, the campaign came to be focused mainly on law-and-order issues, in which, it was argued, the government had not achieved convincing results; this coincided with a strong media focus on a number of egregious crime cases. The far left also strongly criticized Jospin for his moderate economic policies, which they contended were not markedly different from that of right-wing governments favoring businesses and free markets. Jospin's 2002 presidential manifesto was nevertheless a strongly progressive one, calling for access to housing to be made a universal right, supporting employee representation on the supervisory boards of companies, and advocating better provisions for older people and the disabled. As noted by one observer, Jospin's manifesto sought to balance its emphasis on 'inequalities in income' with 'equality of opportunity,' eliminating poverty with special regard to housing whilst promoting social investment through (particularly) education.\nMany left-wing candidates contested the election, gaining small percentages of the vote in the first ballot that reduced Jospin's support. As a result, Jospin finished in third place, behind Chirac and narrowly behind the Front National leader Jean-Marie Le Pen. He thus was not a candidate in the second round of voting.\nFollowing his defeat in April 2002, Jospin immediately declared he would leave politics and stepped down as prime minister. He has since sporadically commented on current political affairs; for instance, he declared his opposition to same-sex marriage. In 2005, he returned to the national political scene by campaigning forcefully in favor of the proposed European Constitution.\nIn 2006, Jospin made it known that he was available to be the Socialist candidate for the 2007 presidential election, but when S\u00e9gol\u00e8ne Royal became ascendant in the polls, he declined to enter the 2006 primary in order not to \"divide the party\".\nHollande presidency.\nOn 14 July 2012, President Fran\u00e7ois Hollande announced that Jospin would lead a commission on deontology and ethics in French political life. This commission has been criticized for being too similar to the Edouard Balladur commission Nicolas Sarkozy created on the same topic in 2007. Some Union for a Popular Movement members also criticized the participation of Roselyne Bachelot. The commission was to give its recommendations by the end of the year.\nPolitical offices held.\nGovernmental functions\nElectoral mandates\nEuropean Parliament\nNational Assembly of France\nRegional Council\nGeneral Council\nMunicipal Council\nPolitical function\nJospin's Ministry: 2 June 1997 \u2013 6 May 2002.\nChanges\nTrotskyist affiliation.\nOn 5 June 2001, Jospin acknowledged before Parliament that he had maintained links with a Trotskyist formation \"in the 1960s\" and with Pierre Lambert's party (the Internationalist Communist Organization, OCI) after joining the Socialist Party in 1971. While studying at the ENA, Jospin was recruited into the OCI by Boris Fraenkel, one of the OCI's founders. He became an active member of the OCI under the pseudonym \"Michel\" after quitting the Ministry of Foreign Affairs in 1968. He declined to locate with precision his rupture with the Lambertists, but \"Le Monde\" alleged it was in 1986\u201387, a year before he became minister, while Lambert himself implicitly situated it in 1988. Jospin said he had maintained only \"private relationships\" with OCI members after joining the PS.\nJospin had concealed his relationship with the OCI while following a strategy of entrism into other parties, and specifically denied it when asked about it (claiming in 1995 that the rumor came from a confusion with his brother Olivier). In 2001, investigative journalists and successive revelations by former Communist associates forced him to come forward.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "67520", "revid": "37052726", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=67520", "title": "4th International", "text": ""}
{"id": "67521", "revid": "18032426", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=67521", "title": "Red River Gorge", "text": "Protected natural area in Kentucky, United States\nThe Red River Gorge is a canyon system on the Red River in east-central Kentucky, United States. Geologically it is part of the Pottsville Escarpment.\nThe gorge lies within the Daniel Boone National Forest and was subsequently designated the Red River Gorge Geological Area, an area of around . It was designated a National Natural Landmark and National Archaeological District, and listed on the National Register of Historic Places. The Clifty Wilderness Area lies entirely within the geological area in the Red River Gorge.\nThis intricate canyon system features an abundance of high sandstone cliffs, rock shelters, waterfalls, and natural bridges. There are more than 100 natural sandstone arches in the Red River Gorge Geological Area. The multitude of sandstone and cliff-lines helped this area become one of the world's top rock climbing destinations and is home to the Red River Gorge Climbers' Coalition. The area is nicknamed the Red by climbers.\nKentucky's Natural Bridge State Park is immediately adjacent to this area, featuring one of the largest natural bridges in the Red River Gorge.\nThe section of the Red River in the upper gorge is also a legally designated Kentucky Wild River by the Kentucky General Assembly through the Office of Kentucky Nature Preserves' Wild Rivers Program.\nBecause of its unusual and rugged nature, the Red River Gorge features a remarkable variety of ecological zones.\nHistory.\nNada Tunnel.\nNada Tunnel is a , , and logging tunnel built between 1910 and 1912. Rock and dirt were removed by dynamite, steam drills, and hand tools. One man was killed during tunnel construction when he attempted to thaw frozen dynamite which exploded when he set it near a fire.\nThe tunnel has often been described as the \"Gateway to Red River Gorge\" for the shortcut it provides motorists.\nHistory of the proposed Red River Gorge Dam.\nThe Red River's tendency to flood offered downstream residents much misery. In 1962 the \"Great Flood of Clay City,\" the worst seen in 102 years, moved both government officials and local communities to lobby the Kentucky State Legislature and the Kennedy administration for immediate construction of a flood control dam. The United States Congress ultimately approved the measure and provided funding. The Army Corps of Engineers set about their business of making the structure a reality; however, many felt that such actions would destroy the unique ecosystem residing in the dam inundation area. The Sierra Club spearheaded the formation of a group opposed to the construction of the dam. This group obtained the help of Supreme Court Justice William O. Douglas by participating in a Dam Protest Hike which drew local and national attention to the situation. The Dam Protest Hike took place on November 18, 1967, at the Clifty Wilderness area junction of Swift Camp Creek and the Red River, Highway 715.\nIn 1971, the University Press of Kentucky commissioned Wendell Berry, a Kentucky native farmer and author to write a book, \"The Unforeseen Wilderness\", advocating the preservation of the gorge in its natural state.\nThe struggle of wills lasted several decades, and involved two proposed dam sites. It finally concluded with Red River's entry into the National Wild and Scenic River system on December 3, 1993, when President Bill Clinton signed \"H.R.914 - Red River Designation Act of 1993,\" into law. The bill was sponsored by U.S. Representative Hal Rogers and provides federal protection for a section of the river. This legislation precluded the construction of any dam on the Red River, helping to preserve the Gorge as it exists today.\nMotion pictures.\nThe Red River Gorge's Sky Bridge appears in the 1955 film \"The Kentuckian\", starring and directed by Burt Lancaster.\nGeology.\nThe Red River Gorge is distinguished by its extensive sandstone cliffs, rock shelters, and other geologic formations shaped over millions of years through the processes of erosion and weathering. It contains the highest concentration of natural arches of any region east of the Mississippi River. Sandstone in the Red River Gorge exhibits prominent iron-oxide banding, where groundwater has redistributed and precipitated iron-rich minerals into red, orange, and brown Liesegang patterns that influence the hardness of the Corbin Sandstone.\nBiology and ecology.\nThe Red River Gorge Geological Area, including Clifty Wilderness, has a very diverse biology. The Gorge is home to a great variety of wildlife including hawks, owls, woodpeckers, hummingbirds, deer, fox, black bears, and two venomous snakes: the copperhead and the timber rattlesnake. It is also home to several endangered species including the white-haired goldenrod which is found only in Red River Gorge. Experts believe that plants of Canadian origin were established in the Red River Gorge area during the Pliocene-Quaternary glaciation which started about 2.58 million years ago. These plants grow in the gorge's sheltered canyons and include diverse species such as purple fringed orchid \"Platanthera psycodes\", Canadian lily \"Lilium canadense\", and Canadian yew \"Taxus canadensis\".\nArchaeology.\nRock shelters and other sites in the Red River Gorge Geological Area contain artifacts of prehistoric occupancy by indigenous people, beginning with the Paleoindian period. Rock shelters are particularly valuable as archeological sites because they are protected from weathering related to precipitation. Plant materials and other relics, such as woven mats and leather moccasins that would decompose in more typical sites are well-preserved in the dry, nitrate-rich soils found in rock shelters. Sites in the area yielded some of the earliest evidence of the domestication of plants found in the eastern United States.\nThe Red River Gorge, Clifty Wilderness, and the Indian Creek area were designated as a National Archaeological District and placed on the National Register of Historic Places in 2003. The National Register district covers of land; as of 2005, it included in the national forest and of private land. It contains 664 known prehistoric and historic sites that date from more than 11,000 years ago to the 20th century; 442 sites are contributing sites in the National Register district.\nClifty Wilderness.\nClifty Wilderness is a wilderness area contained entirely within the Red River Gorge Geological Area.\nRecreation.\nRock climbing.\nThe Red River Gorge is a popular destination for rock climbers. The area has numerous cliffs in the gorge and in the surrounding areas. The vast number of bolted routes in overhanging, pocketed sandstone draws climbers from all over the world to \"the Red\" as it is known. Climbing in the region is often done at many separate small cliffs. Most climbs are a single pitch and most cliffs are less than tall. There are numerous traditional and sport climbing routes in the region, although the latter are more dominant. Many cliffs lie within Daniel Boone National Forest; however several important cliffs are located on private land and in privately owned preserves created to allow climbing access. Among the private preserves are:\nA number of climbing guidebooks have been published for the Red River Gorge. First was \"Red River Gorge Climber's Guide\" by Frank T Becker in 1975. The explosion of climbing activity since that seminal work led to a succession of other guidebooks, including \"Rawk! A Climber's Guide to the Red River Gorge\" by Ed Benjamin and Ed Pearsall, published in 1978, \"Red River Gorge Climbs\" by John H. Bronaugh, published in 1993, and \"Selected Climbs at Red River Gorge Kentucky\" by Porter Jarrard and Chris Snyder, published in 1997. More recent published guidebooks include Ray Ellington's Red River Gorge Rock Climbs, published in 2005 with a second edition in 2007. The continued establishment of new routes required the latest edition to the guidebook to become two volumes, \"Red River Gorge Climbs South\" and \"Red River Gorge Climbs North\". Ray Ellington's newest book, \"Miller Fork Climbing\", explores hundreds of routes in the ever-growing Miller Fork Recreational Preserve.\nMiguel's Pizza, a restaurant in Slade, Kentucky, is widely regarded as the hub of climbing culture in the Red River Gorge. Most climbing guidebooks and websites use Miguel's as the starting point for directions to climbing areas (\"from Miguel's, turn...\").\nHiking and camping.\nThe Red River Gorge is also known for its hiking trails that range in difficulty from beginner to advanced. Over of trails, open only to hiking, are maintained by the Forest Service and are located throughout the park (some trails are designated for horses).\nThere are many campgrounds in the area. Primitive camping, also known as backpack camping, is permitted in the gorge if the camper(s) obtains an overnight permit. Camping is not permitted within of any road or designated trail. No camping in rock shelters or within of the base of any cliff.\nOne of the most popular destinations is Gray's Arch, one of the many natural arches in the park. Gray's Arch is accessible via the Gray's Arch Loop hiking trail (), hikers can scramble up the back side of the arch, although this activity is considered extremely dangerous and can lead to injury or death.\nGladie Visitor Center.\nThe Daniel Boone National Forest Gladie Visitor Center is located in the Red River Gorge in Slade, Kentucky. The center features interpretive exhibits about the area's geology, natural history and cultural history. Visitors can get maps, information about trails, camping and other activities.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "67522", "revid": "1108604", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=67522", "title": "Indre-et-Loire", "text": "Department in Centre-Val de Loire, France\nIndre-et-Loire () is a department in west-central France named after the Indre River and Loire River. In 2019, it had a population of 610,079. Sometimes referred to as Touraine, the name of the historic region, it is nowadays part of the Centre-Val de Loire region. Its prefecture is Tours and subprefectures are Chinon and Loches. Indre-et-Loire is a touristic destination for its numerous monuments that are part of the Ch\u00e2teaux of the Loire Valley.\nHistory.\nEarly times.\nIndre-et-Loire is one of the original 83 departments established during the French Revolution on 4 March 1790. It was created from the former province of Touraine and of small portions of Orl\u00e9anais, Anjou and Poitou. Its prefecture, Tours, was a centre of learning in the Early Middle Ages, having been a key focus of Christian evangelisation since St Martin became its first bishop around 375. From the mid-15th century, the royal court repaired to the Loire Valley, with Tours as its capital; the confluence of the Loire River and Cher River became a centre of silk manufacturing and other luxury goods, including the wine trade, creating a prosperous bourgeoisie.\nRecent years.\nAfter the creation of the department it remained politically conservative, as Honor\u00e9 de Balzac recorded in several of his novels. Conservative Tours refused to welcome the railways which instead were obliged to route their lines by way of Saint-Pierre-des-Corps on the city's eastern edge. The moderate temper of the department's politics remained apparent after the Franco-Prussian War of 1870: sentiments remained predominantly pro-royalist during the early years of the Third Republic. For most of the nineteenth century, Indre-et-Loire was a rural department, but pockets of heavy-duty industrialisation began to appear towards the century's end, accompanied by left-wing politics. 1920 saw the birth of the French Communist Party at the Congress of Tours. By 1920, Saint-Pierre-des-Corps had become a major railway hub and a centre of railway workshops: it had also acquired a reputation as a bastion of working class solidarity.\nGeography.\nIndre-et-Loire is part of the region of Centre-Val de Loire; the neighbouring departments are Loir-et-Cher, Indre, Vienne, Maine-et-Loire and Sarthe.\nPrincipal towns.\nThe most populous commune is Tours, the prefecture. As of 2019, there are 10 communes with more than 10,000 inhabitants:\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nPolitics.\nThe President of the Departmental Council is Jean-G\u00e9rard Paumier of The Republicans."}
{"id": "67523", "revid": "525927", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=67523", "title": "Maine-et-Loire", "text": "Department of France in Pays de la Loire\nMaine-et-Loire () is a department in the Loire Valley in the Pays de la Loire region in Western France. It is named after the two rivers, Maine and the Loire. It borders Mayenne and Sarthe to the north, Loire-Atlantique to the west, Indre-et-Loire to the east, Vienne and Deux-S\u00e8vres to the south, Vend\u00e9e to the south-west, and Ille-et-Vilaine to the north-west. Its prefecture is Angers; its subprefectures are Cholet, Saumur and Segr\u00e9-en-Anjou Bleu. Maine-et-Loire had a population of 818,273 in 2019.\nHistory.\nMaine-et-Loire is one of the original 83 departments created during the French Revolution on 4 March 1790, mostly out of the southern portion of the former province of Anjou. Originally it was called Mayenne-et-Loire, but its name was changed to Maine-et-Loire in 1791. Its present name is drawn from the rivers Maine and Loire, which meet within the department.\nGeography.\nMaine-et-Loire is part of the current region of Pays de la Loire. The principal city is Angers, the seat of a bishopric and of a court of appeal.\nIt has a varied landscape, with forested ranges of hills in the south and north separated by the valley of the Loire. The highest point is Colline des Gardes at . Part of the Loire Valley UNESCO World Heritage Site lies in Maine-et-Loire.\nThe area has many navigable rivers such as the Loire, Sarthe, Mayenne, Loir, and Authion.\nPrincipal towns.\nThe most populous commune is Angers, the prefecture. As of 2019, there are 6 communes with more than 20,000 inhabitants:\nDemographics.\nThe inhabitants of Maine-et-Loire have no official qualifier. They are sometimes known as \"Angevins\", from the former province of Anjou, or \"Main\u00e9lig\u00e9riens\", from the name of the department.\nPopulation development since 1801:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nPolitics.\nThe president of the Departmental Council is Florence Dabin, elected in July 2021.\nTourism.\nCh\u00e2teaux of the Loire Valley \nAnjou traditions\nAngers and around:\nSaumur and around:\nCholet and around:\nSegr\u00e9 and around:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "67524", "revid": "48643156", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=67524", "title": "Cumberland Falls", "text": "Waterfall in the U.S. state of Kentucky\nCumberland Falls, sometimes called the Little Niagara, the Niagara of the South, or the Great Falls, is a waterfall on the Cumberland River in southeastern Kentucky. Spanning the river at the border of McCreary and Whitley counties, the waterfall is the central feature of Cumberland Falls State Resort Park and is part of the Office of Kentucky Nature Preserves designated Wild River System.\nIt is believed the current falls formed as the result of erosion from its original starting place at an escarpment far downstream. The site of the falls was occupied in pre-modern times by a variety of indigenous peoples, and more recently has passed through multiple private owners until eventually being donated, along with surrounding land to Kentucky in 1933.\nA moonbow is regularly visible at this site.\nHistory.\nFormation.\nIt is believed that Cumberland Falls originated at the Pottsville Escarpment, near modern-day Burnside, Kentucky, and retreated to its current location approximately upstream. In its retreat, the falls cut what is now the Cumberland River gorge, reaching depths in places of up to . At its original location, the falls was taller than it is currently, and has lost height due to erosion as it moved upstream. It also carried a greater volume of water originally, because two major tributaries, the Laurel River and the Rockcastle River, both lie between the modern day location and the escarpment. The erosion of the underlying rock, and movement of the falls downward in height, and upstream in location will continue until the falls eventually disappears, and the river again becomes smoothly graded.\nPre-modern history.\nThe area surrounding Cumberland Falls was inhabited by Native Americans going as far back as 10,000 years. By 1650, the area had been visited by those from the Shawnee, Cherokee, Chickasaw, and the Creek peoples. The Cumberland, as well as the nearby Eagle Falls, were both considered sacred by many.\nModern history.\nIn 1750 the Cumberland Falls was rediscovered by the explorer Thomas Walker who named it after the Duke of Cumberland and Strathearn. The first recorded landowners of the falls were Matthew Walton and Adam Shepard in 1800, both engineers who served under George Washington during the American Revolution. Walton and Shepard surveyed the land in 1814, and were issued a land patent in 1828.\nThe first landowners to settle permanently at Cumberland Falls were Lewis Renfro, a Baptist minister, and his wife Mary, who built a cabin there in 1850, which would later be used as a hospital during the American Civil War. The falls and 400 acres of surrounding land were purchased in 1875 by Socrates Owens, who there built the Cumberland Hotel, which was taken over by his wife Nannie and his son Edward following his death. The land and hotel were purchased in 1902 by Henry Brunson, who managed it along with his two daughters until 1931.\nIn 1927 the Kiwanis Club sponsored a trail to be built from nearby Corbin, Kentucky, and dedicated to Kentucky governor William J. Fields. Construction occupied some 200 laborers over nine weeks. However, as late as 1929, the Izaak Walton League wrote of access to the falls saying:\nThe unspoiled charm of Cumberland Falls is due to the fact that the falls are difficult to reach ... Road maps show roads leading from Corbin, twenty miles to the northeast, and from Williamsburg, eighteen miles from the southeast, but both these are so rough as to be practicable only for saddle-horses.\nIn 1928, a proposal to accept the falls as a park was brought to the floor of the Kentucky Senate but was defeated.\nIn the late 1920s, there were plans to build a hydroelectric power station upstream, and divert the river through a mountain tunnel to a point below the falls. However, the Cumberland Falls Preservation Association, formed by businessman Rober Blair, convinced T. Coleman du Pont to purchase the falls and surrounding land, and stipulate they were never to be used for hydroelectricity. In 1930, following his death, the family of du Pont made the decision to donate the to the state. On March 10, 1930, the Kentucky House and Senate overrode the veto of Governor Flem D. Sampson, and voted to accept the land from the du Pont family. The park was officially opened on September 7, 1931.\nIn the 1950s, plans were again announced for the development of upstream hydroelectric power, but were again defeated by the Preservation Association.\nIn 2016, two professional whitewater kayakers, Dane Jackson and Nicholas Troutman, were charged with misdemeanor trespassing after intentionally going over Cumberland Falls in kayaks.\nMoonbow.\nDuring or near a full moon on clear nights, a lunar rainbow or moonbow is sometimes formed by the water of the falls. The formation of a moonbow at Cumberland Falls is aided by a combination of steep gorge walls, which reduce dissipation of the waterfall's mist by wind, and a wide gorge which allows increased levels of moonlight.\nIt is the only location in the Western Hemisphere where moonbows are known to appear with regularity, and the Kentucky Department of Parks publishes schedules for visitors.\nThe ability of visitors to see a moonbow may vary with water level. At low levels, the falls may not produce sufficient mist for the phenomenon. Conversely, if conditions include substantial downstream wind, this may increase the level of mist and make a moonbow more likely to be visible.\nStatistics.\nOn average the falls, which flows over a resistant sandstone bed, is 68 feet (21 m) high and 125 feet (38 m) wide. Cumberland Falls is the second largest waterfall east of the Rocky Mountains, and the largest waterfall as measured by water volume in the Eastern United States, south of Niagara Falls. The falls divides the river into two sections, the Upper and Lower, or \"below the falls\" section.\nWater flow.\nThe water which flows through the Cumberland Falls gathers from a drainage area of . In data collected between 1908 and 2017 by the United States Geological Survey, peak annual water flow at the falls occurred in 1927, at an average rate of 5,196 ft3/s, and the all-time low occurred in 1988, during the 1988\u201389 North American drought, at an average rate of 1,324\u00a0ft3/s. The all-time highest recorded water volume was on Jan. 28, 1918, at a rate of 59,600\u00a0ft3/s, and the lowest recorded annual peak water flow was on Feb. 02, 1985, at 17,500\u00a0ft3/s, but was partially due to water diversion. The lowest naturally occurring annual peak water flow was on Feb. 17, 1964, at 18,200\u00a0ft3/s.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "67528", "revid": "2214", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=67528", "title": "Transnational issues of Armenia", "text": ""}
{"id": "67530", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=67530", "title": "Music of Australia", "text": " \nThe music of Australia has an extensive history made of music societies. Indigenous Australian music forms a significant part of the unique heritage of a 40,000- to 60,000-year history which produced the iconic didgeridoo. Contemporary fusions of indigenous and Western styles are exemplified in the works of Yothu Yindi, No Fixed Address, Geoffrey Gurrumul Yunupingu and Christine Anu, and mark distinctly Australian contributions to world music. \nAustralian music's early western history, was a collection of British colonies, Australian folk music and bush ballads, with songs such as \"Waltzing Matilda\" and \"The Wild Colonial Boy\" heavily influenced by Anglo-Celtic traditions, Indeed many bush ballads are based on the works of national poets Henry Lawson and Banjo Patterson.\nContemporary Australian music ranges across a broad spectrum with trends often concurrent with those of the US, the UK, and similar nations\u2014notably in the Australian rock and Australian country music genres. Tastes have diversified along with post\u2013World War II multicultural immigration to Australia, whilst classical music derives from European influences.\nIn the 1990s and early 2000s, the most recent and possibly only original genre of music to emerge from Australia outside of indigenous music came from Newcastle and Sydney as a genre known as Breakcore.https://\nIndigenous music.\nIndigenous Australian music refers to the music of Aboriginals and Torres Strait Islanders. Music forms an integral part of the social, cultural and ceremonial observances of these peoples, and has been so for over 60,000 years. Traditional indigenous music is best characterised by the didgeridoo, the best-known instrument, which is considered by some to be the world's oldest. Archaeological studies of rock art in the Northern Territory suggest people of the Kakadu region were playing the instrument 15,000 years ago.\nContemporary indigenous Australian music has covered numerous styles, including rock and roll, country, hip hop, and reggae.\nArtists.\nJimmy Little is regarded as the first Aboriginal performer to achieve mainstream success, with his debut 1964 song \"The Royal Telephone\" highly popular and successful. In 2005, Little was presented with an honorary doctorate in music by the University of Sydney. Despite the popularity of some of his work, Little failed to launch indigenous music in the country\u2014from the 1970s onwards, groups such as Coloured Stone, Warumpi Band, and No Fixed Address helped improve the image of the genre. It was Yothu Yindi that brought indigenous music to the mainstream, with their 1991 song \"Treaty\", from the album \"Tribal Voice\", becoming a hit. It reached No. 11 on the ARIA Singles Chart. The band's performances were based on the traditional Yolngu dance, and embodied a sharing of culture. The success of Yothu Yindi\u2014winners of eight ARIA Awards\u2014was followed in by Kev Carmody, Tiddas, Archie Roach and Christine Anu, and numerous other indigenous Australian musicians.\nIndigenous Australian music is unique, as it dates back more than 60,000 years to the prehistory of Australia and continues the ancient songlines through contemporary artists as diverse as: David Dahwurr Hudson, Warumpi Band, Wild Water, Saltwater Band, Nabarlek, Nokturnl, the Pigram Brothers, Blekbala Mujik, and Ruby Hunter.\nIn 2024, Indigenous Australian artists have achieved incredible success at home and abroad, with chart-toppers like The Kid Laroi, Thelma Plum and Baker Boy (who raps and sings in both English and Yolngu) dominating. In 2022, 10 tracks in the Triple J listener-voted Hottest 100 countdown featured Indigenous representation, which was a new record. Arnhem Land's King Stingray was responsible for four of those entries alone.\nFolk music.\nFor much of its history, Australia's bush music belonged to an oral and folkloric tradition, and was only later published in print in volumes such as Banjo Paterson's \"Old Bush Songs\", in the 1890s. The distinctive themes and origins of Australia's \"bush music\" or \"bush band music\" can be traced to the songs sung by the convicts who were sent to Australia during the early period of the British colonisation, beginning in 1788. Early Australian ballads sing of the harsh ways of life of the epoch and of such people and events as bushrangers, swagmen, drovers, stockmen and shearers. Convict and bushranger verses often railed against government tyranny. Classic bush songs on such themes include: \"The Wild Colonial Boy\", \"Click Go the Shears\", \"The Drover's Dream\", \"The Queensland Drover\", \"The Dying Stockman\" and \"Moreton Bay\".\nLater themes which endure to the present include the experiences of war, of droughts and flooding rains, of Aboriginality and of the railways and trucking routes which link Australia's vast distances. Isolation and loneliness of life in the Australian bush have been another theme. \"Waltzing Matilda\", often regarded as Australia's unofficial national anthem, is a quintessential Australian folk song, influenced by Celtic folk ballads. Country and folk artists such as Tex Morton, Slim Dusty, Rolf Harris, the Bushwackers, John Williamson, and John Schumann of the band Redgum have continued to record and popularise the old bush ballads of Australia through the 20th and into the 21st century \u2013 and contemporary artists including Sara Storer and Lee Kernaghan draw heavily on this heritage.\nAustralia has a unique tradition of folk music, with origins in both the indigenous music traditions of the original Australian inhabitants, as well as the introduced folk music (including sea shanties) of 18th and 19th century Europe. Celtic, English, German and Scandinavian folk traditions predominated in this first wave of European immigrant music. The Australian tradition is, in this sense, related to the traditions of other countries with similar ethnic, historical and political origins, such as New Zealand, Canada, and the United States. The Australian indigenous tradition brought to this mix of novel elements, including new instruments, some of which are now internationally familiar, such as the didgeridoo of Northern Australia. A number of British singers have spent periods in Australia and have included Australian material in their repertoires, e.g. A. L. Lloyd, Martin Wyndham-Read and Eric Bogle.\nFolk revival.\nNotable Australian exponents of the folk revival movement included both European immigrants such as Eric Bogle, noted for his sad lament to the battle of Gallipoli \"And the Band Played Waltzing Matilda\", and more contemporary artists such as Archie Roach and Paul Kelly. Kelly's lyrics capture the vastness of the culture and landscape of Australia by chronicling life about him for over 30 years. David Fricke from Rolling Stone calls Kelly \"one of the finest songwriters I have ever heard, Australian or otherwise.\" In the 1970s, Australian Folk Rock brought both familiar and less familiar traditional songs, as well as new compositions, to live venues and the airwaves. Notable artists include the Bushwackers and Redgum. Redgum are known for their 1983 anti-war protest song \"I Was Only Nineteen\", which peaked at No. 1 on the National singles charts. The 1990s brought Australian indigenous folk rock to the world, led by bands including Yothu Yindi. Australia's long and continuous folk tradition continues strongly to this day, with elements of folk music still present in many contemporary artists including those generally thought of as Rock, Heavy Metal and Alternative Music.\nPopular music.\nEarly pop music.\nAustralian composers who published popular musical works (e.g. Ragtime, light ephemera) in the early twentieth century include Vince Courtney, Herbert De Pinna, Jack Lumsdaine, Joe Slater, Bert Rache, Reginald Stoneham, Clement Scott and Herbert Cosgrove, among others. Demand for local works declined with recording and broadcast.\nPossibly the first Australian song to compete with imported recordings was Good-Night Mister Moon by Allan Ryan and William Flynn \nCountry music.\nAustralia has a long tradition of country music, which has developed a style quite distinct from its US counterpart. The early roots of Australian country are related to traditional folk music traditions of Ireland, England, Scotland and many diverse nations. \"Botany Bay\" from the late 19th century is one example. \"Waltzing Matilda\", often regarded by foreigners as Australia's unofficial national anthem, is a quintessential Australian country song, influenced more by Celtic folk ballads than by American Country and Western music. This strain of Australian country music, with lyrics focusing on strictly Australian subjects, is generally known as \"bush music\" or \"bush band music.\" The most successful Australian bush band is Melbourne's the Bushwackers, active since the early 1970s, other well-known country singers include Reg Lindsay, bush balladeer singer Buddy Williams, and entertainers Johnny Ashcroft and Chad Morgan.\nAnother, more Americanized form of Australian country music was pioneered in the 1930s by such recording artists as Tex Morton, and later popularized by Slim Dusty, best remembered for his 1957 song \"A Pub With No Beer\", and Smoky Dawson. Dusty married singer-songwriter Joy McKean in 1951 and became Australia's biggest selling domestic music artist with more than 7 million record sales. British-born country singer and yodeller, Frank Ifield, was one of the first Australian post-war performers to gain widespread international recognition. After returning to the UK in 1959 Ifield was successful in the early 1960s, becoming the first performer to have three consecutive number-one hits on the UK charts: \"I Remember You\", \"Lovesick Blues\" (both 1962) and \"The Wayward Wind\" (1963). \"I Remember You\" was also a Top-5 hit in the US.\nAustralian country artists including Olivia Newton-John, Sherrie Austin, and Keith Urban have achieved considerable success in the USA. In recent years local contemporary country music, featuring much crossover with popular music, had popularity in Australia; notable musicians of this genre include David Hudson, John Williamson, Gina Jeffreys, Lee Kernaghan, Troy Cassar-Daley, Sara Storer, Felicity Urquhart, and Kasey Chambers. Others influenced by the genre include Nick Cave, Paul Kelly, the John Butler Trio, Jagged Stone and the Waifs. Popular Australian country songs include \"Click Go the Shears\" (Traditional), \"Lights on the Hill\" (1973), \"I Honestly Love You\" (1974), \"True Blue\" (1981), and \"Not Pretty Enough\" (2002).\nChildren's music.\nChildren's music in Australia developed gradually over the latter half of the 20th century. Some of the most recognised performers in that period were those associated with the long-running Australian Broadcasting Corporation series \"Play School\", including veteran actor-musician Don Spencer and actor and singer Noni Hazlehurst. Children's music remained a relatively small segment of the Australian music industry until the emergence of groundbreaking children's group the Wiggles in the late 1990s. The multi-award-winning four-piece group rapidly gained international popularity in the early 2000s and by the end of the decade they had become one of the most popular children's groups in the world. The Wiggles now boasts a huge fanbase in many regions including Australasia, Britain, Asia, and the Americas.\nIn 2008, the Wiggles were named Business Review Weekly's top-earning Australian entertainers for the fourth year in a row, having earned A$45\u00a0million in 2007. They have been called \"the world's biggest preschool band\" and \"your child's first rock band\". The group has achieved worldwide success with their children's albums, videos, television series, and concert appearances. They have earned 18 gold, 13 platinum, three double-platinum, and ten multi-platinum awards; additionally 15 ARIA Awards for Best Children's Album (making ARIA history as the most awarded ARIA winner in the one category), received the ARIA for Best Australian Live Act, and been inducted into the ARIA Hall of Fame.\nBy 2002, the Wiggles had become the Australian Broadcasting Corporation's (ABC) most successful pre-school television program. They have performed for over 1.5\u00a0million children in the US between 2005 and 2008. They have won APRA song writing awards for Best Children's Song three times and earned ADSDA's award for Highest Selling Children's Album four times. They have been nominated for ARIA's Best Children's Album award nineteen times, and won the award twelve times. In 2003, they received ARIA's Outstanding Achievement Award for their success in the U.S. and were also inducted into the ARIA Hall of Fame in 2011.\nPeter Combe, Patsy Biscoe and Hi-5 are other notable names within the industry.\nR&amp;B and soul music.\nR&amp;B soul music had a significant impact on Australian's music, although it is notable that many seminal recordings in this genre by American acts of the late 20th century were not played on Australian radio. Anecdotal evidence suggest that racism was a key factor\u2014in his book on the history of Australian radio, author and broadcaster Wayne Mac recounts that when a local Melbourne DJ of the 1960s played the new Ike and Tina Turner single \"River Deep Mountain High\" it was immediately pulled from the playlist by the station's program manager for being \"too noisy and too black\".\nRen\u00e9e Geyer is an Australian singer who came to prominence in the mid-1970s, has long been regarded as one of the finest exponents of jazz, soul and R&amp;B idioms. She had commercial success as a solo artist in Australia, with \"It's a Man's Man's World \"Rock historian, Ian McFarlane described her as having a \"rich, soulful, passionate and husky vocal delivery\". Geyer's iconic status in the Australian music industry was recognised when she was inducted into the ARIA Hall of Fame on 14 July 2005.\nParallel with Geyer's success, American born vocalist Marcia Hines emerged as one of Australia's most successful solo singers. She first came to prominence in the early 1970s with critically acclaimed roles in the local stage productions of \"Hair\" and \"Jesus Christ Superstar\" (in which she was the first African-American to play the role of Mary Magdalene) before launching a solo career. By the late 1970s she was one of Australia's top singing stars, winning several \"Queen of Pop\" awards and hosting her own national TV variety series.\nFollowing their initial dissolution in 1982 Cold Chisel lead vocalist Jimmy Barnes embarked on a successful solo career that has continued from the 1980s to the present. Many of Barnes' albums have featured versions of songs from these genres and his chart-topping album \"Soul Deep (1991)\" consisted entirely of covers of classic 1960s soul/R&amp;B covers. Australian soul singer/songwriters like Daniel Merriweather, has after several successful collaborations with artists such as Mark Ronson, released his official debut album, \"Love &amp; War\", in June 2009. It entered the UK Albums Chart at number two. After launching his career as the winner of an early series of \"Australian Idol\", soul singer/songwriter Guy Sebastian has also made an impact on this genre in Australia winning awards at the Urban Music Awards Australia and New Zealand for Best Male Artist and Best R&amp;B Album. Sebastian's recent release \"Like it Like That\", was the highest selling Australian artist single in 2009 and charted at No. 1 for two consecutive weeks\nIn 2004, \"Australian Idol\" finalist Paulini's debut single \"Angel Eyes\" and album \"One Determined Heart\" both reached number one on the ARIA charts and were certified platinum. Paulini earned ARIA No. 1 Chart Awards for both the single and album. Her second album \"Superwoman\" included the singles \"Rough Day\" and \"So Over You\", and earned Paulini two nominations at the 2007 Urban Music Awards for 'Best R&amp;B Album' and 'Best Female Artist'.\n2006 \"Australian Idol\" runner-up Jessica Mauboy made her musical solo debut in 2008 with the single \"Running Back\", which featured American rapper Flo Rida, and peaked at number three on the ARIA Singles Chart, eventually being certified double platinum. Her debut album \"Been Waiting\" earned her seven nominations at the 2009 ARIA Music Awards, winning the award of 'Highest Selling Single' for \"Running Back\".\nReggae.\nReggae had success on the radio charts in Australia in the early 1980s when Toots and the Maytals, the first artist to use the term \"reggae\" in song, went to number one with their song \"Beautiful Woman\". Early reggae groups from Australia include No Fixed Address.\nRock and pop.\nAustralia has produced a wide variety of rock and popular music, from the internationally successful groups AC/DC, INXS, Nick Cave, Savage Garden, the Seekers, or pop divas Delta Goodrem, Kylie Minogue to the popular local content of John Farnham, Jimmy Barnes or Paul Kelly. Indigenous Australian music and Australian jazz have also had crossover influence on this genre. Early Australian rock and roll stars included Col Joye and Johnny O'Keefe. O'Keefe formed a band in 1956; his hit \"Wild One\" made him the first Australian rock'n'roller to reach the national charts. While US and British content dominated airwaves and record sales into the 1960s, local successes began to emerge \u2013 notably the Easybeats and the folk-pop group the Seekers had significant local success and some international recognition, while AC/DC had their first hits in Australia before going on to international success.\nA pivotal event was the 1970 radio ban, which lasted from May to October that year. The Ban was the climax of a simmering \"pay for play\" dispute between major record companies and commercial radio stations, who refused to pay a proposed new copyright fee for playing pop records on air. The dispute erupted into open conflict in May 1970\u2014many commercial stations boycotted records by the labels involved and refused to list their releases on their Top 40 charts, while the record companies in turn refused to supply radio with free promotional copies of new releases.\nAn unexpected side-effect of the ban was that several emerging Australian acts signed to independent labels (who were not part of the dispute) scored hits with covers of overseas hits; these included the Mixtures' cover of Mungo Jerry's \"In the Summertime\" and Liv Maessen's cover of Mary Hopkin's Eurovision song \"Knock, Knock Who's There?\".\nDespite commercial radio resistance to the more progressive music being produced by bands like Spectrum and Tully, acts as diverse as AC/DC, Sherbet and John Paul Young were able to achieve major success and develop a unique sound for Australian rock. From 1975, key agents for the increased exposure of local music were the nationally broadcast ABC-TV television pop show \"Countdown\", which premiered in late 1974, and Australia's first non-commercial all-rock radio station Double Jay, which opened in January 1975. Hard rock bands AC/DC and Rose Tattoo and harmony rock group Little River Band also found major overseas success in the late 1970s and early 1980s, touring all over the world. Meanwhile, a score of Australian expatriate solo performers like Helen Reddy, Olivia Newton-John and Peter Allen became major stars in the US and internationally. Icehouse also formed in the late 1970s.\nPop magazines such as \"Go-Set\" (which began in 1966), the \"Daily Planet\", and television programs such as \"Countdown\" promoted Australian popular music to the youth market.\n1980s.\nThe 1980s saw a breakthrough in the independence of Australian rock\u2014Nick Cave said that before the 1980s, \"Australia still needed America or England to tell them what was good\". An example of Australians breaking free from convention came in TISM. Formed in 1982, the band is known for its anonymous members, outrageous stage antics, and humorous lyrics. In the words of the band, \"There's only one factor left that makes us work. And that factor, I think, we've burned away, with the crucible of time, into something that's actually genuine.\"\nMen at Work, Divinyls, and Hoodoo Gurus, all formed between 1979 and 1981, became hugely successful worldwide. Men at Work's \"Down Under\" hit number one in Australia, Europe, the UK, Canada, and the United States, and was considered the theme song of Australia's successful showing at the 1983 America's Cup. Hoodoo Gurus, meanwhile, hit it big on the US college circuit\u2014all of their 1980s albums topped the chart. At the same time, a number of Australian bands relocated to the U.K. and particularly London to further their artistic and commercial endeavours, among whom were the Moodists, the Go-Betweens, the Birthday Party with guitarist Rowland S. Howard, Laughing Clowns, Foetus, SPK, the Triffids, and Peter Loveday.\nGrunge.\nGrunge is a subgenre of alternative rock and a subculture that emerged during the mid-1980s in Australia and in the Pacific Northwest U.S. state of Washington. The early grunge movement in the US revolved around Seattle's independent record label Sub Pop and that region's underground music scene. By the early 1990s, its popularity had spread, with grunge bands appearing in California, then emerging in other parts of the United States and in Australia, building strong followings and signing major record deals. Mark Arm, the vocalist for the Seattle band Green River\u2014and later Mudhoney\u2014stated that the term had been used in Australia in the mid-1980s to describe bands such as King Snake Roost, The Scientists, Salamander Jim, and Beasts of Bourbon. Arm used grunge as a descriptive term rather than a genre term, but it eventually came to describe the punk/metal hybrid sound of the Seattle music scene.\nSeveral Australian bands, including Cosmic Psychos and Feedtime are cited as precursors to grunge, their music influencing the Seattle scene through the college radio broadcasts of Sub Pop founder Jonathan Poneman and members of Mudhoney. Chris Dubrow from \"The Guardian\" states that, in the late 1980s, Australia's \"sticky-floored...alternative pub scene\" in seedy inner-city areas produced grunge bands with \"raw and awkward energy\" such as X, Feedtime and Lubricated Goat. Dubrow said \"Cobain...admitted the Australian wave was a big influence\" on his music. Everett True states that \"[t]here's more of an argument to be had for grunge beginning in Australia with the Scientists and their scrawny punk ilk.\"\nFrom being discovered in mid-1994 with their debut single \"Tomorrow\" to their 1995 debut album \"Frogstomp\" (which sold more than 4 million copies worldwide), Silverchair were considered by some to be grunge's \"last stand\". The band's trio of teenagers\u2014Ben Gillies on drums, Daniel Johns on vocals and guitars, and Chris Joannou on bass guitar\u2014were still in high school when the album went to number one in Australia and New Zealand.\n1990s: Indie rock.\nThe 1990s saw continued overseas success from groups such as AC/DC, INXS, Men at Work, Midnight Oil, the Bad Seeds, and a new indie rock scene started to develop locally. Sydney-based Ratcat were the first new band to achieve a mainstream following, while bands such as the Hoodoo Gurus got off to a slower start; their debut album \"Stoneage Romeos\" earned a small following but failed to captivate a mainstream that at the time \"didn't get it\". Later reviews described the band as \"integral to the story of Aussie indie music\", influencing bands including Frenzal Rhomb and Jet. The band became an ARIA Hall of Fame inductee. The Church, meanwhile, was highly successful in the 1980s, only to see their careers diminish in the next decade; 1994's \"Sometime Anywhere\" saw the band recede from a mainstream audience.\nAlternative rock began to gain popularity midway through the 1990s, with grunge and Britpop styles especially popular, resulting in a new wave of Australian bands. Some\u2014such as Savage Garden, the Living End and Silverchair\u2014also gained quick success in the United States, while You Am I, Jebediah, Magic Dirt, Something for Kate, Icecream Hands and Powderfinger gained more success locally. Bands such as Regurgitator and Spiderbait were hit heavily by the post-grunge backlash, losing in sales and critical acclaim.\nMuch of the success of rock in Australia is attributed to the non-commercial Australian Broadcasting Corporation's radio station Triple J, which focuses heavily on Australian alternative music, and has done so since its formation as 2JJ in 1975. Throughout the station's history, they have helped jump start the careers of numerous bands such as Missy Higgins and Killing Heidi through programs such as \"Unearthed\", the Australian Music program Home &amp; Hosed and the Hottest 100.\nThe Big Day Out festival has showcased Australian and international acts, with line-ups spanning multiple genres, with an alternative focus. It has become highly popular amongst musicians; Foo Fighters lead singer Dave Grohl said \"We play the Big Day Out because it's the best tour in the world. You ask any band in the world \u2013 they all want to play the Big Day Out, every single one of them.\" Other festivals, such as Homebake, Livid, and Splendour in the Grass, are also rock focused, and together with Big Day Out are \"united by the dominant presence of the indie-guitar scene\". Australia made its first appearance in the Eurovision Song Contest 2015 after being granted a spot in the final by the EBU.\nElectronic and dance music.\nElectronic music in Australia emerged in the 1990s, drawing from styles such as funk, house, techno, and trance. Early innovators included Whirlywirld and Severed Heads, who were among the first electronic acts to play the Big Day Out and gained recognition for their experimental sound.\nIn the 2000s, Australian electronic acts began achieving mainstream and international success. The Presets rose to prominence with their fusion of electro-house and synth-pop, winning multiple ARIA Music Awards and helping define the \"Modular Records\" sound of the mid-2000s. Their 2008 album \"Apocalypso\" was a commercial and critical success, cementing their role in the evolution of Australian dance music.\nPendulum, formed in Perth in 2002, brought drum and bass into the Australian mainstream by blending electronic production with live instrumentation and rock influences. Their debut album, \"Hold Your Colour\", became one of the best-selling drum and bass albums of all time and expanded their reach to Europe and North America.\nFollowing their success with Pendulum, members Rob Swire and Gareth McGrillen formed Knife Party, an electro house and dubstep duo that gained international popularity with aggressive, high-energy tracks such as \"Internet Friends\" and \"Centipede\". Knife Party became a prominent act at global festivals, further raising the profile of Australian electronic producers on the world stage.\nEducational institutions have also embraced the genre; the University of Adelaide\u2019s Electronic Music Unit and Melbourne\u2019s School of Synthesis\u2014founded by producer Davide Carbone\u2014provide training in music technology and production.\nOther notable acts such as Pnau, Rogue Traders, and Regurgitator have contributed to the genre by blending electronic styles with pop, rock, and hip hop. The success of these artists led to a growth in electronic music festivals including Two Tribes, Future Music Festival, Stereosonic, Defqon.1, Utopia, and IQON, although mainstream radio support remains limited.\nSydney-based magazine \"Cyclic Defrost\", founded in 1998, remains one of the few Australian publications dedicated solely to electronic music and culture.\nGrime.\nGrime is a British electronic genre that emerged in the early 2000s, derivative of electronic music such as UK garage and jungle, and draws influence from dancehall, ragga, and hip hop. The style is typified by rapid, syncopated breakbeats, generally around 140 bpm, and often features an aggressive or jagged electronic sound. Rapping is also a significant element of the style, and lyrics often revolve around gritty depictions of urban life.\nAustralian grime emerged in 2010 after UK-born artist Fraksha released his mixtape \"It's Just Bars\". Fraksha is widely regarded as a pioneer of the scene in Australia. Fraksha, alongside fellow MC's Scotty Hinds, Diem and Murky, formed the first Australian based grime collective, Smash Brothers, in 2010. Smash Brothers pioneered what became Australian grime music, and were known for their high energy performances. For the most part, few members initially released a lot of music other than Fraksha, but all were active in the raving scene where they exposed many to grime music. They also worked with UK based artists such as Skepta, Foreign Beggars and Dexplicit. Another first for Fraksha was the launch of Melbourne radio show The Sunday Roast on KissFM with Affiks, dedicated to grime and Dubstep music. In 2011 he started the first Australian grime night alongside Affiks and Artic called 50/50. Fraksha in 2011 performed in New Zealand alongside UK grime pioneer Dizzee Rascal.\nThe resurgence grime was experiencing in the UK during the mid 2010s also reached Australia. The sound's resurgence also affected the popularity of grime in Australia, with various other Australian MC's picking up the sound with success, such as Diem, Alex Jones, Shadow, Talakai, Nerve, Wombat and Seru.\nArt music.\nJazz.\nThe history of jazz and related genres in Australia extends back into the 19th century. During the gold rush locally formed blackface (white actor-musicians in blackface) minstrel troupes began to tour Australia, touring not only the capital cities but also many of the booming regional towns like Ballarat and Bendigo. Minstrel orchestra music featured improvisatory embellishment and polyrhythm in the (pre-classic) banjo playing and clever percussion breaks. Some genuine African-American minstrel and jubilee singing troupes toured from the 1870s. A more jazz-like form of minstrelsy reached Australia in the late 1890s in the form of improvisatory and syncopated coon song and cakewalk music, two early forms of ragtime. The next two decades brought ensemble, piano and vocal ragtime and leading (mostly white) American ragtime artists, including Ben Harney, \"Emperor of Ragtime\" Gene Greene and pianist Charley Straight. Some of these visitors taught Australians how to 'rag' (improvise unsyncopated popular music into ragtime-style music).\nBy the mid-1920s, phonograph machines, increased contact with American popular music and visiting white American dance musicians had firmly established jazz (meaning jazz inflected modern dance and stage music) in Australia. The first recordings of jazz in Australia are Mastertouch piano rolls recorded in Sydney from around 1922 but jazz began to be recorded on disc by 1925, first in Melbourne and soon thereafter in Sydney. Soon after World War II, jazz in Australia diverged into two strands. One was based on the earlier collectively improvised called \"dixieland\" or traditional jazz. The other so-called modernist stream was based on big band swing, small band progressive swing, boogie woogie, and after WWII, the emerging new style of bebop. By the 1950s American bop, itself, was dividing into so-called 'cool' and 'hard' bop schools, the latter being more polyrhythmic and aggressive. This division reached Australia on a small scale by the end of the 1950s. From the mid-1950s rock and roll began to draw young audiences and social dancers away from jazz. British-style dixieland, called Trad, became popular in the early 1960s. Most modern players stuck with the 'cool' (often called West Coast) style, but some experimented with free jazz, modal jazz, experiment with 'Eastern' influences, art music and visual art concept, electronic and jazz-rock fusions.\nThe 1970s brought tertiary jazz education courses and continuing innovation and diversification in jazz which, by the late 1980s, included world music fusion and contemporary classical and jazz crossovers. From this time, the trend towards eclectic style fusions has continued with ensembles like The Catholics, Australian Art Orchestra, Tongue and Groove, austraLYSIS, Wanderlust, The Necks and many others. It is questionable whether the label jazz is elastic enough to continue to embrace the ever-widening range of improvisatory music that is associated with the term jazz in Australia. However, mainstream modern jazz and dixieland still have the strongest following and patron still flock to hear famous mainstream artists who have been around for decades, such as One Night Stand players Dugald Shaw and Blair Jordan, reeds player Don Burrows and trumpeter James Morrison and, sometimes, the famous pioneer of traditional jazz in Australia, Graeme Bell. A non-academic genre of jazz has also evolved with a harder \"street edge\" style. The Conglomerate, The Bamboos, Damage, Cookin on Three Burners, Black Money John McAll are examples of this.\nSee:\nSacred music.\nThe most ancient musical traditions in Australia transmit the beliefs of the Aboriginal Dream Time. The Ntaria Choir at Hermannsburg, Northern Territory, has a unique musical language which mixes the traditional vocals of the Ntaria Aboriginal women with Lutheran chorales (tunes that were the basis of much of Bach's music). \"Baba Waiyar\", a popular traditional Torres Strait Islander hymn shows the influence of gospel music mixed with traditionally strong Torres Strait Islander vocals and country music. The Australian Aboriginal singer-songwriter Jimmy Little found success in the genre. His gospel song \"Royal Telephone\" (1963) was the first No.1 hit by an Aboriginal artist.\nAustralian composers of church music include George Savin De Chan\u00e9et, John Albert Delany, Edwin Fowles, Nathan Isaac, Alfred Wheeler, Christian Helleman, Guglielmo Enrico Lardelli, Arthur Massey, Frederick Augustus Packer, William Robert Knox, George William Torrance, Alberto Zelman, Ernest Edwin Mitchell (-1951) and Tharawal Aboriginal Tom Foster.\nChristian music in Australia arrived with the First Fleet of British settlers in 1788 and has grown to include a variety of genres including classical music, hymns, Christian rock, country gospel, and Christmas music. St Mary's Cathedral Choir, Sydney, is the oldest musical institution in Australia, from origins in 1817. Major recording artists from Johnny O'Keefe (the first Australian Rock and Roll star) to Paul Kelly (folk rock), Nick Cave (the critically acclaimed brooding rocker) and Slim Dusty (the \"King of Australian country music\") have all recorded Christian themed songs. Other performing artists such as Catholic nun Sister Janet Mead, Aboriginal crooner Jimmy Little and Australian Idol contestant Guy Sebastian have held Christianity as central to their public persona. The Newsboys were founded in Mooloolaba Australia by Peter Furler and they popularised Christian music with hits like \"Shine\" and \"God's not Dead\". Today, Christian music in Australia ranges widely across genres, from Melbourne's St Paul's Cathedral Choir who sing choral evensong most weeknights; to the Contemporary music that is a feature of the evangelical Hillsong congregation.\nAnnually, Australians gather in large numbers for traditional open-air Christmas concerts in December, such as the Carols by Candlelight of Melbourne, and Sydney's Carols in the Domain. Australian Christmas carols like the \"Three Drovers\" or \"Christmas Day\" by John Wheeler and William G. James place the Christmas story in an Australian context of warm, dry Christmas winds and red dust. As the festival of Christmas falls during the Australian summer, Australians gather in large numbers for traditional open-air evening carol services and concerts in December, such as Carols by Candlelight in Melbourne and Carols in the Domain in Sydney.\nAustralian country music's most successful artist Slim Dusty recorded a number of country gospel songs, with which he liked to finish his live shows. In 1971, he released the Gospel album \"Glory Bound Train\", featuring the eponymous hit \"Glory Bound Train\", and other songs of a Christian theme. \"Glory Bound Train\" was in turn the song selected to conclude the tribute concert held at Tamworth after his death. The \"Concert for Slim\" was recorded live on January 20, 2004, at the Tamworth Regional Entertainment Centre, and an all star cast of Australian musicians sung out the show with Slim's \"Glory Bound Train\".\nFunding.\nIn March 2019, the Australian government announced an injection of funding worth A$ in the contemporary music sector. The funding covers support of live music venues, investment for Indigenous music, mentorship programs and music exports.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "67532", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=67532", "title": "Federal Government of Australia", "text": ""}
{"id": "67533", "revid": "82432", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=67533", "title": "Economy of Australia", "text": " \nAustralia has a highly developed mixed economy. As of 2025, Australia was the 15th-largest national economy by nominal GDP (gross domestic product), the 22nd-largest by PPP-adjusted GDP, and was the 21st-largest goods exporter and 24th-largest goods importer. Australia took the record for the longest run of uninterrupted GDP growth in the developed world with the March 2017 financial quarter. It was the 103rd quarter and the 26th year since the country had a technical recession. As of June 2021, the country's GDP was estimated at $1.98\u00a0trillion.\nThe Australian economy is dominated by its service sector, which in 2017 comprised 62.7% of the GDP and employed 78.8% of the labour force. At the height of the mining boom in 2009\u201310, the total value-added of the mining industry was 8.4% of GDP. Despite the recent decline in the mining sector, the Australian economy has remained resilient and stable and did not experience a recession from 1991 until 2020. Among OECD members, Australia has a highly efficient and strong social security system, which comprises roughly 25% of GDP. Also among OECD members, Australia has had the most severe increases in cost of living relative to wage growth since the COVID-19 pandemic, along with Finland and New Zealand.\nThe Australian Securities Exchange in Sydney is the 16th-largest stock exchange in the world in terms of domestic market capitalisation and has one of the largest interest rate derivatives markets in the Asia-Pacific region. Some of Australia's largest companies include Commonwealth Bank, BHP, CSL, Westpac, NAB, ANZ, Fortescue, Wesfarmers, Macquarie Group, Woolworths Group, Rio Tinto, Telstra, Woodside Energy and Transurban. The currency of Australia and its territories is the Australian dollar, which it shares with several Pacific nation states.\nAustralia's economy is strongly intertwined with the countries of East and Southeast Asia, also known as ASEAN Plus Three (APT), accounting for about 64% of exports in 2016. China in particular is Australia's main export and import partner by a wide margin. Australia is a member of the APEC, G20, OECD and WTO. The country has also entered into free trade agreements with ASEAN, Canada, Chile, China, South Korea, Malaysia, New Zealand, Peru, Japan, Singapore, Thailand and the United States. The ANZCERTA agreement with New Zealand has greatly increased integration with the economy of New Zealand.\nHistory.\n20th century.\nAustralia's average GDP growth rate for the period 1901\u20132000 was 3.4% annually. As opposed to many neighbouring Southeast Asian countries, the process towards independence was relatively peaceful and thus did not have significant negative impact on the economy and standard of living. Growth peaked during the 1920s, followed by the 1950s and the 1980s. By contrast, the late 1910s/early 1920s, the 1930s, the 1970s and early 1990s were marked by financial crises.\nEconomic liberalisation.\nFrom the early 1980s onwards, the Australian economy has undergone intermittent economic liberalisation. In 1983, under prime minister Bob Hawke, but mainly driven by treasurer Paul Keating, the Australian dollar was floated and financial deregulation was undertaken.\nEarly 1990s recession.\nThe early 1990s recession came swiftly after the Black Monday of October 1987, as a result of a stock collapse of unprecedented size which caused the Dow Jones Industrial Average to fall by 22.6%. This collapse, larger than the stock market crash of 1929, was handled effectively by the global economy and the stock market began to quickly recover. But in North America, the lumbering savings and loans industry was facing decline, which eventually led to a savings and loan crisis which compromised the well-being of millions of US people. The following recession thus impacted the many countries closely linked to the US, including Australia. Paul Keating, who was treasurer at the time, famously referred to it as \"the recession that Australia had to have.\" During the recession, GDP fell by 1.7%, employment by 3.4% and the unemployment rate rose to 10.8%. However, the recession did assist in reducing long-term inflation rate expectations and Australia has maintained a low inflation environment since the 1990s to the present day.\nMining.\nMining has contributed to Australia's high level of economic growth, from the gold rush in the 1840s to the present day. The opportunities for large profits in pastoralism and mining attracted considerable amounts of British capital, while expansion was supported by enormous government outlays for transport, communication, and urban infrastructures, which also depended heavily on British finance. As the economy expanded, large-scale immigration satisfied the growing demand for workers, especially after the end of convict transportation to the eastern mainland in 1840. Australia's mining operations secured continued economic growth and Western Australia itself benefited strongly from mining iron ore and gold from the 1960s and 1970s which fuelled the rise of suburbanisation and consumerism in Perth, the capital and most populous city of Western Australia, as well as other regional centres.\n2008 financial crisis.\nAustralia is one of the three Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) countries that did not experience two consecutive negative quarters of growth and one of the two that avoided negative year-end GDP growth during the global recession. It was not affected by the crisis from 2008 to 2009 due to a number of factors such as government stimulus spending of $11.8\u00a0billion, its proximity to the booming Chinese economy and the related mining boom kept growth ticking over throughout the worst of the global conditions. In fact, sources such as the IMF and the Reserve Bank of Australia had predicted Australia was well positioned to weather the crisis with minimal disruption, sustaining more than 2% GDP growth in 2009 (as many Western nations went into recession). In the same year, the World Economic Forum ranked Australia's banking system the fourth best in the world, while the Australian dollar's 30% drop was seen as a boon for trade, shielding the country from the crisis and helping to slow growth and consumption. Australia's recession affected New Zealand's economy as Australia was New Zealand's biggest export market. It is said that the term Great Recession as a description of the post-2008 slump is not recognized by Australians particularly those under 30 due to its mild, intangible impact on the country's economy.\nSome analysts had predicted the continuing decline of trade in 2009 could put the economy into recession for the first time in 17 years. However, these initial fears were proved largely unfounded as the Australian economy avoided recession and the unemployment rate peaked at a much lower rate than had been predicted. To help address the anticipated slowdown, the Australian government also announced a stimulus package worth $27 billion to spur economic growth while the Reserve Bank of Australia introduced a series of interest rate cuts.\nWhile Australia's overall national economy grew, some non-mining states and Australia's non-mining economy experienced a recession.\n2010s.\nThe World Bank expected Australia's GDP growth rate to be 3.2% in 2011 and 3.8% in 2012. The economy expanded by 0.4% in the fourth quarter of 2011, and expanded by 1.3% in the first quarter of 2012. The growth rate was reported to be 4.3% year-on-year.\nThe International Monetary Fund in April 2012 predicted that Australia would be the best-performing major advanced economy in the world over the next two years; the Australian Government Department of the Treasury anticipated \"forecast growth of 3.0% in 2012 and 3.5% in 2013\", the National Australia Bank in April 2012 cut its growth forecast for Australia to 2.9% from 3.2%., and JP Morgan in May 2012 cut its growth forecast to 2.7% in calendar 2012 from a previous forecast of 3.0%, also its forecast for growth in 2013 to 3.0% from 3.3%. Deutsche Bank in August 2012, and Soci\u00e9t\u00e9 G\u00e9n\u00e9rale in October 2012, warned that there is risk of recession in Australia in 2013.\nCOVID-19 pandemic and recession.\nIn September 2020, it was confirmed that due to the effects of lockdowns and other government responses to the COVID-19 pandemic, the Australian economy had gone into recession for the first time in nearly thirty years, as the country's GDP fell 7 per cent in the June 2020 quarter, following a 0.3 per cent drop in the March quarter. It officially ended at the beginning of December 2020.\n2020s recovery.\nFollowing the 2020 recession, triggered by the COVID-19 pandemic, Australia faced ongoing economic challenges under the Albanese Labor government, elected in May 2022. Inflation surged, migration exceeded planned targets, and housing affordability worsened, intensifying cost-of-living pressures. Inflation peaked at 6.1% in May 2022 due to global supply chain issues and energy price shocks, falling to 3.6% by March 2024 and 2.4% by December 2024, within the Reserve Bank of Australia's 2\u20133% target. However, core inflation remained at 3.5% in September 2024, with services inflation at 4.6%, indicating persistent domestic pressures. Food prices rose 11.7% and gas 33.9% since 2022, outpacing wage growth of 3.5% annually, while energy rebates capped electricity rises at 2.0% instead of 14.9%.\nLabor's migration policy adopted flexible targets, setting 190,000 places for 2023\u20132024 and 185,000 for 2024\u20132025, unlike the Coalition's stricter caps, with a four-year planning cycle from 2025\u20132026 based on recommendations. However, net overseas migration hit 446,000 in 2023\u20132024, exceeding the 395,000 forecast by 51,000, after peaking at 528,000 in 2022\u20132023, far above historical averages of 200,000\u2013250,000.\nThis \"big Australia by stealth\" was linked to six quarters of negative per capita GDP growth, with GDP per head down 0.3% in 2023\u20132024. The Productivity Commission highlighted strains on housing and infrastructure from this surge.\nHousing affordability declined, with approvals at 89,734 in 2024, below the 21,000 monthly needed for Labor's 1.2 million homes target by 2029, causing a 12,000-dwelling shortfall in January 2025. According to the Housing Industry Association (HIA), Australia constructed approximately 180,000 homes in the previous year, falling well short of the 240,000 needed annually to meet demand. This suggests a yearly shortfall of about 60,000 homes, highlighting the severity of the housing crisis. Alan Kohler attributed a 30\u201340% cost rise to taxes like GST and stamp duty, pricing a two-bedroom apartment at $1 million, unaffordable for median earners at $65,000. He noted barriers like unionisation costs (up 40% since 2020) and NIMBYism, despite 59% of Sydney and 52% of Melbourne residents favouring denser housing. Rents rose 16.4% and housing costs 12.9% since 2022, driven by migration.\nSince 2019, Australian households experienced the sharpest decline in real disposable income of any country in the OECD. According to a comparative analysis of OECD data, real per capita household disposable income in Australia fell by 8.0% over the two years leading up to March 2024. This stands in marked contrast to the OECD average, which recorded a 2.6% increase over the same period. Real GDP per capita fell for 7 consecutive quarters during 2023 and 2024, before a 0.1% increase in the December 2024 quarter. This was however followed by another decline in the March 2025 quarter.\nThis performance positions Australia as an outlier among developed economies and has prompted growing concern over the government's management of the cost-of-living crisis. While most OECD nations saw household incomes either stabilise or rise, supported by targeted fiscal interventions and effective inflation control, Australian households endured a sustained erosion of purchasing power.\nThe fall in real incomes coincided with heightened inflationary pressures, elevated interest rates, and a housing market that remains inaccessible for many. The result has been a tangible reduction in living standards, particularly for middle- and low-income earners, with stagnant wages failing to keep pace with rising costs. Critics argue that the government's fiscal strategy has lacked the responsiveness seen in peer nations, leading to Australia's unique position as the OECD's worst performer on this key economic indicator.\nData.\nThe following table shows the main economic indicators in 1980\u20132025 (with IMF staff estimates in 2026\u20132029). Inflation under 5% is in green.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Static row numbers/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"template:sticky header/styles.css\"/&gt;\nOverview.\nAustralia's per-capita GDP is higher than that of the UK, Canada, Germany and France in terms of purchasing power parity. Per Capita GDP (PPP) Australia is ranked 18th in the world (CIA World Factbook 2016). The country was ranked fifth in the United Nations 2022 Human Development Index and sixth in \"The Economist\" worldwide quality-of-life index 2005. In 2014, using constant exchange rates, Australia's wealth had grown by 4.4% annually on average after the 2008 financial crisis, compared with a 9.2% rate over 2000\u20132007. Australia's sovereign credit rating is \"AAA\" for all three major rating agencies, higher than the United States of America.\nThe emphasis on exporting commodities rather than manufactures underpinned a significant increase in Australia's terms of trade during the rise in commodity prices since 2000. However, due to a colonial heritage a lot of companies operating in Australia are foreign-owned and as a result, Australia has had persistent current account deficits for over 60 years despite periods of positive net merchandise exports; given the net income outlay between Australia and the rest of the world is always negative. The current account deficit totalled AUD$44.5\u00a0billion in 2016 or 2.6% of GDP.\nInflation has typically been between 2 and 3% and the pre-GFC cash rate typically ranged between 5 and 7%, however, partly in response to the end of the mining boom the cash rate has recently been steadily falling, dropping from 4.75% in October 2011 to 1.5% in Aug 2016, then to 1.25% in June 2019 and 1.0% in July 2019. The service sector of the economy, including tourism, education and financial services, constitutes 69% of GDP. Australian National University in Canberra also provides a probabilistic interest-rate-setting project for the Australian economy, which is compiled by shadow board members from the ANU academic staff.\nRich in natural resources, Australia is a major exporter of agricultural products, particularly wheat and wool, minerals such as iron ore and gold, and energy in the forms of liquified natural gas and coal. Although agriculture and natural resources constitute only 3% and 5% of GDP, respectively, they contribute substantially to Australia's export composition. Australia's largest export markets are Japan, China, South Korea, India and the United States.\nAt the turn of the current century, Australia experienced a significant mining boom. The mining sector's contribution to overall GDP grew from around 4.5% in 1993\u201394, to almost 8% in 2006\u201307. The services sector also grew considerably, with property and business services in particular growing from 10% to 14.5% of GDP over the same period, making it the largest single component of GDP (in sectoral terms). This growth has largely been at the expense of the manufacturing sector, which in 2006\u201307 accounted for around 12% of GDP. A decade earlier, it was the largest sector in the economy, accounting for just over 15% of GDP.\nIn 2018 Australia became the country with the largest median wealth per adult, but slipped back to second highest after Switzerland in 2019. Australia's total wealth was estimated to be AUD$10.9\u00a0trillion as of September 2019.\nRegional differences.\nBetween 2010 and 2013, much of the economic growth in Australia was attributed to areas of the country where mining- and resource-based industries and services are mostly located. Western Australia and the Northern Territory are the only states that have economic growth. During 2012 and 2013 Australian Capital Territory, Queensland, Tasmania, South Australia, New South Wales and Victoria experienced recessions at various times. The Australian economy is characterised as a \"two-speed economy\". From June 2012 to March 2013 Victoria experienced a recession. In 2012 the Government of Victoria cut 10% of all jobs in the public service. The period since has seen these trends reversed with Western Australia and Northern Territory, who are heavily dependent on mining, experience significant downturns in GDP while the eastern states returned to growth, led by strong upturns in NSW and Victoria.\nTaxation.\nTaxation in Australia is levied at the federal, state, and local government levels. The federal government raises revenue from personal income taxes and business taxes. Other taxes include the goods and services tax (General Service Tax), excise and customs duties. The federal government is the main source of income for state governments. As a result of state dependence on federal taxation revenue to meet decentralised expenditure responsibilities, Australia is said to have a vertical fiscal imbalance.\nBesides receipts of funds from the federal government, states and territories have their own taxes, in many cases as slightly different rates. State taxes commonly include payroll tax levied on businesses, a poker-machine tax on businesses that offer gambling services, land tax on people and businesses that own land and most significantly, stamp duty on sales of land (in every state) and other items (chattels in some states, unlisted shares in others, and even sales of contracts in some states).\nThe states effectively lost the ability to raise income tax during the Second World War. In 1942, Canberra invoked its Constitutional taxation power (s. 51 (ii)) and enacted the \"Income Tax Act\" and three other statutes to levy a uniform income tax across the country. These acts sought to raise the funds necessary to meet burgeoning wartime expenses and reduce the unequal tax burden between the states by replacing state income taxes with a centralised tax system. The legislation could not expressly prohibit state income taxes (s. 51(ii) does not curtail the power of states to levy taxes) but the federal government's proposal made localised income tax extremely difficult politically. The federal government offered instead compensatory grants authorised by s. 96 of the Constitution for the loss of state income (\"State Grants (Income Tax Reimbursement) Act 1942\").\nThe states rejected Canberra's regime and challenged the legislation's validity in the First Uniform Tax Case (\"South Australia v Commonwealth\") of 1942. The High Court of Australia held that each of the statutes establishing Commonwealth income tax was a valid use of the s. 51(ii) power, in which Latham CJ noted that the system did not undermine essential state functions and imposed only economic and political pressure upon them.\nThe Second Uniform Tax Case (\"Victoria v Commonwealth\" (1957)) reaffirmed the court's earlier decision and confirmed the power of the federal government's power to make s. 96 grants conditionally (in this case, a grant made on the condition that the recipient state does not levy income tax).\nSince the Second Uniform Tax Case, a number of other political and legal decisions have centralised fiscal power with the Commonwealth. In \"Ha vs. New South Wales\" (1997), the High Court found that the \"Business Franchise Licences (Tobacco) Act 1987\" (NSW) was invalid because it levied a customs duty, a power exercisable only by the Commonwealth (s.90). This decision effectively invalidated state taxes on cigarettes, alcohol and petrol. Similarly, the imposition of a Commonwealth goods and services tax (GST) in 2000 transferred another revenue base to the Commonwealth.\nConsequently, Australia has one of the most pronounced vertical fiscal imbalances in the world: the states and territories collect just 18% of all governmental revenues but are responsible for almost 50% of the spending areas. Furthermore, the centralisation of revenue collection has allowed Canberra to force state policy in areas well beyond the scope of its constitutional powers, by using the grants power (s.96) to mandate the terms on which the states spend money in areas over which it has no power (such as spending on education, health and policing).\nLocal governments (called \"councils\" in Australia) have their own taxes (called rates) to enable them to provide services such as local road repairs, local planning and building management, garbage collection, street cleaning, park maintenance services, libraries, and museums. Councils also rely on state and federal funding to provide infrastructure and services such as roads, bridges, sporting facilities and buildings, aged care, maternal and child health, and childcare.\nIn 2000, a goods and services tax (GST) was introduced, similar to the European-style VAT.\nEmployment.\nAccording to the Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS) seasonally adjusted estimates, the unemployment rate dropped 0.1 points to 4.3% in October 2025 while the labour force participation rate remained steady at 67.0%. The participation rate for 15- to 24-year-olds increased by 0.2 points to 71.3% while the unemployment rate for this group decreased by 1 point to 9.6%. According to the ABS, in October 2025, the underemployment rate decreased by 0.2 points to 5.7%, while the underutilisation rate (the unemployed plus the under-employed) decreased by 0.4 points to 10.0% seasonally adjusted.\nAs of June 2025, the number of JobSeeker Payment recipients stands at 883,700 or 5.8% of the labour force.\nThe accuracy of official unemployment figures has been brought into question in the Australian media due to discrepancies between the methods of different research bodies (Roy Morgan versus the ABS), differing definitions of the term 'unemployed' and the ABS' practice of counting under-employed people as \"employed\".\nAs of July 2025, the Australia labour force were employed in the following industries (seasonally adjusted) :\nEmployment for newly qualified professionals.\nAccording to the Australian Graduate Survey done by \"Graduate Careers Australia\", full-time employment for newly qualified professionals from various occupations (around four months after the completion of their qualifications) experienced some declines between 2012 and 2015. Some examples are:\nThe Graduate Careers Survey 2014 explained, \"However, GCA's Beyond Graduation Survey (BGS) indicates that the middle- and longer-term outlook is very positive, with the employment figures for 2010 graduates growing by 14 percentage points three years later.\" The Beyond Graduation Survey 2013 included 12,384 responses and the Graduate Careers Survey 2014 survey included 113,263 responses (\"59.3 per cent of the almost 191,000 Australian resident graduates who were surveyed responded to the AGS.\")\nThe professional associations of some of these occupations expressed their criticism of the immigration policy in 2014.\nStates and territories ranked by unemployment rates.\nNote: All data in the table above is seasonally adjusted.\nSectors.\nIndustry.\nMining.\nIn 2019, the country was the 2nd largest world producer of gold; 8th largest world producer of silver; 6th largest world producer of copper; the world's largest producer of iron ore; the world's largest producer of bauxite; the 2nd largest world producer of manganese; 2nd largest world producer of lead; 3rd largest world producer of zinc; 3rd largest world producer of cobalt; 3rd largest producer of uranium; 6th largest producer of nickel; 8th largest world producer of tin; 14th largest world producer of phosphate; 15th largest world producer of sulfur; in addition to being the 5th largest world producer of salt. The country is also a major producer of precious stones. Australia is the world's largest producer of opal and is one of the largest producers of diamond, ruby, sapphire and jade. In non-renewable energies, in 2020, the country was the 30th largest producer of oil in the world, extracting 351.1 thousand barrels / day. In 2019, the country consumed 1 million barrels / day (20th largest consumer in the world). The country was the 20th largest oil importer in the world in 2018 (461.9 thousand barrels / day). In 2015, Australia was the 12th largest world producer of natural gas, 67.2 billion m3 per year. In 2019, the country was the 22nd largest gas consumer (41.9 billion m3 per year) and was the 10th largest gas exporter in the world in 2015: 34.0 billion m3 per year. In the production of coal, the country was the 4th largest in the world in 2018: 481.3 million tons. Australia is the 2nd largest coal exporter in the world (387 million tons in 2018).\nIn 2014\u201315 mineral extraction in Australia was valued at 212\u00a0billion Australian dollars. Of this, coal represented 45,869\u00a0million, oil and natural gas 40,369\u00a0million, iron ore 69,486\u00a0million, gold ore 13,685\u00a0million, and other metals 7,903\u00a0million.\nCoal is mined primarily in Queensland, New South Wales and Victoria. Fifty-four per cent of the coal mined in Australia is exported, mostly to East Asia. In 2000\u201301, 258.5\u00a0million tonnes of coal was mined, and 193.6\u00a0million tonnes exported. Coal provides about 85% of Australia's electricity production. In fiscal year 2008\u201309, 487 million tonnes of coal was mined, and 261\u00a0million tonnes exported. Australia is the world's leading coal exporter.\nThe Australian mining corporations Rio Tinto Group and BHP are among the largest in the world.\nRio Tinto's Argyle mine in Western Australia was the second-largest diamond mine in the world. The Argyle mine opened in 1983 and has produced more than 95 per cent of Australia's diamonds, including some of the world's most valuable pink and red diamonds. Due to the depletion of ore, Argyle closed in 2020\u2014the closure was expected to reduce Australia's yearly diamond output from 14.2 million carats to 134.7 thousand carats.\nManufacturing.\nThe manufacturing industry in Australia has declined from 30% of GDP in the 1960s to 12% of GDP in 2007.\nIn 2008, four companies mass-produced cars in Australia. Mitsubishi ceased production in March 2008, followed by Ford in 2016, and Holden and Toyota in 2017.\nUntil trade liberalisation in the mid-1980s, Australia had a large textile industry. This decline continued through the first decade of the 21st century. Since the 1980s, tariffs have steadily been reduced; in early 2010, the tariffs were reduced from 17.5 per cent to 10 per cent on clothing, and 7.5\u201310% to 5% for footwear and other textiles.\nAs of 2010, most textile manufacturing, even by Australian companies, is performed in Asia.\nAgriculture.\nIn 2019, the value added from agriculture, fishing and forestry combined made up approximately 2.1% of Australia's GDP. 60% of farm products are exported. Irrigation is an important and widespread practice for a country where many parts receive low rainfall. Agriculture, forestry and fishing was the second-strongest industry from 2013 to 2015, with the number of employees growing from 295,495 in February 2013 to 325,321 in February 2015.\nServices.\nIT-related jobs (such as computer systems design and engineering) are defined as Professional, Scientific and Technical Services by the Department of Education, Employment and Workplace Relations of Australia. IT job creation occurs mostly in the state capital cities of Australia.\nFinance.\nAustralia's \"big four banks\" (National Australia Bank, Commonwealth Bank, Australia and New Zealand Banking Group and Westpac) are among the 'World's 50 Safest Banks' as of April 2012.\nBetween 1991 and 2013, 36,720 mergers and acquisitions with a total known value of US$2,040\u00a0billion with the involvement of Australian firms have been announced. In the year 2013, 1,515 transactions valued at US$78\u00a0billion had been announced which was a decrease in terms of numbers (\u221218%) and value (\u221211%) compared to 2012. The largest takeover or merger transaction involving Australian companies was the 2007 takeover of the Coles Group by Wesfarmers, totalling A$22\u00a0billion.\nTourism.\nIn the financial year 2017/18, tourism represented 3.1% of Australia's GDP contributing A$57.2\u00a0billion to the national economy. Domestic tourism is a significant part of the tourism industry, representing 73% of the total direct tourism GDP.\nIn calendar year 2018, there were 9.3 million visitor arrivals. Tourism employed 646,000 people in Australia in 2017\u201318, 5.2% of the workforce. About 43.7% of persons employed in tourism were part-time. Tourism also contributed 8.0% of Australia's total export earnings in 2010\u201311.\nCreativity and culture.\nGrowing importance is being given to the economic contribution of the creative industries to the national economy. The United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD) recompiles statistics about the export and import of goods and services related to the creative industries. The World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO) has assisted in the preparation of national studies measuring the size of over 50 copyright industries around the world. According to the WIPO compiled data, the national contribution of Creative industries varies from 2% to 11% depending on the country.\nThe Australian Copyright Council (ACC) has been consistently compiling reports using the WIPO-guided framework on the impact of the copyright-based industries to Australia's economy in 2011, 2012, and 2014. In the most up-to-date WIPO-supported study published in 2017, the copyright industries contributed $122.8 billion to the Australian economy in 2016 amounting to 7.4% of Australia's total economic output. The 2016 figure represented an increase of $8.5 billion compared to 2011, with a growth in value added growing at 1.4% per annum (since 2011). Further, it found that these industries generated more economic output than the manufacturing, health care and mining sectors in 2016, and moved from being the 7th largest industry in 2011 to the 3rd in 2016.\nMedia.\nIn 2018, Australia was ranked 19th out of 180 countries in accordance to press freedom. The media industry is highly consolidated, with News Corp Australia and Nine Entertainment publishing the majority of popular newspapers, owning multiple television and radio stations, and providing the two major Australian streaming services, Binge and Stan. Other major media companies include Paramount Australia &amp; New Zealand, Seven West Media and the national broadcasters ABC and SBS.\nEducation.\nSchool attendance is compulsory in Australia, from the age of 5 up until approximately 16 (although it varies between each state and territory). Australia also has an adult literacy rate that was estimated to be 99% in 2003.\nIn the Programme for International Student Assessment, Australia regularly scores among the top five of thirty major developed countries (member countries of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development). In 2018 there were 525,054 international students in Australia, comprising a market of 32,2\u00a0billion A$.\nInfrastructure.\nTransportation.\nAustralia's total transport activity contributed 7.9% to GDP in 2020\u201321, being highly dependent on road transport. It is estimated that roads contribute to more than A$245 billion, to the economic activity, significantly serving to agriculture, forestry, fishing, manufacturing and construction industries. There are more than 300 airports with paved runways. Passenger rail transport includes widespread commuter networks in the major capital cities with more limited intercity and interstate networks. The Australian mining sector is reliant upon rail to transport its product to Australia's ports for export.\nEnergy.\nThe Australian economy is dependent on imported crude oil and petroleum products, the economy's petroleum import dependency is around 80%\u2014crude oil + petroleum products.\nTrade and economic performance.\nIn the second half of the 20th century, Australian trade shifted away from Europe and North America to Japan and other East Asian markets. Regional franchising businesses, now a $128\u00a0billion sector, have been operating co-branded sites overseas for years with new investors coming from Western Australia and Queensland.\nIn the late 19th century, Australia's economic strength relative to the rest of the world was reflected in its GDP. In 1870, Australia had the highest GDP per capita in the world due to economic growth fuelled by its natural resources. However, as Australia's population grew rapidly over the 20th century, its GDP per capita dropped relative to countries such as the US and Norway. However, the Australian economy has been performing nominally better than other economies of the OECD and has supported economic growth for over 20 consecutive years. According to the Reserve Bank of Australia, Australian per capita GDP growth is higher than that of New Zealand, US, Canada and The Netherlands. The past performance of the Australian economy has been heavily influenced by US, Japanese and Chinese economic growth.\nAustralian national debt.\nAustralia's net external debt exceeded $1\u00a0trillion in April 2017 as a result of Australia's structural current account deficits. Although these deficits have narrowed over the last decade due to an increase in net merchandise trade, this effect has been partly offset by the return of Australian government debt; net federal debt was estimated at $326.0\u00a0billion in the 2016\u201317 federal budget of which 60% is owed to foreigners. The entirety of the debt has been accumulated through ten straight budget deficits as Australia had negative net government debt (i.e. The Australian government had net positive bond holdings) a decade earlier in the 2006\u201307 fiscal year.\nChinese investment.\nThere is substantial export to China of iron ore, wool and other raw materials, and over 120,000 Chinese students study in Australian schools and universities. China is the largest purchaser of Australian debt. In 2009, offers were made by state-owned Chinese companies to invest $22\u00a0billion in Australia's resource extraction industry.\nThe Signing of the China-Australia Free-Trade Agreement, signed November 2014, has the potential to drastically increase Chinese Investments as agriculture and services become more lenient.\nAustralia's special investor visa program introduced in 2012 encouraged Chinese investment. The visa program fast-tracks visas and eases the residency requirement for a permanent visa for those ready to invest over five million Australian dollars into state government bonds, specific infrastructure and property investments. Wealthy Chinese interested in direct investment began looking to Australia after Canada started scaling back its investment visa program in 2012 and eliminated its main investor visa program in 2014. In early 2014 it was reported that the Australia's special investor visa was granted to 65 mostly Chinese millionaires who brought over $440\u00a0million into the country. By 2017, almost 90% of the more than 1,300 foreigners who used Australia's special investor visa program were from China. Australia also has an investor visa program with a required investment of one million Australian dollars but with more restrictions and a lengthier period of time to get a permanent visa.\nIn 2017, it was reported that Australia is the third-most popular destination for Chinese to invest wealth offshore, with a 7% increase in Chinese private wealth flowing into Australia while interest in the top two investment destinations, Hong Kong and the United States, fell by 18% and 3%, respectively. In 2017 there were 1.6\u00a0million high-net-worth Chinese (with at least 10\u00a0million Chinese yuan to invest) and 24 per cent of the 3,000 wealthy Chinese surveyed had private investments in Australia. Migration was one of the top three reasons for Chinese investment offshore.\nIn 2018, in the Lowy Institute poll there had a sharp rise in the proportion of the Australian population who say the Australian government is \"allowing too much investment from China\".\nThis number rose from 56 per cent in 2014 to 72 per cent in 2018.\nAustralia's balance of payments.\nIn trade terms, the Australian economy has had persistently large current account deficits (CADs) for more than 50 years. One of the factors that undermines balance of payments is Australia's export base, making it highly vulnerable to the volatility in the prices of commodity goods. In addition, due to a colonial heritage a lot of companies operating in Australia are foreign-owned and, as a result, Australia's net income outlay between it and the rest of the world is always negative; this results in persistent current account deficits even when there is a positive export.\nDependent upon commodities, the Australian government endeavoured to redevelop the Australian manufacturing sector. This initiative, also known as microeconomic reform, helped Australian manufacturing to grow from 10.1% in 1983\u20131984 to 17.8% in 2003\u20132004.\nThere are other factors that have contributed to the extremely high current account deficit in Australia such as lack of international competitiveness.\nHowever, as Australia's CAD is almost entirely generated by the private sector, as outlined in Professor John Pitchford's 'Consenting Adults Thesis' in the early 1990s, there is an argument that the CAD is not a significant issue. Historically, Australia has relied on overseas capital to fill the gap between domestic savings and investment, and many of these investment opportunities could not have been pursued if Australia did not have access to foreign savings. This suggests that Australia's apparently low savings level and CAD are not necessarily a significant problem. As long as the investment that is being funded by overseas capital inflow generates sufficient returns to pay for the servicing costs in the future, the increase in foreign liabilities can be viewed as sustainable in the longer term.\nPersonal wealth.\nAccording to the 2011 Credit Suisse Global Wealth report, Australia's wealth per adult had quadrupled over the past decade, and its total wealth was US$6.4\u00a0trillion. In the report Australia was the second-wealthiest country in the world behind Switzerland based on average wealth per adult, and had the highest median wealth in the world (US$222,000, nearly four times the amount of each US adult) and a proportion of people with wealth above US$100,000 that was eight times the world average. This was attributed to a resilient Australian dollar, property ownership levels and a strong labour market. Compared to the rest of the world, very few Australians had a net worth of less than US$1,000, which was attributed to relatively low credit card and student loan debt. In 2013, Australia was identified by the Credit Suisse as retaining its 2012 position as the nation with the second-highest average wealth per adult (US$403,000); however, the nation's poverty rate was also reported to have increased from 10.2% in 2000\u201301 to 11.8% at the time of the 2013 report on global wealth.\nDespite the economic slowdown, in the 2014 Credit Suisse Global Wealth Report, Australia continued to have the second-highest average wealth per adult (US$430,800) and the highest median wealth (US$225,400), with a total wealth of $7.2\u00a0trillion. The average level of real assets (US$319,700) was the second-highest in the world after Norway and 60% of gross household assets. The report explained that this partly reflects a large endowment of land and natural resources relative to population, and also high urban real estate prices. Only 6% of Australians had a net worth below US$10,000, compared to 29% in the US and 70% for the world as a whole. The average debt was 20% of gross assets. The proportion of people with wealth above US$100,000 was the highest in the world (eight times the world average). Australia had 3.8% (1,783,000 people) of the top 1% of global wealth holders while having 0.4% of the world's adult population. The wealth share by Australia's top decile was 51.1% in 2000, 50.7% in 2007, and 51.1% in 2014. In 2016, Australia continued to be the second-wealthiest nation in terms of wealth per adult.\nIn 2017, Australia was the world's top destination for millionaires, beating the United States for the second consecutive year. An estimated 11,000 millionaires moved to Australia in 2016, compared with the 10,000 who moved to the United States. Australia was especially attractive to Chinese millionaires due to its relative proximity, cleaner environment, political and economic stability, and investor visa programs. Also, the primary reason for millionaires leaving China is top schools abroad that will give their children a better education and career connections.\nMergers and acquisitions.\nAll in all over 43,150 deals have been completed national, inbound or outbound Australia. This cumulates to an overall value of US$2,554\u00a0billion. There was a strong upward trend between 1989 and 2007. In this peak year almost 3,100 deals took place, which is almost 60% more than in 2017, the current low. Australian companies are particularly investing in the fields of metals and minerals (15% of all deals from Australia into foreign countries). Runner-up is the oil and gas industry with only 6.4%.\nHere is a list of the top 10 deals with participation of Australian companies as the acquirer or target company:\nPoverty.\nIn 2022 ACOSS released a report revealing that poverty is growing in Australia, with an estimated 3.3\u00a0million people, or 13.5% of the population, living below the internationally accepted poverty line of 50% of a country's median income. It also estimated that there are 761,000 (17.7%) children under the age of 15 that are in poverty. Indigenous Australians face significantly higher poverty rates, with 30% of Indigenous households in income poverty, emerging as the most socially and economically deprived group in Australia.\nHomelessness.\nThere were 105,237 people experiencing homelessness in Australia on census night in 2011. This equated to 1 in 200 Australians, and represented an increase of 17% from the 2006 census, with the rate of homelessness increasing from 45 per 10,000 to 49 per 10,000.\nThe number of homeless people in Australia jumped by more than 14,000\u2014or 14 per cent\u2014in the five years to 2016, according to census data. The Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS) said 116,000 people were homeless on census night in 2016, representing 50 homeless people per 10,000.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "67534", "revid": "1265247584", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=67534", "title": "Km", "text": ""}
{"id": "67537", "revid": "39102135", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=67537", "title": "Paralympic Games", "text": "Major international sport event for people with disabilities\nThe Paralympic Games or Paralympics is a periodic series of international multisport events involving athletes with a range of disabilities. There are Winter and Summer Paralympic Games, which since the 1988 Summer Olympics in Seoul, South Korea, have been held shortly after the corresponding Olympic Games. All Paralympic Games are governed by the International Paralympic Committee (IPC).\nThe Paralympics began as a small gathering of British World War II veterans in 1948. The 1960 Games in Rome drew 400 athletes with disabilities from 23 countries, as proposed by doctor Antonio Maglio. Currently it is one of the largest international sporting events: the 2020 Summer Paralympics featuring 4,520 athletes from 163 National Paralympic Committees. Paralympians strive for equal treatment with non-disabled Olympic athletes, but there is a large funding gap between Olympic and Paralympic athletes.\nThe Paralympic Games are organized in parallel with and in a similar way to the Olympic Games. The IOC-recognized Special Olympics World Games include athletes with intellectual disabilities (although since 1992, people with intellectual disabilities also participate in the Paralympic Games), and the Deaflympics held since 1924 are exclusive for deaf athletes.\nGiven the wide variety of disabilities of Para athletes, there are several categories in which they compete. The allowable disabilities are divided into ten eligible impairment types: impaired muscle power, impaired passive range of movement, limb deficiency, leg length difference, short stature, hypertonia, ataxia, athetosis, vision impairment and intellectual impairment. These categories are further divided into various subcategories.\nForerunners.\nAthletes with disabilities at the Olympic Games.\nAthletes with disabilities did compete at the Olympic Games prior to the advent of the Paralympics. The first athlete to do so was German-American gymnast George Eyser in 1904, who had one artificial leg. Oliv\u00e9r Halassy, a Hungarian amputee water polo player, competed in three successive Olympic Games, beginning in 1928. Hungarian K\u00e1roly Tak\u00e1cs competed in shooting events in both the 1948 and 1952 Summer Olympics. He was a right-arm amputee and could shoot left-handed. Another athlete with a disability who appeared in the Olympics prior to the Paralympic Games was Lis Hartel, a Danish equestrian athlete who had contracted polio in 1943 and won a silver medal in the dressage event in the 1952 Summer Olympics.\nStoke Mandeville Games.\nThe first organized athletic event for athletes with disabilities that coincided with the Olympic Games took place on the day of the opening of the 1948 Summer Olympics in London. The German-Jewish doctor Ludwig Guttmann, of Stoke Mandeville Hospital, who had fled Nazi Germany with the help of the Council for Assisting Refugee Academics (CARA) in 1939, hosted a sports competition for British World War II veteran patients with spinal cord injuries. The first games were called the 1948 International Wheelchair Games, and were intended to coincide with the 1948 Olympics. Guttman's aim was to create an elite sports competition for people with disabilities that would be equivalent to the Olympic Games. The games were held at the same location each year, and in 1952 Dutch and Israeli veterans took part alongside the British, making it the first international competition of its own kind. In 1960, the 9th annual games took place outside of the UK for the first time in Rome, to coincide with the 1960 Summer Olympics which were also being held in Rome. These were to be later designated the 1st Paralympic Games.\nThese early competitions have been described as the precursors of the Paralympic Games, and Stoke Mandeville holds a similar place in the history of the Paralympic movement as Greece holds in the Olympic Games; since 2012, the Paralympic flame has incorporated a \"heritage flame\" lit at Stoke Mandeville, although it was combined with flames lit in the host country for the formal start of the torch relay. Beginning in 2024, future Paralympic torch relays will officially begin in Stoke Mandeville, as an equivalent to the Olympic flame being created in Olympia.\nMilestones.\nThere have been several milestones in the Paralympic movement. The first official Paralympic Games, coincident with the ninth Stoke Mandeville Games but no longer open solely to war veterans, was held in Rome in 1960. They were the brainchild of Antonio Maglio, a friend and follower of Guttmann and were financed almost entirely by Maglio's employer, the Workers National Accident Insurance Fund of Italy, then led by Renato Morelli, who was also Chairman of the International Social Security Association. Four hundred athletes from 23 countries competed at the 1960 Games. Since 1960, the Paralympic Games have taken place in the same year as the Olympic Games. The Games were initially open only to athletes in wheelchairs; at the 1976 Summer Games, athletes with different disabilities were included for the first time at a Summer Paralympics. With the inclusion of more disability classifications the 1976 Summer Games expanded to 1,600 athletes from 40 countries. \nThe 1988 Summer Paralympics in Seoul was another milestone for the Paralympic movement. It was in Seoul that the Paralympic Summer Games were held directly after the 1988 Summer Olympics, in the same host city, and using the majority of the venues. This set a precedent that was followed in 1992, 1996 and 2000. It was eventually formalized in an agreement between the International Paralympic Committee (IPC) and the International Olympic Committee (IOC) in 2001, and was extended through 2020. On 10 March 2018, the two committees further extended their contract to 2032. Despite being held in the same region, the 1992 Winter Paralympics used different competition venues than those used for the Olympic Games. 1994 Winter Paralympics were the first Winter Games to use the same venues and had the same Organizing Committee as the Winter Olympics.\nWinter Games.\nThe first Winter Paralympic Games were held in 1976 in \u00d6rnsk\u00f6ldsvik, Sweden. This was the first Paralympics in which multiple categories of athletes with disabilities could compete. The Winter Games were celebrated every four years on the same year as their summer counterpart, just as the Olympics were. This tradition was upheld through the 1992 Games in Albertville, France; after that, beginning with the 1994 Games, the Winter Paralympics and the Winter Olympics have been held in those even-numbered years separate from the Summer Olympics. The winter games happen two years after the summer games.\nInternational Paralympic Committee.\nThe International Paralympic Committee is the global governing body of the Paralympic Movement. It comprises 178 National Paralympic Committees (NPC) and four disability-specific international sports federations. The president of the IPC is Andrew Parsons. The IPC's international headquarters are in Bonn, Germany. The IPC is responsible for organizing the Summer and Winter Paralympic Games. It also serves as the International Federation for nine sports (Paralympic athletics, Paralympic swimming, Paralympic archery, Paralympic powerlifting, Para-alpine skiing, Paralympic biathlon, Paralympic cross-country skiing, ice sledge hockey and Wheelchair DanceSport). This requires the IPC to supervise and coordinate the World Championships and other competitions for each of the nine sports it regulates. \nIPC membership also includes National Paralympic Committees and international sporting federations. International Federations are independent sport federations recognized by the IPC as the sole representative of a Paralympic Sport. International Federations responsibilities include technical jurisdiction and guidance over the competition and training venues of their respective sports during the Paralympic Games. The IPC also recognizes media partners, certifies officials, judges, and is responsible for enforcing the bylaws of the Paralympic Charter.\nSince its creation in 1989, IPC has a cooperative relationship with the International Olympic Committee (IOC). Delegates of the IPC are also members of the IOC and participate on IOC committees and commissions. The two governing bodies remain distinct, with separate Games, despite the close working relationship.\nThe Paralympic Games were designed to emphasize the participants' athletic achievements and not their disability. Recent games have emphasized that these games are about ability and not disability. The movement has grown dramatically since its early days \u2013 for example, the number of athletes participating in the Summer Paralympic Games has increased from 400 athletes in Rome in 1960 to 4,342 athletes from 159 countries in Rio de Janeiro in 2016. Both the Paralympic Summer and Winter Games are recognized on the world stage.\nUnlike the Olympic Games, English is the official language of the Paralympic movement. The other languages used at each Paralympic Games are the official languages of the host country or host region. Every proclamation (such as the announcement of each country during the parade of nations in the opening ceremony) is spoken in these two or more languages.\nName and symbols.\nAlthough the name was originally coined as a portmanteau combining \"paraplegic\" (due to its origins as games for people with spinal injuries) and \"Olympic\", the inclusion of other disability groups meant that this was no longer considered very accurate. The present formal explanation for the name is that it derives from the Greek preposition , ('beside' or 'alongside') and thus refers to a competition held in parallel with the Olympic Games. The Summer Games of 1988 held in Seoul was the first time the term \"Paralympic\" came into official use.\n\"Spirit in Motion\" is the current motto for the Paralympic movement. The current Paralympic flag is used since 2020 and contains three colours, red, blue, and green, which are the colours most widely represented in the flags of nations. The colours are each in the shape of an Agito (which is Latin for 'I move/I shake/I stir'), which is the name given to an asymmetrical crescent specially designed for the Paralympic movement. The three Agitos circle a central point, which is a symbol for the athletes congregating from all points of the globe. The motto and symbol of the IPC were changed in 2003 to their current versions. The change was intended to convey the idea that Paralympians have a spirit of competition and that the IPC as an organization realizes its potential and is moving forward to achieve it. The vision of the IPC is, \"To enable Paralympic athletes to achieve sporting excellence and to inspire and excite the world.\" The Paralympic anthem is \"Hymne de l'Avenir\" or \"Anthem of the Future\". It was composed by Thierry Darnis and adopted as the official anthem in March 1996.\nCeremonies.\nOpening.\nAs mandated by the Paralympic Charter, various elements frame the opening ceremonies of the Paralympic Games. Most of these rituals were established are the same that 1920 Summer Olympics in Antwerp and were shared with the Olympic Games. The Opening ceremony typically starts with the hoisting of the host country's flag and a performance of its national anthem. Immediately after the welcome act and the host country anthem and hosting their flag the \"Parade of Nations\" starts with the athletes into the stadium grouped by nation. Since the 1960 Summer Paralympics, the nations enter the stadium alphabetically according to the host country's or region official language, though with the host country's athletes being the last to enter. Beginning with the 2020 Summer Paralympics, the succeeding hosts of the respective Olympic Games (summer or winter) will enter immediately before the current host in descending order. The host nation presents artistic displays of their culture and folklore.\nProtocolary segments are held with the speeches given, formally opening the games. After the opening declaration, the Paralympic flag enters the stadium and is hosted along with the Paralympic Anthem, aside from the host country flag, and the oaths by athletes, coaches, and judges are taken. Finally, the Paralympic flame is brought into the stadium and passed on until it reaches the final torch carrier\u2014often a Paralympic athlete from the host nation\u2014who lights the Paralympic flame in the stadium's cauldron.\nClosing.\nThe closing ceremony of the Paralympic Games takes place after all sporting events have concluded. Flag-bearers from each participating country enter, followed by the athletes who enter together, without any national distinction.\nThe Paralympic flag is taken down. Since the 1988 Winter Paralympics, with some exceptions, the national flag of the country hosting the next Summer or Winter Paralympic Games is hoisted while the corresponding national anthem is played. The games are officially closed, and the Paralympic flame is extinguished. After these compulsory elements, the next host nation briefly introduces itself with artistic displays of dance and theater representative of its culture.\nMedal presentation.\nA medals ceremony is held after the conclusion of each Paralympic event. The winner, second and third-place competitors or teams stand on top of a three-tiered rostrum when they are awarded their respective medal by an IPC member. The national flags of the medalists are then raised while the national anthem of the gold medalist is played. Volunteering citizens of the host country also act as hosts during the medal ceremonies, as they aid the officials who present the medals and act as flag-bearers. For every Paralympic event, the respective medal ceremony is held, at most, one day after the event's final.\nEquality.\nRelationship with the Olympics.\nIn June 2001, the International Olympic Committee (IOC) and the International Paralympic Committee (IPC) signed an agreement that would ensure that the staging of the Paralympic Games is automatically included in the bid for the Olympic Games. The agreement was set to take effect at the 2008 Paralympic Summer Games in Beijing and the 2010 Paralympic Winter Games in Vancouver. However, the Salt Lake 2002 Organizing Committee (SLOC) chose to follow the practice of \"one bid, one city\", with one Organizing Committee for both Games, which was followed up by the 2004 Summer Games in Athens. The agreement was adjusted in 2003. An extension was signed in June 2006, after some troubles at the 2006 Winter Paralympics. Initially agreed to remain in effect until the 2012 Summer Olympics, this was later extended to encompass all Summer and Winter games up until the 2020 Summer Olympics. Even beyond this, all Summer and Winter host cities currently[ [update]] announced are preparing pairs of Olympic and Paralympics Games. This was further confirmed when on 10 March 2018, the IOC and the IPC agreed to further extend the contract to the 2032 Summer Olympics.\nThe IOC has written its commitment to equal access to athletics for all people into its charter, which states,&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The practice of sport is a human right. Every individual must have the possibility of practising sport, without discrimination of any kind and in the Olympic spirit, which requires mutual understanding with a spirit of friendship, solidarity and fair play...Any form of discrimination with regard to a country or a person on grounds of race, religion, politics, gender or otherwise is incompatible with belonging to the Olympic Movement.\nWhile the charter is silent on discrimination specifically related to disability; given the language in the charter regarding discrimination it is reasonable to infer that discrimination on the basis of disability would be against the ideals of the Olympic Charter and the IOC. This is also consistent with the Paralympic Charter, which forbids discrimination on the basis of political, religious, economic, disability, gender, sexual orientation or racial reasons.\nChairman of the London organising committee, Sebastian Coe, said about the 2012 Summer Paralympics and 2012 Summer Olympics in London, England, that, \"We want to change public attitudes towards disability, celebrate the excellence of Paralympic sport and to enshrine from the very outset that the two Games are an integrated whole.\"\nThe 2014 Winter Paralympic Games is the first such Paralympics hosted by Russia. Russia ratified the UN Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities during that period. Notably at 2010 Vancouver, their Paralympic team topped the medal table at the Winter Paralympics, while their Olympic team performed well below expectations at the Winter Olympics. This led the media to highlight the contrast between the achievements of the country's Olympic and Paralympic delegations, despite the greater attention and funding awarded to the Olympic athletes. The Russian Federation organizers of the 2014 Winter Paralympic Games have, since 2007, made efforts to make the host city Sochi more accessible.\nIn 2012, as part of its prohibition on unauthorised advertising, the Paralympic movement began requiring any tattoo of the Olympic rings to be covered during competition, on the basis that the Olympics is technically a third-party organisation. In 2024 the prohibition was ended after protests from athletes.\nParalympians at the Olympics.\nParalympic athletes have sought equal opportunities to compete at the Olympic Games. The precedent was set by Neroli Fairhall, a Paralympic archer from New Zealand, who competed at the 1984 Summer Olympics in Los Angeles.\nIn 2008, Oscar Pistorius, a South African sprinter, attempted to qualify for the 2008 Summer Olympics. Pistorius had both his legs amputated below the knee and races with two carbon fibre blades manufactured by \u00d6ssur. He holds the Paralympic world record in the 400\u00a0meter event. Pistorius missed qualifying for the 2008 Summer Olympics in the 400\u00a0meter race, by 0.70\u00a0seconds. He qualified for the 2008 Summer Paralympics where he won gold medals in the 100, 200, and 400\u00a0meter sprints. \nIn 2011, Pistorius qualified for the 2012 Summer Olympics and competed in two events: he made the semi-final in the 400 metres race; and his team came 8th in the final of the 4 \u00d7 400 metres relay race. Even though all athletes are given equal opportunities to participate in these events, such as the 400-meter race, there has been growing criticism that the games may not be fair to all athletes. For example, athletes running a race with a left prosthetic leg may be disadvantaged compared to those with a right side prosthesis because the races are run in an anticlockwise direction, giving some athletes an advantage.\nSome athletes without a disability also compete at the Paralympics. The sighted guides for athletes with a visual impairment are such a close and essential part of the competition that the athlete with visual impairment and the guide are considered a team, and both athletes are medal candidates.\nFunding.\nStarting at the 1992 Summer Paralympics, recent games have also been supported by contributions from major sponsors. Unlike the Olympics, where the IOC mandates that arenas be clean of sponsor logos, the Paralympics do allow the logos of official sponsors to be displayed inside arenas and on uniforms.\nMedia coverage.\nWhile the Olympic Games have experienced tremendous growth in global media coverage since the 1984 Summer Paralympics, the Paralympics had been slower to develop a consistent mainstream media presence. In June 2023, IPC executives noted that interest in the Paralympics had been improving among broadcasters, citing that it had already reached rights deals for the 2024 Summer Paralympics covering 75% of the world over a year in advance (in comparison to 2020, where many deals were made \"last minute\"), and that it had been pushing for broader coverage and increased rights fees since broadcasters were starting to \"[realize] that [the Paralympics are] actually a great sporting event\", and not treat them as a low-effort obligation bundled with their Olympics rights. Unlike the Olympics, the IPC holds the digital rights to the Paralympics in some markets, allowing it to promote live coverage and other highlights via its own social media platforms to engage online audiences.\nTelevision broadcasts of Paralympic Games began in 1976, but this early coverage was confined to tape-delayed broadcasts to one nation or region. At the 1992 Summer Paralympics, there were 45\u00a0hours of live coverage but it was available only in Europe. Other countries broadcast highlight packages during the Games. No meaningful improvements in coverage occurred until the 2000 Summer Paralympics in Sydney. \nThe 2000 Paralympics represented a significant increase in global media exposure for the Paralympic Games. A deal was reached between the Sydney Paralympic Organizing Committee (SPOC) and All Media Sports (AMS) to broadcast the Games internationally. Deals were reached with Asian, South American, and European broadcast companies to distribute coverage to as many markets as possible. The Games were also webcast for the first time. Because of these efforts, the Sydney Paralympics reached a global audience estimated at 300\u00a0million people. Also significant was the fact that the organizers did not have to pay networks to televise the Games as had been done at the 1992 and 1996 Games. \nDespite these advances, consistent media attention has been a challenge, which was evidenced in the coverage in Great Britain of the 2010 Winter Paralympics. The BBC was criticized for its minimal coverage of the 2010 Winter Paralympics as compared to its coverage of the 2010 Winter Olympics. The BBC announced it would stream some content on its website and show a one-hour highlight program after the Games ended. For the Winter Olympics the BBC aired 160 hours of coverage. The response from the BBC was that budget constraints and the \"time zone factor\" necessitated a limited broadcast schedule. The reduction in coverage was done in spite of increased ratings for the 2008 Summer Paralympics, which was watched by 23% of the population of Great Britain. In Norway, the Norwegian Broadcasting Corporation (NRK) broadcast 30 hours of the 2010 Winter Games live. NRK-sport were critical of parts of the TV production from Vancouver, and notified the EBU of issues such as the biathlon coverage excluding the shooting, and cross-country skiing with skiers in the distance, making it hard to follow the progress of the competition. NRK were far more pleased with the production of the ice sledge hockey and wheelchair curling events, which they felt reached the same level as the Olympic Games. \nNot all Paralympic events have received television coverage; the IPC and its organisers currently contract with the IOC's media unit Olympic Broadcasting Services (OBS) to produce the broadcast feeds for the Paralympics. At the Summer Paralympics, coverage was limited to 16 sports in 2016, but increased to 19 sports in 2020. In 2024, all 22 Summer Paralympic sports were televised for the first time.\nIn the UK, Channel 4 assumed the television rights beginning in the 2012 Summer Paralympics, promising major increases in coverage on television and digital platforms, efforts to heighten the Games' profile, and commitments to incorporate people with disabilities among its staff and presenters. Its coverage of the Paralympics have been promoted through major marketing campaigns; several of its advertisements have won Cannes Lions awards, with its trailer for 2016 \"We're the Superhumans\" receiving an overall Grand Prix award. In January 2020, the Paralympics were classified as a Category A \"listed\" event by the British telecom regulator Ofcom as with the Olympics, mandating that they be broadcast in whole or in part by a free-to-air network, as with the Olympics. Channel 4 reported that its coverage of the 2024 Summer Paralympics was seen by a total audience of 20 million, with the channel achieving its highest viewer share since the 2012 Paralympics.\nOutside the Games.\nA 2010 study by the University of British Columbia (UBC) on the Olympic Games Impact (OGI), showed that of roughly 1,600 Canadian respondents, 41 to 50 percent believed the 2010 Paralympic and Olympic Games in Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada, triggered additional accessibility of buildings, sidewalks and public spaces. 23 percent of employers said the Games had increased their willingness to hire people with disabilities.\nchief executive officer for the International Paralympic Committee Xavier Gonzalez said about the 2008 Summer Paralympics in Beijing, China, that:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In China, the (Paralympic) Games were really a transformation tool for changing attitudes across the board in China towards people with disability, to building accessibility facilities in the city, to changing laws to allow people with a disability to be part of society.\nDown syndrome participation.\nWithin the framework of the International Olympic Committee's commitment to equal access to athletics, concerns have been raised regarding inclusion of athletes with Down syndrome in the Paralympic Games. While the Paralympic movement strives for inclusivity, the absence of a specific classification for athletes with Down syndrome within Paralympic swimming events raises questions about equal and fair competition for Down syndrome athletes.\nInternational Paralympic Committee Para-swimming classification codes are based upon single impairment only, whereas Down syndrome individuals have both physical and intellectual impairments. Although swimmers with Down syndrome are able to compete in the S14 intellectual impairment category (provided they score low in IQ tests), they are often outmatched by the superior physicality of their opponents. At present there is no designated Paralympic category for swimmers with Down syndrome, meaning they have to compete as intellectually disadvantaged athletes. This disregards their physical disabilities.\nA number of advocacy groups globally have been lobbying for the inclusion of a distinct classification category for Down syndrome swimmers within the IPC Classification Codes framework. Initiatives aimed at promoting greater inclusivity within the Paralympic movement have emerged, including advocacy and awareness-raising efforts targeting discrimination and ensuring equal opportunities for athletes with Down syndrome. Despite ongoing advocacy, the issue remains unresolved, and swimmers with Down syndrome continue to face challenges in accessing appropriate classification pathways.\nClassification.\nCategories.\nThe International Paralympic Committee (IPC) has established ten disability categories, including physical, visual, and intellectual impairment. Athletes with one of these disabilities can compete in the Paralympics, are divided within each category according to their level of impairment, in a functional classification system which differs from sport to sport (not every sport can allow for every disability category). These categories apply to both Summer and Winter Paralympics.\nPhysical Impairment \u2013 There are eight different types of physical impairment:\nVisual impairment \u2013 Athletes with visual impairment ranging from partial vision, sufficient to be judged legally blind, to total blindness. This includes impairment of one or more component of the visual system (eye structure, receptors, optic nerve pathway, and visual cortex). The sighted guides for athletes with a visual impairment are such a close and essential part of the competition that the athlete with visual impairment and the guide are considered a team. Beginning in 2012, these guides along with sighted goalkeepers in 5-a-side football became eligible to receive medals of their own.\nIntellectual disability \u2013 Athletes with a significant intellectual impairment and associated limitations in adaptive behaviour. The IPC primarily serves athletes with physical disabilities, but the disability group Intellectual Disability has been added to some Paralympic Games. This includes only elite athletes with intellectual disabilities diagnosed before the age of 18. However, the IOC-recognized Special Olympics World Games are open to all people with intellectual disabilities.\nClassification system.\nThe Paralympics use a functional classification system for athletes, with some variation defined by different sports. In a functional system, the focus is on what effect the athlete's impairment has on his or her athletic performance. Under this system, athletes with total loss of function in their legs will compete together (in most sports), because their functional loss is the same and the reason for the loss is immaterial. \nFor sports like Paralympic swimming or athletics, which are open to athletes with a wide variety of impairments, participants are assigned into a range of classes based on the disability they have and their level of impairment. This aims to minimise the impact of an athlete's impairment on their sporting performance against their rivals. For example, in athletics and swimming, athletes with visual impairments compete in categories 11\u201313, with category 11 athletes having a very low light acuity and/or no light perception, and category 13 athletes having the least severe visual impairment eligible for Paralympic sport.\nFunctional levelling of athletes.\nIn some sports, athletes will be required to use equipment that equalizes the physical limitations between them. For example the Paralympics recognizes three different grades of visual impairment. Athletes in the swimming S11 grade have the most severe visual disabilities, and all swimmers in this grade must wear blackened goggles to prevent any disadvantage from more severe visual impairments. \nTeam levelling.\nThere are also team competitions such as wheelchair rugby or relay swimming where teams are classified as a group. Each athlete is given a sport-specific point value based on their activity limitation. A lower score indicates a more severe activity limitation than a higher score. A team cannot have more than a certain maximum total of points on the field of play at the same time to ensure equal competition. For example, in wheelchair rugby, the four players' combined disability number must total no more than eight points. However in swimming relays there are four categories, with different points totals allowed. Each team must have a combined points value of less than the category total.\nSports.\nThere are twenty-two sports on the Summer Paralympic program and six sports on the Winter Paralympics program. Within some of the sports are several events. For example, alpine skiing has downhill, super combined, super-G, slalom, giant slalom. The IPC has governance over several of the sports but not all of them. Other international organizations, known as International Sports Federations (IF), notably the International Wheelchair and Amputee Sports Federation (IWAS), the International Blind Sports Federation (IBSA), and the Cerebral Palsy International Sports and Recreation Association (CP-ISRA), govern some sports that are specific to certain disability groups. There are national chapters for these International Sport Federations including National Paralympic Committees, which are responsible for recruitment of athletes and governance of sports at the national level.\nAlleged cheating.\nAfter the 2000 Sydney games, a Spanish basketball player alleged that several members of the gold medal-winning Spanish basketball team with intellectual disabilities (ID) did not have disabilities. He claimed that only two athletes out of the twelve-member team met the qualifications of an athlete with an intellectual disability. A controversy ensued and the International Paralympic Committee (IPC) called on the Spanish National Paralympic Committee to launch an investigation. The investigation uncovered several Spanish athletes who had flouted the ID rules. In an interview with the president of the federation that oversees ID competition, Fernando Mart\u00edn Vicente admitted that athletes around the world were breaking the ID eligibility rules. The IPC responded by starting an investigation of its own. The results of the IPC's investigation confirmed the Spanish athlete's allegations and also determined that the incident was not isolated to the basketball ID event or to Spanish athletes. As a result, all ID competitions were suspended indefinitely. The ban was lifted after the 2008 Games after work had been done to tighten the criteria and controls governing admission of athletes with intellectual disabilities. Four sports, swimming, athletics, table tennis and rowing, were anticipated to hold competitions for ID athletes at the 2012 Summer Paralympics.\nThe Paralympics have also been tainted by steroid use. At the 2008 Games in Beijing, three powerlifters and a German basketball player were banned after having tested positive for banned substances. This was a decrease in comparison to the ten powerlifters and one track athlete who were banned from the 2000 Games. German skier Thomas Oelsner became the first Winter Paralympian to test positive for steroids. He had won two gold medals at the 2002 Winter Paralympics, but his medals were stripped after his positive drug test. At the 2010 Winter Paralympics in Vancouver, Swedish curler Glenn Ikonen tested positive for a banned substance and was suspended for six months by the IPC. He was removed from the rest of the curling competition but his team was allowed to continue. The 54-year-old curler said his doctor had prescribed a medication on the banned substances list.\nAnother concern now facing Paralympic officials is the technique of \"boosting\". Athletes can artificially increase their blood pressure, often by self-harming, which has been shown to improve performance by up to 15%. This is most effective in the endurance sports such as cross-country skiing. To increase blood pressure athletes will deliberately cause trauma to limbs below a spinal injury. This trauma can include breaking bones, strapping extremities in too tightly, and using high-pressure compression stockings. The injury is painless but it does affect the athlete's blood pressure.\nAnother potential concern is the use of gene therapy among Paralympic athletes. All Paralympic athletes are banned from enhancing their abilities through gene doping, but it is extremely difficult to differentiate these concepts. The World Anti-Doping Agency (WADA) is currently researching both gene doping and gene therapy, in part to discern the boundary between the two closely related concepts.\nThe IPC have been working with WADA since 2003, to ensure compliance with WADA's anti-doping code among its Paralympic athletes. The IPC has also promised to continue increasing the number of athletes tested at each of its Games, in order to further minimize the possible effect of doping in Paralympic sports. Mandatory in- and out-of competition testing has also been implemented by the IPC to further ensure all of its athletes are performing in compliance with WADA regulations.\nHaving sent samples for forensic analysis, the IPC found evidence that the prevalent doping by Russian athletes was in operation at the 2014 Winter Paralympics in Sochi. On 7 August 2016, the IPC's Governing Board voted unanimously to ban the entire Russian team from the 2016 Summer Paralympics, citing the Russian Paralympic Committee's inability to enforce the IPC's Anti-Doping Code and the World Anti-Doping Code which is \"a fundamental constitutional requirement\". IPC President Sir Philip Craven stated that the Russian government had \"catastrophically failed its Para athletes\". IPC Athletes' Council Chairperson and CPC Member Todd Nicholson said that Russia had used athletes as \"pawns\" to \"show global prowess\".\nNotable champions and achievements.\nTrischa Zorn of the United States is the most decorated paralympian in history. She competed in the blind swimming events and won a total of 55 medals, 41 of which are gold. Her Paralympic career spanned 24\u00a0years from 1980 to 2004. She was also an alternate on the 1980 American Olympic swim team, but did not go to the Olympics due to a boycott by the United States and several of its allies. Ragnhild Myklebust of Norway holds the record for the most medals ever won at the Winter Paralympic Games. Competing in a variety of events between 1988 and 2002, she won a total of 22 medals, of which 17 were gold. After winning five gold medals at the 2002 Games she retired at the age of 58. Neroli Fairhall, a paraplegic archer from New Zealand, was the first paraplegic competitor, and the third Paralympian, to participate in the Olympic Games, when she competed in the 1984 Summer Olympics in Los Angeles. She placed thirty-fourth in the Olympic archery competition, and won a Paralympic gold medal in the same event.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "67538", "revid": "4796325", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=67538", "title": "Australian Defence Force", "text": "National military force of Australia\nThe Australian Defence Force (ADF) is the military organisation responsible for the defence of Australia and its national interests. It consists of three services: the Royal Australian Navy (RAN), the Australian Army and the Royal Australian Air Force (RAAF). The ADF has a strength of just over 90,000 personnel and is supported by the Department of Defence alongside other civilian entities also members of the Australian Defence Organisation.\nDuring the first decades of the 20th century, the Australian Government established the armed services as separate organisations, with each service having an independent chain of command. In 1976, the government made a strategic change and established the ADF to place the services under a single headquarters. Over time, the degree of integration has increased, and tri-service headquarters, logistics, and training institutions have supplanted many single-service establishments. The ADF has been deployed around the world in combat, peacekeeping and disaster-relief missions.\nThe ADF is technologically sophisticated but relatively small for its landmass. The ADF has 58,909 full-time active-duty personnel and 33,269 active reservists. The ADF has the largest military in Oceania, although it is smaller than most Asian military forces. The ADF is supported by a significant budget by worldwide standards and is well equipped and trained, with defence spending at 2.02% of GDP.\nHistory.\nFormation.\nBy 1870, each of the then Australian colonies maintained their own military forces. On 1 January 1901, the colonies federated into a new nation and on 1 March 1901, these colonial forces were amalgamated to establish the Australian Army and Commonwealth Naval Forces. In 1911, the government established the Royal Australian Navy, which absorbed the Commonwealth Naval Force. The Army established the Australian Flying Corps in 1912 which was separated to form the Royal Australian Air Force in 1921. The services were not linked by a single chain of command, as they each reported to their own separate Minister and had separate administrative arrangements. The three services saw action around the world during World War I and World War II, and took part in conflicts in Asia during the Cold War.\nThe importance of joint warfare was made clear to the Australian military during World War II when Australian naval, ground and air units frequently served as part of single commands. Following the war, several senior officers lobbied for the appointment of a commander-in-chief of the three services. The government rejected this proposal and the three services remained fully independent. The absence of a central authority resulted in poor coordination between the services, with each service organising and operating under different military doctrine.\nThe need for an integrated command structure received more emphasis due to inefficient arrangements during the Vietnam War which at times hindered the military's efforts. In 1973, the Secretary of the Department of Defence, Arthur Tange, submitted a report to the Government that recommended the unification of the separate departments supporting each service under a single \"Department of Defence,\" and the creation of the position of Chief of the Defence Force Staff. The government accepted these recommendations, and the Australian Defence Force was established on 9 February 1976.\nDefence of Australia era.\nUntil the 1970s, Australia's military strategy centred on the concept of \"forward defence\", in which the role of the Australian military was to co-operate with allied forces to counter threats in Australia's region. In 1969, when the United States began the Guam Doctrine and the British withdrew east of Suez, Australia developed a defence policy which emphasised self-reliance and the defence of continental Australia. This was known as the Defence of Australia Policy. Under this policy, the focus of Australian defence planning was to protect Australia's northern maritime approaches (the Air-Sea Gap) against enemy attack. In line with this goal, the ADF was restructured to increase its ability to strike at enemy forces from Australian bases and to counter raids on continental Australia. The ADF achieved this by increasing the capabilities of the RAN and RAAF and relocating regular Army units to northern Australia.\nAt this time, the ADF had no military units on operational deployment outside Australia. In 1987, the ADF made its first operational deployment as part of Operation Morris Dance, in which several warships and a rifle company deployed to the waters off Fiji in response to the 1987 Fijian coups d'\u00e9tat. While broadly successful, this deployment highlighted the need for the ADF to improve its capability to rapidly respond to unforeseen events.\nSince the late 1980s, the Government has increasingly called upon the ADF to contribute forces to peacekeeping missions around the world. While most of these deployments involved only small numbers of specialists, several led to the deployment of hundreds of personnel. Large peacekeeping deployments were made to Namibia in early 1989, Cambodia between 1992 and 1993, Somalia in 1993, Rwanda between 1994 and 1995 and Bougainville in 1994 and from 1997 onwards.\nThe Australian contribution to the 1991 Gulf War was the first time Australian personnel were deployed to an active war zone since the establishment of the ADF. Although the warships and clearance diving team deployed to the Persian Gulf did not see combat, the deployment tested the ADF's capabilities and command structure. Following the war the Navy regularly deployed a frigate to the Persian Gulf or Red Sea to enforce the trade sanctions imposed on Iraq.\nEast Timor deployment.\nIn 1996, John Howard led the Liberal Party's election campaign and became prime minister. Subsequently, there were significant reforms to the ADF's force structure and role. The new government's defence strategy placed less emphasis on defending Australia from direct attack and greater emphasis on working in co-operation with regional states and Australia's allies to manage potential security threats. From 1997 the Government also implemented a series of changes to the ADF's force structure to increase the proportion of combat units to support units and improve the ADF's combat effectiveness.\nThe ADF's experiences during the deployment to East Timor in 1999 led to significant changes in Australia's defence policies and, an enhancement of the ADF's ability to conduct operations outside Australia. This successful deployment was the first time a large ADF force had operated outside of Australia since the Vietnam War and revealed shortcomings in its ability to mount and sustain such operations.\nIn 2000, the Government released a new Defence White Paper, \"Defence 2000\u00a0\u2013 Our Future Defence Force\", that placed a greater emphasis on preparing the ADF for overseas deployments. The Government committed to improve the ADF's capabilities by improving the readiness and equipment of ADF units, expanding the ADF and increasing real Defence expenditure by 3% per year; in the event, expenditure increased by 2.3% per annum in real terms in the period to 2012\u201313. In 2003 and 2005, the \"Defence Updates\" emphasised this focus on expeditionary operations and led to an expansion and modernisation of the ADF.\nIraq and Afghanistan.\nSince 2000, the ADF's expanded force structure and deployment capabilities have been put to the test on several occasions. Following the 11 September 2001 terrorist attacks on the United States, Australia committed a special forces task group and an air-to-air refuelling aircraft to operations in Afghanistan, and naval warships to the Persian Gulf as Operation Slipper. In 2003, approximately 2,000 ADF personnel, including a special forces task group, three warships and 14 F/A-18 Hornet aircraft, took part in the invasion of Iraq.\nThe ADF was subsequently involved in the reconstruction of Iraq. From 2003 until 2005 this was mainly limited to a Security Detachment which protected the Australian embassy, the attachment of officers to multi-national headquarters, small numbers of transport and maritime patrol aircraft, and teams of air traffic controllers and medical personnel. From 2005 until 2008 a battalion-sized Australian Army battle group (initially designated the Al Muthanna Task Group, and later Overwatch Battle Group (West)) was stationed in southern Iraq. In addition, teams of ADF personnel were deployed to train Iraqi military units. In line with a 2007 election commitment, the Rudd government withdrew combat-related forces from Iraq in mid-2008, and most of the remaining Australian units left the country the next year.\nThe ADF also undertook several operations in Australia's immediate region during the 2000s. In 2003, elements of all three services were dispatched to Solomon Islands as part of the Regional Assistance Mission to the Solomon Islands. Regular deployments of Australian forces continued to the islands until 2017. Between December 2004 and March 2005, 1,400 ADF personnel served in Indonesia as part of Operation Sumatra Assist, which formed part of Australia's response to the devastating 2004 Indian Ocean earthquake. In May 2006, approximately 2,000 ADF personnel deployed to East Timor in Operation Astute following unrest between elements of the Timor Leste Defence Force. This deployment concluded in March 2013.\nFrom 2006 until 2013 a battalion-sized Australian Army task force operated in Urozgan Province, Afghanistan; this unit was primarily tasked with providing assistance for reconstruction efforts and training Afghan forces, but was frequently involved in combat. In addition, Special Forces Task Groups were deployed from 2005 to 2006 and 2007 until 2013. Other specialist elements of the ADF, including detachments of CH-47 Chinook helicopters and RAAF radar and air traffic control units, were also periodically deployed to the country. A total of 40 ADF personnel were killed in Afghanistan between 2002 and 2013, and 262 wounded. Following the withdrawal of the combat forces in 2013, ADF training teams have continued to be stationed in the country to train Afghan forces.\nThe Australian Labor Party (ALP) governments led by prime ministers Kevin Rudd and Julia Gillard between 2007 and 2013 commissioned two defence white papers, which were published in 2009 and 2013. The 2009 document, \"\", had a focus on responding to China's rapidly growing influence. It included commitments to expand the RAN, including acquiring twelve submarines, and increasing defence spending by three percent per year in real terms. This increase in spending did not occur, however. The \"Defence White Paper 2013\" had similar strategic themes, but set out a more modest program of defence spending which reflected the government's constrained finances. As part of an election commitment, the Liberal\u2013National Coalition Abbott government commissioned a further defence white paper that was published in 2016. This document also included a commitment to expand the ADF's size and capabilities. There has generally been bipartisan agreement between the ALP and the Liberal\u2013National Coalition on the ADF's role since the mid-1970s. Both political groupings currently support the ADF's focus on expeditionary operations, and the broad funding target set out in the \"2016 Defence White Paper\". The ADF's broad force structure has also experienced little change since the 1980s. For instance, throughout this period the Army's main combat formations have been three brigades and the RAAF has been equipped with around 100 combat aircraft. Most of the equipment used by the services has been replaced or upgraded, however.\nIt is stated in the \"2016 Defence White Paper\" that Australia's changing security environment will lead to new demands being placed on the Australian Defence Force. Although it is not expected that Australia will face any threat of direct attack from another country, terrorist groups and tensions between nations in East Asia pose threats to Australian security. More broadly, the Australian Government believes that it needs to make a contribution to maintaining the rules-based order globally. There is also a risk that climate change, weak economic growth and social factors could cause instability in South Pacific countries.\nThe ADF has developed strategies to respond to Australia's changing strategic environment. The \"2016 Defence White Paper\" states that \"the Government will ensure Australia maintains a regionally superior ADF\nwith the highest levels of military capability and scientific and technological sophistication\". To this end, the government intends to improve the ADF's combat power and expand the number of military personnel. This will include introducing new technologies and capabilities. The ADF is also seeking to improve its intelligence capabilities and co-operation between the services.\nBeginning in August 2014, RAAF combat forces, an Army special forces task force and an Army training unit were deployed to the Middle East during Operation Okra as part of the international war against the Islamic State. The RAAF aircraft conducted air strikes in Iraq and Syria and provided airborne command and control and air-to-air refuelling for the coalition forces. The special forces advised the Iraqi Army and the training unit trained Iraqi soldiers. The RAAF combat aircraft completed operations in January 2018, and the other aircraft were withdrawn in September 2020. The Army training force departed in mid-2020.\n2020\u2013present.\nThe Australian Government believes that the country's strategic circumstances are worsening due to the threat posed by China. This has led to decisions to expand the ADF and enhance its ability to participate in high intensity combat. The \"2020 Defence Strategic Update\" called for the ADF's efforts to be focused on the Indo-Pacific region. It also concluded that there was no longer a ten-year period of strategic warning before Australia could be involved in a major war. The document stated that the ADF's funding would be expanded, and its capacity to strike at targets from a long distance be improved. In September 2021, Australia entered into the AUKUS trilateral security partnership with the United Kingdom and United States. As part of this partnership, Australia will obtain nuclear attack submarines to significantly improve the RAN's capabilities - this replaced a plan to acquire 12 conventionally powered \"Attack\"-class submarines in partnership with France. The three AUKUS countries also agreed to collaborate on a range of military technologies.\nAn investigation of allegations of Australian war crimes in Afghanistan was completed in November 2020. The Brereton Report found that there was evidence that 25 Australian special forces personnel committed war crimes on 25 occasions, resulting in the deaths of 39 people and the mistreatment of two others. General Angus Campbell accepted all of the 143 recommendations made in the report. The government announced the implementation of 139 of the recommendations in 2024, with the remaining relating to ongoing criminal investigations by the newly created Office of the Special Investigator. The office charged a first soldier with war crimes in March 2023.\nDuring August 2021, RAAF aircraft participated in an international airlift to evacuate people from Kabul in Afghanistan after it fell to the Taliban. An Army infantry company was deployed to Kabul as part of this operation. More than 3,500 people were evacuated by the RAAF. Following the Russian invasion of Ukraine in February 2022 Australia provided military assistance to Ukraine. As of April 2023[ [update]], this included the transfer of military equipment from the ADF worth $A475 million and the deployment of an Army training team to the United Kingdom to train Ukrainian soldiers.\nThe election of the ALP Albanese government in May 2022 did not significantly change Australia's defence posture, as the ALP and Coalition parties have broadly similar defence policies. This includes an agreement on China posing a threat to Australia's security. The main difference is that the ALP sees climate change as an important security issue. After coming to power, the Albanese government commissioned the Defence Strategic Review that was publicly released in April 2023. The review found that the security challenges facing Australia had continued to worsen, and called for the ADF to be restructured to meet the threats. This includes transitioning the ADF from its traditional structure of a \"balanced force\" capable of a range of activities to a \"focused force\" tailored mainly to protecting Australia from military attack or coercion. As part of this change, the review recommended reducing the planned size of the Army's mechanised forces and expanding its long-range firepower. The review also identified climate change as a threat to Australia and called for a \"whole of nation effort\" to defending Australia that goes beyond the ADF. The government accepted most of the review's recommendations.\nStructure.\nThe Australian Defence Force and Department of Defence make up the Australian Defence Organisation (ADO), which is often referred to as \"Defence\". A diarchy of the Chief of the Defence Force (CDF) and the Secretary of the Department of Defence administers the ADO. The Department of Defence is staffed by both civilian and military personnel, and includes agencies such as the Defence Intelligence Organisation (DIO) and Defence Science and Technology Group (DST Group).\nCommand arrangements.\nThe ADF's command arrangements are set out in the \"Defence Act 1903\" and subordinate legislation. The act refers to the constitution, which vests the governor-general with the command-in-chief of the Defence Force. This power is only exercised on the advice of government ministers. The act also states that the Minister for Defence \"has general control and administration of the Defence Force\" and that the CDF and the Secretary of the Department of Defence must \"comply with any directions of the Minister\". The leaders of the ADO are also responsible to the junior ministers who are appointed to manage specific elements of the defence portfolio. Under the Albanese Ministry two cabinet-level ministers have been responsible for the Defence portfolio since May 2022: the position of Minister for Defence held by the Deputy Prime Minister Richard Marles, and Matt Keogh is the Minister for Defence Personnel and the Minister for Veterans' Affairs. In addition, there are two junior ministers: Matt Thistlethwaite is the Assistant Minister for Defence and Assistant Minister for Veterans' Affairs and Pat Conroy is the Minister for Defence Industry.\nThe CDF is the most senior appointment in the ADF and commands the force. The CDF is the only four-star officer in the ADF and is a general, admiral or air chief marshal. As well as having command responsibilities, the CDF is the Minister for Defence's principal military adviser. AdmiralDavid Johnston is the current CDF, and assumed this position on 10 July 2024. In 2006 Hugh White, a prominent academic and former Deputy Secretary in the Department of Defence, criticised the existing and prior Defence ministers for not providing the CDF and Secretary of Defence with enough authority to manage the ADF, with the minister playing too large a role in managing the organisation. Conversely, in 2024 associate professor James Connor found that Defence ministers have been too reliant on advice from the Defence department, partially due to fast turnover of defence ministers.\nUnder the current ADF command structure the day-to-day management of the ADF is distinct from the command of military operations. The services are administered through the ADO, with the head of each service (the Chief of Navy, Chief of Army and Chief of Air Force) and the service headquarters being responsible for raising, training and sustaining combat forces. Each chief is also the CDF's principal adviser on matters concerning the responsibilities of their service. The CDF chairs the Chiefs of Service Committee which comprises the service chiefs, Vice Chief of the Defence Force and the Chief of Joint Operations (CJOPS). The CDF and service chiefs are supported by an integrated ADF Headquarters, which replaced separate service headquarters on 1 July 2017.\nWhile the individual members of each service ultimately report to their service's Chief, the Chiefs do not control military operations. Control of ADF operations is exercised through a formal command chain headed by the CJOPS, who reports directly to the CDF. The CJOPS commands the Headquarters Joint Operations Command (HQJOC) as well as temporary joint task forces. These joint task forces comprise units assigned from their service to participate in operations or training exercises.\nJoint forces.\nOperational command of the ADF is exercised by HQJOC, which is located at a purpose-built facility near Bungendore, New South Wales. This is a joint headquarters comprising personnel from the three services and includes a continuously manned Joint Control Centre. HQJOC's main role is to \"plan, monitor and control\" ADF operations and exercises, and it is organised around groups of plans, operations and support staff. HQJOC also monitors the readiness of the ADF units which are not assigned to operations and contributes to developing Australia's military doctrine.\nAs well as HQJOC, the ADF has permanent joint operational commands responsible to the CJOPS. Joint Operations Command (JOC) includes the two headquarters responsible for patrolling Australia's maritime borders on a day-to-day basis, Northern Command and Maritime Border Command. Other JOC units include the Joint Movements Group and the Air and Space Operations Centre. Individual ADF units and Joint Task Groups are assigned to JOC during operations, and HQJOC includes officers responsible for submarine and special operations forces.\nThe ADF includes a number of joint operational and training units. These include the Joint Military Police Unit and the Joint Helicopter Aircrew Training School.\nIn 2023, after the release of the Defence Strategic Review (DSR) and a recommendation to consolidate the ADF's guided weapons and explosive ordnance (GWEO) across the services, leading to the creation of the Guided Weapons and Explosive Ordnance Group (GWEOG), and the appointment of Air Marshal Leon Phillips, OAM as its head. This moved the responsibility of acquisition and sustainment of the ADF's explosive materiel from CASG to the newly formed GWEOG.\nRoyal Australian Navy.\nThe Royal Australian Navy is the naval branch of the Australian Defence Force. The RAN operates just under 50 commissioned warships, including destroyers, frigates, submarines, patrol boats and auxiliary ships, as well as a number of non-commissioned vessels. In addition, the RAN maintains a force of combat, logistics and training helicopters.\nThere are two parts to the RAN's structure. One is an operational command, Fleet Command, and the other is a support command, Navy Strategic Command. The Navy's assets are administered by five \"forces\" which report to the Commander Australian Fleet. These are the Fleet Air Arm, the Mine Warfare, Clearance Diving, Hydrographic, Meteorological and Patrol Force, Shore Force, Submarine Force and Surface Force.\nAustralian Army.\nThe Army is organised into three main elements which report to the Chief of Army; the Headquarters of the 1st Division, Special Operations Command and Forces Command. As of 2017, approximately 85% of Army personnel were in units assigned to Forces Command, which is responsible for preparing units and individuals for operations. Headquarters 1st Division is responsible for high-level training activities and is capable of being deployed to command large scale ground operations. Only a small number of units are permanently assigned to the 1st Division; these include the 2nd Battalion, Royal Australian Regiment which forms the pre-landing force for the Australian Amphibious Force, a signals regiment and three training and personnel support units.\nThe Australian Army's main combat forces are grouped in brigades. Its main conventional forces are three regular combat brigades which are organised on a common structure; the 1st, 3rd and 7th Brigades. Support for the units in these formations is provided by an aviation brigade (16th Aviation Brigade), a combat support and ISTAR brigade (6th Brigade) and a logistics brigade (the 17th Sustainment Brigade). Under a restructure of the Army's health capability, a new health brigade, designated the 2nd Health Brigade, will be raised in 2023. In addition, there are six Army Reserve brigades; these brigades are administered by the 2nd Division and \"paired\" with the three regular combat brigades. The Army's main tactical formations are combined arms battlegroups made up of elements drawn from different units.\nThe Special Operations Command commands the Army's special forces units. It comprises the Special Air Service Regiment, the 2nd Commando Regiment, the reserve 1st Commando Regiment and the Special Operations Engineer Regiment as well as logistics and training units. The Army's special forces units have been expanded since 2001 and are well equipped and capable of being deployed by sea, air or land. As of 2014, Special Operations Command comprised approximately 2,200 personnel.\nRoyal Australian Air Force.\nThe Royal Australian Air Force (RAAF) is the air power branch of the ADF. The RAAF has modern combat and transport aircraft and a network of bases in strategic locations across Australia.\nThe RAAF has a single operational command, Air Command. Air Command is the operational arm of the RAAF and consists of Air Combat Group, Air Mobility Group, Surveillance and Response Group, Combat Support Group, Air Warfare Centre and Air Force Training Group. Each group consists of several wings.\nThe RAAF has nineteen flying squadrons; five combat squadrons, two maritime patrol squadrons, six transport squadrons, six training squadrons (including three Operational Conversion Units and a forward air control training squadron) as well as one Airborne Early Warning &amp; Control squadron and a Joint Terminal Attack Controller squadron. The ground units supporting these flying squadrons include three expeditionary combat support squadrons, three security force squadrons and a range of intelligence, air traffic control, communications, radar and medical units.\nLogistic support.\nThe ADF's logistics are managed by the Department of Defence's Capability Acquisition and Sustainment Group (CASG). The CASG was established in 2015 from the previously semi-independent Defence Materiel Organisation. CASG is responsible for the acquisition of all materiel (except guided weapons and explosive ordnance) and services used by the ADF and maintaining this equipment throughout its life of type.\nCASG is not directly responsible for supplying deployed ADF units; this is the responsibility of the Joint Logistics Command (JLC) and the single service logistic units, instead CASG has responsibility for the supply and transport of materiel from manufacturers to supply depots. These units include the Navy's Strategic Command and replenishment ships, the Army's 17th Sustainment Brigade and Combat Service Support Battalions, and the Combat Support Group RAAF.\nThe ADF maintains stockpiles of ammunition, fuel and other supplies. Since the late 1990s, ammunition for the three services has been stored in a network of facilities managed by the JLC. The creation of a GWEO Group moved the responsibility of acquisition and sustainment of Explosive Materiel within the ADF from JLC and CASG to itself. The ADF also holds several months' worth of fuel for the Navy's vessels and several weeks' worth for aircraft and vehicles. A number of defence analysts have raised concerns over the adequacy of the fuel stockpile, especially as Australia is largely dependent on imports which could be disrupted in the event of war.\nThe increasing role of the private sector forms an important trend in the ADF's logistics arrangements. During the 1990s many of the ADF's support functions were transferred to the private sector to improve the efficiency with which they were provided. Since these reforms most of the \"garrison\" support services at military bases have been provided by private firms. The reforms also led to many of the ADF's logistics units being disbanded or reduced in size. Since this time private firms have increasingly been contracted to provide critical support to ADF units deployed outside Australia. This support has included transporting equipment and personnel and constructing and supplying bases.\nMilitary intelligence and surveillance.\nThe Australian Defence Force's intelligence collection and analysis capabilities include each of the services' intelligence systems and units, two joint civilian-military intelligence gathering agencies and two strategic and operational-level intelligence analysis organisations.\nEach of the three services has its own intelligence collection assets. RAN doctrine stresses the importance of collecting a wide range of information and combining it to inform decisions. It also notes that the \"Collins\"-class submarines are particularly effective sources of \"acoustic, electromagnetic and environmental information\". The Army's intelligence and surveillance units include the 1st Intelligence Battalion, 7th Signal Regiment (Electronic Warfare), 20th Surveillance and Target Acquisition Regiment, three Regional Force Surveillance Units and the Special Air Service Regiment. The RAAF monitors the airspace of Australia and neighbouring countries using the Vigilare system, which combines input from the service's Jindalee Operational Radar Network, other ADF air defence radars (including airborne and naval systems) and civilian air traffic control radars. The RAAF's other intelligence assets include No. 87 Squadron and the AP-3C Orion aircraft operated by No. 92 Wing. A C band radar and a telescope located at Naval Communication Station Harold E. Holt provide a space situational awareness capability, which includes tracking space assets and debris. Australia also provides personnel to the US Joint Space Operations Center in Colorado Springs which tracks and identifies any man-made object in orbit.\nThe Defence Strategic Policy and Intelligence Group within the Department of Defence supports the services and co-operates with the civilian agencies within the Australian Intelligence Community. This Group consists of the Australian Geospatial-Intelligence Organisation (AGO), Australian Signals Directorate (ASD) and Defence Intelligence Organisation (DIO). The AGO is responsible for geospatial intelligence and producing maps for the ADF, the ASD, originally the Defence Signals Directorate, is Australia's signals intelligence agency, and the DIO is responsible for the analysis of intelligence collected by the other intelligence agencies. The three agencies are headquartered in Canberra, though the AGO has staff in Bendigo and the ASD maintains permanent signals collection facilities in other locations.\nThe ASD also includes the Australian Cyber Security Centre (ACSC) which is responsible for protecting Defence and other Australian Government agencies against cyberwarfare attacks. The ACSC was established in January 2010 and is jointly staffed by the ASD and personnel from the Attorney-General's Department, Australian Security Intelligence Organisation, and Australian Federal Police. Unlike the United States military, the ADF does not class cyberwarfare as being a separate sphere of warfare. In July 2017 an Information Warfare Division was raised, tasked with both defensive and offensive cyber operations.\nThe Australian Secret Intelligence Service (ASIS) has been involved in ADF operations since the Vietnam War including East Timor, Iraq and Afghanistan. In 2012, the Director-General of ASIS stated that the service's agents had saved the lives of Australian soldiers, enabled special forces operations and that \"it's difficult to see a situation in the future where the ADF would deploy without ASIS alongside\". It has been reported that one of the Special Air Service Regiment's squadrons works with ASIS and has undertaken independent covert intelligence-collection operations outside Australia.\nPersonnel.\nThe Australian military has been an all-volunteer force since the abolition of conscription in 1972. Both men and women can enlist in the ADF, with women being able to apply for all roles. Only Australian citizens and permanent residents who are eligible for Australian citizenship can enlist. Recruits must be aged at least 17, and meet health, educational and aptitude standards. The ADF is one of the few areas of the Australian Government to continue to have compulsory retirement ages: permanent personnel must retire at 60 years of age and reservists at 65. Both permanent and reserve personnel can work through flexible arrangements, including part-time hours or remotely from their duty station, subject to approval. Discipline of defence personnel is guided by the \"Defence Force Discipline Act\" \"1982\", ultimately overseen by the Judge Advocate General of the ADF.\nAustralian demographic trends will put pressure on the ADF in the future. Excluding other factors, the ageing of the Australian population will result in smaller numbers of potential recruits entering the Australian labour market each year. Some predictions are that population ageing will result in slower economic growth and increased government expenditure on pensions and health programs. As a result of these trends, the ageing of Australia's population may worsen the ADF's manpower situation and may force the Government to reallocate some of the Defence budget. Few young Australians consider joining the military and the ADF has to compete for recruits against private sector firms which are able to offer higher salaries.\nPersonnel numbers.\n the ADF comprised 58,909 permanent (full-time) and 33,269 active reserve (part-time) personnel. Compared to 57,036 permanent and 24,028 active reserve personnel eleven years prior in June 2014. The Army is the largest service, followed by the RAAF and RAN. The ADO also employed 20,545 civilian Australian Public Service (APS) staff as at 30 June 2025. During the 2024\u201325 financial year 6,228 people enlisted in the ADF on a permanent basis and 4,562 left, representing a net gain of 1,664 personnel.\nThe distribution of ADF personnel between the services and categories of service on 30 June 2025 was as follows:\nThe number of ADF personnel has changed over the last 20 years. During the 1990s the strength of the ADF was reduced from around 70,000 to 50,000 permanent personnel as a result of budget cuts and the outsourcing of some military functions. The ADF began to grow from 2000 after the defence white paper released that year called for an expansion to the military's strength, though the size of the military decreased between the 2003\u201304 to 2005\u201306 financial years due to problems with attracting further recruits. By 2009\u201310 the ADF was above its budgeted size, leading to reductions until 2014\u201315. The size of the ADF grew between the 2014\u201315 and 2016\u201317 financial years. The ADF has not met its recruitment targets over the period since the 1995\u201396 financial year.\nWhilst the ADF is the largest military in Oceania, it is small compared to most Asian military forces ranking 8th out of 27 countries in Asia in 2024 according to the Lowy Institute. According to a 2021 Joint Standing Committee on Foreign Affairs, Defence and Trade parliamentary report, the \"Committee [was] concerned that the ADF is too small to credibly field sufficient rotational combat forces for protracted high-end combat operations, either as a lead or contributing nation\".\nBoth the number of personnel in the ADF and the share of the Australian population this represents is smaller than that in many countries in Australia's immediate region. Several NATO member countries, including France and the United States, also have a higher share of their population in the military. This is a continuation of long-term trends, as outside of major wars Australia has always had a relatively small military. The size of the force is a result of Australia's relatively small population and the military being structured around a maritime strategy focused on the RAN and RAAF rather than a manpower-intensive army.\nIn March 2022, Prime Minister Scott Morrison announced that by 2040 the strength of the ADF would grow by around 30% to be almost 80,000 permanent personnel. The expansion is estimated to cost at least A$38 billion which includes increasing the number of APS personnel.\nIn June 2024, the government announced a new policy to grow the ADF as outlined in the \"National Defence Strategy\" released in April 2024. Under the policy, permanent residents who have lived in Australia for 12 months from countries in the Five Eyes alliance will become eligible to join the ADF. From July 2024, New Zealand permanent residents will be eligible to join the ADF. From January 2025, permanent residents from the United Kingdom, United States and Canada will be eligible to join the ADF. Once the person has served 90 days in the ADF they will become eligible for Australian citizenship and would be expected to apply.\nReserves.\nEach of the branches of the ADF has a reserve component. These forces are the Royal Australian Naval Reserve, Australian Army Reserve and Royal Australian Air Force Reserve. The main role of the reserves is to supplement the permanent elements of the ADF during deployments and crises, including natural disasters. This can include attaching individual reservists to regular units or deploying units composed entirely of reserve personnel. As reservists serve on a part-time basis, they are less costly to the government than permanent members of the ADF, but the nature of their service can mean that reservists have a lower level of readiness than regular personnel and require further training before they can be deployed. It has historically proven difficult to set a level of training requirements which allows reservists to be rapidly deployable yet does not act as a disincentive to recruitment and continued participation. Successive governments since the 1960s have also been reluctant to use the \"call out\" powers to require reservists to undertake active service.\nThere are two main categories of reserve personnel; those in the active reserve and those in the standby reserve. Members of the active reserve have an annual minimum training obligation. Reservists can volunteer to undertake more than the minimum periods of training and active service. Members of the standby reserve are not required to undertake training, and would only be called up in response to a national emergency or to fill a specialised position. Most standby reservists are former full-time members of the ADF.\nWhile Australian Naval Reserve personnel are assigned to permanent units, most members of the Army Reserve and Air Force Reserve are members of reserve units. Most of the RAAF's reserve units are not intended to be deployed, and reserve personnel are generally attached to regular air force units during their periods of active service. The Army Reserve is organised into permanent combat and support units, though most are currently manned at levels well below their authorised strengths and are not capable of deploying as formed units.\nThe ADF's increased activities since 1999 and shortfalls in recruiting permanent personnel has led to reservists being more frequently called to active service. This has included large scale domestic deployments, which have included providing security for major events such as the 2000 Summer Olympics and responding to natural disasters. Large numbers of reserve personnel have also been deployed as part of ADF operations in Australia's region; this has included the deployment of Army Reserve rifle companies to East Timor and the Solomon Islands. Smaller numbers of reservists have taken part in operations in locations distant from Australia. Notably, companies of the Army Reserve 1st Commando Regiment were regularly deployed to Afghanistan as part of the Special Operations Task Group.\nTraining.\nIndividual training of Australian servicemen and women is generally provided by the services in their own training institutions. Each service has its own training organisation to manage this individual training. Where possible, however, individual training is increasingly being provided through tri-service schools.\nMilitary academies include for the Navy, Royal Military College, Duntroon, for the Army, and the Officers' Training School for the Air Force. The Australian Defence Force Academy is a tri-service university for officer cadets of all services who wish to attain a university degree through the ADF. Navy recruit training is conducted at , Army recruits are trained at the Army Recruit Training Centre and Air Force recruits at RAAF Base Wagga.\nWomen in the ADF.\nWomen first served in the Australian military during World War II when each service established a separate female branch. The RAAF was the first service to fully integrate women into operational units, doing so in 1977, with the Army and RAN following in 1979 and 1985 respectively. The ADF initially struggled to integrate women, with integration being driven by changing Australian social values and Government legislation rather than a change in attitudes within the male-dominated military.\nThe number of positions available to women in the ADF has increased over time. Although servicewomen were initially barred from combat positions, these restrictions began to be lifted in 1990. In September 2011 Minister for Defence Stephen Smith announced that the Cabinet had decided to remove all restrictions on women serving in combat positions, and that this change would come into effect within five years. This decision was supported by the CDF and the chiefs of the services. Serving women became able to apply for all positions on 1 January 2013 except special forces roles in the Army which became open to women in January 2014. In January 2016, civilian women became able to be directly recruited to all positions.\nDespite the expansion in the number of positions available to women and other changes which aim to encourage increased female recruitment and retention, the growth in the proportion of female permanent defence personnel has been slow. In the 1989\u20131990 financial year women made up 11.4% of the ADF personnel. In the 2008\u20132009 financial year women occupied 13.5% of ADF positions. During the same period the proportion of civilian positions filled by women in the Australian Defence Organisation increased from 30.8% to 42.8%. In 2023\u20132024, women made up 20.7% of the ADF's permanent force. The proportion of women in the permanent force differs by service: 15.3% of members of the Army are women, compared to 24.1% of the RAN and 27% for the RAAF. In 2024, the ADF adopted targets to increase the proportion of women in the ADF's permanent force to 25% by 2030 and the proportion of women in the services by 2030 of: 28% in the RAN, 18% in the Army and 35% in the RAAF.\nThere continue to be concerns over the incidence of sexual abuse and gender-based discrimination in the ADF. In 2014 the Defence Abuse Response Taskforce estimated that around 1,100 currently-serving ADF personnel had abused other members of the military, and recommended that a royal commission be conducted to investigate long-running allegations of sexual abuse and assault of servicewomen at the Australian Defence Force Academy. In 2013 Chief of Army General David Morrison publicly released a video in which he warned against gender-based discrimination, and stated that he would dismiss members of the Army who engaged in such conduct.\nEthnic and religious composition.\nA high percentage of ADF personnel are drawn from the Anglo-Celtic portion of Australia's population. In 2011 the proportion of ADF personnel born in Australia and the other predominately Anglo-Celtic countries was higher than this population group's share of both the Australian workforce and overall population. As a result, analyst Mark Thomson has argued that the ADF is unrepresentative of Australia's society in this regard and that recruiting more personnel from other ethnic backgrounds would improve the ADF's language skills and cultural empathy. In 2013, the ADF launched the \"Defence Diversity and Inclusion Strategy 2012-2017\" to recruit more volunteers from culturally and linguistically diverse backgrounds and to improve statistics collection.\nOn 30 June 2025, 3.9% of ADF permanent personnel and 3.0% of Reserves were Indigenous Australians. The \"Defence Reconciliation Action Plan 2019-2022\" had aimed to increase the number of Indigenous Australians the ADF recruits and to improve their retention rate, and had set a target of 5% Indigenous representation by 2025. Restrictions on Indigenous Australians' ability to enlist in the military existed until the 1970s, though hundreds of Indigenous men and women had joined the military when restrictions were reduced during the world wars. By 1992 the representation of Indigenous Australians in the ADF was equivalent to their proportion of the Australian population, though they continue to be under-represented among the officer corps. Two of the Army's three Regional Force Surveillance Units (NORFORCE and the 51st Battalion, Far North Queensland Regiment) are manned mostly by Indigenous Australian reservists. In 2015 Indigenous Australians made up around 2% of ADF personnel, which was smaller than the Indigenous share of the total Australian population.\nIn line with trends across the broader Australian population, the proportion of ADF personnel who are not religious has increased considerably over recent years. The proportion of ADF personnel who reported that their religion was Christianity in service censuses and human relations databases decreased from around 66% in 2003 to just over 52% in 2015. Over this period, the proportion who stated that they do not have a religious affiliation increased from 31% to 47%. Only 1% of ADF members reported having a non-Christian religious affiliation in 2015. In 2023 it was reported that 80% of new ADF recruits did not have religious beliefs.\nSexuality and gender identity.\nAustralia allows gay men and lesbians to serve openly. Openly gay and lesbian personnel were banned from the ADF until November 1992 when the Australian Government decided to remove this prohibition. The heads of the services and most military personnel opposed this change at the time, and it caused considerable public debate. Opponents of lifting the ban on gay and lesbian personnel argued that doing so would greatly harm the ADF's cohesiveness and cause large numbers of resignations. This did not eventuate, and the reform caused few problems. A 2000 study found that lifting the ban on gay service did not have any negative effects on the ADF's morale, effectiveness or recruitment and retention, and may have led to increased productivity and improved working environments. Few members of the ADF came out as lesbian, gay or bisexual until the late 1990s, however, and those who did were not always welcomed by their comrades.\nADF personnel in same-sex relationships experienced discriminatory treatment until the 2000s. This included Defence not recognising same-sex spouses, which prevented these couples from receiving the financial entitlements available to opposite-sex couples and could be a barrier to the spouse being treated as their partner's next of kin. The ADF officially recognised same-sex relationships in 2005, and since 1 January 2009 these couples have had the same access to military retirement pensions and superannuation as opposite-sex couples. Transgender personnel have been permitted to serve in the ADF since 2010, and are provided with support when necessary. Despite the removal of restrictions on gay and lesbian personnel, harassment and discrimination continued to occur; for instance a 2013 survey found that 10% of gay soldiers had experienced discrimination and more than 30% hid their sexuality. The ADF has actively encouraged the inclusion of LGBTI personnel since the mid-2010s, with its leadership highlighting the importance of the issue and the military justice system being strongly used to prevent harassment and discrimination. Defence Force Recruiting also encourages LGBTI people to enlist. As of 2023, 4.8 percent of ADF personnel identified as members of the LGBTI+ community.\nDefence expenditure and procurement.\nCurrent expenditure.\nThe Australian Government allocated A$ to the Australian Defence Organisation in the 2024\u201325 financial year. This level of expenditure is equivalent to approximately 2.02% of Australian Gross Domestic Product (GDP).\nAustralia's defence expenditure is much larger in dollar terms to that of most countries in Australia's immediate region. The share of GDP Australia spends on defence is also larger than that in most developed economies and major South-East Asian countries. China allocates approximately the same proportion of GDP to Defence as Australia does, and has been rapidly increasing its nominal expenditure. The Stockholm International Peace Research Institute has estimated that Australia's defence spending in 2017 was the 13th highest of any country in real terms. As a proportion of GDP Australia's defence spending ranks as 49th of the countries for which data is available.\nLong term expenditure.\nIn 2024, the Australian Government released the \"National Defence Strategy\" which plans to lift defence spending to A$ by 2033-34 which would represent 2.4% of GDP.\nEquipment.\nThe ADF seeks to be a high-technology force. Although most of the ADF's weapons are only used by single service, there is an increasing emphasis on commonality. The three services use the same small arms and the SIG Sauer P320 is the ADF's standard hand gun, the EF88 Austeyr the standard rifle, the F89 Minimi the standard light support weapon, the FN Herstal MAG-58 the standard light machine gun and the Browning M2HB the standard heavy machine gun.\nThe ADF is equipped with conventional weapons only. Australia does not possess weapons of mass destruction and has ratified the Biological Weapons Convention, Chemical Weapons Convention and Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty. The Australian Government is committed to encouraging nuclear disarmament internationally. Australia is also a party to international agreements which prohibit land mines and cluster munitions.\nAs of 2025[ [update]], the Royal Australian Navy operated a large number of ships and submarines. The Navy's main surface combatants were seven \"Anzac\"-class frigates and three \"Hobart\"-class destroyers. The RAN's submarine force had six \"Collins-class\" submarines. There were three \"Armidale\"-class and ten \"Cape-class\" patrol boats for border security and fisheries patrol duties in Australia's northern waters. The RAN's amphibious force comprises the two \"Canberra\"-class landing helicopter docks and the dock landing ship . The Navy's minesweeping force is equipped with three \"Huon\"-class minehunters. Two \"Supply\"-class replenishment oilers support these combatants. The RAN also operated one survey vessel the \"Leeuwin\". Non-commissioned ships operated by the RAN include the sail training ship \"Young Endeavour\". There were also four auxiliary ships operated by private companies on behalf of the RAN. The Fleet Air Arm's helicopter force comprised 23 MH-60R Seahawk anti-submarine and a training force equipped with 15 EC 135T2+ helicopters.\nThe Australian Army is equipped with a wide range of equipment in order to be able to employ combined arms approaches in combat. As of 2025[ [update]], the Army's armoured fighting vehicle holdings included 27 M1A2 SEPv3 Abrams main battle tanks, 416 M113AS4 armoured personnel carriers, 221 ASLAV armoured reconnaissance vehicles and 25 Boxer combat reconnaissance vehicles. The Army had approximately 875 Bushmaster Protected Mobility Vehicles in service and had 1,098 Hawkei protected mobility vehicles. The Army's artillery holdings consisted of 48 155\u00a0mm towed M777 howitzers, 2 M142 HIMARS multiple rocket launchers, 176 81\u00a0mm M252A1 mortars, 7 NASAMS-3 medium range surface-to-air missile systems and FGM-148 Javelin anti-tank missiles. Australian Army Aviation operated several different models of helicopters. These included 22 Eurocopter Tiger armed reconnaissance helicopters, 14 CH-47F Chinook, 17 UH-60M Black Hawks and 5 EC 135T3+ leased from the United Kingdom. The Army also operated 15 RQ-7B Shadow 2000 uncrewed aerial vehicles. The Army's fleet of watercraft at this time included 15 LCM-8 landing craft.\nThe Royal Australian Air Force operates combat, maritime patrol, transport and training aircraft. As of 2025[ [update]], the combat aircraft force comprised 63 F-35A Lightning IIs, 24 F/A-18F Super Hornets and 12 EA-18G Growlers. The intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance force was equipped with 12 P-8 Poseidon maritime patrol aircraft and 6 E-7A Wedgetail AEW&amp;C aircraft. The air transport force operated 12 C-130J-30 Super Hercules, 8 C-17 Globemaster IIIs and 10 C-27J Spartans. A further 12 Super King Air 350s were used in both the transport and training roles. The RAAF also operated 3 Challenger and 2 Boeing 737 aircraft as VIP transports. The RAAF had seven KC-30 Multi-Role Tanker Transports. The RAAF's training units were equipped with 49 PC-21s and 33 Hawk 127s. The RAAF was also equipped with 3 MQ-4C unmanned aerial vehicles.\nBases.\nThe Australian Defence Force maintains 60 major bases and many other facilities across all the states and territories of Australia. These bases occupy millions of hectares of land, giving the ADO Australia's largest real estate portfolio. Defence Housing Australia manages around 19,000 residences occupied by members of the ADF. While most of the Army's permanent force units are based in northern Australia, the majority of Navy and Air Force units are based near Sydney, Brisbane and Perth. Few ADF bases are currently shared by different services. Small Army and RAAF units are also located at Royal Malaysian Air Force Base Butterworth. The administrative headquarters of the ADF and the three services is located in Canberra alongside the main offices of the Department of Defence.\nThe Royal Australian Navy has two main bases; Fleet Base East (HMAS \"Kuttabul\") in Sydney and Fleet Base West (HMAS \"Stirling\") near Perth. The Navy's operational headquarters, Fleet Headquarters, is located adjacent to Fleet Base East. The majority of the Navy's patrol boats are based at in Darwin, Northern Territory, with the remaining patrol boats and the hydrographic fleet located at in Cairns. The Fleet Air Arm is based at near Nowra, New South Wales.\nThe Australian Army's regular units are concentrated in a few bases, most of which are located in Australia's northern states. The Army's operational headquarters, Forces Command, is located at Victoria Barracks in Sydney. Most elements of the Army's three regular brigades are based at Robertson Barracks near Darwin, Lavarack Barracks in Townsville, Queensland, and Gallipoli Barracks in Brisbane. The 1st Division's Headquarters is also located at Gallipoli Barracks. Other important Army bases include the Army Aviation Centre near Oakey, Queensland, Holsworthy Barracks near Sydney, Woodside Barracks near Adelaide, South Australia, and Campbell Barracks in Perth. Dozens of Army Reserve depots are located across Australia.\nThe Royal Australian Air Force maintains several air bases, including three which are only occasionally activated. The RAAF's operational headquarters, Air Command, is located at RAAF Base Glenbrook near Sydney. The Air Force's combat aircraft are based at RAAF Base Amberley near Ipswich, Queensland, RAAF Base Tindal near Katherine, Northern Territory, and RAAF Base Williamtown near Newcastle, New South Wales. The RAAF's maritime patrol aircraft are based at RAAF Base Edinburgh near Adelaide and most of its transport aircraft are based at RAAF Base Richmond in Sydney. RAAF Base Edinburgh is also home to the control centre for the Jindalee Operational Radar Network. Most of the RAAF's training aircraft are based at RAAF Base Pearce near Perth with the remaining aircraft located at RAAF Base East Sale near Sale, Victoria, and RAAF Base Williamtown. The RAAF also maintains a network of bases in northern Australia to support operations to Australia's north. These bases include RAAF Base Darwin and RAAF Base Townsville and three 'bare bases' in Queensland and Western Australia. Of the RAAF's operational bases, only Tindal is located near an area in which the service's aircraft might feasibly see combat. While this protects the majority of the RAAF's assets from air attack, most air bases are poorly defended and aircraft are generally hangared in un-hardened shelters.\nLegal standing.\nSection 51(vi) of the Australian Constitution gives the Australian Parliament the power to make laws regarding Australia's defence and defence forces and section 114 prevents the states from raising armed forces without the permission of the Commonwealth. Under section 119 the Commonwealth is assigned responsibility for defending Australia from invasion.\nSection 68 of the Constitution states that the governor-general is the commander-in-chief of the ADF. In practical terms, this power is largely ceremonial. The governor-general may only exercise this power on the advice from the prime minister, other ministers or through the Federal Executive Council. The elected government also controls the ADF through the minister for Defence, who has the power under section 8 of the \"Defence Act 1903\" over the \"general control and administration of the Defence Force\" and may make directions to the chief of Defence Force that must be complied with.\nFor practical purposes, the decision to commit the ADF to armed conflict is a decision of the elected government, made by the prime minister following deliberations of the National Security Committee of Cabinet (NSC). The NSC may refer its decision to the full Cabinet for its endorsement. However, the precise legal mechanism for the exercise of this war-making power is unclear. The Commonwealth Government has never been required by the Constitution or legislation to seek parliamentary approval for decisions to deploy military forces overseas or go to war.\nDomestic responsibilities.\nIn addition to its military role, the ADF contributes to domestic security as well as disaster relief efforts in Australia and overseas. These functions are primarily the responsibility of civilian agencies, and the ADF's role in them requires specific justification and authorisation.\nElements of the ADF are frequently called out to contribute to relief efforts following natural disasters in Australia or overseas. The ADF's role in these efforts is set out in Australia's emergency management plans. The ADF typically contributes specialist capabilities, such as engineers or transport, to support the civil authorities. For major disasters, this can involve a large-scale deployment of personnel and assets. While the ADF has a commitment to assist relief efforts, several defence white papers have specified that this is a secondary responsibility to the force's focus on maintaining combat capabilities. As a result, requests for assistance have to be balanced against military priorities. No elements of the ADF are specifically tasked with or equipped for disaster relief efforts.\nThe ADF can also be tasked with providing aid to civil authorities outside of natural disasters; for instance in response to industrial action or to assist civilian police maintain law and order. This rarely occurs, however, and most Australians consider the use of military personnel to break strikes or undertake law enforcement to be inappropriate. Due to the political sensitivities associated with strike breaking, the ADF conducts little planning or other preparations for this role and the \"Defence Act\" explicitly states that reservists may not be called out or deployed in response to industrial action.\nOver recent years, the ADF has been frequently committed to disaster relief. This has included deployments of large numbers of personnel to support fire fighting efforts during the 2019\u201320 Australian bushfire season and to assist state police and healthcare services during the COVID-19 pandemic. The scale of these deployments and the disruption they have caused to military training has led to suggestions that either elements of the Army Reserve be dedicated to disaster relief or a separate civilian organisation be established to take on the duties the ADF is undertaking.\nThe ADF makes a significant contribution to Australia's domestic maritime security. ADF ships, aircraft and Regional Force Surveillance Units conduct patrols of northern Australia in conjunction with the Australian Border Force (ABF). This operation, which is code-named Operation Resolute, is commanded by the Maritime Border Command which is jointly manned by members of the ADF and ABF. This operation involves a considerable proportion of the ADF's assets, with the forces assigned typically including two major naval vessels, multiple patrol boats, Regional Force Surveillance Unit patrols and AP-3 Orion aircraft. The ADF also often contributes to search and rescue efforts coordinated by the Australian Maritime Safety Authority and other civilian agencies.\nWhile the ADF does not have a significant nation-building role, it provides assistance to remote Indigenous Australian communities through the Army Aboriginal Community Assistance Program. Under this program, which has been conducted since 1997, an engineer squadron works with one community for several months each year to upgrade local infrastructure and provide training. The ADF also took part in the intervention in remote Northern Territory Indigenous communities between June 2007 and October 2008. During this operation more than 600 ADF personnel provided logistical support to the Northern Territory Emergency Response Task Force and helped conduct child health checks.\nThe ADF shares responsibility for counter-terrorism with civilian law enforcement agencies. Under \"Australia's Counter-Terrorism Strategy\", the state and territory police and emergency services have the primary responsibility for responding to any terrorist incidents on Australian territory. If a terrorist threat or the consequences of an incident are beyond the capacity of civilian authorities to resolve, the ADF may be called out to provide support following a request from the relevant state or territory government. The Commonwealth Government has responsibility for responding to offshore terrorist incidents. ADF liaison officers are posted to civilian law enforcement agencies, and the military offers specialised training to police counter-terrorism teams. To meet its counter-terrorism responsibilities the ADF maintains two elite Tactical Assault Groups, the Special Operations Engineer Regiment as well as a company-sized high readiness group in each Army Reserve brigade and the 1st Commando Regiment. ADF intelligence assets also work with other Australian Government and police agencies to counter foreign terrorist threats. While these forces provide a substantial counter-terrorism capability, the ADF does not regard domestic security as being part of its \"core business\".\nForeign defence relations.\nThe Australian Defence Force cooperates with militaries around the world. Australia's formal military agreements include the ANZUS Alliance with the United States, the Closer Defence Program with New Zealand, the Five Power Defence Arrangements with Malaysia, Singapore, New Zealand and the United Kingdom, and the ABCA Armies Standardisation Program with the United States, the United Kingdom, Canada and New Zealand. Australia has also established a partnership with NATO. ADF activities under these agreements include participating in joint planning, intelligence sharing, personnel exchanges, equipment standardisation programs and joint exercises. Australia is also a member of the UKUSA signals intelligence gathering agreement. Members of the ADF are posted to Australian diplomatic missions around the world as defence attach\u00e9s; in 2016 the role of these officers was expanded to include promoting export sales for the Australian defence industry. The \"2016 Defence White Paper\" stated that the Government will seek to further expand the ADF's international engagement.\nSingapore and the United States maintain military units in Australia. Two Republic of Singapore Air Force pilot training squadrons with a total of 230 personnel are based in Australia. The Singapore Armed Forces also uses the Shoalwater Bay Military Training Area in Queensland for large-scale exercises; under the terms of a bilateral agreement, these run for up to 18 weeks each year and involve as many as 14,000 Singaporean personnel.\nThe United States maintains intelligence and communications facilities in Australia which are staffed by 1,700 personnel. The intelligence facilities comprise the Pine Gap satellite tracking station near Alice Springs and Naval Communication Station Harold E. Holt near Exmouth, Western Australia. Pine Gap is jointly operated by Australian and United States personnel and Naval Communication Station Harold E. Holt has been an exclusively Australian-operated facility since 1999. In early 2007 the Australian Government approved the construction of a new US communications installation at the Defence Signals Directorate Australian Defence Satellite Communications Station facility near Geraldton, Western Australia, to provide a ground station for the US-led Wideband Global System which Australia is partly funding. The United States Military also frequently uses Australian exercise areas and these facilities have been upgraded to support joint Australian-United States training. In November 2011, the Australian and American Governments announced plans to base on rotational basis a United States Marine Corps Marine Air-Ground Task Force in the Northern Territory for training and exercise purposes and increase rotations of United States Air Force (USAF) aircraft through northern Australia. As part of this agreement, the Marine Rotational Force\u00a0\u2013 Darwin has been deployed to Australia for six months each year since 2012. It is planned for this force to eventually comprise around 2,500 personnel with supporting aircraft and equipment. The expanded rotations of USAF units to Australia began in early 2017.\nThe ADF provides assistance to militaries in Australia's region through the Defence Cooperation Program. Under this program the ADF provides assistance with training, infrastructure, equipment and logistics and participates in joint exercises with countries in South East Asia and Oceania. The Pacific Patrol Boat Program is the largest Defence Cooperation Program activity and supports 22 Pacific class patrol boats operated by twelve South Pacific countries. Other important activities include supporting the development of the Timor Leste Defence Force and Papua New Guinea Defence Force and supplying watercraft to the Armed Forces of the Philippines. Australia also directly contributes to the defence of Pacific countries by periodically deploying warships and aircraft to patrol their territorial waters; this includes an annual deployment of RAAF AP-3 Orions to the region as part of a multi-national maritime surveillance operation. Under an informal agreement Australia is responsible for the defence of Nauru.\nSince the signing of the Japan-Australia Acquisition and Cross-Servicing Agreement, the Joint Declaration on Security Cooperation between Japan and Australia, and the Reciprocal Access Agreement between Japan and Australia, the Australian Defence Force has been working closely with the Japan Self-Defense Forces on various joint operations, training exercises, and strategic initiatives. These agreements have significantly enhanced bilateral defence cooperation, improving interoperability, mutual support, and coordination in regional security matters.\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWorks consulted.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "67539", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=67539", "title": "Foreign relations of Australia", "text": "Foreign relations of Australia are influenced by its position as a leading trading nation and as a significant donor of humanitarian aid. Australia's foreign policy is guided by a commitment to multilateralism and regionalism, as well as to build strong bilateral relations with its allies. Key concerns include free trade, terrorism, refugees, economic co-operation with Asia and stability in the Indo-Pacific. Australia is active in the United Nations and the Commonwealth of Nations. Given its history of starting and supporting important regional and global initiatives, it has been described as a regional middle power par excellence.\nIt maintains significant ties with ASEAN and has become steadfastly allied with New Zealand, through long-standing ties dating back to the 1800s. The country also has a longstanding alliance with the United States of America. Over recent decades Australia has sought to strengthen its relationship with Asian countries, with this becoming the focus of the country's network of diplomatic missions. In 2021, Australia signed a significant security partnership with the United Kingdom and the United States of America (AUKUS) aimed at upholding security in the Indo-Pacific region.\nHistory.\nPost-Federation period.\nThe Department of External Affairs was one of the inaugural departments created upon the federation of the Australian colonies in 1901, but largely remained an appendage of the Prime Minister's Department. Outside of the prime minister, the role of Australian High Commissioner to the United Kingdom (established in 1910) remained the most significant conduit for Australian foreign relations, with its significance emphasised by the fact that the first three appointees were former prime ministers. It has been suggested that, for Australia's early governments, foreign policy meant \"relations with London on matters of imperial foreign policy on which Australia might have an interest\".\nAustralia's first prime minister Edmund Barton was in favour of a uniform foreign policy for the British Empire, suggesting Australia could have no \"foreign policy of its own\" but expected that the British government would defer to the Australian perspective for \"regional\" imperial policy. Barton's successor Alfred Deakin also repeatedly lobbied the British government for greater consultation on imperial foreign policy and suggested the establishment of an imperial department of state to coordinate policy, as part of his broader support for an Imperial Federation. Deakin took some of the first steps towards diplomatic independence by dealing directly with the Japanese consul-general, for which he was reminded by the Colonial Office that it \"expected Australia to conduct any dealings with a foreign power through London\". He also dealt directly with the U.S. consul in Sydney to engineer the visit of the Great White Fleet in 1908. His actions \"set a precedent for unilateralism\" in foreign policy that was followed by his immediate successors as prime minister, although with a continued reliance on the British diplomatic service and policy-making apparatus and no efforts to develop Australian equivalents.\nWorld War I and 1920s.\nWorld War I brought about an increase in direct Australian engagement with governments outside the British Empire, prompted by strategic concerns including the fate of German territories in the Pacific captured by Australian troops during the war. Prime Minister Billy Hughes visited the United States in 1918 and \"in a series of meetings and speeches, called on the US to cooperate with Australia in ensuring postwar security in the Far East\". At the 1919 Paris Peace Conference, Hughes led an Australian section within the British Empire delegation and co-signed the Treaty of Versailles on behalf of Australia, as with other British dominions. Hughes lobbied powerfully for Australian interests at the conference, including the granting of League of Nations mandates over the former German New Guinea and Nauru and opposition to Japan's Racial Equality Proposal to protect the White Australia policy.\nThe 1920s marked \"the genesis of a distinct Australian foreign policy\", largely in response to changing power dynamics and the decline in British influence in the Pacific following the Washington Naval Conference of 1922 influence. Australia continued to rely on \"the UK and its imperial machinery for diplomatic representation and economic and material security\". Following the 1923 Imperial Conference, attempts to formulate a uniform imperial foreign policy were largely abandoned in favour of a system of dominion ratification of British decisions. Governmental interest in foreign policy declined during the Great Depression as the Scullin government concentrated on internal economic matters. In 1929, internationalist Frederic Eggleston complained to a Senate committee that \"no parliament which is responsible for its own foreign policy has less discussion on foreign affairs than does the Australian Parliament\".\nWhile yet to exchange formal diplomatic representatives, Australia made a number of \"quasi-diplomatic\" appointments in the post-war period, who functioned as official representatives of the Australian government but held no diplomatic rank. These included appointment of Henry Braddon to the United States in 1918 with the title of \"commissioner\" and the appointment of Clive Voss as \"commercial agent\" in France in 1919. In 1921, Australia appointed its first official representative in Asia, with the appointment of Edward S. Little as trade commissioner to China, based in Shanghai. Senator Thomas Bakhap undertook a trade mission to China in 1922 at the instigation of Hughes, and in the same year Egbert Sheaf was appointed as a trade commissioner to \"the East\", based in Singapore. The initial trade commissioner service was partially funded by state governments and ultimately failed due to a lack of support from Prime Minister Stanley Bruce and state premiers.\n1930s: appeasement and rearmament.\nThe appointment of the Lyons government in 1932 marked a renewed interest in foreign policy, complemented by the establishment of foreign policy departments at universities and non-governmental advisory bodies like the Australian Institute of International Affairs. Prime Minister Joseph Lyons took a keen interest in foreign relations and exerted significant influence over the government's foreign policy. He authorised three \"Pacific initiatives\" as a sign of greater Australian interest in the Asia-Pacific. The first was the Australian Eastern Mission of 1934, led by deputy prime minister John Latham, which visited seven Asian countries and has been identified as a milestone in the early development of Australian foreign policy. The second initiative was the appointment in 1935 of Australian representatives in China, the Dutch East Indies, Japan, and United States \u2013 albeit below the rank of ambassador \u2013 where previously Australia's interests had been represented solely by British officials. The third was Lyons's \"Pacific Pact\" proposal, which envisioned a non-aggression pact between the major powers in the Pacific. Although he championed the pact at the 1937 Imperial Conference, discussions failed to progress. In Bird's opinion, \"the Lyons years should thus be seen as a part of the evolution of Australian external policy from dependency towards autonomy [\u2026] it is perhaps the continuation and acceleration of the process of transition for which Lyons as Prime Minister ought to be best remembered\".\nWorld War II.\nThe first accredited diplomat sent to a foreign country was Richard Casey, appointed as the first Minister to the United States in January 1940. This was followed shortly after by the arrival of the first Australian high commissioner to Canada, and by appointments of Ministers to Japan in 1940 and China in 1941. With the entry of Japan into the war in December 1941 and the failure of British forces at Singapore, there was a genuine fear of an imminent Japanese invasion. The only solution was to come under American protection. Ever since that time, United States has been the most important security ally. The close security relationship with the United States was formalized in 1951 by the Australia, New Zealand, United States Security (ANZUS) Treaty which remains the cornerstone of Australian security arrangements.\nIn parallel with the evolution of the British Empire to the Commonwealth of Nations, Australia progressively took responsibility for fully managing its foreign relations with other states. Australia concluded an agreement in 1944 with New Zealand dealing with the security, welfare, and advancement of the people of the dependent territories of the Pacific (the ANZAC pact). Australia was one of the founders of the United Nations (1945) and the South Pacific Commission (1947), and in 1950, it proposed the Colombo Plan to assist developing countries in Asia. After the war, Australia played a role in the Far Eastern Commission in Japan and supported Indonesian independence during that country's revolt against the Dutch (1945\u201349).\nCold War.\nAs the Cold War deepened, Australia aligned itself fully with the Western Powers. In addition to contributing to UN forces in the Korean War \u2013 it was the first country to announce it would do so after the United States \u2013 Australia sent troops to assist in putting down the communist revolt in Malaya in 1948\u201360 and later to combat the Indonesian-supported invasion of Sarawak in 1963\u201365. Australia sent troops to repel communism and assist South Vietnamese and American forces in the Vietnam War, in a move that stirred up antiwar activism at home. Australia has been active in the Five Eyes intelligence alliance, and in the Australia \u2013 New Zealand \u2013 United Kingdom agreement and the Five Power Defence Arrangement\u2014successive arrangements with Britain and New Zealand to ensure the security of Singapore and Malaysia.\nContemporary issues.\nAfter the end of the Cold War, Australia remained an important contributor to UN peacekeeping missions and to other multilateral security missions, often in alliance with the United States. Notably, it joined coalition forces in the Persian Gulf War in 1991, the War in Afghanistan (2001-2021), the Iraq War of 2003\u20132011 and the War in Iraq (2013-2017). In 1999 Australian peace keeping forces intervened in East Timor following its referendum to secede from Indonesia. In 2006 Australia sent a contingent of Australian troops to the state to assist in the 2006 East Timor crisis. Australia has also most recently led security assistance, peacekeeping and policing missions elsewhere in its neighbourhood, including in the Solomon Islands, Papua New Guinea and Tonga.\nIn the late 20th Century and early 21st Century, a new element in Australia's foreign relations was the growing relationship with the People's Republic of China. After the establishment of diplomatic relations in December 1972, Sino-Australian relations grew rapidly, to a point where China became Australia's main trading partner and extensive official and people-to-people links were well established. In the first 15 years of the 21st Century, Australia maintained privileged relations with both the United States and China. Since 2017, Sino-Australian relations have deteriorated dramatically, as a result of Australian criticism of policies and actions taken under General Secretary of the Chinese Communist Party Xi Jinping. This has strongly influenced recent Australian bilateral and multi-lateral engagements such as the Pacific Step-Up with Pacific Island states, the development of comprehensive strategic partnerships with a number of regional states, and the pursuit of alliances directed at countering Chinese predominance in the Indo-Pacific region. Since 2017, existing security arrangements have been augmented by a revived Quadrilateral Security Dialogue involving India, Japan and United States, the 2021 AUKUS security partnership with the United States and United Kingdom and the 2022 Australia-Japan Reciprocal Access Agreement, which provides for closer Australian-Japanese cooperation on defence and humanitarian operations.\nInternational agencies, treaties, and agreements.\nMembership of international organizations and groupings.\nOne of the drafters of the UN Charter, Australia has given firm support to the United Nations system. Australia held the first Presidency of the Security Council in 1946 and provided the first military observers under UN auspices a year later, to Indonesia. It has been a member of the Security Council a further four times, in 1956\u201357, 1973\u201374, 1986\u201387 and 2013\u201314. It has been regularly elected a member of the Economic and Social Council most recently for 2020\u201322, a member of the United Nations Human Rights Council in 2018\u201320 and its predecessor the UN Commission on Human Rights in the 1990s. Australia takes a prominent part in many other UN activities, including peacekeeping, disarmament negotiations, and narcotics control. In September 1999, acting under a UN Security Council mandate, Australia led an international coalition to restore order in East Timor upon Indonesia's withdrawal from that territory. Australia has also been closely engaged in international development cooperation and humanitarian assistance through the Specialized agencies, Funds and Programmes and Regional Commissions of the United Nations and major International Financial Institutions, in particular the World Bank, the International Monetary Fund, the Asian Development Bank and the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank.\nAustralia is a member of the G20, the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), and the APEC forum. It is active in meetings of the Commonwealth Heads of Government, the Pacific Islands Forum and other Pacific Islands regional organizations and the Indian Ocean Rim Association. It has been a leader in the Cairns Group \u2013 countries pressing for agricultural trade reform in the Uruguay Round of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) negotiations. Australia is also a member of MIKTA, an informal and diverse middle power partnership between Mexico, Indonesia, South Korea, Turkey and Australia, led by its foreign ministers, which seeks to promote an effective, rules-based global order.\nAustralia has devoted particular attention in the early 21st century to promoting regional architecture centred around the countries of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), to support dialogue on political, security and economic challenges in the Indo-Pacific region. Australia is an active participant in the ASEAN Regional Forum (ARF), and the ASEAN sponsored East Asia Summit. Australia's place at the 2005 inaugural summit was only secured after it agreed to to ASEAN's Treaty of Amity and Cooperation in Southeast Asia. Australia had been reluctant to sign the treaty out of concerns regarding how it would affect Australia's obligation under other treaty arrangements including ANZUS.\nComprehensive strategic partnerships.\nComprehensive strategic partnerships are broad, high level relationships which have increasingly been formalized in the Asia-Pacific region under this description since the early 21st century. They are arrangements which, in general, convey a sense of mutual value, strategic alignment and positive intent to further strengthen ties. They establish the framework for an intensified level of engagement across governments and indicate particularly close bilateral relations. Australia has a formal comprehensive strategic partnership with the following countries and multi-national organizations:\nIn 2014, the Australian Prime Minister and Chinese President agreed to describe the relationship as a \"comprehensive strategic partnership\", and this helped facilitate an extensive program of engagement. This partnership went into dormancy, particularly from 2020, but is being gradually revived with the improvement of relations since 2023.\nTrade.\nOverall Australia's largest trading partners are the United States, South Korea, Japan, China, and the United Kingdom. Australia currently has bilateral Free Trade Agreements with New Zealand, the United States, Thailand and Singapore as of 2007 and the United Kingdom as of 2021. As well as this, Australia is in the process undertaking studies on Free Trade Agreements with ASEAN, China, Chile, India, Indonesia, and Malaysia.\nArmaments.\nTo bolster its foreign policy, Australia maintains a very well-equipped military.\nAccording to SIPRI, Australia is the eight largest importer of major weapons in the world. The US supplied 80 per cent of Australia's imports and Spain 15 per cent. All armed services have received new major arms in 2014\u201318, but mainly aircraft and ships. The F-35 combat aircraft and antisubmarine warfare aircraft from the USA made up 53 per cent of Australian arms imports in 2014\u201318, while ships from Spain accounted for 29 per cent.\nAustralia is modernising its armed forces but also acquiring weapons that significantly increase its long-range capabilities. Among the weapons imported in 2010\u201314 were 5 tanker aircraft and the first of 2 amphibious assault ships from Spain, along with 2 large transport aircraft and 4 airborne early warning (AEW) aircraft from the USA. Australia also received 26 combat aircraft from the US, with 82 more on order (see box 3), as well as 8 anti-submarine warfare aircraft from the US and 3 Hobart destroyers from Spain.\nIn 2021, after Australia ended its 20-year military mission in Afghanistan, the defence officials held formal talks on strengthening military ties with the United Arab Emirates. However, the human rights groups said that it was \"very concerning\" to witness, as the Emirates was accused of carrying out \"unlawful attacks\" in war-torn nations like Libya and Yemen.\nIn contrast to 2014\u201318, the period from 2019 to 2023 saw a 21 per cent decline in Australia's major arms imports. \nHowever, in December 2021, Australia signed a defence procurement deal with South Korea worth $1billion AUD (US$720 million) for modern artillery, supply trucks and radars supplied by South Korean defense company Hanwha. The South Korean President Moon Jae-in and Australian Prime Minister Scott Morrison met for the signing of the agreement and additionally announced they were formally upgrading the Australian-South Korean relationship to a \"comprehensive strategic partnership\". Moreover, in 2023 Australia reached an agreement with the UK and the USA to import at least six nuclear-powered submarines.\nInternational aid.\nAccording to the Australian think tank Lowy Institute, Australia is the Pacific region's largest development partner, disbursing A$17 billion worth of international aid between 2008 and 2021, accounting for 40% of the region's overseas development finance (ODF). Australian international aid in the Pacific exceeded other regional partners including the Asian Development Bank, China, New Zealand and Japan. Between 2019 and 2021, Australian's overseas development finance in the Pacific rose from A$1.34 billion in 2019 to A$1.89 billion in 2021.\nIn May 2024, RNZ reported that the Albanese Government had slightly increased Australia's foreign aid budget by four percent, bringing its total 2024\u20132025 aid o A$4.961 billion budget. In August 2023, the Government had released its new international development strategy, which promised new country, gender, disability and humanitarian aid strategies.\nDiplomatic relations.\nAs of 2011, Australia had established formal diplomatic relations with all members of the United Nations as well as the Holy See, Kosovo, Cook Islands and (in 2014) Niue. In many cases, diplomatic relations are maintained on a non-resident basis, with the Australian ambassador or high commissioner based in another country. Since 2012, diplomatic relations have been effectively suspended with the Syrian Arab Republic, with no diplomatic accreditation by either country maintained, but consular relations continue. In the case of Afghanistan, following the Taliban takeover in 2021, diplomatic relations are in an ambiguous status with Australia \"temporarily\" closing its embassy in Kabul and not recognizing the Islamic Emirate government but maintaining the credentials of the embassy of the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan in Canberra. A number of Canadian missions provide consular assistance to Australians in countries in Africa where Australia does not maintain an office (and Australia reciprocates this arrangement for Canada in some other countries) through the Canada-Australia Consular Services Sharing Agreement.\nDue to the One China Policy of the People's Republic of China, the Australian Office in Taiwan (formerly the Australian Commerce and Industry Office) unofficially represents Australia's interest in Taiwan, serving a function similar to other Australian Consulates.\nList.\nList of countries which Australia maintains diplomatic relations with:\nBilateral relations.\nOceania.\nAustralia is a member of the Pacific Islands Forum and other regional organisations. As part of its Pacific Step-Up initiative announced in 2016 Australia has uniquely established resident High Commissions and embassies in all independent and self governing members of the Pacific Islands Forum as well as consulates-general in New Caledonia and French Polynesia. Australia provides aid to many of its developing Pacific Islands neighbours, and to Papua New Guinea. For decades, it has been the largest donor of aid to the Oceania region. China and New Zealand, the next biggest donors, donated only one sixth of Australia's aid during the 2010s.\nSince the end of the Cold War, the understanding from the United States has been that Australia and New Zealand would assume responsibility for the security of much of the Oceania region, whom they already share pre-existing cultural and economic ties to.\nAustralia's approach to the Pacific has included frequent references to what it has perceived as an \"Arc of Instability\" among its island neighbours. In August 2006 Australian Defence Minister Brendan Nelson stated to the Australian Parliament:\nWe cannot afford to have failing states in our region. The so-called 'arc of instability', which basically goes from East Timor through to the south-west Pacific states, means that not only does Australia have a responsibility in preventing and indeed assisting with humanitarian and disaster relief, but also that we cannot allow any of these countries to become havens for transnational crime, nor indeed havens for terrorism.\nAs from early 2008, the Australian government led by Kevin Rudd began what it called a \"new approach\" to relations between Australia and the Pacific, appointing a Parliamentary Secretary for Pacific Island Affairs, Duncan Kerr. In February, Kerr and fellow Parliamentary Secretary for Foreign Affairs, Bob McMullan visited Samoa, Tonga and Kiribati in February, and stated:\nBroadly, the approach is one of much more partnership and engagement on the basis of mutual respect. We're not going to be lecturing or hectoring, we're going to try and work together with them and I think we set a pretty good standard with the way we started. The relationships we've established with ministers and leaders in those countries [Kiribati, Tonga and Samoa] is very positive.\nRichard Marles, the deputy leader of the Australian Labor Party, has strongly advocated for Australia to prioritize its role in the Pacific. In 2021, he wrote a book titled \"Tides that bind: Australia in the Pacific\", and claimed in an interview that, \"By any measure, we are huge part of the Pacific. We're the largest donor into the Pacific, we've got the biggest diplomatic footprint in the Pacific, we've got the most development resources in the Pacific of any country. For most of the Pacific, we're the most important bilateral relationship they have, more important than the United States, more important than China.\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "67540", "revid": "2214", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=67540", "title": "Transnational issues of Australia", "text": ""}
{"id": "67542", "revid": "82432", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=67542", "title": "Geography of Austria", "text": "Austria is a predominantly mountainous country in Central Europe, approximately between Germany, Italy and Hungary. It has a total area of .\nAustria shares national borders with Switzerland (a non-European Union member state, which it borders for 158\u00a0km, or 98\u00a0mi) and the principality of Liechtenstein (also a non-EU member state, of which it borders for 34\u00a0km or 21\u00a0mi) to the west, Germany (801\u00a0km or 497\u00a0mi) and the Czech Republic (402\u00a0km or 249\u00a0mi) and Slovakia (105\u00a0km or 65\u00a0mi) to the north, Hungary to the east (331\u00a0km or 205\u00a0mi), and Slovenia (330\u00a0km or 185\u00a0mi) and Italy (404\u00a0km or 251\u00a0mi) to the south (total: 2,534\u00a0km or 1,574\u00a0mi).\nThe westernmost third of the somewhat pear-shaped country consists of a narrow corridor between Germany and Italy that is between wide. The rest of Austria lies to the east and has a maximum north\u2013south width of . The country measures almost in length, extending from Lake Constance (German \"Bodensee\") on the Austrian-Swiss-German border in the west to the Neusiedler See on the Austrian-Hungarian border in the east. The contrast between these two lakes \u2013 one in the Alps and the other a typical steppe lake on the westernmost fringe of the Hungarian Plain \u2013 illustrates the diversity of Austria's landscape.\nSeven of Austria's nine federal states have long historical traditions predating the establishment of the Republic of Austria in 1918: Upper Austria, Lower Austria, Styria, Carinthia, Salzburg, Tyrol, and Vorarlberg. The states of Burgenland and Vienna were established after World War I. Most of Burgenland had been part of the Kingdom of Hungary, but it had a predominantly German-speaking population and hence became Austrian. Administrative and ideological reasons played a role in the establishment of Vienna as an independent state. Vienna, historically the capital of Lower Austria, was a socialist stronghold, whereas Lower Austria was conservative, and both socialists and conservatives wanted to consolidate their influence in their respective states. Each state has a state capital with the exception of Vienna, which is a state in its own right in addition to being the federal capital. In Vienna, the City Council and the mayor function as a state parliament (Landtag) and state governor (Landeshauptmann), respectively.\nPhysical geography.\nLandform regions.\nAustria may be divided into three unequal geographical areas. The largest part of Austria (62%) is occupied by the relatively young mountains of the Alps, but in the east, these give way to a part of the Pannonian plain, and north of the river Danube lies the Bohemian Forest, an older, but lower, granite mountain range.\nRiver Danube.\nThe Danube has its source near Donaueschingen in southwestern Germany and flows through Austria before emptying into the Black Sea. It is the only major European river that flows eastwards, and its importance as an inland waterway has been enhanced by the completion in 1992 of the Rhine-Main-Danube Canal in Bavaria, which connects the rivers Rhine and Main with the Danube and makes barge traffic from the North Sea to the Black Sea possible.\nThe major rivers north of the watershed of the Austrian Alps (the Inn in Tyrol, the Salzach in Salzburg, and the Enns in Styria and Upper Austria) are direct tributaries of the Danube and flow north into the Danube valley, whereas the rivers south of the watershed in central and eastern Austria (the Gail and Drau rivers in Carinthia and the M\u00fcrz and Mur in Styria) flow south into the drainage system of the Drau, which eventually empties into the Danube in Serbia. Consequently, central and eastern Austria are geographically oriented away from the watershed of the Alps: the provinces of Upper Austria and Lower Austria toward the Danube and the provinces of Carinthia and Styria toward the Drau.\nThe Alps.\nThree major ranges of the Alps \u2013 the Northern Calcareous Alps, Central Alps, and Southern Calcareous Alps \u2013 run west to east through Austria. The Central Alps, which consist largely of a granite base, are the largest and highest ranges in Austria. The Central Alps run from Tyrol to approximately the Styria-Lower Austria border and include areas that are permanently glaciated in the \u00d6tztal Alps on the Tyrolean\u2013Italian border and the High Tauern in East Tyrol and Carinthia. The Northern Calcareous Alps, which run from Vorarlberg through Tyrol into Salzburg along the German border and through Upper Austria and Lower Austria toward Vienna, and the Southern Calcareous Alps, on the Carinthia-Slovenia border, are predominantly limestone and dolomite. At 3,797 m, Gro\u00dfglockner is the highest mountain in Austria. As a general rule, the farther east the Northern and Central Alps run, the lower they become. The altitude of the mountains also drops north and south of the central ranges.\nAs a geographic feature, the Alps literally overshadow other landform regions. Just over 28% of Austria is moderately hilly or flat: the Northern Alpine Foreland, which includes the Danube Valley; the lowlands and hilly regions in northeastern and eastern Austria, which include the Danube Basin; and the rolling hills and lowlands of the Southeastern Alpine Foreland. The parts of Austria that are most suitable for settlement \u2013 that is, arable and climatically favorable \u2013 run north of the Alps through the provinces of Upper Austria and Lower Austria in the Danube Valley and then curve east and south of the Alps through Lower Austria, Vienna, Burgenland, and Styria. Austria's least mountainous landscape is southeast of the low Leithagebirge, which forms the southern lip of the Vienna Basin, where the steppe of the Hungarian Plain begins.\nBohemian Forest (mountain range).\nThe granite massif of the Bohemian Forest (known in German as the \"B\u00f6hmerwald\"), a low mountain range with bare and windswept plateaus and a harsh climate, is located north of the Danube Valley and covers the remaining 10% of Austria's area. Notable is the Manhartsberg a granite ridge which separates Waldviertel from Weinviertel.\nMountains.\nThe 35 highest mountains in Austria:\nForests.\nIn Austria forest cover is around 47% of the total land area, equivalent to 3,899,150 hectares (ha) of forest in 2020, up from 3,775,670 hectares (ha) in 1990. In 2020, naturally regenerating forest covered 2,227,500 hectares (ha) and planted forest covered 1,671,500 hectares (ha). Of the naturally regenerating forest 2% was reported to be primary forest (consisting of native tree species with no clearly visible indications of human activity) and around 23% of the forest area was found within protected areas. For the year 2015, 18% of the forest area was reported to be under public ownership, 82% private ownership and 0% with ownership listed as other or unknown.\nHuman geography.\nLand-use patterns in Austria change from Alpine to non-Alpine regions. Approximately one-tenth of Austria is barren or unproductive, that is, extremely Alpine or above the tree line. Just over 40% of Austria is covered by forests, the majority of which is in Alpine regions. Less than one-fifth of Austria is arable and suitable for conventional agriculture. The percentage of arable land in Austria increases in the East as the country becomes less alpine. More than one-fifth of Austria is pasture and meadow located at varying altitudes. Almost half of this grassland consists of high Alpine pastures.\nHistorically, high Alpine pastures have been used during the summer for grazing dairy cattle, thus making space available at lower altitudes for cultivating and harvesting fodder for winter. Many of the high pastures are at altitudes of more than 1,000 m.\nAlthough agriculture in mountainous areas was at one time economically viable, in recent decades it has survived only with the help of extensive subsidies.\nThe Alps make many areas of Austria uninhabitable. Austria's so-called areas of permanent settlement \u2013 regions that are cultivated, continuously inhabited, and used for transportation, but do not include forests, Alpine pastures, or barren land \u2013 cover only 40% or 35,000\u00a0km2 of the country. The great majority of the area of permanent settlement is in the Danube valley and the lowlands or hilly regions north, east, and south of the Alps, where approximately two-thirds of the population lives.\nIn the country's predominantly Alpine provinces, most of the population live in river valleys: Bregenz on the shores of Lake Constance in Vorarlberg; Innsbruck on the river Inn in Tyrol; Salzburg on the river Salzach in Salzburg; and Klagenfurt on the W\u00f6rthersee lake in Carinthia. The higher the Alps are, the less inhabitable they become in terms of soil, microclimate, and vegetation. Conversely, the lower and broader the Alpine valleys are, the more densely populated they become.\nTyrol illustrates most clearly the relationship between Alpine geography and habitation. As the most mountainous province (less than 3% of the land is arable), it is the most sparsely inhabited, with an area of permanent settlement of only 15%.\nBecause of the Alps, the country as a whole is one of the least densely populated states of Western and Central Europe. With ninety-three inhabitants per square kilometre, Austria has a population density similar to that of the former Yugoslavia.\nAustria's national borders and geography have corresponded very little. Since the fall of the Western Roman Empire, the Alps and the Danube have not served to mark political boundaries. Even within Austria, provincial borders were only occasionally set by the ranges and ridges of the Alps.\nAlthough the Alps did not mark political boundaries, they often separated groups of people from one another. Because in the past the Alps were impassable, inhabitants isolated in valleys or networks of valleys developed distinct regional subcultures. Consequently, the inhabitants of one valley frequently maintained dialects, native or traditional dress, architectural styles, and folklore that substantially differed from those of the next valley. Differences were great enough that the origins of outsiders could easily be identified. However, mass media, mobility, prosperity, and tourism have eroded the distinctness of Alpine regional subcultures to a great extent by reducing the isolation that gave them their particular character.\nDespite the Alps, Austria has historically been a land of transit. The Danube valley, for centuries Central Europe's aquatic link to the Balkan Peninsula and the \"Orient\" in the broadest sense of the word, has always been an avenue of east\u2013west transit. However, Europe's division into two opposing economic and military blocs after World War II diminished Austria's importance as a place of transit. Since the opening of Eastern Europe in 1989, the country has begun to re-assume its historical role. By the early 1990s, it had already experienced a substantial increase in the number of people and vehicles crossing its eastern frontiers.\nWithin the Alps, four passes and the roads that run through them are of particular importance for north\u2013south transit. The Semmering Pass on the provincial border of Lower Austria and Styria connects the Vienna Basin with the M\u00fcrz and Mur valleys, thus providing northeast\u2013southwest access to Styria and Slovenia, and, via Carinthia, to Italy.\nThe Pyrhn Pass between the provinces of Upper Austria and Styria and the Tauern Pass between the High Tauern range and the Lower Tauern range of the Central Alps in Salzburg, provide access to the Mur Valley in Styria and the Drau Valley in Carinthia, respectively. The highways that run through these passes are important northwest\u2013southeast lines of communication through the Alps. The Pyrhn highway has been nicknamed the \"Fremdarbeiterweg\" (\"foreign workers' route\") because millions of \"Gastarbeiter\" (\"guest workers\") in Germany use it to return to their homes in the Balkans and Turkey for vacation. Many Germans and northern Europeans also use it in the summer months to reach the Adriatic coast. After the outbreak of hostilities in Yugoslavia in the summer of 1991, however, a substantial amount of this traffic was re-routed through the Danube Valley and Hungary.\nThe most important pass in the Austrian Alps is the Brenner Pass, located on the Austrian-Italian border in Tyrol. At 1,370 m, it is one of the lowest Alpine passes. The route up the Inn valley and over the Brenner Pass has been historically an important and convenient route of north\u2013south transit between Germany and Italy, and provides the most direct route between Europe's two most highly industrialized regions: Germany and northern Italy.\nNatural resources:\noil, lignite, timber, iron ore, copper, zinc, antimony, magnesite, tungsten, graphite, salt, hydropower\nLand use:\n&lt;br&gt;\"arable land:\"\n16.44%\n&lt;br&gt;\"permanent crops:\"\n0.79%\n&lt;br&gt;\"other:\"\n82.77% (2012)\nIrrigated land:\n1,170\u00a0km2 (2007)\nTotal renewable water resources:\n77.7\u00a0km3 (2011)\nFreshwater withdrawal (domestic/industrial/agricultural)\n&lt;br&gt;\"total:\"\n3.66\u00a0km3/yr (18%/79%/3%)\n&lt;br&gt;\"per capital:\"\n452.4 m3/yr (2008)\nClimate.\nThe Alps serve as a watershed for Europe's three major kinds of weather systems that influence Austrian weather. The Atlantic maritime climate from the northwest is characterized by low-pressure fronts, mild air from the Gulf Stream, and precipitation. It has the greatest influence on the northern slopes of the Alps, the Northern Alpine Foreland, and the Danube valley. The continental climate is characterized by low pressure fronts with precipitation in summer and high pressure systems with cold and dry air in winter. It affects mainly eastern Austria. Mediterranean high-pressure systems from the south are characterized by few clouds and warm air, and they influence the weather of the southern slopes of the Alps and that of the Southeastern Alpine Foreland, making them the most temperate part of Austria.\nOne peculiarity of the Mediterranean weather systems is the f\u00f6hn wind, a warm air mass that originates in the African Sahara and moves north rapidly, periodically raising temperatures up to in a short period of time. Many people respond to this rapid weather change with headaches, irritability, and circulatory problems. During the winter, the rapid warming that accompanies a f\u00f6hn can thaw the snow cover in the Alps to such an extent that avalanches occur.\nGiven the importance of Alpine skiing for the Austrian tourist industry, December is the month during which the weather is watched with the greatest anticipation. As a rule, Atlantic maritime weather systems bring snow, and continental weather systems help keep it. However, a predominance of cold, dry continental systems or warm Mediterranean ones inevitably postpone the beginning of the ski season. In the summer, Mediterranean high-pressure systems bring warm, sunny weather.\nEcological concerns.\nAustrians faced a number of ecological problems in the 1990s. One of the most pressing is the pollution caused by the staggering increase of traffic through the country. Traffic on the superhighway going through the Brenner Pass has, for example, increased from 600,000 vehicles per year in the early 1970s to over 10\u00a0million per year in the early 1990s. One quarter of the traffic crossing Austria consists of semitrailers used for heavy transport. The opening of Eastern Europe has only exacerbated the problem of transit traffic.\nThe Alpine valleys through which much of this traffic passes are unusually vulnerable to ecological damage. Narrow valleys are not conducive to dissipation of noise or pollutants caused by motor vehicles. Inversions \u2013 cold layers of air that trap warm layers of air or warm layers of air that trap cold layers in the valleys and lowlands \u2013 also seasonally contribute to the magnitude of the pollution problem.\nAustria has negotiated with the EU to set limits on the amount of commercial transit traffic, especially through Tyrol. Work is also under way to develop a \"piggy-back\" system of loading semitrailers on to flatbed railroad cars in southern Germany and northern Italy, transporting them through Tyrol by rail. Environmentalists have pushed for measures that are more far-reaching. They advocate, for example, digging a tunnel from Garmisch-Partenkirchen in southern Germany to Bolzano in northern Italy.\nPollution is also brought by the weather systems that determine the country's climate. Atlantic maritime weather systems carry pollution into Austria from northwestern Europe. Austria's proximity to industrialized regions of former Communist states, with negligible or no pollution control policies or equipment, combined with the influence of continental weather systems also have proved to be extremely harmful. Mediterranean weather systems transmit industrial pollutants from northern Italy.\nAs a result of domestic and foreign pollution, 37% of Austria's forests had been damaged by acid rain and/or pollutant emissions by 1991. The damage to forests has had dire consequences, including the decimation of forests that for centuries had protected many Alpine communities from avalanches, erosion, mudslides, or flooding caused by runoff.\nThe seriousness of the ecological problems confronting the country gave rise in the 1970s to an environmentalist movement. Political parties were formed, and representatives were elected to parliament. A referendum in 1978 closed down a newly completed nuclear power station and turned the country away from the exploitation of nuclear energy. Public opposition in 1984 stopped the planned construction of a hydroelectric power station in a wetlands region.\nThe country's long-standing commercial use of the Alps for recreational purposes has also come under examination. Extensive tourism places an inordinate amount of pressure on sensitive Alpine ecosystems. Ski runs damage forests, as do summer sports such as off-trail mountain hiking or mountain biking. Many Alpine villages have also grown greatly because of the tourist industry. In extreme cases, they have up to twenty hotel beds for each inhabitant, a ratio that places a disproportionate seasonal burden on communal infrastructures and the environment. For these reasons, efforts have been made to introduce \"green\" or \"soft\" forms of tourism that are more compatible with the Alpine environment.\nPart of the solution to Austria's ecological problems is being sought in stricter environmental legislation at the domestic level. Ultimately, however, pan-European and global cooperation in the realm of pollution and emission control will be necessary to protect the country's environment.\nEnvironment - current issues:\nsome forest degradation caused by air and soil pollution; soil pollution results from the use of agricultural chemicals; air pollution results from emissions by coal- and oil-fired power stations and industrial plants and from trucks transiting Austria between northern and southern Europe\nEnvironment - international agreements:\n&lt;br&gt;\"party to:\"\nAir Pollution, Air Pollution-Nitrogen Oxides, Air Pollution-Sulphur 85, Air Pollution-Sulphur 94, Air Pollution-Volatile Organic Compounds, Antarctic Treaty, Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification, Endangered Species, Environmental Modification, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution, Tropical Timber 83, Tropical Timber 94, Wetlands, Whaling\n&lt;br&gt;\"signed, but not ratified:\"\nAir Pollution-Persistent Organic Pollutants, Antarctic-Environmental Protocol, Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol\n\"country comparison to the world:\" 120\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "67545", "revid": "35498457", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=67545", "title": "Economy of Austria", "text": "The economy of Austria is a highly developed social market economy, with the country being one of the fourteen richest in the world in terms of GDP (gross domestic product) per capita. Until the 1980s, many of Austria's largest industry firms were nationalised. In recent years, privatisation has reduced state holdings to a level comparable to other European economies. Among OECD nations, Austria has a highly efficient and strong social security system; social expenditure stood at roughly 29.4% of GDP. \nLabor movements are particularly strong in Austria, and they have a large influence on labor politics. Next to a highly developed industry, international tourism is the most important part of the national economy. The economy of Austria's average GDP is 13th growth in OECD countries, from 1992 to 2017. In Austria, 1.37% over average population growth is the strong factor.\nGermany has historically been the main trading partner of Austria, making the Austrian economy vulnerable to rapid changes in the German economy. However, since Austria became a member state of the European Union, it has gained closer ties to other European Union economies. This development reduced its economic dependence on Germany. In addition, Austria's membership in the EU has drawn an influx of foreign investors.\nThey were attracted by Austria's access to the European Single Market and the country's proximity to the aspiring economies of the European Union. Growth in GDP has accelerated in recent years, and reached 3.3% in 2006.\nIn 2024 Austria has a very high, $58,669 nominal GDP per capita ranked 13th.\nVienna was ranked the fifth richest NUTS-2 region within Europe (see Economy of the European Union), with its GDP reaching \u20ac38,632 per capita. It was trailing behind Inner London, Luxembourg, the Brussels-Capital Region and Hamburg.\nGrowth had been steady between 2002 and 2006, varying between 1 and 3.3%. After hitting 0% in 2013, growth had picked up a little. As of 2016, growth was set at 1.5%.\nHistory.\nFoundation and \"Interbellum\".\nFirst Austrian Republic, founded as a result of the dissolution of Austria-Hungary, inherited an economy battered by the ravages of the First World War, namely:\nA number of international relief schemes failed to garner enough support while a report by Sir William Goode argued that the Austrian economy would collapse without swift foreign intervention. As such, the Austrian economic crisis stretched into its second year, with inflation running at 99%.\nLeague of Nations Bailout.\nSource:\nWith annual inflation running at 2,877%, the League of Nations was officially appointed to organise an Austrian reconstruction plan in August 1922. The League scheme was based on the view that Austrian troubles as a result of an inability to pay for necessities and obtain credit, and therefore, an Austrian financial revival was critical to Austrian survival. To this end, the plan was focused solely on financial reconstruction. Austria would receive loans raised from international money markets and the Austrian public, which would be secured on customs and tobacco taxes. In exchange, Austria would in effect lose sovereignty over its economy, agreeing to:\nThe measures took effect in 1923. Short-term effects were impressive; during the announcement to undertake Austrian reconstruction in August 1922, public confidence soared. Foreign currency holdings were converted back into krone, stabilising the currency. This allowed the Austrian Foreign Exchange Agency to finally intervene to fix the krone to the dollar, something that the wild gyrations of the past had not permitted. Capital rushed back into Austria, and domestic prices stabilised, pronouncing the end of hyperinflation.\nThe steam ran out shortly after implementation. Growth averaged 0.35% per annum until 1929, unemployment leapt five-fold, bankruptcies increased 41-fold, and the trade deficit doubled.\n\"Anschluss\".\nAustria was annexed by Nazi Germany in 1938, and consequently lost control of its own economic policy until the formation of the Second Republic in 1945.\nPost World War II.\nEver since the end of the World War II, Austria has achieved sustained economic growth. In the soaring 1950s, the rebuilding efforts for Austria lead to an average annual growth rate of more than 5% in real terms and averaged about four-point five percent through most of the 1960s. Following moderate real GDP growth of 1.7%, 2% and 1.2%, respectively, in 1995, 1996, and 1997, the economy rebounded and with real GDP expansion of 2.9 percent in 1998 and 2.2% in 1999.\nAustria became a member of the EU on 1 January 1995. Membership brought economic benefits and challenges and has drawn an influx of foreign investors attracted by Austria's access to the single European market. Austria also has made progress in generally increasing its international competitiveness. As a member of the economic and monetary union of the European Union (EMU), Austria's economy is closely integrated with other EU member countries, especially with Germany. On 1 January 1999, Austria introduced the new Euro currency for accounting purposes. In January 2002, Euro notes and coins were introduced, replacing those of the Austrian schilling.\nCurrency.\nIn Austria, Euros appear as 1999, however all Austrian euro coins introduced in 2002 have this year on it; unlike other countries of the eurozone where mint year is minted in the coin. Eight different designs, one per face value, were selected for the Austrian coins. In 2007, in order to adopt the new common map like the rest of the eurozone countries, Austria changed the common side of its coins.\nBefore adopting the Euro in 2002 Austria had maintained use of the Austrian schilling which was first established in December 1924. The Schilling was abolished in the wake of the Anschluss in 1938 and has been reintroduced after the end of the World War II in November 1945.\nAustria has one of the richest collection of collectors' coins in the eurozone, with face value ranging from 10 to 100 euro (although a 100,000 euro coin was exceptionally minted in 2004). These coins are a legacy of an old national practice of minting of silver and gold coins. Unlike normal issues, these coins are not legal tender in all the eurozone. For instance, a \u20ac5 Austrian commemorative coin cannot be used in any other country.\nPrivatisation, state participation and labour movements.\nMany of the country's largest firms were nationalised in the early post-war period to protect them from Soviet takeover as war reparations. For many years, the government and its state-owned industries conglomerate played a very important role in the Austrian economy. However, starting in the early 1990s, the group was broken apart, state-owned firms started to operate largely as private businesses, and a great number of these firms were wholly or partially privatised. The government still operates some firms, state monopolies, utilities, and services. Due to the 2008 financial crisis, two banks were nationalised. Since 2019 the \u00d6sterreichische Industrieholding (\u00d6BAG) administers the investments of the Republic of Austria in partially or entirely nationalized companies, but came under strong criticism after leaked messages showed how Thomas Schmidt had a say in the appointment of the supervisory board and became sole director. Austria enjoys well-developed industry, banking, transportation, services, and commercial facilities.\nAustria has a strong labour movement. The Austrian Trade Union Federation (\u00d6GB) comprises constituent unions with a total membership of about 1.5 million\u2014more than half the country's wage and salary earners. Since 1945, the \u00d6GB has pursued a moderate, consensus-oriented wage policy, cooperating with industry, agriculture, and the government on a broad range of social and economic issues in what is known as Austria's \"social partnership\". The \u00d6GB has often opposed the Sch\u00fcssel government's programme for budget consolidation, social reform, and improving the business climate, and indications are rising that Austria's peaceful social climate could become more confrontational.\nAgriculture, industry and services.\nAustrian farms, like those of other west European mountainous countries, are small and fragmented, and production is relatively expensive. Since Austria's becoming a member of the EU in 1995, the Austrian agricultural sector has been undergoing substantial reform under the EU's Common Agricultural Policy (CAP). Although Austrian farmers provide about 80% of domestic food requirements, the agricultural contribution to gross domestic product (GDP) has declined since 1950 to less than 3%.\nAlthough some industries are global competitors, such as several iron and steel works, chemical plants and oil corporations that are large industrial enterprises employing thousands of people, most industrial and commercial enterprises in Austria are relatively small on an international scale.\nMost important for Austria is the service sector generating the vast majority of Austria's GDP. Vienna has grown into a finance and consulting metropole and has established itself as the door to the East within the last decades. Viennese law firms and banks are among the leading corporations in business with the new EU member states. Tourism is very important for Austria's economy, accounting for around 10 percent of Austria's GDP. In 2001, Austria was the tenth most visited country in the world with over 18.2 million tourists. Previously, dependency on German guests made this sector of the Austrian economy very dependent on German economy. However recent developments have brought a change, especially since winter ski resorts such as Arlberg or Kitzb\u00fchel are now more and more frequented by Eastern Europeans, Russians and Americans.\nAustria produced in 2018:\nIn addition to smaller productions of other agricultural products.\nHealth care services.\nAustria's health care system was developed alongside other social welfare programmes by the social democrats in Vienna initially.\nTrade position.\nTrade with other EU countries accounts for almost 66% of Austrian imports and exports. Expanding trade and investment in the emerging markets of central and eastern Europe is a major element of Austrian economic activity. Trade with these countries accounts for almost 14% of Austrian imports and exports, and Austrian firms have sizable investments in and continue to move labour-intensive, low-tech production to these countries. Although the big investment boom has waned, Austria still has the potential to attract EU firms seeking convenient access to these developing markets.\nMergers and acquisitions.\nCompanies and investors from Austria are active in mergers and acquisitions (M&amp;A). Since 1991, more than 7,183 mergers &amp; acquisitions transactions have been announced with a known total value of 261.6 bil. EUR. In 2017, over 245 deals with a total value of over 12.9 bil. EUR have taken place. They are not only active in national deals, but also as important investors in cross-border M&amp;A abroad, with Germany being the most important partner. 854 German companies have been acquired by Austrian parant companies (outbound) so far.\nThe industry with the largest M&amp;A activity in Austria in terms of transaction value has been the financial sector, whereas the industry with the largest number of transactions has been Industrials - representing 19.2%.\nData.\nThe following table shows the main economic indicators in 1980\u20132024 (with IMF staff estimates in 2025). Inflation under 5% is in green.\nCompanies.\nIn 2022, the sector with the highest number of companies registered in Austria is Services with 97,733 companies followed by Finance, Insurance, and Real Estate and Retail Trade with 70,696 and 59,942 companies respectively.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "67547", "revid": "279219", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=67547", "title": "Transportation of Austria", "text": ""}
{"id": "67549", "revid": "591714", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=67549", "title": "Austrian Armed Forces", "text": "Combined military forces of the Republic of Austria\n&lt;/noinclude&gt;\nThe Austrian Armed Forces () are the combined military forces of Austria.\nThe military consists of 16,000 active-duty personnel and 125,600 reservists. The military budget is 1.0% of national GDP (including pensions) or \u20ac3.317 billion (2023, without pensions).\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHistory.\nInterwar.\nIn 1918, the Republic of German-Austria established a military known as the (\"People's Defence\"). \"Volkswehr\" forces took part in military confrontations with Royal Yugoslav Army troops which occupied parts of Carinthia that Austria claimed as its own. In 1920, after the Republic of German-Austria transitioned into the First Austrian Republic, the new regime changed the military's name to the (\"Federal Army\"), which it has been known by ever since. In 1938, officers led by Alfred Jansa developed a military operation plan to defend against a potential invasion by Nazi Germany, which ultimately went unused due to a lack of political willpower when Austria was annexed by the Germans in the same year during the \"Anschluss\". Under German rule, the was disbanded, and many Austrians served during World War II in the \"Wehrmacht\" and \"Waffen-SS\" (Austrian SS).\nWorld War II role of the \"Bundesheer\":\nIn 1955, Austria issued its Declaration of Neutrality, meaning that it would never join a military alliance. The Austrian Armed Forces' main purpose since then has been the protection of Austria's neutrality. Its relationship with NATO is limited to the Partnership for Peace programme.\nWith the end of the Cold War, the Austrian military have increasingly assisted the border police in controlling the influx of undocumented migrants through Austrian borders. The war in the neighbouring Balkans resulted in the lifting of the restrictions on the range of weaponry of the Austrian military that had been imposed by the Austrian State Treaty.\nCold War.\nOn 1 March 1978, the \"Wehrgesetz 1978\" became law, which encompassed the \"Heeresgliederung 1978\" plan to grow the Austrian Armed Forces to 384,000 (84,000 active, 300,000 militia) by the early 1990s to be able to fully employ the Austrian Raumverteidigung concept. A total of 30 new Landwehrstammregimenter were to be raised. On 6 October 1987, the Austrian government enacted the \"Heeresgliederung 1987\", which instructed the armed forces to stop the growth of the militia at 200,000. Afterwards only the militia's infantry grew, making 1988-1989 the timeframe Austria's armed forces reached their maximum strength. On 29 May 1990 the \"Wehrgesetz 1978\" was cancelled and the army began to shrink, which accelerated with the \"Gesamte Rechtsvorschrift f\u00fcr Wehrgesetz 1990\" (Fassung of 31.12.1992).\nRaumverteidigung.\nNATO's Central Army Group in Southern Germany was arrayed against attacks from East Germany and Czechoslovakia, with only the German Army's 10th Panzer Division available to cover the army group's Austrian flank. To strengthen the flank NATO would have deployed the French Army's II Corps, which would have required seven days for mobilization and approach. The arrival of Warsaw Pact forces in southern Bavaria within the first six days after the start of hostilities would have prompted NATO to use tactical nuclear weapons to block the enemy approach routes through Upper Austria. To prevent the use of tactical nuclear weapons on Austrian territory the Austrian military developed the Raumverteidigung (Area Defense) concept, which envisioned that Austrian forces would delay, harass and decimate Warsaw Pact forces with determined, sustained and costly resistance along their expected axis of advance.\nStrategic considerations.\nThe Austrian military assumed that Warsaw Pact forces would include Czechoslovak People's Army, Hungarian People's Army, and Soviet Army units. A mixed Czechoslovak-Soviet corps of three divisions was expected to mass in the B\u0159eclav-Brno-Znojmo region and attack through the Weinviertel north of Vienna. The expected crossing of the Danube was expected to occur between Tulln and Krems, from where the enemy forces would have turned West to reach the Sankt P\u00f6lten area. In parallel the 5th Hungarian Army, consisting of Hungarian units, Soviet Central Group of Forces and Southern Group of Forces units, and Czechoslovak units based in Slovakia was expected to strike from Sopron through the Wiener Wald towards Sankt P\u00f6lten.\nAfter taking Sankt P\u00f6lten the Austrian armed forces expected the combined Warsaw Pact forces to strike West to take possession of the Linz-Steyr-Wels, supported by an advance of two Czechoslovak People's Army divisions through the M\u00fchlviertel to the North of Linz. After taking possession of the Linz basin the Warsaw Pact attack would have continued into Bavaria. The Austrian military also expected an advance by up to three Hungarian People's Army divisions, supported by Romanian People's Army units, into Styria and across the Soboth Pass and Pack Saddle towards Klagenfurt and Villach, from where the Eastern forces could turn South towards the Italian Army's 5th Army Corps or West towards the Italian 4th Alpine Army Corps.\nWhile it was imagined that NATO troops could likewise use Austria as a stepping stone for invasions of the Warsaw Pact countries, such a scenario was considered highly unlikely, unrealistic and eventually remained theoretical in strategic realization.\nInitial dispositions.\nIn 1978 the Austrian Armed Forces enacted its new concept of Raumverteidigung. The Raumverteidigung divided the entire nation into Key Zones (Schl\u00fcsselzonen), Area Security Zones (Raumsicherungszonen), and Subzones (Teilzonen). Key zones were set up in those areas of the national territory, which an aggressor had to take possession of in order to achieve his military goals. Area security zones were set up to deny an aggressor the possibility to bypass key zones and prevent the massing, movement, supply, and maintenance of enemy units. Operationally the aim was to block the direct march lines through layered defenses in the key zones and to prevent an aggressor from freely using the space in the area security zones through mobile warfare. Both types of zones were to be defended by militia formations.&lt;ref name=\"Keusch/Halbartschlager\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;\nThe four subzones formed the Central Area in Austria's mountainous interior, which was outside of the anticipated main axis of a Warsaw Pact advance. In the event of an attack and an occupation of most of Austria, one or more the sub zones would form the national territory, which would justify the continuation of Austria as a subject of international law. The central area was therefore of essential importance and had to be defended at its entrances. The Army Command and Austrian government would have retreat to a bunker complex in St Johann im Pongau in the central area. Furthermore, the central area acted as main depot of Austria's war stocks. The capital Vienna would not have been defended and was therefore excluded from defense preparations.\nGeographically the country was divided into 34 areas:\nEach key zone and area security zone, and Block Zone 33 were overseen during peacetime by a Landwehrstammregiment, which were tasked with training the militia forces needed for the defense of their assigned zone. The Landwehrstammregiments consisted of a staff company, training companies, a supply train, and mobilization depots. Some of the Landwehrstammregiment also trained and fielded an active J\u00e4ger battalion. In case of war the Landwehrstammregiments would have reformed as Landwehr Regiments with various types of militia battalions and companies, allowing the regiments to fight delaying actions from fortified positions as well has hit and run attacks on enemy formations trying to pass through their zone. The Landwehr regiments formed the area-bound Landwehr and fielded the following types of Landwehr units:\nOperationally the country was divided initially into three operational areas (Operationsraum), which were commanded by the Army Command.\nThe Air Division and army's support troops were under direct Army Command. In wartime the operational commands would command nine brigades, which formed the mobile Landwehr. The mobile Landwehr was the Austrian armed forces reserve, which once the intentions of the opponent were determined, could be used to counterattack enemy formations. The mobile Landwehr consisted of six light J\u00e4ger brigades, which would only be fully manned during wartime, and three Panzergrenadier brigades, equipped with main battle tanks and infantry fighting vehicles, which were fully manned at all times. The staffs of the six J\u00e4ger brigades would have been formed upon war by the armed forces military commands, which in peacetime had territorial functions in the states. The three Panzergrenadier brigades were assigned to the 1st Panzergrenadier Division and based along the Danube valley from Vienna to Linz.\nRaumverteidigung Organization.\nEach Austrian military command was numbered from 1 to 9, with all zones and units assigned to the command or part of the command starting with the same number. The only exception was the 9th Panzergrenadier Brigade, which carried the number of the Vorarlberg Military Command in the extreme West of the country, but was based near Vienna in the East of the country and manned by conscripts from Vienna. The Austrian military commands of the Raumverteidigung concept, their assigned number, zones and main units during peacetime were:\nUnder the area defence strategy, which determined the army's structure until 1993, the army was divided into three principal elements: the standing alert force () of active units, including the 1st Panzergrenadier Division and the air division; the mobile militia (), organized as eight mechanized reserve brigades to be deployed to key danger spots in the event of mobilization; and the stationary militia () of twenty-six reserve infantry regiments organized for territorial defence. Both the mobile militia and the stationary militia were brought up to strength only in times of mobilization or during periods allotted for refresher training, usually three weeks in June. Training of conscripts was conducted by twenty-eight training and equipment-holding regiments (). On mobilization, these regiments would disband, with their cadre reassigned to lead reserve units or form replacement regiments and battalions.\nAt the army level were a headquarters, guard, and special forces battalions and an artillery battalion at cadre strength. Two corps headquarters, one in the east at Graz and one in the west at Salzburg, would, on mobilization, command the provincially organized units in their respective zones. Each corps included artillery, antitank, antiaircraft, and engineering battalions, and a logistics regiment, all on a cadre basis.\nEach of the nine provincial military commands supervised the training and maintenance activities of their training and equipment-holding regiments. On mobilization, these nine commands would convert to a divisional headquarters commanding mobile militia, stationary militia, and other independent units.\nThe only active units immediately available in an emergency were those of the standing alert force of some 15,000 career soldiers supplemented by eight-month conscripts. The force was organized as a mechanized division consisting of three armored infantry brigades. Each brigade was composed of one tank battalion, one mechanized infantry battalion, and one self-propelled artillery battalion. Two of the brigades had antitank battalions equipped with self-propelled weapons. The divisional headquarters was at Baden bei Wien near Vienna; the 3rd, 4th, and 9th Brigades were based in separate locations, also in the northeast of the country. 3rd Brigade was at Mautern an der Donau, 4th at Linz, and 9th Brigade at G\u00f6tzendorf an der Leitha.\nPost-Cold War.\nThe New Army Structure\u2014the reorganization plan announced in late 1991 and scheduled to be in place sometime in 1995\u2014replaces the previous two-corps structure with one of three corps. The new corps is headquartered at Baden, with responsibility for the two northeastern provinces of Lower Austria and Upper Austria. Army headquarters will be eliminated, as will the divisional structure for the three standing brigades. The three corps\u2014in effect, regional commands\u2014will be directly subordinate to the general troop inspector. The three mechanized brigades will be placed directly under the new Third Corps at Baden, although in the future one brigade may be assigned to each of the three corps. The mobile militia will be reduced from eight to six mechanized brigades. Each of the nine provincial commands will have at least one militia regiment of two to six battalions as well as local defence companies.\nTotal personnel strength\u2014both standing forces and reserves\u2014is to be materially contracted under the new plan. The fully mobilized army will decline in strength from 200,000 to 120,000. The standing alert force will be reduced from 15,000 to 10,000. Reaction time is to be radically shortened so that part of the standing alert force can be deployed within hours to a crisis zone (for example, one adjacent to the border with Slovenia). A task force ready for immediate deployment will be maintained by one of the mechanized brigades on a rotational basis. Separate militia training companies to which all conscripts are assigned will be dismantled; in the future, conscripts will undergo basic training within their mobilization companies. Conscripts in the final stages of their training could supplement the standing forces by being poised for operational deployment at short notice.\nPromotion is not based solely on merit but on position attained, level of education, and seniority. Officers with advanced degrees (for which study at the National Defence Academy qualifies) can expect to attain grade VIII before reaching the retirement age of sixty to sixty-five. Those with a baccalaureate degree can expect to reach grade VII (colonel). Career NCOs form part of the same comprehensive personnel structure. It is common for NCOs to transfer at some stage in their careers to civilian status at the equivalent grade, either in the Ministry for National Defence or in the police or prison services after further training.\nStrong Europe Tank Challenge 2017.\nAustria took first place in the Strong Europe Tank Challenge 2017 as six nations and partner nations battled it out in Grafenwoehr, Germany. The Austrian tankers defeated teams from France, Germany, Poland, Ukraine and from the United States in the exercise. The Austrian soldiers used Leopard 2A4 tanks during the competition.\n2019 Uniform changes.\nSince 2019 the new service uniform with a six colour camouflage pattern is issued, but the old service uniform in olive is still widespread and will be taken out of service very slowly. The dress uniform is grey; for formal occasions a white uniform may be worn. The air force uniform is identical, with the addition of wings worn on the right jacket breast\u2014gold for officers and silver for enlisted personnel. Branches of service are identified by beret colours: scarlet for the honour Guard; green for infantry; black for armour; cherry for airborne; and dark blue for quartermaster. Insignia of rank are worn on the jacket lapel of the dress uniform (silver stars on a green or gold shield) and on the epaulets of the field uniform (white, silver or gold stars on an olive drab field).\nOrganization.\nThe armed forces consist solely of the army, of which the air force is considered a constituent part. In 1993, the total active complement of the armed forces was 52,000, of whom 20,000 to 30,000 were conscripts undergoing training of six to eight months. The army had 46,000 personnel on active duty (including an estimated 19,500 conscripts), and the air force had 6,000 personnel (2,400 conscripts).\nGovernance.\nUnder the constitution, the President is the commander-in-chief of the armed forces. In reality, the Chancellor has the decision-making authority, exercised through the Minister for National Defence. The Chancellor also chairs the National Defence Council, which has as its members a vice-chairman, the minister for national defence, an appointee of this minister, the Chief of the General Staff, and a parliamentary representative. The minister for national defence, acting in co-operation with the minister for interior, coordinates the work of the four major committees under the National Defence Council: the Military Defence Committee; the Civil Defence Committee; the Economic Defence Committee; and the Psychological Defence Committee. The Chief of the General Staff acts as the senior military adviser to the Minister for National Defence, assists the minister in the exercise of his authority, and, as the head of the general staff, is responsible for planning. However, the army commander exercises direct operational control of the Bundesheer in both peacetime and wartime.\nArticle 79 of the constitution, as amended in 1985, states that the Army is entrusted with the military defence of the country. Insofar as the legally constituted civil authority requests its co-operation, the army is further charged with protecting constitutional institutions and their capacity to act, as well as the democratic freedoms of the inhabitants; maintaining order and security in the interior; and rendering aid in disasters and mishaps of extraordinary scope. In administering the armed forces, the Ministry for National Defence is organized into four principal sections and the inspectorate general: Section I deals with legal and legislative matters; Section II handles personnel and recruitment matters, including discipline and grievances; Section III is concerned with troop command, schools, and other facilities, and it also comprises departments G-1 through G-5 as well as a separate department for air operations; and Section IV deals with procurement and supply, quartermaster matters, armaments, and ordnance.\nThe general troop inspectorate is a separate section of the ministry with responsibility for co-ordination and fulfilment of the missions of the armed forces. It encompasses a general staff department, an attach\u00e9 department, and planning and inspection groups.\nMission.\nThe main constitutional tasks of today's Austrian military are:\nRanks.\nOf the eight enlisted ranks, only a sergeant (Wachtmeister) or above is considered an NCO. There are two warrant officer ranks\u2014Offiziersstellvertreter and Vizeleutnant. The lowest commissioned rank of officer candidate (F\u00e4hnrich)\u2014is held by cadets at the military academy and by reserve officers in training for the rank second lieutenant. To maintain conformity with grade levels in the civil service, there are only two ranks of general in the personnel system\u2014brigadier general (one star) and general lieutenant (three stars). However, the ranks of major general (two stars) and full general (equivalent to four stars) are accorded to officers holding particular military commands.\nBranches.\nAir Force.\nAustria's air force () has as its missions the defence of Austrian airspace, tactical support of Austrian ground forces, reconnaissance and military transport, and search-and-rescue support when requested by civil authorities.\nUntil 1985, when the first of twenty-four Saab 35 Draken were delivered, the country had remained essentially without the capacity to contest violations of its airspace. The Drakens, reconditioned after having served the Swedish Air Force since the early 1960s, were armed, in accordance with the restrictions on missiles in the State Treaty of 1955, only with a cannon. However, following Austria's revised interpretation of its obligations under the treaty, a decision was made in 1993 to procure AIM-9 Sidewinder air-to-air missiles. The first of these missiles were purchased from Swedish air force inventory, while later a higher performance model was acquired directly from the United States, with deliveries commencing in 1995. French Mistral surface-to-air missiles systems were purchased to add ground-based protection against air attack. The first of the systems arrived in Austria in 1993; final deliveries concluded in 1996.\nThe Drakens were retired in 2005 and 12 F-5E Tiger II were leased from Switzerland to avoid a gap in the Austrian air defence capabilities until the first Austrian Eurofighter Typhoon units became operational in 2007. Besides one squadron of 15 Eurofighter Typhoons, the air force has a squadron with 28 Saab 105 trainers, which double as reconnaissance and close air support planes.\nThe helicopter fleet includes 23 AB 212 helicopters used as light transport. 24 French Alouette III are in service as search-and-rescue helicopters. Furthermore, the air force fields 10 OH-58B Kiowa as light scout helicopters. After Austria had to request assistance from the United States Army, Swiss Air Force, French Air Force, and German Bundeswehr to evacuate survivors after the 1999 Galt\u00fcr Avalanche a decision was taken to equip the Austrian Air Force with medium-sized transport helicopters. Thus in 2002 Austria acquired 9 UH-60 Black Hawk helicopters. In 2003 the air force received 3 C-130K Hercules transport aircraft to support the armed forces in their UN peacekeeping and humanitarian activities.\nSpecial Operations Forces.\nThe Jagdkommando (lit. \"Hunting Command\") is the Austrian Armed Forces' Special Operations group. The duties of this elite unit match those of its foreign counterparts, such as the United States Army Special Forces and British Special Air Service being amongst others counter-terrorism and counter-insurgency. Jagdkommando soldiers are highly trained professionals whose thorough and rigorous training enables them to take over when tasks or situations outgrow the capabilities and specialization of conventional units.\nConscription, training and reserves.\nUntil 1971, Austrian males were obligated to serve nine months in the armed forces, followed by four days of active service every two years for training and inspection. In 1971 the period of initial service was reduced to six months, followed by a total of sixty days of refresher training in the reserves. In the early 1990s, about 45,000 conscripts completed their initial military training every year, and 80,000 reservists participated in some form of exercises each year.\nReducing the mobilization strength of the army to 120,000 under the New Army Structure plan is to be accomplished in part by limiting initial training of recruits to six months, followed by reducing the period allotted for refresher training from twenty years to ten years. Each reservist is to receive training over a twelve-day period every second year during his first ten years of reserve duty, generally not extending beyond the time he reaches his mid-thirties. The reduced need for conscripts corresponds to a lower pool of young men because of a declining birth rate. The availability of about 40,000 fit trainees annually in 1993 was expected to fall to barely 30,000 by 2000 and to 26,000 by 2015.\nIn 2006 conscription was reduced to six months total. Mandatory reserve training was abolished. Since then the army reserve battalions (Miliz) are suffering from a lack of new reservists and are therefore overaging.\nUnder a 1974 law, conscientious objectors can be assigned work as medical orderlies, or other occupations in lieu of military service. Exemptions from service are liberally granted\u2014in 1992 about 12,000 persons were exempted, a great increase over the 1991 total of 4,500. The increase occurred after a new law, valid only for 1992 and 1993, no longer required young men to present their objections to the military in a credible way. Previously, that had not been the case. In 1990, for example, two young men rejected by the alternate service commission on the grounds that they did not present their beliefs in a credible manner were sentenced to prison terms of three months and one month, respectively.\nConscripts may attain the rank of private first class by the completion of initial training. Those with leadership potential may serve a longer period to obtain noncommissioned officer (NCO) status in the militia. Those volunteering for the career service can, after three to four years, apply to attend the NCO academy and later a senior NCO course to qualify as warrant officers. Both regular and militia officer candidates undergo a one-year program of basic training. After a further three years, regular officer candidates attending the military academy at Wiener Neustadt and militia officer candidates undergoing periodic intensified refresher training qualify as second lieutenants. The reserve obligation of conscripts generally ends by the time they reach their mid-thirties; NCOs and officers usually end their reserve status at a later age depending on their rank and specialization. By the early 1990s, some 1.3 million men had completed their initial service and refresher training obligations and had no further active-duty commitment.\nThe military personnel system is an integral part of a comprehensive civil service system. The nine officer ranks from officer candidate through general correspond to grades I through IX of the civil service system. The highest grade, IX, may be occupied by a section chief (undersecretary), a career ambassador, or a three-star general. A grade VIII position may be held by a departmental counselor, a career minister, or a brigadier general. Salary levels are the same for both civil and military personnel in the equivalent grades, although various allowances may be added, such as flight pay or hazardous-duty pay.\nThe system of promotion in the Austrian military, which offers no incentive for early retirement, means that the military is top-heavy with senior officers. The New Army Structure, which is intended to result in many fewer active-duty and reserve commands, compounds the difficulty. Personnel changes can be implemented only gradually, as the surplus of officers shrinks by attrition. In 1991, the army had four officers of general rank, fifty-nine at the rank of brigadier general (one star), 155 colonels, and 254 lieutenant colonels. The education of career officers is conducted at the Maria Theresia Military Academy at Wiener Neustadt, forty-five kilometres south of Vienna, which was founded in 1752. Young men who have completed their university entrance requirements are eligible to compete for places. The three-year course graduated 212 students in 1990. At the National Defence Academy in Vienna, which has a curriculum comparable to those of the National Defence University and the Army War College in the United States, operational and troop commanders of field-grade rank study for three years in preparation for general staff and command positions. The NCO school is located at Enns near Linz. Troop schools provide continuous specialized courses for officers and NCOs in artillery, air defence, armour, combat engineering, communications, and the like.\nIn 1998 the Austrian government approved women's membership in the Austrian Armed Forces. All service branches are open for female volunteers. In a public opinion survey in 1988, about 66 percent of those polled approved of opening the military to voluntary service by women; only nine percent favoured obligatory service.\nEquipment.\nThe Austrian military has a wide variety of equipment. Recently, Austria has spent considerable amounts of money modernizing its military arsenal. Leopard 2 main battle tanks, Ulan and Pandur infantry fighting vehicles, C-130 Hercules transport planes, S-70 Black Hawk utility helicopters, and Eurofighter Typhoon multi-purpose combat aircraft have been purchased, along with new helicopters to replace the inadequate ones used after the 1999 Galt\u00fcr Avalanche.\nInternational operations.\nCurrently (2024) there are forces in:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nTraditions.\nSome of the traditions of the old Austro-Hungarian Army continue to be carried on in . For example, the most famous regiment in the Bundesheer is the \"Hoch und Deutschmeister Regiment\", now known as J\u00e4gerbataillon Wien 1 based in \"Maria Theresien Kaserne\", named after Empress Maria Theresa of Austria. Also nearly every other regiment of the Bundesheer carries on traditions of the famous Austro-Hungarian regiments like \"Kaiserj\u00e4ger\", \"Rainer\", etc.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "67550", "revid": "2214", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=67550", "title": "Transnational issues of Austria", "text": ""}
{"id": "67551", "revid": "42778291", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=67551", "title": "Geography of the Bahamas", "text": "The Bahamas are a group of about 700 islands and cays in the western Atlantic Ocean, of which only between 30 and 40 are inhabited. The largest of the islands is Andros Island, located north of Cuba and southeast of Florida. The Bimini islands are to its northwest. To the North is the island of Grand Bahama, home to the second-largest city in the country, Freeport. The island of Great Abaco is to its east. In the far south is the island of Great Inagua, the second-largest island in the country. Other notable islands include Eleuthera, Cat Island, San Salvador Island, Acklins, Crooked Island, and Mayaguana. Nassau is the capital and largest city, located on New Providence. The islands have a tropical savannah climate, moderated by the Gulf Stream. The total size is . Due to the many widespread islands it has the 41st largest Exclusive Economic Zone of .\nThe islands are surface projections of two oceanic Bahama Banks - the Little Bahama Bank and the Great Bahama Bank. The highest point is only above sea level on Cat Island; the island of New Providence, where the capital city of Nassau is located, reaches a maximum elevation of only thirty-seven meters. The land on the Bahamas has a foundation of fossil coral, but much of the rock is oolitic limestone; the stone is derived from the disintegration of coral reefs and seashells. The land is primarily either rocky or mangrove swamp. Low scrub covers much of the surface area. Pineyards are found on four of the northern islands: Grand Bahama, Great Abaco, New Providence, and Andros. On some of the southern islands, low-growing tropical hardwood flourishes. Although some soil is very fertile, it is also very thin. Only a few freshwater lakes and just one river, located on Andros Island, are found in the Bahamas.\nClimate.\nThe climate of the Bahama islands is mostly tropical savanna, with two seasons, a hot and wet summer (wet season) and dry winter (dry season).\nDuring the wet season, which extends from May through October, the climate is dominated by warm, moist tropical air masses as the Bermuda High brings a southeasterly flow from the deep tropics. Daily high temperatures are in the range, with a dew point temperatures in the range, creating the typical hot and sultry island weather. Brief but intense thundershowers are common with thunder and lightning. In the wet season, tropical storms and weak tropical lows may also contribute to the seasonal rainfall.\nIn the dry season, extending from November through April, the subtropical high retreats, and a mix of drier northeast trade winds and occasional westerlies coming down from the North American mainland impact the Bahamas. Sunny, arid conditions prevail in the Bahamas in the dry season, and at times drought conditions can impact farming and agriculture. High temperatures during the dry season are in the range.\nAnnual rainfall averages and is usually concentrated in the May\u2013June and September\u2013October periods. Rainfall often occurs in short-lived, fairly intense, but brief thundershowers accompanied by strong gusty winds, followed by a return to clear skies.\nWinds are predominantly easterly throughout the year but tend to become northeasterly from October to April and southeasterly from May to September. These winds seldom exceed twenty-four kilometres per hour except during hurricane season. Although the hurricane season officially lasts from June to November, most hurricanes in the Bahamas occur between July and October. The strongest storm to strike the country was Hurricane Andrew in 1992, until Hurricane Dorian struck in 2019. Damage was estimated at US$250 million and mainly affected agricultural products.\nThe most intense hurricane to strike the Bahamas was Hurricane Dorian in 2019, with wind gusts of up to being recorded. 84 people died (74 of whom were from the Bahamas), and there was catastrophic damage to buildings, homes, and boats, and sometimes complete destruction. Preliminary damage estimates are in the US$7 billion range.\nClimate change.\nClimate change is causing temperature increases in the Bahamas. The average temperature has increased by approximately 0.5\u00a0\u00b0C since 1960. The rate of the temperature increase varies seasonally, with average daily maximum temperatures for July recently increasing at a rate of 2.6\u00a0\u00b0C per 100 years. Global temperature rise of 2\u00a0\u00b0C above preindustrial levels can increase the likelihood of extreme hurricane rainfall by four to five times in the Bahamas. The IPCC expects the 20-year average global temperature to exceed +1.5\u00a0\u00b0C in the early 2030s.\nThe Bahamas is expected to be highly affected by sea level rise because at least 80% of the total land is below 10 meters elevation. As a small island developing state, the Bahamas is vulnerable to escalating disease outbreaks, and climate change could affect the seasonality of outbreaks and transmission of disease.\nAlthough the country's greenhouse gas emissions are comparatively small (2.94 million tonnes of green house gases emitted in 2023), the Bahamas is reliant on imported fossil fuels for energy generation. The government plans to increase solar energy capacity to 30% of the country's total energy production by 2033. The Bahamas has pledged to reduce its emissions by 30% by 2030, if international support is received.\nGeography.\nLocation.\nAtlantic Ocean, chain islands in the North Atlantic Ocean, southeast of Florida, northeast of Cuba and northwest of the Turks and Caicos Islands.\nGeographic coordinates (capital city Nassau): 25\u00b04\u2032N 77\u00b020\u2032W\n\"county comparison to the world:\" 161\nLand.\nLandforms.\nAs an island nation, the Bahamas is made up of numerous archipelagos, beaches, straits, blue holes, and other landforms. The tallest mountain is Mount Alvernia, at only 207 feet above sea level. Notable bodies of water include Dean's Blue Hole, Lake Rosa, and the Goose River. The Bahamas also contains many creeks.\nEnvironment.\nForests.\nIn the Bahamas forest cover is around 51% of the total land area, equivalent to 509,860 hectares (ha) of forest in 2020, which was unchanged from 1990. In 2020, naturally regenerating forest covered 509,860 hectares (ha) and planted forest covered 0 hectares (ha). Of the naturally regenerating forest 0% was reported to be primary forest (consisting of native tree species with no clearly visible indications of human activity) and around 0% of the forest area was found within protected areas. For the year 2015, 80% of the forest area was reported to be under public ownership, 20% private ownership and 0% with ownership listed as other or unknown.\nEnvironment - International agreements.\nParty to these agreements: \nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "67552", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=67552", "title": "Geography of Bahamas", "text": ""}
{"id": "67554", "revid": "22604547", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=67554", "title": "Invasive species", "text": "Non-native organism causing damage to an established environment\nAn invasive species is an introduced species that harms its new environment. Invasive species adversely affect habitats and bioregions, causing ecological, environmental, and/or economic damage. Since the 20th century, invasive species have become serious economic, social, and environmental threats worldwide.\nInvasion of long-established ecosystems by organisms is a natural phenomenon, but human-facilitated introductions have greatly increased the rate, scale, and geographic range of invasion. For millennia, humans have served as both accidental and deliberate dispersal agents, beginning with their earliest migrations, accelerating in the Age of Discovery, and accelerating again with the spread of international trade. Notable invasive plant species include the kudzu vine, giant hogweed (\"Heracleum mantegazzianum\"), Japanese knotweed (\"Reynoutria japonica\"), and yellow starthistle (\"Centaurea solstitialis\"). Notable invasive animals include European rabbits (\"Oryctolagus cuniculus\"), domestic cats (\"Felis catus\"), and carp (family Cyprinidae).\nTerminology.\nInvasive species are the subset of established non-native alien or naturalized species that are a threat to native species and biodiversity. The term \"invasive\" is poorly defined and often very subjective. Invasive species may be plants, animals, fungi, and microbes; some include native species that have invaded human habitats such as farms and landscapes. Some broaden the term to include indigenous or \"native\" species that have colonized natural areas. Some sources name \"Homo sapiens\" as an invasive species, but broad appreciation of human learning capacity and their behavioral potential and plasticity may argue against any such fixed categorization. The definition of \"native\" can also be controversial. For example, the ancestors of modern horses (\"Equus ferus)\" evolved in North America and radiated to Eurasia before becoming extinct in North America. Upon being introduced to North America in 1493 by Spanish conquistadors, it is debatable whether the feral horses were native or exotic to the continent of their evolutionary ancestors.\nWhile invasive species can be studied within many subfields of biology, most research on invasive organisms has been in ecology and biogeography. Much of the work has been influenced by Charles Elton's 1958 book \"The Ecology of Invasion by Animals and Plants\" which creates a generalized picture of biological invasions. Studies remained sparse until the 1990s. This research, largely field observational studies, has disproportionately been concerned with terrestrial plants. The rapid growth of the field has driven a need to standardize the language used to describe invasive species and events. Despite this, little standard terminology exists. The field lacks any official designation but is commonly referred to as \"invasion ecology\" or more generally \"invasion biology\". This lack of standard terminology has arisen due to the interdisciplinary nature of the field, which borrows terms from disciplines such as agriculture, zoology, and pathology, as well as due to studies being performed in isolation.\nIn an attempt to avoid the ambiguous, subjective, and pejorative vocabulary that so often accompanies discussion of invasive species even in scientific papers, Colautti and MacIsaac proposed a new nomenclature system based on biogeography rather than on taxa. By discarding taxonomy, human health, and economic factors, this model focused only on ecological factors. The model evaluated individual populations rather than entire species. It classified each population based on its success in that environment. This model applied equally to indigenous and to introduced species, and did not automatically categorize successful introductions as harmful.\nThe USDA's National Invasive Species Information Center defines invasive species very narrowly. According to Executive Order 13112, \"'Invasive species' means an alien species whose introduction does or is likely to cause economic or environmental harm or harm to human health.\"\nCauses.\nTypically, an introduced species must persist at low population densities before it can become invasive in a new environment. At low densities, introduced species often face difficulties in reproducing and sustaining a viable population\u2014sometimes requiring multiple introductions before establishment occurs. Patterns of repeated human movement, such as ship traffic between ports or vehicles travelling along major highways, can create recurring opportunities for arrival and establishment, a phenomenon known as high propagule pressure.\nEcosystem-based mechanisms.\nIn ecosystems, the availability of resources determines the impact of additional species on the ecosystem. Stable ecosystems have a resource equilibrium, which can be changed fundamentally by the arrival of invasive species. When changes such as a forest fire occur, normal ecological succession favors native grasses and forbs. An introduced species that can spread faster than natives can outcompete native species for food, squeezing the natives out. Nitrogen and phosphorus are often the limiting factors in these situations. Every species occupies an ecological niche in its native ecosystem; some species fill large and varied roles, while others are highly specialized. Invading species may occupy unused niches, or create new ones. For example, edge effects describe what happens when part of an ecosystem is disturbed, as in when land is cleared for agriculture. The boundary between the remaining undisturbed habitat and the newly cleared land itself forms a distinct new habitat, creating new winners and losers, and potentially hosting species that would not otherwise thrive outside the boundary habitat.\nIn 1958, Charles S. Elton claimed that ecosystems with higher species diversity were less subject to invasive species because fewer niches remained unoccupied. Other ecologists later pointed to highly diverse, but heavily invaded ecosystems, arguing that ecosystems with high species diversity were more susceptible to invasion. This debate hinged on the spatial scale of invasion studies. Small-scale studies tended to show a negative relationship between diversity and invasion, while large-scale studies tended to show the reverse, perhaps a side-effect of invasives' ability to capitalize on increased resource availability and weaker species interactions that are more common when larger samples are considered. However, this pattern does not seem to hold true for invasive vertebrates.\nIsland ecosystems may be more prone to invasion because their species face few strong competitors and predators, and because their distance from colonizing species populations makes them more likely to have \"open\" niches. For example, native bird populations on Guam have been decimated by the invasive brown tree snake (\"Boiga irregularis\").\nIn New Zealand the first invasive species were the dogs and rats brought by Polynesian settlers around 1300. These and other introductions devastated endemic New Zealand species. The colonization of Madagascar brought similar harm to its ecosystems. Logging has caused harm directly by destroying habitat, and has allowed non-native species such as prickly pear (\"Opuntia\") and silver wattle (\"Acacia dealbata\") to invade. The water hyacinth (\"Pontederia crassipes\") forms dense mats on water surfaces, limiting light penetration and hence harming aquatic organisms, and creating substantial management costs. The shrub lantana (\"Lantana camara\") is now considered invasive in over 60 countries, and has invaded large geographies in several countries prompting aggressive federal efforts to control it.\nPrimary geomorphological effects of invasive plants are bioconstruction and bioprotection. For example, kudzu (\"Pueraria montana\"), a vine native to Asia, was widely introduced in the southeastern United States in the early 20th century to control soil erosion. The primary geomorphological effects of invasive animals are bioturbation, bioerosion, and bioconstruction. For example, invasions of the Chinese mitten crab (\"Eriocheir sinensis\") have resulted in higher bioturbation and bioerosion rates.\nA native species can also become harmful and effectively invasive to its native environment after human alterations to its food web. This has been the case with the purple sea urchin (\"Strongylocentrotus purpuratus\"), which has decimated kelp forests along the northern California coast due to overharvesting of its natural predator, the California sea otter (\"Enhydra lutris\").\nSpecies-based mechanisms.\nInvasive species appear to have specific traits or specific combinations of traits that allow them to outcompete native species. In some cases, these characteristics include rates of growth and reproduction. In other cases, invasive species interact with native species other more directly. One study found that 86% of invasive species could be identified from such traits alone. Another study found that invasive species often had only a few of the traits, and that noninvasive species had these also. Common invasive species traits include fast growth and rapid reproduction, such as vegetative reproduction in plants; association with humans; and prior successful invasions. Domestic cats (\"Felis catus\") are effective predators of wildlife. They have become feral and invasive in places such as the Florida Keys.\nAn introduced species might become invasive if it can outcompete native species for resources. If these species evolved under great competition or predation, then the new environment may host fewer able competitors, allowing the invader to proliferate. Ecosystems used to their fullest capacity by native species can be modeled as zero-sum systems, in which any gain for the invader is a loss for the native. However, such unilateral competitive superiority (and extinction of native species with increased populations of the invader) is not the rule.\nAn invasive species might be able to use resources previously unavailable to native species, such as deep water accessed by a long taproot, or to live on previously uninhabited soil types. For example, barbed goatgrass (\"Aegilops triuncialis\") was introduced to California on serpentine soils, which have low water-retention, low nutrient levels, a high magnesium/calcium ratio, and possible heavy metal toxicity. Plant populations on these soils tend to show low density, but goatgrass can form dense stands on these soils and crowd out native species.\nInvasive species may also alter their environment by releasing chemical compounds, modifying abiotic factors, or affecting the behavior of herbivores, all of which can impact other species. Some, like mother of thousands (\"Kalanchoe daigremontana\"), produce allelopathic compounds that inhibit competitors. Others like the toad plant (\"Stapelia gigantea)\" facilitate the growth of seedlings of other species in arid environments by providing appropriate microclimates and preventing herbivores from eating seedlings.\nChanges in fire regimens are another form of facilitation. Cheatgrass (\"Bromus tectorum\")\",\" originally from Eurasia, is highly fire-adapted. It spreads rapidly after burning, and increases the frequency and intensity of fires by providing large amounts of dry detritus during the fire season in western North America. Where it is widespread, it has altered the local fire regimen so much that native plants cannot survive the frequent fires, allowing it to become dominant in its introduced range.\nEcological facilitation occurs where one species, including invasive species, physically modifies a habitat in ways advantageous to other species. For example, zebra mussels (\"Dreissena polymorpha\") increase habitat complexity on lake floors, providing crevices in which invertebrates live. This increase in complexity, together with the nutrition provided by the waste products of mussel filter-feeding, increases the density and diversity of benthic invertebrate communities.\nIntroduced species may spread rapidly and unpredictably. When bottlenecks and founder effects cause a great decrease in the population size and may constrict genetic variation, individuals begin to show additive variance as opposed to epistatic variance. This conversion can lead to increased variance in the founding populations, which permits rapid evolution. Selection may then act on the capacity to disperse as well as on physiological tolerance to new stressors in the environment, such as changed temperature and different predators and prey.\nRapid adaptive evolution through intraspecific phenotypic plasticity, pre-adaptation, and post-introduction evolution lead to offspring that have higher fitness. Critically, plasticity permits changes to better suit the individual to its environment. Pre-adaptations and evolution after the introduction reinforce the success of the introduced species.\nThe enemy release hypothesis states that evolution leads to ecological balance in every ecosystem. No single species can occupy a majority of an ecosystem due to the presences of competitors, predators, and diseases. Introduced species moved to a novel habitat can become invasive, with rapid population growth, when these controls do not exist in the new ecosystem.\nVectors.\nNon-native species have many vectors, but most are associated with human activity. Natural range extensions are common, but humans often carry specimens faster and over greater distances than natural forces. An early human vector occurred when prehistoric humans introduced the Pacific rat (\"Rattus exulans\") to Polynesia.\nVectors include plants or seeds imported for horticulture. The pet trade moves animals across borders, where they can escape and become invasive. Organisms may also stow away on transport vehicles. Incidental human assisted transfer is the main cause of introductions\u00a0\u2013 other than in polar regions. Diseases may be vectored by invasive insects: the Asian citrus psyllid (\"Diaphorina citri\") carries the bacterial disease citrus greening. The arrival of invasive propagules to a new site is a function of the site's invasibility.\nMany invasive species, once they are dominant in the area, become essential to the ecosystem of that area, and their removal could be harmful. Economics plays a major role in exotic species introduction. High demand for the valuable Chinese mitten crab is one explanation for the possible intentional release of the species in foreign waters.\nWithin the aquatic environment.\nMaritime trade has rapidly affected the way marine organisms are transported within the ocean; new means of species transport include hull fouling and ballast water transport. In fact, Molnar et al. 2008 documented the pathways of hundreds of marine invasive species and found that shipping was the dominant mechanism for the transfer of invasive species.\nMany marine organisms can attach themselves to vessel hulls. Such organisms are easily transported from one body of water to another, and are a significant risk factor for a biological invasion event. Controlling for vessel hull fouling is voluntary and there are no regulations currently in place to manage hull fouling. However, the governments of California and New Zealand have announced more stringent control for vessel hull fouling within their respective jurisdictions.\nAnother vector of non-native aquatic species is ballast water taken up at sea and released in port by transoceanic vessels. Some 10,000 species are transported via ballast water each day. Many of these are harmful. For example, freshwater zebra mussels (\"Dreissena polymorpha\") from Eurasia most likely reached the Great Lakes via ballast water. The mussels outcompete native organisms for oxygen and food, and can be transported in the small puddle left in a supposedly empty ballast tank. Regulations attempt to mitigate such risks, not always successfully.\nClimate change is causing an increase in ocean temperature. These changes to the environment in turn cause range shifts in organisms, creating new species interactions. For example, organisms in a ballast tank of a ship traveling from the temperate zone through tropical waters may experience temperature fluctuations as much as 20\u00a0\u00b0C. Heat challenges during transport may enhance the stress tolerance of species in their non-native range, by selecting for genotypes that will survive a second applied heat stress, such as increased ocean temperature in the founder population.\nEffects of wildfire and firefighting.\nInvasive species often exploit disturbances to an ecosystem (wildfires, roads, foot trails) to colonize an area. Large wildfires can sterilize soils, while adding nutrients. \nInvasive plants that can regenerate from their roots then have an advantage over natives that rely on seeds for propagation.\nAdverse effects.\nInvasive species can affect the invaded habitats and bioregions adversely, causing ecological, environmental, or economic damage.\nEcological.\nThe European Union defines \"Invasive Alien Species\" as those that are outside their natural distribution area, and that threaten biological diversity. Biotic invasion is one of the five top drivers for global biodiversity loss, and is increasing because of tourism and globalization. This may be particularly true in inadequately regulated fresh water systems, though quarantines and ballast water rules have improved the situation.\nInvasive species may drive local native species to extinction via competitive exclusion, niche displacement, or hybridization with related native species. Therefore, besides their economic ramifications, alien invasions may result in extensive changes in the structure, composition and global distribution of the biota at sites of introduction, leading ultimately to the homogenization of the world's fauna and flora and the loss of biodiversity. It is difficult to unequivocally attribute extinctions to a species invasion, though for example there is strong evidence that the extinction of about 90 amphibian species was caused by the chytrid fungus (\"Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis\") spread by international trade.\nMultiple successive introductions of different non-native species can worsen the total effect, as with the introductions of the amethyst gem clam (\"Gemma gemma\") and the European green crab (\"Carcinus maenas\"). The gem clam was introduced into California's Bodega Harbor from the US East Coast a century ago. On its own, it did not displace native clams (\"Nutricola\" spp.). However, in the mid-1990s, the introduction of the European green crab resulted in an increase of the amethyst gem at the expense of the native clams. In India, multiple invasive plants have invaded 66% of natural areas, reducing the densities of native forage plants, declining the habitat-use by wild herbivores and threatening the long-term sustenance of dependent carnivores, including tigers.\nInvasive species can change the functions of ecosystems. For example, invasive plants can alter the fire regime (cheatgrass, \"Bromus tectorum\"), nutrient cycling (smooth cordgrass, \"Spartina alterniflora\"), and hydrology (\"Tamarix\") in native ecosystems. Invasive species that are closely related to rare native species have the potential to hybridize with the native species. Harmful effects of hybridization have led to a decline and even extinction of native species. For example, hybridization with introduced cordgrass threatens the existence of California cordgrass (\"Spartina foliosa\") in San Francisco Bay. Invasive species cause competition for native species, and because of this 400 of the 958 endangered species under the Endangered Species Act are at risk.\nThe unintentional introduction of forest pest species and plant pathogens can change forest ecology and damage the timber industry. Overall, forest ecosystems in the U.S. are widely invaded by exotic pests, plants, and pathogens.\nThe Asian long-horned beetle (\"Anoplophora glabripennis\") was first introduced into the U.S. in 1996, and was expected to infect and damage millions of acres of hardwood trees. As of 2005 thirty million dollars had been spent in attempts to eradicate this pest and protect millions of trees in the affected regions. The woolly adelgid (\"Adelges tsugae\") has inflicted damage on old-growth spruce, fir and hemlock forests and damages the Christmas tree industry. Chestnut blight (\"Cryphonectria parasitica\") and Dutch elm disease (Ascomycota) are plant pathogens with serious impacts. Garlic mustard (\"Alliaria petiolata)\" is one of the most problematic invasive plant species in eastern North American forests, where it is highly invasive of the understory, reducing the growth rate of tree seedlings and threatening to modify the forest's tree composition.\nNative species can be threatened with extinction through the process of genetic pollution. Genetic pollution is unintentional hybridization and introgression, which leads to homogenization or replacement of local genotypes as a result of either a numerical or fitness advantage of the introduced species. Genetic pollution occurs either through introduction or through habitat modification, where previously isolated species are brought into contact with the new genotypes. Invading species have been shown to adapt to their new environments in a remarkably short amount of time. The population size of invading species may remain small for a number of years and then experience an explosion in population, a phenomenon known as \"the lag effect\".\nHybrids resulting from invasive species interbreeding with native species can incorporate their genotypes into the gene pool over time through introgression. Similarly, in some instances a small invading population can threaten much larger native populations. For example, cordgrass (\"Spartina alterniflora)\" was introduced in the San Francisco Bay and hybridized with native \"California cordgrass (Spartina foliosa).\" The higher pollen count and male fitness of the invading species resulted in introgression that threatened the native populations due to lower pollen counts and lower viability of the native species. Reduction in fitness is not always apparent from morphological observations alone. Some degree of gene flow is normal, and preserves constellations of genes and genotypes. An example of this is the interbreeding of migrating coyotes (\"Canis latrans\") with the critically endangered red wolf (\"Canis rufus\"), in areas of eastern North Carolina where the red wolf was reintroduced, reducing wolf numbers.\nEnvironmental.\nIn South Africa's Cape Town region, analysis demonstrated that the restoration of priority source water sub-catchments through the removal of thirsty alien plant invasions (such as Australian acacias, pines, eucalyptus, and Australian black wattle) would generate expected annual water gains of 50 billion liters within 5 years compared to the business-as-usual scenario (which is important as Cape Town experiences significant water scarcity). This is the equivalent to one-sixth of the city's current supply needs. These annual gains will double within 30 years. The catchment restoration is significantly more cost-effective then other water augmentation solutions (1/10 the unit cost of alternative options). A water fund has been established, and these exotic species are being eradicated.\nHuman health.\nInvasive species can affect human health. With the alteration in ecosystem functionality (due to homogenization of biota communities), invasive species have resulted in negative effects on human well-being, which includes reduced resource availability, unrestrained spread of human diseases, recreational and educational activities, and tourism. Alien species have caused diseases including human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), monkey pox, and severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS).\nInvasive species and accompanying control efforts can have long term public health implications. For instance, pesticides applied to treat a particular pest species could pollute soil and surface water. Encroachment of humans into previously remote ecosystems has exposed exotic diseases such as HIV to the wider population. Introduced birds (e.g. pigeons), rodents, and insects (e.g. mosquito, flea, louse and tsetse fly pests) can serve as vectors and reservoirs of human afflictions. Throughout recorded history, epidemics of human diseases, such as malaria, yellow fever, typhus, and bubonic plague, spread via these vectors. A recent example of an introduced disease is the spread of the West Nile virus, which killed humans, birds, mammals, and reptiles. The introduced Chinese mitten crabs (\"Eriocheir sinensis\") are carriers of Asian lung fluke. Waterborne disease agents, such as cholera bacteria (\"Vibrio cholerae\"), and causative agents of harmful algal blooms are often transported via ballast water.\nEconomic.\nGlobally, invasive species management and control are substantial economic burdens, with expenditures reaching approximately $1.4 trillion annually. The economic impact of invasive alien species alone was estimated to exceed $423 billion annually as of 2019. This cost has exhibited a significant increase, quadrupling every decade since 1970, underscoring the escalating financial implications of these biological invasions.\nInvasive species contribute to ecological degradation, altering ecosystem functionality and reducing the services ecosystems provide. This necessitates additional expenditures to control the spread of biological invasions, mitigate further impacts, and restore affected ecosystems. For example, the damage caused by 79 invasive species between 1906 and 1991 in the United States has been estimated at US$120 billion. Similarly, in China, invasive species have been reported to reduce the country's gross domestic product (GDP) by 1.36% per year.\nThe management of biological invasions can be costly. In Australia, for instance, the expense to monitor, control, manage, and research invasive weed species is approximately AU$116.4 million per year, with costs directed solely to central and local governments.\nWhile in some cases, invasive species may offer economic benefits, such as the potential for commercial forestry from invasive trees, these benefits are generally overshadowed by the substantial costs associated with biological invasions. In most cases, the economic returns from invasive species are far less than the costs they impose.\nUnited States.\nIn the Great Lakes region the sea lamprey (\"Petromyzon marinus\") is an invasive species. In its original habitat, it had co-evolved as a parasite that did not kill its host. However, in the Great Lakes region, it acts as a predator and can consume up to 40 pounds of fish in its 12\u201318 month feeding period. Sea lampreys prey on all types of large fish such as lake trout (\"Salvelinus namaycush\") and salmon. The sea lampreys' destructive effects on large fish negatively affect the fishing industry and have helped cause the collapse of the population of some species.\nEconomic costs from invasive species can be separated into direct costs through production loss in agriculture and forestry, and management costs. Estimated damage and control costs of invasive species in the U.S. amount to more than $138\u00a0billion annually. Economic losses can occur through loss of recreational and tourism revenues. When economic costs of invasions are calculated as production loss and management costs, they are low because they do not consider environmental damage; if monetary values were assigned to the extinction of species, loss in biodiversity, and loss of ecosystem services, costs from impacts of invasive species would drastically increase. It is often argued that the key to invasive species management is early detection and rapid response. However, early response only helps when the invasive species is not frequently reintroduced into the managed area, and the cost of response is affordable.\nWeeds reduce yield in agriculture. Many weeds are accidental introductions that accompany imports of commercial seeds and plants. Introduced weeds in pastures compete with native forage plants, threaten young cattle (e.g., leafy spurge, \"Euphorbia virgata\") or are unpalatable because of thorns and spines (e.g., yellow starthistle, \"Centaurea solstitialis\"). Forage loss from invasive weeds on pastures amounts to nearly US$1\u00a0billion in the U.S. A decline in pollinator services and loss of fruit production has been caused by honey bees (\"Apis mellifera\") infected by the invasive varroa mite (\"Varroa destructor\"). Introduced rats (\"Rattus rattus\" and \"R. norvegicus\") have become serious pests on farms, destroying stored grains. The introduction of leaf miner flies (Agromyzidae), including the American serpentine leaf miner (\"Liriomyza trifolii\"), to California has caused losses in California's floriculture industry, as the larvae of these invasive species feed on ornamental plants.\nInvasive plant pathogens and insect vectors for plant diseases can suppress agricultural yields and harm nursery stock. Citrus greening is a bacterial disease vectored by the invasive Asian citrus psyllid (\"Diaphorina citri\"). As a result, citrus is under quarantine and highly regulated in areas where the psyllid has been found.\nInvasive species can impact outdoor recreation, such as fishing, hunting, hiking, wildlife viewing, and water-based activities. They can damage environmental services including water quality, plant and animal diversity, and species abundance, though the extent of this is under-researched. Eurasian watermilfoil (\"Myriophyllum spicatum\") in parts of the US, fills lakes with plants, complicating fishing and boating. The loud call of the introduced common coqui (\"Eleutherodactylus coqui\") depresses real estate values in affected neighborhoods of Hawaii. The large webs of the orb-weaving spider (\"Zygiella x-notata\"), invasive in California, disrupts garden work.\nEurope.\nThe overall economic cost of invasive alien species in Europe between 1960 and 2020 has been estimated at around US$140 billion (including potential costs that may or may not have actually materialized) or US$78 billion (only including observed costs known to have materialized). These estimates are very conservative. Models based on these data suggest a true \"annual\" cost of around US$140 billion in 2020.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Visible anchor/styles.css\" /&gt;Italyis one of the most invaded countries in Europe, with an estimate of more than 3,000 alien species. The impacts of invasive alien species on the economy has been wide-ranging, from management costs, to loss of crops, to infrastructure damage. The overall economic cost of invasions to Italy between 1990 and 2020 was estimated at US$819.76 million (EUR\u20ac704.78 million). However, only 15 recorded species have more reliably estimated costs, hence the actual cost may be much larger than the aforementioned sum.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Visible anchor/styles.css\" /&gt;Francehas an estimated minimum of 2,750 introduced and invasive alien species. Renault et al. (2021) obtained 1,583 cost records for 98 invasive alien species and found that they caused a conservative total cost between US$1.2 billion and 11.5 billion over the period 1993\u20132018. This study extrapolated costs for species invading France, but for which costs were reported only in other countries but not in France, which yielded an additional cost ranging from US$151 million to $3.03 billion. Damage costs were nearly eight times higher than management expenditure. Insects, and in particular the Asian tiger mosquito (\"Aedes albopictus\") and the yellow fever mosquito (\"A. aegypti\"), created the highest economic costs, followed by non-graminoid terrestrial flowering and aquatic plants (\"Ambrosia artemisiifolia\", \"Ludwigia\" sp. and \"Lagarosiphon major\"). Over 90% of alien species currently recorded in France had no costs reported in the literature, resulting in high biases in taxonomic, regional and activity sector coverages. However, the lack of reports does not mean there are no negative consequences or costs.\nFavorable effects.\nThe entomologist Chris D. Thomas argues that most introduced species are neutral or beneficial with respect to other species but this is a minority opinion. The scientific community ubiquitously considers their effects on biodiversity to be negative. Others point out that that conservation and restoration projects can have fascist principles behind them. Some, like environmental journalist Fred Pearce, take a more philosophical stance on certain conservation paths, claiming that those \"who want to cosset nature like a delicate flower, to protect it from the threat of alien species, are the ethnic cleansers of nature, neutralizing the forces that they should be promoting.\" Emma Marris points out that, the \"only way to really stop life from changing is to kill it.\" Indigenous communities have often incorporated introduced species, such as the banana tree to the Americas, into their traditional diets and kinships.\nSome invasive species can provide a suitable habitat or food source for other organisms. In areas where a native has become extinct or reached a point that it cannot be restored, non-native species can fill their role. For instance, in the US, the endangered southwestern willow flycatcher (\"Empidonax traillii\") mainly nests in the non-native tamarisk. \nThe introduced mesquite (\"Neltuma juliflora\") is an aggressive invasive species in India, but is the preferred nesting site of native waterbirds in small cities like Udaipur in Rajasthan. Similarly, Ridgway's rail (\"Rallus obsoletus\") has adapted to the invasive hybrid of \"Spartina alterniflora\" and \"Spartina foliosa\", which offers better cover and nesting habitat. In Australia, saltwater crocodiles (\"Crocodylus porosus\"), which had become endangered, have recovered by feeding on introduced feral pigs (\"Sus domesticus\").\nNon-native species can act as catalysts for restoration, increasing the heterogeneity and biodiversity in an ecosystem. This can create microclimates in sparse and eroded ecosystems, promoting the growth and reestablishment of native species. For example, in Kenya, guava trees in farmland are attractive to many fruit-eating birds, which drop seeds from rainforest trees as much as away beneath the guavas, encouraging forest regeneration.\nNon-native species can provide ecosystem services, functioning as biocontrol agents to limit the effects of invasive agricultural pests. Asian oysters, for example, filter water pollutants better than native oysters in Chesapeake Bay. Some species have invaded an area so long ago that they are considered to have naturalised there. For example, the sweat bee (\"Lasioglossum leucozonium)\", shown by population genetic analysis to be an invasive species in North America, has become an important pollinator of caneberry (\"Rubus\" spp.) as well as cucurbit, apple trees, and blueberry (\"Cyanococcus\") bushes. In the US, the endangered Taylor's checkerspot butterfly (\"Euphydryas editha taylori\") has come to rely on invasive ribwort plantain (\"Plantago lanceolata\") as the food plant for its caterpillars.\nSome invasions offer potential commercial benefits. For instance, silver carp (\"Hypophthalmichthys molitrix\") and common carp (\"Cyprinus carpio\") can be harvested for human food and exported to markets already familiar with the product, or processed into pet foods or mink feed. Water hyacinth (\"Pontederia crassipes\") can be turned into fuel by methane digesters, and other invasive plants can be harvested and utilized as a source of bioenergy.\nControl, eradication, and study.\nHumans are versatile enough to remediate adverse effects of species invasions. The public is motivated by invasive species that impact their local area. \nThe control of alien species populations is important in the conservation of biodiversity in natural ecosystem. One of the most promising methods for controlling alien species is genetic.\nCargo inspection and quarantine.\nThe original motivation was to protect against agricultural pests while still allowing the export of agricultural products. In 1994 the first set of global standards were agreed to, including the Agreement on the Application of Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures (SPS Agreement). These are overseen by the World Trade Organization. The International Maritime Organization oversees the International Convention for the Control and Management of Ships' Ballast Water and Sediments (the Ballast Water Management Convention). Although primarily targeted at other, more general environmental concerns, the Convention on Biological Diversity does specify some steps that its members should take to control invasive species. The CBD is the most significant international agreement on the environmental consequences of invasive species; most such measures are voluntary and unspecific.\nSlowing spread.\nFirefighters are becoming responsible for decontamination of their own equipment, public water equipment, and private water equipment, due to the risk of aquatic invasive species transfer. In the United States this is especially a concern for wildland firefighters because quagga (\"Dreissena bugensis\") and zebra (\"Dreissena polymorpha\") mussel invasion and wildfires co-occur in the American West.\nReestablishing species.\nIsland restoration deals with the eradication of invasive species on islands. A 2019 study suggests that if eradications of invasive animals were conducted on just 169 islands, the survival prospects of 9.4% of the Earth's most highly threatened terrestrial insular vertebrates would be improved.\nInvasive vertebrate eradication on islands aligns with United Nations Sustainable Development Goal 15 and associated targets.\nRodents were carried to South Georgia, an island in the southern Atlantic Ocean with no permanent inhabitants, in the 18th century by sealing and whaling ships. They soon wrought havoc on the island's bird population, eating eggs and attacking chicks. In 2018, the South Georgia Island was declared free of invasive rodents after a multi-year extermination effort. Bird populations have rebounded, including the South Georgia pipit (\"Anthus antarcticus\") and South Georgia pintail (\"Anas georgica georgica\"), both endemic to the island.\nTaxon substitution.\nNon-native species can be introduced to fill an ecological engineering role that previously was performed by a native species now extinct. The procedure is known as taxon substitution. On many islands, tortoise extinction has resulted in dysfunctional ecosystems with respect to seed dispersal and herbivory. On the offshore islets of Mauritius, tortoises now extinct had served as the keystone herbivores. Introduction of the non-native Aldabra giant tortoises (\"Aldabrachelys gigantea\") on two islets in 2000 and 2007 has begun to restore ecological equilibrium. The introduced tortoises are dispersing seeds of several native plants and are selectively grazing invasive plant species. Grazing and browsing are expected to replace ongoing intensive manual weeding, and the introduced tortoises are already breeding.\nBy using them as food.\nThe practice of eating invasive species to reduce their populations has been explored. In 2005, Chef Bun Lai of Miya's Sushi in New Haven, Connecticut, created the first menu dedicated to invasive species. At that time, half the items on the menu were conceptual because those invasive species were not yet commercially available. By 2013, Miya's offered invasive aquatic species such as Chesapeake blue catfish (\"Ictalurus furcatus\"), Florida lionfish (\"Pterois\" \"sp.\"), Kentucky silver carp (\"Hypophthalmichthys molitrix)\", Georgia cannonball jellyfish (\"Stomolophus meleagris\"), and invasive plants such as Japanese knotweed (\"Reynoutria japonica\") and autumn olive (\"Elaeagnus umbellata\"). Joe Roman, a Harvard and University of Vermont conservation biologist and recipient of the Rachel Carson Environmental award, runs a website named \"Eat The Invaders\". In the 21st century, organizations including Reef Environmental Educational Foundation and the Institute for Applied Ecology have published cookbooks and recipes using invasive species as ingredients. Invasive plant species have been explored as a sustainable source of beneficial phytochemicals and edible protein.\nProponents of eating invasive organisms argue that humans have the ability to eat away any species that it has an appetite for, pointing to the many animals which humans have been able to hunt to extinction\u2014such as the Caribbean monk seal (\"Neomonachus tropicalis\") and the passenger pigeon (\"Ectopistes migratorius\"). They further point to Jamaica's success in significantly decreasing the population of lionfish by encouraging the consumption of the fish. Skeptics point out that once a foreign species has entrenched itself in a new place\u2014such as the Indo-Pacific lionfish that has now virtually taken over the waters of the western Atlantic Ocean, Caribbean and Gulf of Mexico\u2014eradication is almost impossible. Critics argue that encouraging consumption might have the unintended effect of spreading harmful species even more widely.\nPesticides and herbicides.\nPesticides are commonly used to control invasives. Herbicides used against invasive plants include fungal herbicides. Although the effective population size of an introduced population is bottlenecked, some genetic variation has been known to provide invasive plants with resistance against these fungal bioherbicides. Invasive populations of cheatgrass (\"Bromus tectorum\") exist with resistance to \"Ustilago bullata\" used as a biocontrol, and a similar problem has been reported in Japanese stiltgrass \"(Microstegium vimineum\") subject to \"Bipolaris microstegii\" and \"B. drechsleri\". This is not solely a character of invasive plant genetics but is normal for wild plants such as the weed wild flax (\"Linum marginale)\" and its fungal pathogen flax rust (\"Melampsora lini)\". Crops have another disadvantage over any uncontrolled plant \u2013 wild native or invasive \u2013 namely their greater uptake of nutrients, as they are deliberately bred to increase nutrient intake to enable increased product output.\nGene drive.\nA gene drive could be used to eliminate invasive species and has, for example, been proposed as a way to eliminate invasive mammal species in New Zealand. Briefly put, an individual of a species may have two versions of a gene, one with a desired coding outcome and one not, with offspring having a 50:50 chance of inheriting one or the other. Genetic engineering can be used to inhibit inheritance of the non-desired gene, resulting in faster propagation of the desired gene in subsequent generations. Gene drives for biodiversity conservation purposes are being explored as part of The Genetic Biocontrol of Invasive Rodents program because they offer the potential for reduced risk to non-target species and reduced costs when compared to traditional invasive species removal techniques. A wider outreach network for gene drive research exists to raise awareness of the value of gene drive research for the public good. Some scientists are concerned that the technique could wipe out species in their original native habitats. The gene could mutate, causing unforeseen problems, or hybridize with native species.\nPredicting invasive plants.\nAccurately predicting the impacts of non-native plants can be an especially effective management option because most introductions of non-native plant species are intentional. Weed risk assessments attempt to predict the chances that a specific plant will have negative effects in a new environment, often using a standardized questionnaire. The resulting total score is associated with a management action such as \"prevent introduction\". Assessments commonly use information about the physiology, life history, native ranges, and phylogenetic relationships of the species evaluated. The effectiveness of the approach is debated.\nPredicting invasive animals.\nInvasive alien animal species can seriously affect human well-being and biodiversity. A hierarchical approach underpins the management measures used to lessen these effects, ranging from invasive species management to invasion prevention through early warning and quick response. Currenlty, a small number of research on invading mammals have employed spatially explicit models, and the majority of them only looked at a small number of species. The majority of the research employed climate matching to assess the appropriateness of global geographic regions or the potential for established species to spread farther. For species that are not yet established but are anticipated to do so, modelling techniques may be a helpful tool to evaluate the risk of establishment; nevertheless, there aren't many research of this kind for mammals.\nReturning invasive species to origin country.\nIn 2025 in the first time in history a project to return an invasive specie to the country it came from, has been started in the Hebrides in Scotland. Hedgehogs \"native to the UK mainland\" were brought to those islands decades ago to fight garden pests, but the introduction create severe harm to birds which are nesting on the ground. The authorities decided to move them back to the mainland, meaning help to the birds but do not do harm to the hedgehogs.\nReferences.\nAttribution.\nThis article incorporates CC-BY-3.0 text from the reference\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "67556", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=67556", "title": "Mickey Slim", "text": "Claimed cocktail combining gin and DDT\nThe Mickey Slim was a drink claimed to have been consumed by some in the United States in the 1940s or 1950s. According to the 2001 book \"The Dedalus Book of Absinthe\", it was made by combining gin with a pinch of DDT (dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane), an insecticide that would later be banned in most countries; consumers of this concoction reportedly claimed that its effects were similar to absinthe.\nDue to a lack of documentary evidence, it has been questioned whether this is a modern urban legend rather than a historical reality. As of January 2023, the earliest reference on Newspapers.com to the drink is in the television listing for a 1992 episode of \"Pandora's Box\", a BBC documentary series.\nThis beverage should not be confused with the knockout drink known as the Mickey Finn.\nEffects of consumption of DDT by humans.\nIn a 2009 study, DDT was linked to various health problems in humans. However, the negative health effects on humans have not always been apparent. \"Time Magazine\", reported on August 1, 1971, that Pest Control Executive Robert Loibl and his wife Louise start breakfast with a 10 mg capsule of DDT to demonstrate its safety, doing so for three months in front of witnesses. The well-known British entomologist Kenneth Mellanby often ate small amounts of DDT during his 40 years of lectures. On p.\u00a075 of his 1992 book \"The DDT Story\", Mellanby famously wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;[The] consumption of smaller doses in the milligram range appears to be quite harmless. I know that I myself, when lecturing about DDT during the years immediately after World War II, frequently consumed a substantial pinch of DDT, to the consternation of the audience, but with no apparent harm to myself, either then or during the next 40 years.\nThe entomologist Gordon Edwards also frequently demonstrated DDT consumption, and he appeared in the September 1971 edition of \"Esquire magazine\" doing so. None of them reported any psychoactive effects of their consumption of DDT.\nThere have been no reports of this tasteless chemical having any psychoactive effects. The comparison to absinthe basically does not indicate any effect at all (aside from that of the alcohol in the cocktail), since the assumed psychedelic effect of absinthe, that is, the effect of the chemical thujone, has in recent times been revealed to be close to non-existent.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "67559", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=67559", "title": "Somalia/History", "text": ""}
{"id": "67560", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=67560", "title": "Somalia/People", "text": ""}
{"id": "67561", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=67561", "title": "Somalia/Government", "text": ""}
{"id": "67562", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=67562", "title": "Somalia/Economy", "text": ""}
{"id": "67563", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=67563", "title": "Somalia/Communications", "text": ""}
{"id": "67564", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=67564", "title": "Somalia/Transportation", "text": ""}
{"id": "67565", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=67565", "title": "Somalia/Military", "text": ""}
{"id": "67566", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=67566", "title": "Somalia/Transnational issues", "text": ""}
{"id": "67568", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=67568", "title": "Paraguay/History", "text": ""}
{"id": "67569", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=67569", "title": "Paraguay/Geography", "text": ""}
{"id": "67570", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=67570", "title": "Paraguay/People", "text": ""}
{"id": "67571", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=67571", "title": "Paraguay/Communications", "text": ""}
{"id": "67572", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=67572", "title": "Paraguay/Transportation", "text": ""}
{"id": "67573", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=67573", "title": "Paraguay/Military", "text": ""}
{"id": "67574", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=67574", "title": "Paraguay/Transnational issues", "text": ""}
{"id": "67575", "revid": "5957417", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=67575", "title": "Gustave Moreau", "text": "French Symbolist painter (1826\u20131898)\nGustave Moreau (; 6 April 1826 \u2013 18 April 1898) was a French artist and an important figure in the Symbolist movement. Jean Cassou called him \"the Symbolist painter par excellence\". He was an influential forerunner of symbolism in the visual arts in the 1860s, and at the height of the symbolist movement in the 1890s, he was among the most significant painters. Art historian Robert Delevoy wrote that Moreau \"brought symbolist polyvalence to its highest point in \"Jupiter and Semele\".\" He was a prolific artist who produced over 15,000 paintings, watercolors, and drawings. Moreau painted allegories and traditional biblical and mythological subjects favored by the fine art academies. J. K. Huysmans wrote, \"Gustave Moreau has given new freshness to dreary old subjects by a talent both subtle and ample: he has taken myths worn out by the repetitions of centuries and expressed them in a language that is persuasive and lofty, mysterious and new.\" The female characters from the Bible and mythology that he so frequently depicted came to be regarded by many as the archetypical symbolist woman. His art (and symbolism in general) fell from favor and received little attention in the early 20th century but, beginning in the 1960s and 70s, he has come to be considered among the most paramount of symbolist painters.\nGustave Moreau was born in Paris and showed an aptitude for drawing at an early age. He received a sound education at Coll\u00e8ge Rollin (now Coll\u00e8ge-lyc\u00e9e Jacques-Decour) and traditional academic training in painting at the Ecole des Beaux-Arts. In the early 1850s he developed a close friendship/mentorship with Th\u00e9odore Chass\u00e9riau and had some modest success exhibiting as the Paris Salon. Chass\u00e9riau's premature death in 1856 deeply affected Moreau, and he left Paris to travel in Italy from 1857 to 1859, returning with hundreds of copies and studies he made of old master paintings there. In 1864 his painting \"Oedipus and the Sphinx\" received a great deal attention at the Paris Salon, winning a medal and establishing his reputation. He had continued success through the 1860s, gradually gaining a select group of enthusiastic and loyal admirers and collectors. Although his painting \"Prometheus\" received a medal at the Salon of 1869, criticisms in the press were severe and he did not submit paintings to the Salon again until 1876, permanently withdrawing after 1880.\nMoreau was decorated Officier de la L\u00e9gion d'Honneur in 1883. Somewhat misanthropic, he grew increasingly reclusive in later years, although he maintained a close circle of friends. He was often reluctant to sell his work, seldom exhibited, and turned down a number of prestigious offers, including an invitation to exhibit at the Salon Les XX in Brussels (1887), rejected the post of a professor when he was elected to the Ecole des Beaux-Arts (1888), and rejected offers to decorate buildings at the Sorbonne (1891). It was only after the death of his friend \u00c9lie Delaunay in 1891 that he agreed to take over Delaunay's studio at the Ecole des Beaux-Arts. Moreau excelled as a teacher, counting Henri Matisse, Georges Rouault, and other notable artists amongst his pupils. His parents bought a townhouse in 1852 at 14 Rue de La Rochefoucauld, converting the top floor into a studio for Moreau, where he lived and worked, a bachelor, for the rest of his life, his father dying in 1862, and his mother, Ad\u00e8le-Pauline in 1884. Moreau died of cancer in 1898, bequeathing the townhome and studio with nearly 1200 paintings and watercolors, and over 10,000 drawings to the State to be converted into a museum. The Mus\u00e9e Gustave Moreau opened to the public in 1903 and is still open today. It is by far the largest and most significant collection of his work.\nBiography.\nEducation and early career (1826\u20131856).\nGustave Moreau was born in Paris, into a cultured, upper-middle-class family. His father, Louis Jean Marie Moreau (1790\u20131862), was an architect, and his mother, n\u00e9e Ad\u00e8le Pauline Desmoutier (1802\u20131884) was a musician. During a turbulent period in French history his father worked for the city of Paris, but being of liberal leanings, he was at times dismissed and later reinstated from various offices as powers shifted. The family lived in Vesoul, France from 1827 to 1830. After the July Revolution of 1830, he was appointed highway commissioner for the city of Paris. Although the office was not highly revered, his duties were more varied than the title suggests and he remained there until he retired in 1858. As a child Moreau was of frail health. Beginning at about the age of eight, he started drawing incessantly. In 1837 he began attending the Coll\u00e8ge Rollin (Coll\u00e8ge-lyc\u00e9e Jacques-Decour) in Paris as a boarder, but in 1840 when his older sister died at the age of 13, he was withdrawn from the school and lived a somewhat sheltered life with his parents. His father encouraged and supported his artistic tendencies but was adamant that he received a solid classical education. Moreau learned Greek, Latin, and read both French and classical literature in his father's rather substantial library. He learned piano and was a very good tenor. In 1841 he visited Italy with his mother and relatives, where he filled a 60-page album with drawings.\nVisiting museums and galleries in Italy profoundly impressed Moreau and influenced his resolution to pursue a career as an artist. Upon returning in 1841 he started attending a drawing studio in the evenings. In 1844 he entered the private studio of Fran\u00e7ois-\u00c9douard Picot, a member of the \u00c9cole des Beaux-Arts, who offered classes to aspiring young artists to prepare for the entrance examinations at the \u00c9cole des Beaux-Arts. In 1846 Moreau was admitted to Picot's formal class at the \u00c9cole des Beaux-Arts. Moreau had grand aspirations of winning the prestigious Grand Prix de Rome, but when he failed to make the final rounds in 1848 and 1849 he left the \u00c9cole des Beaux-Arts prematurely. His style soon drifted away from those favored by the academy, but many of the basic Beaux-Arts methods and concepts he learned would remain with him for the rest of his life, as would his commitment to history painting.\nMoreau spent his time copying paintings in the Louvre and was soon drawn to romanticism. Two contemporary artists he greatly admired were Eug\u00e8ne Delacroix and Th\u00e9odore Chass\u00e9riau, both of whom lived and worked in his neighborhood. Chass\u00e9riau had entered the private studio of the great Neoclassical painter Jean-Auguste-Dominique Ingres at the age of ten and later spent time with Ingres at the French Academy in Rome, but in his late teens he turned away from Neoclassicism to Delacroix and romanticism. Chass\u00e9riau never attended the \u00c9cole des Beaux-Arts, but he was driven and hardworking and managed to establish a reputation for himself, securing commissions, and living a rather bohemian and sometimes turbulent life. Moreau developed a friendship with Chass\u00e9riau, seven years his senior, and rented a studio near Chass\u00e9riau's. He soon followed suit, becoming something of a dapper man about town during this period, attending the opera and theater, and even singing at the social gatherings he frequented. Anecdotal accounts say Moreau visited Delacroix's studio around 1850; he was 28 years older than Moreau, but there is little evidence of a relationship beyond that.\nMoreau's father bought a townhome at 14 rue de la Rochefoucauld in 1853, converting the top floor into a studio for Moreau, where he and his parents lived for the rest of their lives. Shortly before moving in, Moreau had started an ambitious canvas, \"a scene of epic slaughter\" based on an episode from the \"Odyssey\", titled \"The Suitors\" (1852\u20131896). He worked on the painting on and off for the rest of his life, even adding strips of canvas to enlarge the work to a monumental 3.85 x 3.43 meters, but it was still unfinished at the time of his death. Moreau began exhibiting his work with some regularity in the 1850s. He secured some commissions from the city for paintings with the help of his father. He participated in the Paris Salon for the first time in 1852, presenting a \"Pieta\" which was purchased by the state for 600 francs. In the Salon of 1853 he exhibited \"Darius Fleeing after the Battle of Arbela\" and \"The Song of Songs\", both showing some influence of Chass\u00e9riau, and the latter bought by the state for 2,000 francs for the Dijon Museum. There was no Salon in 1854, although he received a commission from the state in 1854 for \"Athenians being Delivered to the Minotaur in the Cretan Labyrinth\" which was shown at the 1855 Paris World's Fair and purchased for 4,000 francs for the Bourg-en-Bresse Museum. After a few short weeks of declining health in 1856, Chass\u00e9riau died at the age of 37. On 10 October 1856, Delacroix noted in his journal \"Funeral procession of poor Chass\u00e9riau. I saw Dauzats, Diaz, and the young Moreau. I quite like him\" Moreau started work on \"The Young Man and Death\" in 1856, finished in 1865 and dedicated to Chass\u00e9riau.\nItaly (1857\u20131859).\nThe death of Chasseriau in 1856 caused Moreau in his grief to withdraw from public life. Concerned about his condition, Moreau's parents suggested he travel to Italy again. Living in Italy, he found a renewed love for art. He gained inspiration from the artists of the Italian Renaissance, such as Leonardo da Vinci and Michelangelo.\nMoreau left Paris in October 1857 with his friend, artist Fr\u00e9d\u00e9ric Charlot de Courcy, sailing from Marseille to Civitavecchia and on to Rome. He approached his time in Italy as a period of extended study, a compensation for his premature withdraw from the \u00c9cole des Beaux-Arts in Paris of sorts. After a few days of getting oriented and taking in the sights he began studying and copying art in the city in earnest. He spent the better part of two months in the Sistine Chapel copying figures from the ceiling seven or eight hours a day. He copied the work of relatively obscure and unknown artists as often as the established masters. He was particularly interested in examining complex grouping of multiple figures and compositional color schemes. He frequented the Villa Medici, where he could work from live models, and there he established friendships with other Parisians studying in Italy, including Elie Delaunay, Henri Chapu, \u00c9mile L\u00e9vy, and Georges Bizet. He met a young Edgar Degas, for whom Moreau was to become something of a mentor while in Italy. In August 1858 he was joined by his parents. His father, having recently retired, was particularly interested in the architecture. In Venice he developed a fascination with Vittore Carpaccio, a little known artist at that time, and copied several of his works. Visits were made to Florence, Milan, Pisa, and Siena.\nThe Second Italian War of Independence broke out in the spring of 1859, making the summer in Naples and Pompeii a tense period. Moreau largely copied the work of others in Italy, and produced only a few original works there. Examples include some large drawings on the theme of \"Hesiod and the Muse\" and a number of fine landscapes in watercolors, painted en plein air. In September 1859 Moreau and his parents returned to Paris with several hundred drawings and paintings. Back in Paris, Degas painted a small portrait of Moreau in 1860, that hung in Moreau's studio for the rest of his life. However, their relationship began to drift as Degas soon fell under the influence of \u00c9douard Manet and impressionism, while Moreau stayed focused on history painting. Moreau once remarked to Degas \"You pretend to be able to renew art through ballet?\" to which Degas replied \"And you think you will be able to do it by jewelry?\"\nSalon success and mid career (1860\u20131880).\nMoreau never married and very little information is known about his personal and romantic relationships. In the past some biographers speculated that he was gay, largely inferred from the fact that he was a bachelor, a lack of information regarding women in his life, and the sometimes effeminate or androgynous appearance of male figures in some of his paintings. However, more recent research and documents revealed a relationship with Adelaide-Alexandrine Dureux (b. Guise, 8 November 1835 \u2013 d. Paris, March 1890) that lasted over 30 years. Moreau apparently met Alexandrine soon after his return from Italy and in following years he produced many drawings and watercolors of her, as well as romantic caricatures of the two of them walking on clouds together. He subsidized an apartment for her on Rue Notre-Dame de Lorette, just a few blocks from the townhome where he lived with his parents. Their relationship was very discreet and known by only a few in his closest circle. His mother was aware of their relationship and apparently fond of her, as indicated by a stipulation in her will that provided an annuity for Alexandrine should Gustave die before her. He designed her tombstone, engraved with their interlaced initials, A and G, which is located near his family plot where he was interred with his parents.\n\"Oedipus and the Sphinx\", one of his first Symbolist paintings, won a medal at the Paris Salon of 1864. Its style revealed his close study of the work of Vittore Carpaccio, Mantegna and Giovanni Bellini. Its firm outlines and detailed modeling are typical of the works that brought him success with critics and the public for the remainder of the decade. Moreau quickly gained a reputation for eccentricity. One commentator said Moreau's work was \"like a pastiche of Mantegna created by a German student who relaxes from his painting by reading Schopenhauer\". The painting currently resides in the permanent collection at the New York Metropolitan Museum of Art.\nIn the 1870s, disturbed by criticism that his work had become formulaic, he stopped exhibiting for a few years while he concentrated on renewing his art. In 1876 he completed \"Salome Dancing before Herod\", which announced a more painterly style that would characterize his later works.\nHe was made a Chevalier de la L\u00e9gion d'honneur in 1875 and was promoted to an Officier de la L\u00e9gion d'honneur in 1883.\nTeaching and later career (1881\u20131898).\nMoreau increasingly withdrew from society in his later years; he stopped exhibiting at the Salon, and refused to exhibit abroad. However, he continued to produce paintings and sporadically exhibited his work in other venues such as the 1889 Paris World's Fair. He occasionally entertained guests at his townhome and was known for his engaging conversation, but visitors were rarely allowed in his studio to see his work. He was exceptionally cultivated, erudite, and a voracious reader with a personal library of over 1,600 volumes. Compared to other artists who had achieved his level of success in Paris at that time, he lived a fairly modest lifestyle. Edgar Degas, who lived nearby and occasionally still interacted with him, described Moreau in later years as \"a hermit who knows what time the trains leave\".\nArt collector Anthony Roux commissioned several artists to produce works based on Jean de La Fontaine's Fables in 1879, including Moreau, Paul-Jacques-Aim\u00e9 Baudry, Jules-\u00c9lie Delaunay, Gustave Dor\u00e9, Henri Gervex, Henri Harpignies, Ernest H\u00e9bert, N\u00e9lie Jacquemart, Eug\u00e8ne Lami, Jean-Fran\u00e7ois Raffa\u00eblli, F\u00e9lix Ziem, and others. The results were all exhibited together in 1881 at Cercle des Aquarellistes in Paris. The exhibit was celebrated by the critics of the day, and the work of Moreau's (who completed 25 pieces, more than any other) was judged far superior to most of the others. He alone was commissioned to continue the series. In the only private show in his life, 64 La Fontaine fables with six other large watercolors were exhibited at the Goupil &amp; Cie Gallery in 1886, where Th\u00ebo Van Gogh was manager, and later in London. The series was exhibited again posthumously in Paris in 1906, and one was donated to the Mus\u00e9e national Gustave Moreau. Remarkably, after Roux's death in 1914, 63 of the watercolors were sold to a single collector, and although regarded as among his finest work, they were not exhibited by the buyer, or their heirs, for well over 100 years, and are known only from some early, low quality black and white reproductions. Nearly half of the paintings later disappeared during the reign of the Nazis and have not resurfaced.\nMoreau and his mother were very close throughout his life. She lost her hearing in her later years and Gustave communicated with her by writing notes on slips of paper, often giving his thoughts regarding the paintings he was working on. His assistant Henri Rupp saved many of the notes, which are archived at the museum and provide significant insight into Moreau's ideas on his art. The death of his mother at the age of 82 in 1884 caused him deep despair. For a while he could not spend nights alone in the family townhome and took refuge at the apartment of Alexandrine Dureux nearby. Ultimately, the room where his mother died was left unchanged and became something of a shrine that he never entered. Six years later he was at Alexandrine Dureux's bedside when she died on 28 March 1890 after five months of deteriorating health. Her death also affected him greatly. He bought back several watercolors that he had given her over the years and some furniture from her heirs, which he placed in a room of his townhome in her memory. Both deaths reinforced his isolation and he buried himself in his work, which took on an even greater melancholic edge.\nMoreau was elected into the \u00c9cole des Beaux-Arts in 1888, but he declined professorship and a class, and the director Paul Dubois, exempted him from all formal obligations. However, on his death bed, \u00c9lie Delaunay (a close friend since their time in Rome) asked Moreau to succeed him and direct one of the main ateliers at the school. Moreau reluctantly took the class on a temporary basis in October 1891, but later accepted the appointment of professor and atelier director in January 1892 at the age of sixty-five. Moreau was a contrasting individual from the academic artists at the \u00c9cole des Beaux-Arts, including L\u00e9on G\u00ebr\u00f4me, L\u00e9on Bonnat, William Bougueruau, Jean-Paul Laurens, Luc-Olivier Merson, and Jules-Eug\u00e8ne Lenepveu. About 125 students passed through Moreau's studio between 1891 and 1898; among them were Pierre Marcel-B\u00e9ronneau, Simon Bussy, Charles Camoin, Henri Evenepoel, Jules Flandrin, Raoul du Gardier, Jacques Gr\u00fcber, Charles-Fran\u00e7ois-Prosper Gu\u00e9rin, Henri Matisse, Albert Marquet, Henri Manguin, Edgard Maxence, Theodor Pallady, L\u00e9on Printemps, Georges Rouault, and Fernand Sabatt\u00e9.\n\"Here, during his last years, he displayed remarkable talents as a teacher.\" Moreau's class quickly attracted the most progressive and adventurous students. As early as 1896 Roger-Marx wrote, \"The fires of insurrection have been lit in the very heart of the \u00c9cole des Beaux-Arts: all the rebels against routine all those who wish to develop in their own individual way, have gathered under the shield of Gustave Moreau.\" Moreau made no attempt to impose his own views or style on his students. He gave them a stimulating atmosphere and intelligent encouragement to follow their own ideas. He took his pupils to the Louvre to study and copy the masters, unheard of at the \u00c9cole des Beaux-Arts: Matisse said \"It was an almost revolutionary attitude on his part to show us the way to the Museum.\" Students were invited to his home on Sunday afternoons (but not allowed to see his studio), and occasionally he visited his students.\nYesterday at half past one I was walking along the embankment when I met Gustave Moreau, who like myself was on his way to see a good chum of mine, Henri Matisse, a delicate painter, skilful in the art of using grays. He suffers from violent neuralgia in his arm and can hardly walk. Somehow or other we reached the Quai Saint-Michel, where Matisse was strolling about, waiting for him. We made our way painfully up the stairs of that old house at No 19. There we were at last in the small studio full of torn wallpaper and knick-knacks, all gray with dust. Moreau said to me \"We are the jury.\" He sat down in an armchair, with me beside him, and we spent a delightful hour. He told us the whys and the wherefores of his likes and dislikes. Matisse showed us his entries for the Champs de Mars exhibition [i.e. Salon de la Soci\u00e9t\u00e9 Nationale des Beaux-Arts], some ten canvases, with beautiful colors, practically all of them still lifes, and they provided the starting point for talk about everything connected with art, including music. Moreau has remained astonishingly young. There is nothing professorial about him, not a hint of pedantry. He is a friend.\" \u2013 Henri Evenepoel\nGeorges Rouault said, \"He was not a professor in the commonly accepted sense, but a man whom it did you good to emulate.\" Rouault was already a student when Moreau took the class. He soon recognized Rouault's exceptional talent, and Rouault always held Moreau in the highest esteem. \"Half a century later Rouault still spoke of him with the same veneration, with the same sympathy and cordiality, as if Moreau were still living, and as if Rouault himself were still a raw youth at the feet of a mentor whose judgments he trusted implicitly both in art and in life. Matisse said, \"Gustave Moreau's great quality was to regard the mind of a young student as needing to develop continuously throughout his life, and not to push him to get through the various scholastic examinations.\" Matisse had been denied admission to the \u00c9cole des Beaux-Arts, but Moreau saw him drawing in the public courtyard of the school and invited him to join his class, exempting him from the entrance examination. Matisse soon became the central figure among a faction of students in Moreau's studio that developed into the fauvist. Albert Marquet said, \"As early as 1898, Matisse and I were working in what was later to be called the fauve manner\", exemplified by \"Fauve Nude\", painted in Moreau's atelier. For decades his pupils credited the significance of their teacher, recalling his prophetic comments that were often taken to heart: \"the more elementary your means are, the more your sensibility shows through.\"; \"One must think color, one must have it in the imagination.\" \"Nature in itself is nothing! It merely gives the artist an occasion to express himself. Art is the unflagging pursuit through plastic means of expression and inner feeling.\" \nMoreau's concerns for the fate of his life's work started in the 1860s. He began an inventory of his paintings about 1884, and the death of Delaunay in 1891 exemplified what could become of an artist's work after their death. Moreau arrived at the idea of leaving his house to the state as a museum, and remodeled his townhome in 1895, expanding his small studio on the top floor into a much larger exhibition space. After about a year of declining health, Moreau died of stomach cancer on 18 April 1898 and was buried at the Cimeti\u00e8re de Montmartre in Paris in his parents' tomb. He left instructions stipulating that his death was not to be announced in the press; his funeral was to be a very small, simple service; and any flowers were to be placed on the grave of Alexandrine Dureux, not his own. The government was hesitant to accept the estate, as artist's house museums were very rare at that time and unprecedented in France. His assistant Henri Rupp was significant in organizing the estate and persuading the state to take it over.\nArt.\nI believe neither in what I touch nor in what I see and only in what I feel. My brain and my reason seem to be ephemeral and of dubious reality. My inner feeling alone appears to me eternal and unquestionably certain. \u2013 Gustave Moreau\nExoticism.\nGustave Moreau's education in classical drawing did not stop him from experimenting with different styles of art. By traveling to other countries such as Italy or Holland and reading publications, Moreau was able to develop his unique form of art. The most important publications he owned were \"The Grammar of Ornament\" by Owen Jones, \"Le costume historique\" by August Racinet, and \"Le Costume\" by Frederick Hottenroth. All these influences led Moreau to draw not only humans, but animals and architectural monuments. He started his career drawing classical art, but by incorporating exotic images he developed a mysterious and unique form of art.\nLegacy.\nDuring his lifetime, Moreau produced more than 15,000 paintings, watercolors and drawings. Due to his reluctance to sell his work, when he died he still owned 1,200 paintings and watercolors and 10,000 drawings which he left to the state. The Mus\u00e9e national Gustave Moreau at 14 rue de la Rochefoucauld (9th arrondissement), opened to the public on 14 January 1903, with his former student Georges Rouault appointed curator.\n \"A visionary like none other, he made the land of dreams his own, but from the madness of his dreams a sense of anguish and despair found its way into his works. A master sorcerer, he cast a spell over his period, enthralled his contemporaries, and brought a tinge of idealism to the skeptical and practical fin-de si\u00e8cle. Under the influence of his painting, a whole generation of young men have grown up doleful and languid, their eyes obstinately turned to the past and the magic of other days; a whole generation of men of letters, especially poets, have become nostalgically enamored of slender Salomes glittering with jewels, of Muses carrying blood drained severed heads.\" \u2013 Jean Lorrain\nHis influence on symbolism in his lifetime and the decade following his death was tremendous. \"Gustave Moreau was the man of the moment. Aloof, independent, solitary, he yet became fashionable in high society and was taken up in masonic and occult circles.\" Art historian Jean Selz wrote \"He was a symbolist before the Symbolist and the most extraordinary of all of them.\" He influenced the next generation of Symbolists, particularly leading figures in Belgian Symbolism such as Jean Delville and Fernand Khnopff, and Odilon Redon in France. Redon said of his work \"Moreau, a bachelor, produced the work of an elegant bachelor, strictly sealed up against the shocks of life; his work is the fruit of it, it is art and nothing but art, and that is a saying a good deal.\"\nMany poets and writers of the day revered Moreau's paintings, Th\u00e9ophile Gautier, Joris-Karl Huysmans, St\u00e9phane Mallarm\u00e9, Paul de Saint-Victor, and Emile Zola all praised his work. It was a common practice at the time for poets to paraphrase in verse paintings they admired, and the paintings of Gustave Moreau were among the most lauded of the symbolist poets. Th\u00e9odore de Banville, Jos\u00e9 Maria de Heredia, Claudius Popelin, Jean Lorrain, Henri Cazalis, and others wrote of Moreau's work in poetry.\nInterest in his work remained fairly high in the first decade of the 20th century and occasional exhibitions of his paintings were held in the 15 years following his death. However, when the museum opened there was some disappointment in the audiences of the time in seeing the large numbers of drawings and unfinished paintings, and not a museum full of highly finished masterworks in oils, and attendance began to drop off after the opening. With the rise and prevalence of realism, impressionism and postimpressionism, followed by the onslaught of fauvism, cubism, futurism, expressionism, abstract art, and dada, Moreau (and most symbolist painting not realized in an expressionist style), appeared less relevant to modernism and was all but forgotten. After World War I, what little fame and notoriety Moreau had was largely related on his status as the teacher of Rouault and Matisse and the Fauvist. One of the only exhibitions in the 40-year period between 1918 and 1958 was a show held in Paris in 1926 centered around Moreau and his pupils.\nMoreau and surrealism.\nAndr\u00e9 Breton famously used to \"haunt\" the museum and regarded Moreau as a precursor of Surrealism. In his \"Manifesto of Surrealism\", he listed forerunners of the movement, poets and painters who \"could pass for Surrealist\", and included Moreau with Picasso, de Chirico, and a short list of other examples. Breton wrote in 1961: \"My discovery of the Gustave Moreau Museum in Paris when I was sixteen years old shaped my likes and loves for the rest of my life. It was there, in certain women's faces and figures, that I had the revelation of beauty and love.\" Georges Bataille wrote enthusiastically of his work, calling him a precursor of surrealism. Salvador Dal\u00ed was also a great admirer of Moreau's work and a regular visitor to the Gustave Moreau Museum: \"To those I love, I recommend visiting the Museum, going and plunging into this twilight world where, risen from the gulf of erotic and scatological obsession, constellations of precious stones float like so many promises of archangelical redemption.\" It was at the Gustave Moreau Museum in 1970 that Dal\u00ed (holding a wax replica of his own head on a silver platter) chose to make the public announcement of his plans to open his own museum, Teatro-Museo Dal\u00ed, in Figueras, Spain. Max Ernst is known to have used reproductions of Moreau's work on occasion to create collages.\nAndre Breton advocated for Moreau's work throughout his life, whenever he had the opportunity, in his writings, and introduced other writers and artists to the museum in Paris. At a time when Moreau and symbolism had largely drifted into obscurity, Breton sponsored an exhibition of symbolist drawings in Paris, at the Dateau-Lavoir Gallery in 1958. The exhibit has been identified as a significant event in re-establishing recognition of Moreau's work. It was a small, \"over-confidential\" exhibition, but it succeeded in getting the attention of the right curators and in 1961, no less than the Louvre Museum and the Museum of Modern Art mounted exhibitions of Moreau's paintings, which in turn were followed by a landmark exhibition of symbolism, \"Le Groupe des XX et son temps\" in Brussels in 1962. By the 1970s, exhibitions and monographs on Moreau and symbolism were appearing with some regularity.\nThe Japanese artist Yoshitaka Amano, known for works such as \"Final Fantasy\", \"Angel's Egg\", and \"Vampire Hunter D\", was inspired by Moreau's style. Amano said in an interview that when he was first experimenting with styles to try to find his own, he would try to mimic the works of Moreau.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Sister-inline/styles.css\"/&gt; Media related to at Wikimedia Commons"}
{"id": "67576", "revid": "44120587", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=67576", "title": "Politics of Albania", "text": " \nAlbania is a unitary parliamentary constitutional republic, in which the president of Albania is the head of state and the prime minister of Albania is the head of government in a multi-party system. The executive power is exercised by the Government and the prime minister with its Cabinet. Legislative power is vested in the Parliament of Albania. The judiciary is independent of the executive and the legislature. The political system of Albania is laid out in the 1998 constitution. The Parliament adopted the current constitution on 28 November 1998. Historically Albania has had many constitutions. Initially constituted as a monarchy in 1913, Albania became briefly a republic in 1925, and then a authoritarian monarchy in 1928. In 1939 Albania was invaded by Fascist Italian forces, imposing a puppet state, and later occupied by Nazi German forces. Following the partisan liberation from the Nazis in 1944 a provisional government was formed, which by 1946 had transformed into a communist one-party state. In March 1991 democracy was restored with multi-party elections.\nThe president represents the unity of the Albanian people in the country and abroad as the head of state and is also the commander-in-chief of the military. The president is nominated through a secret vote and without debate by the Parliament of Albania by a majority of three-fifths of all its members and is in every case elected for five years. The president maintains regular and coordinated operation and stability of the national government system, safeguards the independence and territorial integrity of Albania and appoints prime ministers on the basis of the balance of power in the Parliament. The prime minister is appointed by the president after each parliamentary election and must have the confidence of the Parliament to stay in office. The prime minister is elected on the basis of universal suffrage, through a secret ballot, for a four-year term. The constitution sets no limit as to office terms of the prime minister. The prime minister is \"de facto\" the most powerful and influential person in Albanian politics. However, in the absence of the prime minister, the deputy prime minister takes over his functions, such as chairing the cabinet and the council of ministers of Albania.\nThe Parliament is a unicameral legislative body of Albania. It is vested in both the government as well as in the parliament. The number of representatives is 140, which are elected by popular vote to serve four-year terms. The oldest parliament with extant records was held on 2 March 1444, forged in Lezh\u00eb under Gjergj Kastrioti Sk\u00ebnderbeu as the leader against the Ottoman Empire. Since 1991, the introduction of pluralism, the party system is dominated by the Democratic and the post-communist Socialist. Parliamentary elections are held every four years, the most recent in 2021. In April 2021 parliamentary election, ruling Socialist Party, led by Prime Minister Edi Rama, secured its third consecutive victory, winning nearly half of votes and enough seats in parliament to govern alone. In February 2022, Albania's Constitutional Court overturned parliament's impeachment of President Ilir Meta, opponent of the ruling Socialist Party.\nAlbania is a member state of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization and also an official candidate for membership in the European Union.\nThe Economist Intelligence Unit rated Albania a \"flawed democracy\" in , in conjunction with the electoral democracy score of over 0.5 given by V-Dem in 2024.\nExecutive.\nSince the Declaration of Independence in 1912, Albania has experienced different models of governance, including an international protectorate, a monarchy, a state-party regime and the parliamentary republic as well. Throughout all this period, the function of the head of state has been exercised in various forms.\nNowadays, the President of Albania \"(Presidenti)\" is the head of state, commander-in-chief of the military and the representative of the unity of the Albanian people. The president is indirectly elected to a five-year term by the Parliament by secret vote, requiring a three-fifths majority of the votes of all members. The president has the power to guarantee observation of the Constitution and all laws, act as commander-in-chief of the Albanian Armed Forces, exercise the duties of the Parliament, when the Parliament is not in session, and appoint the Prime Minister. The president has the power to declare war, to grant pardon and to conclude agreements of peace, alliance, and participation in international organizations; upon the request of the government a simple parliamentary majority is required to ratify such actions, agreements, or treaties.\nThe prime minister of Albania \"(Kryeministri)\" is the head of government. According to the Constitution, the prime minister is the most senior minister of cabinet in the executive branch of government in the Albanian parliamentary system. The prime minister is appointed by the president; ministers are nominated by the president as well on the basis of the prime minister's recommendation. The Council of Ministers is responsible for carrying out both foreign and domestic policies. It directs and controls the activities of the ministries and other state organs. The deputy prime minister of Albania \"(Z\u00ebvend\u00ebskryeministri)\" is the deputy head of government. In the absence of the prime minister, the deputy prime minister takes over his functions, such as chairing the Cabinet and the Council of Ministers.\nLegislative.\nThe Parliament of Albania \"(Kuvendi i Shqip\u00ebris\u00eb)\" is a unicameral legislative body. It is composed of not less than 140 members elected to a four-year term on the basis of direct, universal, periodic and equal suffrage by secret ballot. As of Article 45 of the Constitution, which guarantees the right to vote, the people of Albania exercise their power through their elected representatives in the Parliament. When the Parliament is elected, the first session shall be held no later than 20 days after the completion of elections with the president as the speaker. There are 15 permanent committees. Extraordinary meets can be called by the president, by the Chairperson of the Parliament, by the prime minister or by the one fifth of the members. Decisions are made based on a majority vote if more than half of the members are present, except in cases where the Constitution provides for a special majority. As specified by the current electoral legislation in Albania, 140 members of the Parliament are elected in multi-seat constituencies. Within any constituency, parties must meet a threshold of 3 percent of votes, and pre-election coalitions must meet a threshold of 5 percent of votes. All laws passed by the Parliament are published through the Fletorja Zyrtare, the official journal of the government.\nThe chairperson of the Parliament \"(Kryetar i Kuvendit)\" is the presiding officer of the Parliament and is elected by the members of the Parliament. The official function is to moderate debate, make rulings on procedure, announce the results of votes, decides who may speak and has the powers to discipline members who break the procedures of the chamber or house. When the president is temporarily absent or incapable of exercising its powers, the chairperson takes over his functions.\nJudiciary.\nAlbania follows the civil law tradition, which is based on the French law system. It has a three-tiered, independent judicial system governed by the constitution and national legislation enacted by the Parliament. The judicial branch of Albania is divided into three main institutions; the 'Highest Courts', which includes the Supreme Court (Gjykata e Lart\u00eb) and the Constitutional Court (Gjykata Kushtetuese), the 'Intermediate Courts' such as the Courts of Appeal (Gjykata e Apelit), Court of Appeals against corruption and organized crime (Gjykata e Apelit kund\u00ebr Korrupsionit dhe Krimit t\u00eb Organizuar), and the Administrative Court of Appeals (Gjykata Administrative e Apelit) as well as the 'First Instance Courts' such as the District Courts (Gjykata e Juridksionit t\u00eb P\u00ebrgjithsh\u00ebm) and the Court of First Instance against corruption and organized crime (Gjykata e Shkall\u00ebs s\u00eb Par\u00eb kund\u00ebr Korrupsionit dhe Krimit t\u00eb Organizuar).\nThe Supreme Court is the highest court of appeal in Albania; its hearings are open and judgments are made publicly, except in cases where the privacy of the accused is to be protected. It is composed of nineteen judges such as the president of the Supreme Court and eighteen members of the Supreme Court. The judges are selected and appointed amongst judges with more than 10 years of seniority or prominent lawyers, who have exercised their activity for more than 15 years. The members can serve for a single term of nine years, without the right of reappointment. The Constitutional Court is the final authority for the interpretation of the Constitution and the compliance of laws in accordance with the constitution.\nElections.\nFollowing the collapse of the communist regime in the nation, the first multi-party elections were held in 1991, simultaneously with the 1991 parliamentary elections. The 1998 Constitution of Albania guarantees the right to vote without restriction due to sex, race, social status, education level, or wealth. Every Albanian citizen who has reached the age of 18 has the right to vote. Regular elections take place for the office of the president, parliamentary, county prefects, county assemblies, city and municipal mayors and city and municipal councils.\nThe president is elected through a secret vote and without debate by the Parliament by a majority of three-fifths majority of all its members, for five years. The Constitution sets a limit to a maximum of two terms in office. The Parliament is elected to a four-year term in twelve multi-seat constituencies analogous to the 12 county borders, with amendments to achieve a uniform number of eligible voters in each constituency to within 3%. Within the constituencies, seats are elected by closed list proportional representation, with an electoral threshold of 3% for parties and 5% for alliances. Seats were allocated to alliances using the d'Hondt system, then to political parties using the Sainte-Lagu\u00eb method.\nThe county prefects and city and municipal mayors are elected to four-year terms by majority of votes cast within applicable local government units. A runoff election is held if no candidate achieves a majority in the first round of voting. Members of county, city, and municipal councils are also elected to four-year terms through proportional representation.\nParties.\nAlbania has a multi-party system, with numerous parties in which no one party often has a chance of gaining power alone, and parties must collaborate in order to form coalition governments. The two major parties are the Socialist Party of Albania (PS) and the Democratic Party of Albania (PD). Albania also has a number of minor parties. Following is a list of political parties with elected representation at the national level in the Parliament following the general parliamentary elections of 2021.\nIn the 2023 Albanian local elections the Democratic Party of Albania (PD) were not allowed to register their candidates, a court upheld that decision accordingly the Socialist Party of Albania (PS) won most seats.\nForeign policy.\nForeign policy is conducted through the Ministry of Foreign Affairs in Tirana. Albania maintains a network of 50 diplomatic missions abroad and holds relations with more than 115 countries. It is a member of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), United Nations (UN), Council of Europe, International Monetary Fund (IMF), World Bank and several others. Citizens of the country have visa-free or visa on arrival access to 98 countries and territories, with the Albanian passport ranking 55th in terms of travel freedom according to the Henley visa restrictions index. Today, Albania maintains strong diplomatic relations with such countries as the United States, Italy, Brazil, Greece, Austria, Croatia, China, Germany, Portugal, the United Kingdom, Turkey, Kuwait and Switzerland.\nSince the collapse of communism in 1990, the country has extended its responsibilities and position in European and international affairs, supporting and establishing friendly relations with other nations. The main objectives are the accession of Albania to the European Union; the international recognition of Kosovo; the recognition of the expulsion of Cham Albanians; and helping and protecting the rights of Albanians in Montenegro, Macedonia, Greece, southern Serbia, Italy and the Albanian diaspora.\nFurthermore, the country became one of the first eastern European countries to join the North Atlantic Treaty Organization. Politicians of Albania considered admission to NATO as a top priority for the country. Since 1992, it has been extensively engaged with NATO, and has maintained its position as a stability factor and a strong ally of the United States and European Union in the troubled and divided region of the Balkans. At the April 2008 summit in Bucharest, NATO agreed to the accession of Albania and Croatia. One year later in April 2009, both countries joined the alliance. Although, the country received candidate status for the European Union membership in 2014, based on its 2009 application. Today, Albania plays a central role in the negotiation of the Berlin Process.\nAdministrative divisions.\nWith a total area of , Albania is divided into twelve administrative counties ('). The counties are further subdivided into 61 municipalities ('). In addition, the counties were further subdivided in 36 districts (\"\"), which became defunct in 2000.\nThe counties were created on 31 July 2000 to replace the thirty-six former districts. The government introduced a new administrative division to be implemented in 2015, whereby municipalities were reduced to 61, while rural ones called (') are abolished. The defunct municipalities are known as Neighborhoods or Villages ('). There are overall 2980 villages or communities in the entire country, formerly known as localities (\"\"). The municipalities are the first level of local governance, responsible for local needs and law enforcement. As part of the reform, major town centers in the country were physically redesigned and fa\u00e7ades painted to reflect a more Mediterranean look.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "67577", "revid": "49380818", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=67577", "title": "Demographics of Algeria", "text": "Demographic features of the population of Algeria include population density, ethnicity, education level, health of the populace, economic status, religious affiliations and other aspects. All figures are from National Office of Statistics Algeria and the United Nations Demographic Yearbooks, unless otherwise indicated.\nNinety-one percent of the Algerian population lives along the Mediterranean coast on 12% of the country's total land mass. 75% of the population is urban, and urbanization continues, despite government efforts to discourage migration to the cities.\n97% of the population follows Sunni Islam; the few non-Sunni Muslims are mainly Ibadis from the Mozabite valley at 1.3% (see Islam in Algeria).\nChristianity in Algeria constitutes about 1% of the total population. While significantly greater during the French colonial years, a mostly foreign Roman Catholic community still exists, as do some Protestants. The Jewish community of Algeria, which once constituted 2% of the total population, has substantially decreased due to emigration, mostly to France and Israel.\nAlgeria's educational system has grown rapidly since 1962. In 2022, there were almost 11 million pupils and 2 million students. Education is free and compulsory to age 16. Modest numbers of Algerian students study abroad, primarily in France and French-speaking Canada. In 2000, the government launched a major review of the country's educational system.\nPopulation size and structure.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAge distribution.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Hidden begin/styles.css\"/&gt;Population by Sex and Age Group (Census 16.IV.2008) (Data refer to population in housing units and collective living quarters only.): \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Hidden begin/styles.css\"/&gt;Population Estimates by Sex and Age Group (1.VII.2017):\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Hidden begin/styles.css\"/&gt;Population Estimates by Sex and Age Group (Estimates 1.VII.2020) (Data refer to national projections.):\n&lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;/includeonly&gt;\n&lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;/includeonly&gt;\nVital statistics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"template:sticky header/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Sort under/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Table alignment/tables.css\" /&gt;\nEthnic groups.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Pie chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nArabs make up 73.6% of the population of Algeria, Berbers make up 23.2%, Arabized Berbers make up 3%, and others constitute 0.2%. Phoenicians, Romans, Byzantines, Arabs, Turks as well as other ethnic groups have contributed to the ethnic makeup and genetic structure of the Algerian population. Descendants of Andalusian refugees are also present in the population of Algiers and other cities. Moreover, Spanish was spoken by these Aragonese and Castillian Morisco descendants deep into the 18th century, and even Catalan was spoken at the same time by Catalan Morisco descendants in the small town of Grish El-Oued.\nThe Arab population of Algeria is a result of the inflow of sedentary and nomadic Arab tribes from Arabia since the Muslim conquest of the Maghreb in the 7th century with a major wave in the 11th century. The majority of Algerians identify with an Arab-based identity due to the 20th century Arab nationalism. The ethnic Berbers are divided into many groups with varying languages. The largest of these are the Kabyles, who live in the Kabylia region east of Algiers, the Chaoui of North-East Algeria, the Tuaregs in the southern desert and the Shenwa people of North Algeria.\nDuring the colonial period, there was a large (15% in 1960) European population who became known as \"Pied-Noirs\". They were primarily of French, Spanish and Italian origin. Almost all of this population left during the war of independence or immediately after its end.\nGenetics.\nY-DNA frequencies in coastal Algeria.\nIn a recent genetic study by Semino et al. (2004), the Haplogroup J1 associated with the diffusion of Arabs was found at 35% in Algeria, which is one of the most common haplogroups in Algeria, like the rest of the Maghreb, along with E1b1b.\nRecent studies on the common J1 Y chromosome suggest it arrived over 10,000 years ago in North Africa, and M81/E3b2 is a Y chromosome specific to North African ancestry, dating to the Neolithic. A thorough study by Arredi et al. (2004) which analyzed populations from Algeria concludes that the North African pattern of Y-chromosomal variation (including both E3b2 and J haplogroups is largely of Neolithic origin, which suggests that the Neolithic transition in this part of the world was accompanied by demic diffusion of Afro-Asiatic\u2013speaking pastoralists from the Middle East. This Neolithic origin was later confirmed by Myles et al. (2005) which suggest that \"contemporary Berber populations possess the genetic signature of a past migration of pastoralists from the Middle East\", although later papers have suggested that this date could have been as longas ten thousand years ago, with the transition from the Oranian to the Capsian culture in North Africa.\nLanguages.\nArabic and Berber serve as both official languages and national languages in Algeria.\nAlgerian Arabic (Algerian Dziriya or Darja) is the language used by the majority of the population. Colloquial Algerian Arabic has many Berber and French loanwords.\nAlthough French has no official status, Algeria is the second-largest Francophone country in the world in terms of speakers, and French is widely used in government, media (newspapers, radio, local television), and both the education system (from primary school onwards) and academia due to Algeria's colonial history. It can be regarded as the \"de facto\" co-official language of Algeria. In 2008, 11.2 million Algerians could read and write in French. An Abassa Institute study in April 2000 found that 60% of households could speak and understand French. In recent decades the government has reinforced the study of French and TV programs have reinforced use of the language.\nAlgeria emerged as a bilingual state after 1962. Colloquial Arabic is spoken by about 83% of the population and Berber by 27.4%.\nReligion.\nIslam is the predominant religion with 99% of the population. There are about 150,000 Ibadis in the M'zab Valley in the region of Ghardaia.\nThere were an estimated 10,000 Christians in Algeria in 2008. In a 2009 study the UNO estimated there were 45,000 Catholics and 50,000\u2013100,000 Protestants in Algeria. A 2015 study estimates 380,000 Muslims converted to Christianity in Algeria."}
{"id": "67578", "revid": "49380818", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=67578", "title": "Demographics of Albania", "text": "Demographic features of the population of Albania include population density, ethnicity, education level, health of the populace, economic status, religious affiliations and other aspects. The demography of Albania is monitored by the Institute of Statistics of Albania. The institute has performed demographic censuses since the 1920s. The latest census in Albania was performed in September 2023.\nAlbania is a fairly ethnically and linguistically homogeneous country, with ethnic Albanians forming 91% of the total population in the country. The total population residing in Albania in September 2023 was 2,402,113 according to the most recent INSTAT census. The population pyramid shown in the infobox on this page does not reflect this population census with figures of the birth cohorts deflated, sometimes drastically, and the population pyramid deflated with no large outcrops at all, as the population numbers now are around half a million lower than the population pyramid shown. Page 16 in the latest Albanian population census shows the 2023 population pyramid overlaid on the population pyramid from the previous census. Click on the small number \"1\" after the population number in the infobox or at the end of the above first section for the Albanian 2023 census publication, which has the best depiction of the population pyramids, or look for the census population pyramids under External links, although the population pyramid under External links is chopped off at the top. (Written 19 April 2025). Also under external links click on population pyramids until 2100.\nThe first official population statistic for Albania was the 1923 census, when the country had a total of 823,000 inhabitants. Previous censuses were carried out by the Ottoman Empire, which are not yet available. A shift in administrative borders in 1913 make comparison of various periods more complicated. Maddison from 2001, estimates that in Albania about 200,000 people lived up to the year 1600, and that the population grew to 300,000 by 1700, implying an annual average growth rate of 0.4% in that period. However, population growth accelerated from the declaration of independence in 1912 to 1944 to 0.7% per year. After the second World War, population increase policies pursued by the communist government and a large life expectancy fueled a 2.5% annual increase for the following 45 years. Albania consistently had the largest birth rate and one of the smallest death rates in Europe at the time. The growth strained economic resources during communism in a Malthusian fashion that led to the collapse of the regime and the emigration of about 20 to 25 percent of the population in the following two decades. Albania experienced a demographic transition starting from 1960s, when crude birth rates began a slow decline, despite a government policy that called for a population increase. After the 1990s, the population showed an average decline of about 0.3% per year, caused by emigration. In the 2001 Census, the population declined to 3,023,000 from almost 3,300,000 million in 1990.\nThe permanent population of Albania at the 2023 census had decreased with 420,000 people compared to the 2011 census. The population density in 2023 was 84 inhabitants per square kilometre. The overall life expectancy in Albania at birth was 78 years in 2011. In 2011, for the first time in the history of population censuses in Albania, the population in urban areas (53.7%) was larger than the population of rural areas (46.3%). The Albanian language is the official language, but minority languages are officially used in some local government units. Albanian is declared as the native language by 98.76% of the population. The Albanian people are considered one of the most polyglot people in Europe. They generally speak more than two languages, which are mainly French, Greek, Italian, and English, which are increasing due to migration return, and new Greek and Italian communities in the country. The main religions of Albania are Islam (50.67%), Christianity (16%) of which Roman Catholicism (8.38%), Eastern Orthodoxy (7.22%) and Evangelicism (0.4%), other religions (0.15%), Believers without denomination (13.83%) and Atheists (3.55%) according to the 2023 census. There were also those who preferred not to answer (10.17%),\nThe main ethnic groups in Albania are Albanians (91%), Greeks (1%), Egyptians (0.5%), Romani people (0.4%), Bulgarians (0.3%), as well as Bosniaks, Aromanians, Macedonians, Serbs and Montenegrins.\nAlbania has a high Human Development Index of 0.764, ranking 75th in the world in 2016. In 2016, Albania had a total population of 2,786,026, 1,361,326 being males and 1,424,700 females. 42,922 inhabitants have left Albania and in the same year the number of immigrants in the country was 25,846.\nAlbanian demographics are difficult to ascertain and verify due to political corruption at the local and central level as noted by the Council of Europe.\nPopulation.\nWith an estimated population of 2.36 million in 2025, Albania ranks 142nd in the world by population. The population density is 101 inhabitants per square kilometre. The life expectancy at birth in 2024 was 80 years. The total fertility rate is 1.21 children per mother, the third lowest in Europe after Malta and Spain. There were 23,617 births and 21,286 deaths in Albania in 2023, a positive natural population increase as the number of births exceeded the number of deaths by 2,331. In 2025, the total dependency ratio of population in Albania is 57.1% and the median age is 44.3 years old.\nIn 2001, the number of households amounted to 726,895. The age structure was under 6 years by 10.8% and 65 years and older by 7.5%. However, the sex ratio amounted to 49.9% males and 50.1% females of the total population. In 2011, the total population was 2,831,741. The comparison of the figures shows that the population has decreased by 7.7% in about ten years. Large scale emigration and fertility decline are supposed to be the main causes of the observed population decrease. A preliminary estimate of the number of persons that refused to participate in the census is 29,355 (1.04%). This figure is based on the number of dwellings for which a refusal was recorded and is included in the total population. The total population is composed of 1,421,810 males (50.2%) and 1,409,931 females (49.8%). For the first time in the history of population censuses in the nation, the population in urban areas is larger than the population of rural areas. According to 2011 census preliminary results, 53.7 percent of the population lives in urban areas and 46.3 percent in rural areas.\nThe 2011 census is regarded as unreliable and inaccurate by the Council of Europe, showing incompatibility with the protection of national minorities. Also, the World Council of Churches sent letters to the United Nations Human Rights Council regarding the matter, having conducted their own questionnaire which showed major irregularities. It was the first census to include ethnicity, was struck by controversy since according to article 20 of the Census law, there is a $1,000 fine for anyone who declares anything other than what was written down on the individual's birth certificate. Some of the minorities, mainly the Greeks, boycotted the census. In 2024, the religious affiliation in Albania was 36.5% Muslims, 33.8% Irreligious believers, 8% Orthodox Christians, 7.9% Catholics, 7.2% Atheists and Agnostics, 5.2% Bektashi and 1.2% Protestants.\nTirana County is the area with the highest population of 811,649 in the country. Fier County remains the population with the second highest population with a total of 312,488. The Counties with the lowest result are Gjirokast\u00ebr, Kuk\u00ebs and Dib\u00ebr respectively with 70,331, 84,035 and 134,153 inhabitants. About 53.4% of Albania's population live in cities. The three largest counties account for half of the population.\nAlmost 53.4% of the population of Albania living in cities. According to the Institute of Statistics (INSTAT), the three largest counties account for half of the population. Over 1 million people live in Tirana and Durr\u00ebs, making it the largest urban area in Albania. The area of the capital Tirana, is one of largest cities in the Balkan Peninsula and ranks 7th with a population about 800,000.\nThe second largest is the port city of Durr\u00ebs, with a population of 201.110, followed by Vlor\u00eb, the largest city in southern Albania, with 141.513 inhabitants. The Institute of Statistics forecast that the population may even increase by less than a fifth from 763.560 by 2011 to 909.252\nby 2031, depending on the actual birth rate and the level of net migration.\n&lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;/includeonly&gt;\n&lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;/includeonly&gt;\n&lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;/includeonly&gt;\nVital statistics.\nAfter WWII.\nSource: Institute of Statistics (INSTAT)\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"template:sticky header/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Sort under/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Table alignment/tables.css\" /&gt;\nStructure of the population.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Hidden begin/styles.css\"/&gt;Population Estimates by Sex and Age Group (01.I.2021):\nEthnic groups.\nAlbania is inhabited mostly by Albanians. In the 2011 official census, 97.8% of those who disclosed their identity were Albanians (82.58% overall), while 2.3% stated other ethnicities (1.9% overall). Albania recognizes nine national minorities. These include Aromanians, Balkan Egyptians, Greeks, Bulgarians, Bosniaks, Macedonians, Montenegrins, Serbs, and Roma. As conducting a satisfactory census of ethnic minorities is one of the country's commitments to the European Union, the Government of Albania conducted an official census to clarify the ethnic composition of the population in 2011. However this census was deemed unreliable by internal and external organisations, including the Council of Europe and many of Albania's ethnic minority groups. The last census to include data on ethnic minorities was conducted in 1989. The census conducted in 2001 did not collect information about ethnic groups and nationalities in the population.\nSince the 21st century, Albania has also witnessed a significant settlement of foreign expats into the country, such as Italians, Chinese, Turks, Bengalis, Americans, Portuguese and other foreign workers. In 2021 there were as many as 15,000 foreigners living in Albania (0.5% of the population).\nAlbania also houses 3,200 Afghan refugees and over 3,800 Ukrainian refugees.\n &lt;br&gt;&lt;br&gt;.&lt;br&gt;.\nReligion.\nAccording to the 2023 census, there were 1,101,718 (45.86%) Muslims (mostly Sunni Muslims and Non-denominational Muslims) 201,530 (8.38%) Catholics, 173,645 (7.22%) Eastern Orthodox, 115,644 (4.81%) Bektashi Muslims, 9,658 (0.4%) Evangelicals, 3 670 (0.15%) of other religions, 332,155 (13.82%) believers without denomination, 85,311 (3.55%) Atheists and 378,782 (15.76%) did not provide an answer.\nThe Constitution of Albania extends freedom of religion to all citizens and the government generally respects this right in practice. It declares no official religion and provides for equality of all religions. However, the predominant religious communities enjoy a greater degree of official recognition and social status based on their historical presence in the country. All registered religious groups have the right to hold bank accounts and to own property and buildings. Religious freedoms have in large part been secured by the generally amicable relationship among religions. The Ministry of Education has the right to approve the curricula of religious schools to ensure their compliance with national education standards while the State Committee on Cults oversees implementation. There are also 68 vocational training centers administered by religious communities.\nGovernment policy and practice contributed to the generally free exercise of religion. The government is secular and the Ministry of Education asserts that public schools in the country are secular and that the law prohibits ideological and religious indoctrination. Religion is not taught in public schools.\nLanguage.\nThe Albanian language is the official language of Albania. It has two distinct dialects, Tosk, spoken in the south, and Gheg, spoken in the north. The Shkumbin river is the rough dividing line between the two dialects. The language is spoken primarily in Greece, Italy, Kosovo, North Macedonia and Montenegro. Centuries-old communities speaking Albanian-based dialects can be found scattered in Greece (Arvanites), Southern Italy, Sicily and Calabria (Arb\u00ebresh\u00eb) and in Ukraine. However, due to the large Albanian diaspora, the total number of speakers is much higher than the native speakers in Southern Europe. The four dialects include Tosk Albanian, Gheg Albanian, Arb\u00ebresh and Arvanitika.\nForeign languages spoken generally include one \u2013 or more \u2013 amongst the following: English, French, Greek, Italian. Language knowledge is increasing due to returning migrants, as well as new Greek and Italian communities in the country. In particular, Italian is widely spoken throughout Albania. La Francophonie states that 30,000 French speakers can be found in Albania. Greek, the language of the Greek minority of the south, is also very widespread in that region. Nowadays, knowledge of English is growing very rapidly, especially among the youth.\nThe ethnic minorities languages include Aromanian, Serbian, Macedonian, Bosnian, Bulgarian, Gorani, and Roma. Greek is the largest minority language of the country as well as the first largest foreign language. Approximately 5,000 Macedonian language-speakers can be found in Albania. Most of these living in the southeastern part of the country.\nEducation.\nLiteracy in the country is 98.7 percent. The school life expectancy (primary to tertiary education) of Albania is 16 years. The nation ranks 25th out of 167 countries in the world. In 2015, the overall literacy rate in Albania was 98.7%; the male literacy rate was 99.2% and female literacy rate was 98.3%.\nEducation for primary \"(arsimi fillor)\", secondary \"(arsimi i mes\u00ebm)\", and tertiary \"(arsimi universitar)\" levels are mostly supported by the state. Classes start in September or October and end in June or July. Albanian is the primary language of instruction in all public schools. Education takes place in three stages: primary, secondary, and pre-university. Primary education is obligatory from grade 1 to 9. Students must pass the graduation exams at the end of the 9th grade in order to continue their education. After primary school, the general education is provided at the secondary schools. Students get prepared for the Matura examination, allowing them to obtain their matura diploma, which grants admission to higher education. The country follows the Bologna model in accordance with the 2007 Law on 'Higher Education'. These institutions can be public or private, and may offer one, two or three levels of higher education depending on the institution.\nHealth.\nAlbania has a universal health care system. In 2000, Albania had the world's 55th best healthcare performance.\nAccording to the World Health Organization (WHO), Albania ranks around the 40th in the world in terms of life expectancy. Compared to other Western countries, Albania has a low rate of obesity.\nSource: \"UN World Population Prospects\"\nDiaspora.\nAlbanians have established communities in many regions throughout southern Europe. The modern Albanian diaspora was formed largely in the 15th century, when many Albanians emigrated to southern Italy, especially in Sicily and Calabria also to Greece, to escape either various socio-political difficulties and the Ottoman conquest. Other destinations include the US, Canada, Argentina, and Turkey.\nOver the last twenty years, Albania has experienced major demographic changes, having the highest population growth in Europe before the collapse of communism in the country. Albania has also shifted to population decline since the changes. However, during the final days of the transition from communism to capitalism in 1990, over a million Albanians moved to foreign countries. These include Australia, Canada, France, Germany, Italy, the Nordic countries, Switzerland and the United Kingdom. About 440,000 of them settled in Greece, where Albanians make up 60% of immigrants. 350,000 Albanians have migrated to Italy over the 1990s to 2000s, however the number has increased substantially. The situation in Kosovo is similar. More than a million Albanians have left Kosovo permanently since the late 1980s, not counting those fleeing the Kosovo War who have subsequently returned. Important destinations for Albanians emigrating from Kosovo have been Switzerland and Germany.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "67579", "revid": "7447121", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=67579", "title": "Foreign relations of Algeria", "text": " \nSince its independence from France in 1962, Algeria has pursued an activist foreign policy. In the 1960s and 1970s, Algeria was noted for its support of Third World policies and independence movements. Since its independence, Algeria has been a member of the Arab League, the African Union and of the United Nations.\nHistory of foreign relations since independence.\nDuring Ben Bella's presidency (1962\u20131965).\nFollowing its independence in 1962, Algeria developed deep ties with many foreign countries with a heavy presence in the global scene. The Algerian government, pursuing the dynamics that had started during the Algerian War for Independence and into the Cold War used the country's strategic geopolitical position \u2013 at the crossroads of Europe, Sub-Saharan Africa and the Arabian world \u2013 to assert its own interests. Algeria came to see itself as a full actor in the Cold War and not simply a bystander caught in a crossfire between the Western and Eastern blocs. Moreover, Algeria played a central role in the creation of the Third World as a global political project, using its position at the intersection of international agendas \u2013 notably between non-alignment and Afro-Asianism positions, and between anticolonial and socialist movements.\nAlgeria at the center of the competition between the Western and Eastern superpowers.\nBeing a newly independent country from colonial rule of a Western power \u2013 France \u2013 and having waged a liberation war with a socialist orientation, Algeria was naturally inclined to turn towards the Soviet Union and its allies. However, the country's strategic advantages increased its importance to the eyes of the Western bloc. Primarily, France wanted to preserve its interests in the oil and gas exploitations in Algeria. As Charles de Gaulle stated to the Algerian finance minister in 1963, \"If the Algerian government respects its commitments and takes into account our interests, it can count on our cooperation\". Hence, French economic aid continued to flow in Algeria, to ensure control on the petroleum and gas industry as well as maintain continued use of Algerian soil to run atomic tests in the Saharan desert. Under Ben Bella, diplomatic relations with France were normalized, the negotiations concerning oil and gas leading to an agreement in 1964. As to the United States, they wanted to prevent Algeria from becoming yet another socialist country joining the ranks of the Soviet bloc. Hence, along with minor military equipment, the United States provided Algeria with a food program (PL-480) which delivered free food to the population. However, the Algerian commitment to supporting anti-colonial movements in Africa went against American interests in the continent, which led to an indirect conflict with the United States and an increasingly hostile relationship between the two countries.\nDuring the war for independence, the ALN had already benefitted from equipment, training and advice from communist countries: the USSR (though its help was quite timid until the final months of the war), China, Yugoslavia and Czechoslovakia. Moreover, ALN delegations had visited China and North Vietnam to learn from their guerrilla strategies. Help and support from the communist bloc therefore increased after independence:\nThe Sino-Soviet split strengthened the two communist countries' competition for Algeria. However, China was inferior economically and militarily to the USSR, and could not match the USSR's industrial equipment and sophisticated armaments. Moreover, as the autogestion model proved to be widely inefficient, Algeria started to move towards a more centralized and Soviet-style economy by the end of 1964.\nAlgeria and the Third World project.\nBen Bella's foreign policy was marked by globalism, as it was not restrained to a specific culture nor geographical region. Rather, the project of the Third World and its diverse manifestations \u2013 the Non-Aligned Movement, the Afro-Asian People's Solidarity Organization, etc. \u2013 were meant to include all the developing and anti-imperialist countries, and Algeria intended to play a major role in its development.\nThis role is perfectly summarized by Amilcar Cabral's \u2013 leader of the African Party for the Independence of Guinea and Cape Verde \u2013 famous declaration that Algeria was the \"Mecca of revolution\". Indeed, the Algerian foreign policy had been influenced by Frantz Fanon's and other radical Third World thinkers' urgings to \"export revolution\" to other countries suffering from the yoke of imperial oppression. Therefore, the support of armed nationalists and revolutionaries was one of the foundations of Algerian relations with African countries. Ever since 1960, the FLN camps in Algeria's neighboring countries (Morocco, Tunisia and Mali) had been used to provide training and material help to revolutionary movements. By 1963, Algeria was offering refuge, funds, weapons and training to rebels from a dozen African countries: the left-wing opposition in Morocco, the secessionist Sanwi government in Ivory Coast, the Sawaba party in Niger, the CNL (or \"Simbas\") in Congo-Leopoldville, the UPC in Cameroon, the MPLA and FNLA in Angola (250 recruits were trained in Algeria and 70 tons of armaments were sent to this country), and several armed groups in Zanzibar, Portuguese Guinea, South Africa and Namibia.\nHowever, the Third World project also materialized through the various conferences and international organizations that united developing countries. Firstly, the Non-Aligned Movement, which was founded in Belgrade in 1961, and which Algeria joined shortly after its independence, defined the concept of non-alignment in the Cold War as a way for poor countries to exploit the conflicts and tensions and hence to promote their own interests. According to Jeffrey J. Byrne, the Algerian conception of the Non-Aligned Movement was that of a \"political, goal-oriented and geographically unbounded anti-imperial solidarity\". The Third World coalition could therefore encompass Latin America countries, and even Europe ones like Yugoslavia. Algeria was particularly important in this sense, as it acted as a bridge between blocs and regions. For instance, its position at the crossroads of the Arab and the sub-Saharan worlds enabled Algeria to create links and unity between these two regions: at Algeria's request, Arab countries supported Angolan and other African revolutions, while African countries endorsed the Palestinian cause. However, these global Third World solidarity links went further than Africa: for example, the National Liberation Front of South Vietnam opened a permanent office in Algiers (one of only two that were located in non-communist countries). One of the most successful Third World projects was the Organization of African Unity, founded in Addis Ababa in 1963 to formalize and institutionalize the main Third World principles. Moreover, Algeria advocated for the creation within the organization of a \"liberation committee\", the \"Committee of Nine\", to support national liberation movements (even by military means). This embodies the Algerian view of Third Worldism: the institutionalization of collective defiance towards the imperial system.\nTherefore, if the multipolarity of international relations \u2013 the traditional East versus West bipolarism, but also the intra-communist poles and the development of Third World alternatives \u2013 had benefitted the non-aligned states such as Algeria, the latter's increasing reliance on the Soviet Union \u2013 especially since the Sand War against Morocco in 1963 \u2013 risked jeopardizing the country's independence and its relations with other powers, such as the United States or China.\nDuring Boumediene's presidency (1965\u20131978).\nAlgerian foreign relations during the presidency of Houari Boumediene marked a shift towards more stable and Algero-centered policies, in opposition to Ben Bella's cosmopolitism. However, this greater focus on the country's economic needs and traditional Islamic culture did not end the period of international ambitions.\nAlgeria's centrality in the Third World.\nPan-Africanism and Pan-Arabism were strengthened during the Boumediene era. Algeria had joined the Arab League in 1962, and hosted its 1973 summit in Algiers. This strong relation with other Arab countries, notably with Egypt, was reinforced after Boumediene's seizure of power. For instance, in 1966, Egyptian president Gamal Abdel Nasser sent thousands of teachers to support Algeria in the Arabization of its educational system. After Nasser's death in 1970, Boumediene increasingly represented the political project of Pan-Arabism; and in 1973, Algeria played a major role in the organization of the war against Israel, as well as calling for oil to be used as a weapon in the OPEC. Moreover, in 1969, Algiers hosted the Pan-African Cultural Festival: this grandiose display of an African identity, forged from the continent's common experience of Western imperialism, reunited anticolonial militants from numerous countries of the Third World. Far from being opposed, Pan-Arabism and Pan-Africanism were, under Algerian influence, united: Boumedi\u00e8ne summoned an extraordinary session of the Organization for African Unity following the Kippur War in 1973, which resulted in the creation of a special committee to coordinate the Organization and the Arab League, and in the break of diplomatic relations of 42 African states with Israel. Finally, Boumedi\u00e8ne presided over a larger and more powerful Non-Aligned Movement in 1973.\nAlgeria's approach to international politics was motivated by the need for a \"liberation\" from the Western neocolonial economic superiority. Hence, in October 1967, Algiers hosted the meeting of the \"Group of 77\", which united 77 developing countries on major revendications: a global reform of the terms of trade and a greater collaboration between Third World countries to set the prices for their raw materials. Furthermore, the main points of Boumediene's address to the United Nations General Assembly in 1974 \u2013 reparations for colonization and a transfer of resources from North to South \u2013 were adopted by UN. The notion of a \"new international economic order\" emerged as a way to reshape the world economy to the benefit of developing countries, based on the principle of sovereign equality between states.\nA careful equilibrium between Cold War powers.\nBoumediene took pride in Algeria's non-aligned status, by claiming its distance from both Soviet-style socialism and Western capitalism, while the country enjoyed an increasing prosperity. However, support from the Communist bloc did not halt. Indeed, because of their dependence on raw materials and their lack of hard currencies, commerce between Third World countries was negligible. The USSR, on the contrary, was able to deliver military equipment, industrial expertise, and trade outputs: the Soviets replaced France as the first destination for Algerian wine, and provided 200,000 tons of wheat when a drought hit the country in 1966.\nOnce again, the support Algeria received from the Soviet bloc was not exclusive to that of the Western bloc. Even though Boumediene took strong public stands, as when he claimed in 1969 after a summer of violence against Algerians living in France that if the French government could not insure the security of Algerian immigrants, he would repatriate them regardless of the cost, Algerian-French relations were progressively normalized during the 1970 decade. This posturing, like the nationalization of oil in 1971, served to increase his popularity in internal politics. However, France remained a model of prosperity, Algeria was still heavily dependent on France economically, and in 1975, French President Val\u00e9ry Giscard d'Estaing made the first presidential visit since independence. More generally, Algeria continued to do business with the West, and avoided to be overly dependent on Soviet support. Indeed, despite the break of relations with the United States after the Six-Day War in 1967, the Americans had almost replaced France as Algeria's primary trade partner by the early 1970s. Therefore, the competition between the West and the USSR gave Algeria opportunities to diversify its economic partnerships.\nDuring Bouteflika's presidency (1999 - 2019).\nSince his inauguration in 1999, President Abdelaziz Bouteflika sought to extend Algeria's international influence, traveling extensively throughout the world. In July 2001, he became the first Algerian President to visit the US White House in 16 years.\nHe made official visits, among others, to France, South Africa, Italy, Spain, Germany, China, Japan, South Korea and Russia.\nAfter Bouteflika (2019-).\nOn 24 August 2021, Algeria cut diplomatic relations with neighbouring Morocco, accusing Morocco of supporting a separatist group and hostile actions against Algeria. Morocco called the decision unjustified.\nAfter the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine, Algeria has tried to keep good relations with both Russia and the West by remaining neutral at the UN on other votes.\nDiplomatic relations.\nList of countries which Algeria maintains diplomatic relations with:\nAfrica.\nAlgeria has friendly relations with other countries in the Maghreb, Tunisia and Libya, and with Sub-Saharan countries Mali and Niger. Algeria has taken the lead in working on issues related to the African continent. Host of the Organisation of African Unity Conference in 2000, Algeria also was key in bringing Ethiopia and Eritrea to the peace table in 2000. It has worked closely with other African countries to establish the New Partnership for Africa's Development. Algeria has taken a lead in reviving the Arab Maghreb Union with other regional Arab countries.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "67580", "revid": "49380818", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=67580", "title": "Demographics of Andorra", "text": "This is a demography of the population of Andorra, including population density, ethnicity, education level, health of the populace, economic status, religious affiliations and other aspects of the population.\nSpaniards form the largest ethnic group in Andorra, followed by Andorrans, Portuguese, and French.\nThe national language of the country is Catalan, a Romance language in the Western Romance group, spoken by over 9 million people in nearby regions of Spain and France. While Catalan is the only official language, Spanish is particularly widespread, and French and Portuguese are also commonly spoken due to immigration and geographic proximity. Most residents of Andorra are multilingual, typically speaking Catalan and their native language, as a significant portion of the population was born outside the country.\nThe vast majority of the population lives in the seven urbanized valleys that form Andorra's political districts, the seven \"parr\u00f2quies\" (parishes):\nPopulation size and structure.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nPopulation.\nThe latest population figure (2025) of Andorra is 87,971.\nTotal: 48.8 years\nMale: 48.7 years\nFemale: 48.8 years (2024 est.)\nAt birth: 1.06 male(s)/female\nUnder 15 years: 1.06 male(s)/female\n15-64 years: 1.05 male(s)/female\n65 years and over: 1.03 male(s)/female\nTotal population: 1.05 male(s)/female (2024 est.)\nStructure of the population.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Hidden begin/styles.css\"/&gt;Population Estimates by Sex and Age Group (01.I.2021) (Population statistics are compiled from registers.): \nVital statistics.\nBirths and deaths.\nFrom state sources:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"template:sticky header/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Sort under/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Table alignment/tables.css\" /&gt;\nTotal: 3.3 deaths/1,000 live births\n\"country comparison to the world:\" 200\nMale: 3.4 deaths/1,000 live births\nFemale: 3.2 deaths/1,000 live births (2024 est.)\nTotal population: 83.8 years\nCountry comparison to the world: 10\nMale: 81.6 years\nFemale: 86.2 years (2024 est.)\nSpanish 34.3%\nAndorrans 32.1%\nPortuguese 10%\nFrench 5.6%\nOther 18%\n(These figures represent population by country of birth, 2024 est.)\nCatalan (official)\nSpanish\nFrench\nPortuguese\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "67581", "revid": "45789152", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=67581", "title": "Ophioglossales", "text": ""}
{"id": "67582", "revid": "1312709550", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=67582", "title": "Politics of Andorra", "text": "The politics of Andorra take place in a framework of a parliamentary constitutional diarchy, and a multi-party system. Executive power is exercised by the government, with the Head of Government of Andorra as chief executive. Legislative power is vested in both the government and parliament. The judiciary is independent of the executive and the legislature.\nBefore 1993, Andorra's political system had no clear division of powers into executive, legislative, and judicial branches. A constitution ratified and approved in 1993 establishes Andorra as a sovereign parliamentary democracy that retains the Bishop of Urgell and president of France as co-princes and heads of state. However, the head of government retains executive power. The two co-princes serve coequally with limited powers that do not include an individual veto over government acts (however, a bill can in effect be \"vetoed\" if both do not sign the legislation). They are each represented in Andorra by a personal representative.\nThe fundamental impetus for this political transformation was a recommendation by the Council of Europe in 1990 that, if Andorra wished to attain full integration in the European Union (EU), it should adopt a modern constitution that guarantees the rights of those living and working there. A Tripartite Commission \u2013 made up of representatives of the co-princes, the General Council, and the Executive Council \u2013 was formed in 1990 and finalized the draft constitution in April 1991, making the new constitution a fact.\nOne remaining, symbolic, legacy of Andorra's special relationship with France and Spain, is that the principality has no postal service of its own \u2013 French and Spanish postal services operate side by side, although each of them issues separate stamps for Andorra, instead of using their own.\nGovernment.\nExecutive branch.\nUnder the 1993 constitution, the co-princes continue as heads of state, but the head of government retains executive power. The two co-princes serve coequally with limited powers that do not include veto over government acts. Both are represented in Andorra by a delegate, although since 1993, France and Spain have their own embassies. As co-princes of Andorra, the Bishop of Urgell and the President of France maintain supreme authority in approval of all international treaties with France and Spain, as well as all those that deal with internal security, defense, Andorran territory, diplomatic representation, and judicial or penal cooperation. Although the institution of the co-princes is viewed by some as an anachronism, the majority sees them as both a link with Andorra's traditions and a way to balance the power of Andorra's two much larger neighbors.\nThe way the two princes are chosen makes Andorra one of the most politically distinct nations on earth. One co-prince is the sitting Bishop of Urgell of the Catalan city of La Seu d'Urgell, currently Josep-Llu\u00eds Serrano Pentinat. The other is the sitting President of France, currently Emmanuel Macron (it has historically been any head of state of France, including kings and emperors of the French). As neither prince lives in Andorra, their role is almost entirely ceremonial.\nIn 1981, the Executive Council, consisting of the Cap de Govern (head of government) and seven ministers, was established. Every four years, after the general elections, the General Council elects the head of government, who, in turn, chooses the other members of the Executive Council.\nLegislative branch.\nAndorra's main legislative body is the 28-member General Council (Parliament). The sindic (president), the subsindic and the members of the Council are elected in the general elections to be held every four years. The Council meets throughout the year on dates set by tradition or as required.\nAt least one representative from each parish must be present for the General Council to meet. Historically, within the General Council, four deputies apiece from each of the seven parishes have provided representation. This system allowed parishes with as few as 350 voters the same number of representatives as larger parishes with up to 2,600 voters. To reduce this imbalance, a provision in the new constitution modified the structure and format for electing Council members. Under the new format, half of the representatives are chosen by the traditional system, and the other half selected from nationwide lists.\nA sindic and a subsindic are chosen by the General Council to implement its decisions. They serve three-year terms and may be reappointed once. They receive an annual salary. Sindics have virtually no discretionary powers, and all policy decisions must be approved by the Council as a whole.\nJudicial branch.\nThe judicial system is independent. Courts apply the customary law of Andorra, supplemented with Roman law and customary Catalan law. Civil cases are first heard by the Court of \"Batlles\" \u2013 a group of four judges, two chosen by each co-prince. Appeals are heard in the Court of Appeals. The highest body is the five-member Superior Court of Justice.\nPolitical parties and elections.\nThe last election for the General Council was held on 2 April 2023.\nAdministrative divisions.\nAndorra is formed by seven parishes (parr\u00f2quies, singular - parr\u00f2quia); Andorra la Vella, Canillo, Encamp, La Massana, Escaldes-Engordany, Ordino, Sant Julia de Loria.\nSecurity.\nThe Government of Andorra maintains a small ceremonial Army, a well-equipped modernized Police Corps, a Fire Brigade, a Mountain Rescue Service, and the GIPA, which is a para-military unit trained in hostage and counter-terrorism roles.\nPolitical conditions.\nAndorra's young democracy is in the process of redefining its political party system. Three out of the five parties that dominated the political scene in past years have dissolved. The Liberal Union (UL) tried to reshape itself and change its name to that of the Liberal Party of Andorra (PLA) to offer a political umbrella to small parties and groups that have not yet found their place. Another party, the Social Democratic Party of Andorra, has been formed. It was designed to attract parties previously aligned with socialist ideals. Since the 1993 constitutional ratification, three coalition governments have formed. For instance, one government united the UL, the CNA (National Andorran Coalition), and another relatively small party with Marc Forn\u00e9 Moln\u00e9, a Liberal Unionist, as Cap de Govern, or head of government. In the 2011 election, however, the Democrats for Andorra won a landslide victory over the Social Democrats, capturing 20 of the legislature's 28 seats, with the Social Democrats winning six and the Lauredian Union winning two.\nIn recent years the government has instituted many reforms. It legalized political parties and trade unions, and legally guaranteed freedom of religion and assembly. There has also been a redefinition of the qualifications for Andorran citizenship, a major issue in a country where only 13,000 of 65,000 residents were legal citizens. In 1995, a law to broaden citizenship was passed, but citizenship remains difficult to acquire. Only Andorran nationals are able to transmit citizenship automatically to their children, a legal principal known as jus sanguinis. Lawful residents in Andorra who are nationals of France, Spain or Portugal may obtain citizenship after 10 years of residency. Other nationals may obtain citizenship after 20 years of residency. Children of residents may opt for Andorran citizenship after age 18 if they resided most of their lives in Andorra. Mere birth on Andorran soil, a legal principal known as jus soli, does not confer citizenship. Dual nationality is not permitted. Non-citizens are allowed to own only a 33% share of a company. Only after residing in the country for 20 years may they own 100% of a company. A proposed law to reduce the necessary years from 20 to 10 was debated in Parliament.\nBy creating a modern legal framework for the country, the 1993 constitution has allowed Andorra to begin a shift from an economy based largely on duty-free shopping to one based on international banking and finance. Despite promising new changes, it is likely that Andorra will, at least for the short term, continue to confront a number of difficult issues arising from the large influx of foreign residents and the need to develop modern social and political institutions. In addition to questions of Andorran nationality and immigration policy, other priority issues include allowing freedom of association, dealing with housing scarcities and speculation in real estate, developing the tourism industry, and renegotiating the relationship with the European Union.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
