{"id": "72727", "revid": "9023670", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72727", "title": "Green Revolution", "text": "Agricultural developments in 1950s\u20131960s\nThe Green Revolution, or the Third Agricultural Revolution, was a period during which technology transfer initiatives resulted in a significant increase in crop yields. These changes in agriculture initially emerged in developed countries in the early 20th century and subsequently spread globally until the late 1980s. In the late 1960s, farmers began incorporating new technologies, including high-yielding varieties of cereals, particularly dwarf wheat and rice, and the widespread use of chemical fertilizers (to produce their high yields, the new seeds require far more fertilizer than traditional varieties), pesticides, and controlled irrigation. \nAt the same time, newer methods of cultivation, including mechanization, were adopted, often as a package of practices to replace traditional agricultural technology. This was often in conjunction with loans conditional on policy changes being made by the developing nations adopting them, such as privatizing fertilizer manufacture and distribution.\nBoth the Ford Foundation and the Rockefeller Foundation were heavily involved in its initial development in Mexico. A key leader was agricultural scientist Norman Borlaug, the \"Father of the Green Revolution\", who received the Nobel Peace Prize in 1970. He is credited with saving over a billion people from starvation. Another important scientific figure was Yuan Longping, whose work on hybrid rice varieties is credited with saving at least as many lives. The basic approach was the development of high-yielding varieties of cereal grains, expansion of irrigation infrastructure, modernization of management techniques, distribution of hybridized seeds, synthetic fertilizers, and pesticides to farmers. As crops began to reach the maximum improvement possible through selective breeding, genetic modification technologies were developed to allow for continued efforts.\nStudies show that the Green Revolution contributed to widespread eradication of poverty, averted hunger for millions, raised incomes, increased greenhouse gas emissions, reduced land use for agriculture, and contributed to declines in infant mortality.\nHistory.\nUse of the term.\nThe term \"Green Revolution\" was first used by William S. Gaud, the administrator of the U.S. Agency for International Development (USAID), in a speech on 8 March 1968. He noted the spread of the new technologies as: \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nDevelopment in Mexico.\nMexico has been called the 'birthplace' and 'burial ground' of the Green Revolution. It began with great promise and it has been argued that \"during the twentieth century two 'revolutions' transformed rural Mexico: the Mexican Revolution (1910\u20131920) and the Green Revolution (1940\u20131970).\"\nThe genesis of the Green Revolution was a lengthy visit in 1940 by U.S. Vice President-elect Henry A. Wallace, who had served as U.S. Secretary of Agriculture during President Franklin Roosevelt's first two terms, and before government service, had founded a company, Pioneer Hi-Bred International, that had revolutionized the hybridization of seed corn to greatly increase crop yields. He became appalled at the meager corn yields in Mexico, where 80 percent of the people lived off the land, and a Mexican farmer had to work as much as 500 hours to produce a single bushel of corn, about 50 times longer than the typical Iowa farmer planting hybrid seed. Wallace persuaded the Rockefeller Foundation to fund an agricultural station in Mexico to hybridize corn and wheat for arid climates, and to lead it, he hired a young Iowa agronomist named Norman Borlaug. \nThe project was supported by the Mexican government under new President Manuel \u00c1vila Camacho, and the U.S. government, the United Nations, and the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO). For the U.S. government, its neighbor Mexico was an important experimental case in the use of technology and scientific expertise in agriculture that became the model for international agricultural development. Mexico sought to transform agricultural productivity, particularly with irrigated rather than dry-land cultivation in its northwest, to solve its problem of lack of food self-sufficiency. In the center and south of Mexico, where large-scale production faced challenges, agricultural production languished. Increased production promised food self-sufficiency in Mexico to feed its growing and urbanizing population with the increase in a number of calories consumed per Mexican. The science of hybridization was seen as a valuable way to feed the poor and would relieve some pressure of the land redistribution process. In general, the success of \"Green Revolution\" depended on the use of machinery for cultivation and harvest, on large-scale agricultural enterprises with access to credit (often from foreign investors), government-supported infrastructure projects, and access to low-wage agricultural workers.\nWithin eight years of Wallace's visit, Mexico had no need to import food, for the first time since 1910; within 20 years, corn production had tripled, and wheat production had increased five-fold. In 1943, Mexico imported half of its wheat requirements, however by 1956 it had become self-sufficient and it was exporting half a million tons of wheat by 1964. Within 30 years, Borlaug was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize for ultimately saving two billion people from starvation.\nMexico was the recipient of knowledge and technology of the Green Revolution, and it was an active participant with financial supports from the government for agriculture and Mexican agronomists. In the aftermath of the Mexican Revolution, the government had redistributed land to ejidatarios in some parts of the country which had broken the back of the hacienda system. During the presidency of L\u00e1zaro C\u00e1rdenas (1934\u20131940), land reform in Mexico reached its apex in the center and south of Mexico. Agricultural productivity had fallen significantly by the 1940s.\nAfter Borlaug's agricultural station was established, in 1941, a team of U.S. scientists, Richard Bradfield (Cornell University), Paul C. Mangelsdorf (Harvard University), and Elvin Charles Stakman (under whom Borlaug had studied at the University of Minnesota) surveyed Mexican agriculture to recommend policies and practices. In 1943, the Mexican government founded the International Maize and Wheat Improvement Center (CIMMYT), which became a base for international agricultural research. \nAgriculture in Mexico had been a sociopolitical issue, a key factor in some regions' participation in the Mexican Revolution. It was also a technical issue enabled by a cohort of trained agronomists who advised ejidatarios on how to increase productivity. In the post-World War II era, the government sought development in agriculture that bettered technological aspects of agriculture in regions not dominated by small-scale ejido cultivators. This drive for agricultural transformation brought Mexico self-sufficiency in food, and in the political sphere during the Cold War, helped stem unrest and the appeal of Communism.\nThe Mexican government created the Mexican Agricultural Program (MAP) to be the lead organization in raising productivity. Mexico became the showcase for extending the Green Revolution to other areas of Latin America and beyond, into Africa and Asia. New breeds of maize, beans, and wheat produced bumper crops with additional inputs (such as fertilizer and pesticides) and careful cultivation. Many Mexican farmers who had been dubious about the scientists or hostile to them (often a mutual relationship of discord) came to see the scientific approach to agriculture as worth adopting.\nThe requirements for the full package of inputs of new strains of seeds, fertilizer, synthetic pesticides, and water were often not within the reach of small-scale farmers. The application of pesticides could be hazardous for farmers. Their use often damaged the local ecology, contaminating waterways and endangering the health of workers and newborns.\nOne of the participants in the Mexican experiment, Edwin J. Wellhausen, summarized the factors leading to its initial success. These include: high yield plants without disease resistivity, adaptability, and ability to use fertilizers; improved use of soils, adequate fertilizers, and control of weeds and pests; and \"a favorable ratio between the cost of fertilizers (and other investments) to the price of the produce.\"\nIR8 rice and the Philippines.\nIn 1960 during the administration of President Carlos P. Garcia the Government of the Republic of the Philippines with the Ford Foundation and the Rockefeller Foundation established the International Rice Research Institute (IRRI). A rice crossing between Dee-Geo-woo-gen and Peta was done at IRRI in 1962. In 1966, one of the breeding lines became a new cultivar: IR8 rice. The administration of President Ferdinand Marcos made the promotion of IR8 the lynchpin of the Masagana 99 program, along with a credit program. The new variety required the use of fertilizers and pesticides but produced substantially higher yields than the traditional cultivars. Annual rice production in the Philippines increased from 3.7 to 7.7\u00a0million tons in two decades. The switch to IR8 rice made the Philippines a rice exporter for the first time in the 20th century, though imports still exceeded exports, according to data from the United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization. From 1966 to 1986, the Philippines imported around 2,679,000 metric tons and exported only 632,000 metric tons of milled rice. By 1980, however, problems with the credit scheme rendered the loans accessible only to rich landowners while leaving poor farmers in debt.\n The program was also noted to have become a vehicle of political patronage.\nStart in India.\nIn 1961, Norman Borlaug was invited to India by the adviser to the Indian Minister of Agriculture Dr. M. S. Swaminathan. Despite bureaucratic hurdles imposed by India's grain monopolies, the Ford Foundation and Indian government collaborated to import wheat seed from the International Maize and Wheat Improvement Center (CIMMYT). The state of Punjab was selected by the Indian government to be the first site to try the new crops because of its reliable water supply, the presence of Indus plains which make it one of the most fertile plains on earth, and a history of agricultural success. India began its own Green Revolution program of plant breeding, irrigation development, and financing of agrochemicals.\nIndia soon adopted IR8 rice. In 1968, Indian agronomist S.K. De Datta published his findings that IR8 rice yielded about 5 tons per hectare with no fertilizer, and almost 10 tons per hectare under optimal conditions. This was 10 times the yield of traditional rice. IR8 was a success throughout Asia and dubbed the \"Miracle Rice\". IR8 was also developed into Semi-dwarf IR36.\nIn the 1960s, rice yields in India were about two tons per hectare; by the mid-1990s, they had risen to 6 tons per hectare. In the 1970s, rice cost about $550 a ton; in 2001, it cost under $200 a ton. India became one of the world's most successful rice producers, and is now a major rice exporter, shipping nearly 4.5\u00a0million tons in 2006.\nGreen Revolution in China.\nChina's large and increasing population meant that increasing food production, principally rice, was a top priority for the Chinese government. When the People's Republic of China was established in 1949, the Chinese Communist Party made it a priority to pursue agricultural development. They sought to solve China's food security issues by focusing on traditional crop production, biological pest control, the implementation of modern technology and science, creating food reserves for the population, high-yield seed varieties, multi-cropping, controlled irrigation, and protecting food security. This began with the Agrarian Reform Law of 1950, which ended private land ownership and gave land back to the peasants. Unlike with Mexico, the Philippines, India, or Brazil, the beginning of China's unique Green Revolution were unrelated to the American \"Green Revolution.\" Rather, it was characterized by the government's sponsorship of agricultural research in concert with peasant knowledge and feedback, earlier international research, nature-based pest control and many other non-industrial agricultural practices, in order to feed the rapidly growing population.\nProminent in the development of productive hybrid rice was Yuan Longping, whose research hybridized wild strains of rice with existing strains. He has been dubbed \"the father of hybrid rice\", and was considered a national hero in China. Chinese rice production met the nation's food security needs, and today they are a leading exporter of rice. In recent years, however, extensive use of ground water for irrigation has drawn down aquifers and extensive use of fertilizers has increased greenhouse gas emissions. China has not expanded the area of cultivable land, China's unique high yields per hectare gave China the food security it sought. In 1979, there were 490 million Chinese people living in poverty. In 2014, there were only 82 million. Half of China's population had once been hungry and in poverty, but by 2014, only 6% remained so.\nBrazil's agricultural revolution.\nBrazil's vast inland cerrado region was regarded as unfit for farming before the 1960s because the soil was too acidic and poor in nutrients, according to Norman Borlaug. However, from the 1960s, vast quantities of lime (pulverized chalk or limestone) were poured on the soil to reduce acidity. The effort went on for decades; by the late 1990s, between 14 million and 16 million tons of lime were being spread on Brazilian fields each year. The quantity rose to 25 million tons in 2003 and 2004, equaling around five tons of lime per hectare. As a result, Brazil has become the world's second biggest soybean exporter. Soybeans are also widely used in animal feed, and the large volume of soy produced in Brazil has contributed to Brazil's rise to become the biggest exporter of beef and poultry in the world. Several parallels can also be found in Argentina's boom in soybean production as well.\nProblems in Africa.\nThere have been numerous attempts to introduce the successful concepts from the Mexican and Indian projects into Africa. These programs have generally been less successful. Reasons cited include widespread corruption, insecurity, a lack of infrastructure, and a general lack of will on the part of the governments. Yet environmental factors, such as the availability of water for irrigation, the high diversity in slope and soil types in one given area are also reasons why the Green Revolution is not so successful in Africa.\nA recent program in western Africa is attempting to introduce a new high yielding 'family' of rice varieties known as \"New Rice for Africa\" (NERICA). NERICA varieties yield about 30% more rice under normal conditions and can double yields with small amounts of fertilizer and very basic irrigation. However, the program has been beset by problems getting the rice into the hands of farmers, and to date the only success has been in Guinea, where it currently accounts for 16% of rice cultivation.\nAfter a famine in 2001 and years of chronic hunger and poverty, in 2005 the small African country of Malawi launched the \"Agricultural Input Subsidy Program\" by which vouchers are given to smallholder farmers to buy subsidized nitrogen fertilizer and corn seeds. Within its first year, the program was reported to have had extreme success, producing the largest corn harvest of the country's history, enough to feed the country with tons left over. The program has advanced yearly ever since. Various sources claim that the program has been an unusual success, hailing it as a \"miracle\". Malawi experienced a 40% drop in corn production in 2015 and 2016.\nA 2021, a randomized control trial on temporary subsidies for corn farmers in Mozambique found that adoption of Green Revolution technology led to increased yields in both the short- and long-term.\nConsultative Group on International Agricultural Research.\nIn 1970, the year that Borlaug won the Nobel Peace Prize, foundation officials proposed a worldwide network of agricultural research centers under a permanent secretariat. This was further supported and developed by the World Bank; on 19 May 1971, the Consultative Group on International Agricultural Research (CGIAR) was established, co-sponsored by the FAO, IFAD, and UNDP. CGIAR has added many research centers throughout the world.\nCGIAR has responded, at least in part, to criticisms of Green Revolution methodologies. This began in the 1980s, and mainly was a result of pressure from donor organizations. Methods like agroecosystem analysis and farming system research have been adopted to gain a more holistic view of agriculture.\nAgricultural production and food security.\nAccording to a 2012 review in \"Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences\" of the existing academic literature, the Green Revolution \"contributed to widespread poverty reduction, averted hunger for millions of people, and avoided the conversion of thousands of hectares of land into agricultural cultivation.\"\nTechnological Developments.\nThe Green Revolution spread technologies that already existed but had not been widely implemented outside industrialized nations. Two kinds of technologies were used in the Green Revolution, on the issues of cultivation and breeding. The technologies in cultivation are targeted at providing excellent growing conditions, which include modern irrigation projects, pesticides, and synthetic nitrogen fertilizer. The breeding technologies aimed at improving crop varieties developed through science-based methods including hybrids, combining modern genetics with plant-breeding trait selections.\nHigh-yielding varieties.\nThe novel technological development of the Green Revolution was the production of novel wheat cultivars. Agronomists bred high-yielding varieties of corn, wheat, and rice. HYVs have higher nitrogen-absorbing potential than other varieties. Since cereals that absorbed extra nitrogen would typically lodge, or fall over before harvest, semi-dwarfing genes were bred into their genomes. A Japanese dwarf wheat cultivar Norin 10 developed by Japanese agronomist Gonjiro Inazuka, which was sent to Orville Vogel at Washington State University by Cecil Salmon, was instrumental in developing Green Revolution wheat cultivars. In the 1960s, with a food crisis in Asia, the spread of high-yielding variety rice greatly increased.\nDr. Norman Borlaug, the \"Father of the Green Revolution\", bred rust-resistant cultivars which have strong and firm stems, preventing them from falling over under extreme weather at high levels of fertilization. CIMMYT (Centro Internacional de Mejoramiento de Maiz y Trigo\u00a0\u2013 International Center for Maize and Wheat Improvements) conducted these breeding programs and helped spread high-yielding varieties in Mexico and countries in Asia like India and Pakistan. These programs led to the doubling of harvests in these countries.\nPlant scientists figured out several parameters related to the high yield and identified the related genes which control the plant height and tiller number. With advances in molecular genetics, the mutant genes responsible for \"Arabidopsis thaliana\" genes (GA 20-oxidase, \"ga1\", \"ga1-3\"), wheat reduced-height genes (\"Rht\") and a rice semidwarf gene (\"sd1\") were cloned. These were identified as gibberellin biosynthesis genes or cellular signaling component genes. Stem growth in the mutant background is significantly reduced leading to the dwarf phenotype. Photosynthetic investment in the stem is reduced dramatically as the shorter plants are inherently more stable mechanically. Assimilates become redirected to grain production, amplifying in particular the effect of chemical fertilizers on commercial yield.\nHigh-yielding varieties significantly outperform traditional varieties in the presence of adequate irrigation, pesticides, and fertilizers. In the absence of these inputs, traditional varieties may outperform high-yielding varieties. Therefore, several authors have challenged the apparent superiority of high-yielding varieties not only compared to the traditional varieties alone, but by contrasting the monocultural system associated with high-yielding varieties with the polycultural system associated with traditional ones.\nProduction increases.\nBy one 2021 estimate, the Green Revolution increased yields by 44% between 1965 and 2010. Cereal production more than doubled in developing nations between the years 1961\u20131985. Yields of rice, corn, and wheat increased steadily during that period. The production increases can be attributed equal to irrigation, fertilizer, and seed development, at least in the case of Asian rice.\nWhile agricultural output increased as a result of the Green Revolution, the energy input to produce a crop has increased faster, so that the ratio of crops produced to energy input has decreased over time. Green Revolution techniques also heavily rely on agricultural machinery and chemical fertilizers, pesticides, herbicides, and defoliants; which, as of 2014, are derived from crude oil, making agriculture increasingly reliant on crude oil extraction. \nEffects on food security.\nThe energy for the Green Revolution was provided by fossil fuels in the form of fertilizers (natural gas), pesticides (oil), and hydrocarbon fueled irrigation. The development of synthetic nitrogen fertilizer has significantly supported global population growth\u00a0\u2014 it has been estimated that almost half the people on the Earth are currently fed as a result of synthetic nitrogen fertilizer use. According to ICIS Fertilizers managing editor Julia Meehan, \"People don't realise that 50% of the world's food relies on fertilisers.\"\nThe world population has grown by about five billion since the beginning of the Green Revolution. India saw annual wheat production rise from 10 million tons in the 1960s to 73\u00a0million in 2006. The average person in the developing world consumes roughly 25% more calories per day now than before the Green Revolution. Between 1950 and 1984, as the Green Revolution transformed agriculture around the globe, world grain production increased by 160%.\nThe production increases fostered by the Green Revolution are often credited with having helped to avoid widespread famine, and for feeding billions of people.\nFood security.\nMalthusian criticism.\nSome criticisms generally involve some variation of the Malthusian principle of population. Such concerns often revolve around the idea that the Green Revolution is unsustainable, and argue that humanity is now in a state of overpopulation or overshoot with regards to the sustainable carrying capacity and ecological demands on the Earth. A 2021 study found, contrary to the expectations of the Malthusian hypothesis, that the Green Revolution led to reduced population growth, rather than an increase in population growth.\nAlthough many people die each year as a direct or indirect result of hunger and poor nutrition, Malthus's more extreme predictions have failed to materialize. In 1798 Thomas Malthus made his prediction of impending famine. The world's population had doubled by 1923 and doubled again by 1973 without fulfilling Malthus's prediction. Malthusian Paul R. Ehrlich, in his 1968 book \"The Population Bomb\", said that \"India couldn't possibly feed two hundred million more people by 1980\" and \"Hundreds of millions of people will starve to death in spite of any crash programs.\" Ehrlich's warnings failed to materialize when India became self-sustaining in cereal production in 1974 (six years later) as a result of the introduction of Norman Borlaug's dwarf wheat varieties.\nHowever, Borlaug was well aware of the implications of population growth. In his Nobel lecture he repeatedly presented improvements in food production within a sober understanding of the context of population. \"The green revolution has won a temporary success in man's war against hunger and deprivation; it has given man a breathing space. If fully implemented, the revolution can provide sufficient food for sustenance during the next three decades. But the frightening power of human reproduction must also be curbed; otherwise the success of the green revolution will be ephemeral only. Most people still fail to comprehend the magnitude and menace of the \"Population Monster\"...Since man is potentially a rational being, however, I am confident that within the next two decades he will recognize the self-destructive course he steers along the road of irresponsible population growth...\"\nFamine.\nTo some modern Western sociologists and writers, increasing food production is not synonymous with increasing food security, and is only part of a larger equation. For example, Harvard professor Amartya Sen wrote that large historic famines were not caused by decreases in food supply, but by socioeconomic dynamics and a failure of public action. Economist Peter Bowbrick disputes Sen's theory, arguing that Sen relies on inconsistent arguments and contradicts available information, including sources that Sen himself cited. Bowbrick further argues that Sen's views coincide with that of the Bengal government at the time of the Bengal famine of 1943, and the policies Sen advocates failed to relieve the famine.\nQuality of diet.\nSome have challenged the value of the increased food production of Green Revolution agriculture. These monoculture crops are often used for export, feed for animals, or conversion into biofuel. According to Emile Frison of Bioversity International, the Green Revolution has also led to a change in dietary habits, as fewer people are affected by hunger and die from starvation, but many are affected by malnutrition such as iron or vitamin-A deficiencies. Frison further asserts that almost 60% of yearly deaths of children under age five in developing countries are related to malnutrition.\nThe strategies developed by the Green Revolution focused on fending off starvation and were very successful in raising overall yields of cereal grains, but did not give sufficient relevance to nutritional quality. High yield cereal crops have low quality proteins, with essential amino acid deficiencies, are high in carbohydrates, and lack balanced essential fatty acids, vitamins, minerals and other quality factors.\nHigh-yield rice, introduced since 1964 to poverty-ridden Asian countries, such as the Philippines, was found to have inferior flavor and be more glutinous and less savory than their native varieties, causing its price to be lower than the average market value.\nIn the Philippines the heavy use of pesticides in rice production, in the early part of the Green Revolution, poisoned and killed off fish and weedy green vegetables that traditionally coexisted in rice paddies. These were nutritious food sources for many poor Filipino farmers prior to the introduction of pesticides, further impacting the diets of locals.\nSocioeconomic impacts.\nAccording to a 2021 study, the Green Revolution substantially increased income. A delay in the Green Revolution by ten years would have cost 17% of GDP per capita, whereas if the Green Revolution had never happened, it could have reduced GDP per capita in the developing world by half.\nEnvironmental impact.\nBiodiversity.\nThere are varying opinions about the effect of the Green Revolution on wild biodiversity. One hypothesis speculates that by increasing production per unit of land area, agriculture will not need to expand into new, uncultivated areas to feed a growing human population. However, land degradation and soil nutrients depletion have forced farmers to clear forested areas in order to maintain production. A counter-hypothesis speculates that biodiversity was sacrificed because traditional systems of agriculture that were displaced sometimes incorporated practices to preserve wild biodiversity, and because the Green Revolution expanded agricultural development into new areas where it was once unprofitable or too arid. For example, the development of wheat varieties tolerant to acid soil conditions with high aluminium content permitted the introduction of agriculture in the Cerrado semi-humid tropical savanna. \nThe world community has clearly acknowledged the negative aspects of agricultural expansion as the 1992 Rio Treaty, signed by 189 nations, has generated numerous national Biodiversity Action Plans which assign significant biodiversity loss to agriculture's expansion into new domains.\nThe Green Revolution has been criticized for an agricultural model which relied on a few staple and market profitable crops, and pursuing a model which limited the biodiversity of Mexico. One of the critics against these techniques and the Green Revolution as a whole was Carl O. Sauer, a geography professor at the University of California, Berkeley. According to Sauer these techniques of plant breeding would result in negative effects on the country's resources, and the culture:\nA good aggressive bunch of American agronomists and plant breeders could ruin the native resources for good and all by pushing their American commercial stocks... And Mexican agriculture cannot be pointed toward standardization on a few commercial types without upsetting native economy and culture hopelessly... Unless the Americans understand that, they'd better keep out of this country entirely. That must be approached from an appreciation of native economies as being basically sound.\nGreenhouse gas emissions.\nStudies indicate that the Green Revolution has substantially increased emissions of the greenhouse gas CO2. High yield agriculture has dramatic effects on the amount of carbon cycling in the atmosphere. The way in which farms are grown, in tandem with the seasonal carbon cycling of various crops, could alter the impact carbon in the atmosphere has on global warming. Wheat, rice, and soybean crops account for a significant amount of the increase in carbon in the atmosphere over the last 50 years. \nPoorly regulated applications of nitrogen fertilizer that exceed the amount used by plants, such as broadcast applications of urea, result in emissions of nitrous oxide, a potent greenhouse gas, and in water pollution. As the UN Special Rapporteur on the Right to Food, Michael Fakhri summarized in 2022, \"food systems emit approximately one third of the world\u2019s greenhouse gases and contribute to the alarming decline in the number of animal and plant species. Intensive industrial agriculture and export-oriented food policies have driven much of this damage. Ever since governments started adopting the Green Revolution in the 1950s, the world's food systems have been increasingly designed along industrial models, the idea being that, if people are able to purchase industrial inputs, then they can produce a large amount of food. Productivity was not measured in terms of human and environmental health, but exclusively in terms of commodity output and economic growth. This same system disrupted carbon, nitrogen and phosphorus cycles because it requires farmers to depend on fossil fuel- based machines and chemical inputs, displacing long-standing regenerative and integrated farming practices.\" The IPCC's synthesis of recent findings states similarly \"intensive agriculture during the second half of the 20th century led to soil degradation and loss of natural resources and contributed to climate change.\" They further specify, \"while the Green Revolution technologies substantially increased the yield of few crops and allowed countries to reduce hunger, they also resulted in inappropriate and excessive use of agrochemicals, inefficient water use, loss of beneficial biodiversity, water and soil pollution and significantly reduced crop and varietal diversity.\"\nLand use.\nA 2021 study found that the Green Revolution led to a reduction in land used for agriculture.\nHealth impact.\nStudies have found that the Green Revolution substantially reduced infant mortality in the developing world. A 2020 study of 37 developing countries found that the diffusion of modern crop varieties \"reduced infant mortality by 2.4\u20135.3 percentage points (from a baseline of 18%), with stronger effects for male infants and among poor households.\" Another 2020 study found that high yield crop varieties reduced infant mortality in India, with particularly large effects for rural children, boys and low-caste children.\nConsumption of pesticides and fertilizer agrochemicals associated with the Green Revolution may have adverse health impacts. For example, pesticides may increase the likelihood of cancer. Poor farming practices including non-compliance to usage of masks and over-usage of the chemicals compound this situation. In 1989, WHO and UNEP estimated that there were around 1 million human pesticide poisonings annually. Some 20,000 (mostly in developing countries) ended in death, as a result of poor labeling, loose safety standards etc. A 2014 study found that Indian children who were exposed to higher quantities of fertilizer agrochemicals experienced more adverse health impacts.\nSecond Green Revolution.\nAlthough the Green Revolution has been able to improve agricultural output briefly in some regions in the world, its yield rates have been declining, while its social and environmental costs become more clearly apparent. As a result, many organizations continue to invent new ways to rectify, significantly augment or replace the techniques already used in the Green Revolution. Frequently quoted inventions are the System of Rice Intensification, marker-assisted selection, agroecology, and applying existing technologies to agricultural problems of the developing world. It is projected that global populations by 2050 will increase by one-third and as such will require a 70% increase in the production of food, which can be achieved with the right policies and investments. \nEvergreen Revolution.\nThe term 'Evergreen Revolution' was coined by Indian agricultural scientist M. S. Swaminathan in 1990, though he has stated that the concept dates back to as early as 1968. It aims to represent an added dimension to the original concepts and practices of the green revolution, the ecological dimension. Swaminathan has described it as \"productivity in perpetuity without associated ecological harm\". The concept has evolved into a combination of science, economics, and sociology. In 2002, American biologist E.O. Wilson observed that: \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The problem before us is how to feed billions of new mouths over the next several decades and save the rest of life at the same time, without being trapped in a Faustian bargain that threatens freedom and security. No one knows the exact solution to this dilemma. The benefit must come from an Evergreen Revolution. The aim of this new thrust is to lift food production well above the level obtained by the Green Revolution of the 1960s, using technology and regulatory policy more advanced and even safer than those now in existence.\u2014\u200aHowever, despite Swaminathan's prominent role in India's adoption of Green Revolution agriculture, the 'Evergreen' concept largely reflects the failures of the original project. Although a relatively lesser known term, its substance largely reflects the consensus positions outlined in recent IPCC and other synthetic reports.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "72728", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72728", "title": "Earth Summit 2002", "text": "International conferens in Johannesburg, South Africa in August\u2013September 2002\nThe World Summit on Sustainable Development 2002, took place in South Africa, from 26 August to 4 September 2002. It was convened to discuss sustainable development organizations, 10 years after the first Earth Summit in Rio de Janeiro. (It was therefore also informally nicknamed \"Rio 10.\")\nDeclarations.\nThe Johannesburg Declaration was the main outcome of the Summit; however, there were several other international agreements.\nIt laid out the Johannesburg Plan of Implementation as an action plan.\nAgreements.\nJohannesburg, 27 August: agreement was made to restore the world's depleted fisheries for 2015. It was agreed to by negotiators at the World Summit.\nInstead of new agreements between governments, the Earth Summit was organized mostly around almost 300 \"partnership initiatives\" known as Type II, as opposed to Type I Partnerships which are the more classic outcome of international treaties. These were to be the key means to achieve the Millennium Development Goals. These are kept in a database of Partnerships for Sustainable Development.\nU.S. participation.\nThe absence of the United States rendered the summit partially impotent. George W. Bush boycotted the summit and did not attend. Except for a brief appearance by Colin Powell, who hurriedly addressed the closing stages of the conference while his airplane taxied on the runway of Johannesburg International, the US government did not send a delegation, earning Bush praise in a letter from conservative organizations such as Americans for Tax Reform, American Enterprise Institute, and Competitive Enterprise Institute.\nHistory.\nThe United Nations Conference on the Human Environment, was first held in Stockholm, Sweden, in June 1972, and marked the emergence of international environmental law. The Declaration on the Human Environment also known as the Stockholm Declaration set out the principles for various international environmental issues, including human rights, natural resource management, pollution prevention and the relationship between the environment and development. The conference also led to the creation of the United Nations Environment Programme.\nThe Brundtland Commission set up by Gro Harlem Brundtland, the pioneer of sustainable development, provided the momentum for first Earth Summit 1992 \u2013 the United Nations Conference on Environmental Development (UNCED), that was also headed by Maurice Strong, who had been a prominent member of the Brundtland Commission \u2013 and also for Agenda 21.\nSouth Africa's first National Conference on Environment and Development entitled, \"Ecologise Politics, Politicise Ecology\" was held at the University of the Western Cape in conjunction with the Cape Town Ecology Group and the Western Cape Branch of the World Conference on Religion and Peace in 1991. Prominent persons involved in this conference were Ebrahim Rasool, Cheryl Carolus, Faried Esack, and Julia Martin.\nThe initial informal discussions on a possible new Summit in 2002 were held in February 1998 and hosted by Derek Osborn who co-chaired the preparatory meetings for Rio+5 and Stakeholder Forum for a Sustainable Future. A set of 10 governments started working informally to start putting together the possible agenda for a Summit. the non-papers produced in 1998 and 1999 ensured that when the UN Commission met in 2000 it could agree to host another Summit in 2002.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "72731", "revid": "869314", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72731", "title": "Negro League", "text": ""}
{"id": "72732", "revid": "40781349", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72732", "title": "William Harvey Carney", "text": "American soldier (1840\u20131908)\nWilliam Harvey Carney (February 29, 1840 \u2013 December 9, 1908) was an American soldier during the American Civil War. Born enslaved, he was awarded the Medal of Honor in 1900 for his gallantry in saving the regimental colors during the Battle of Fort Wagner in 1863. The action for which he received the Medal of Honor preceded that of any other African American Medal of Honor recipient; however, his medal was actually one of the last to be awarded for Civil War service. Some African Americans received the Medal of Honor as early as April 1865.\nBiography.\nWilliam Harvey Carney was born as a slave in Norfolk, Virginia, on February 29, 1840. How he made his way to freedom is not certain. According to most accounts, he escaped through the Underground Railroad, and joined his father in Massachusetts. Other members of their family were freed by purchase or by the death of their master.\nCivil War.\nCarney joined the 54th Massachusetts Volunteer Infantry in March 1863 and was later promoted to sergeant due to his heroism and actions during the battle of Fort Wagner.\nHe took part in the July 18, 1863, assault on Fort Wagner in Charleston, South Carolina. His actions there ultimately earned him the Medal of Honor. When the color guard was killed, Carney retrieved the U.S. flag and marched forward with it, despite serious wounds. When the Union troops were forced to retreat under fire, he struggled back across the battlefield (he was shot in both his right arm and leg as well as his chest, with the last shot fired barely hitting his head), and, eventually returning to his own lines and turning over the colors to another survivor of the 54th, saying, \"Boys, I only did my duty; the old flag never touched the ground!\"\nHe received an honorable discharge due to disability from his wounds in June 1864.\nPost-war.\nAfter his discharge, Carney returned to New Bedford, Massachusetts, and took a job maintaining the city's streetlights. He then delivered mail for 32 years. He was a founding vice president of the New Bedford Branch 18 of the National Association of Letter Carriers, in 1890. He married Susannah Williams, and they had a daughter, Clara Heronia. He spent a few years in California, then returned again in 1869.\nCarney received his Medal of Honor on May 23, 1900, nearly 37 years after the events at Fort Wagner (more than half of such awards from the Civil War were presented 20 or more years after the fact). 20 African American men received the medal before him, but because his battle actions happened earlier than the others, some have incorrectly cited him as the first to receive the medal. His citation reads:\nWhen the color sergeant was shot down, this soldier grasped the flag, led the way to the parapet, and planted the colors thereon. When the troops fell back he brought off the flag, under a fierce fire in which he was twice severely wounded.\nIn 1901, shortly after his medal was awarded, a song was published about his daring exploits: \"Boys the Old Flag Never Touched the Ground\".\nCaptain Luis F. Emilio, the most junior captain of the 54th, who had been left in charge during the attack on Battery Wagner by the deaths or wounding of all of his superiors, in his 1891 book \"A Brave Black Regiment\" wrote: \"It is due, however, to the following-named enlisted men that they be recorded above their fellows for especial merit: [1st] Sgt. Robert J. Simmons, [Col.] Sgt. William H. Carney...\"\nCarney died at the Boston City Hospital on December 9, 1908, of complications from an elevator accident at the Massachusetts State House, where he worked for the Department of State. His body lay in repose for one day at the undertaking rooms of Walden Banks, 142 Lenox Street, at the wish of his wife and daughter. He was buried in the family plot at Oak Grove Cemetery in New Bedford, Massachusetts. Engraved on his tombstone is an image of the Medal of Honor.\nOther honors.\nA New Bedford, Massachusetts, elementary school was named in his honor, and his New Bedford home at 128 Mill Street is listed on the National Register of Historic Places.\nHis statue, along with Private Milton L. Olive, is seen on the African-American Medal of Honor Recipients Memorial in Wilmington, Delaware.\nSgt. Carney's statue is also prominently featured in his hometown at West Point Cemetery (Norfolk, Virginia), atop a monument to African American Civil War and Spanish American War veterans.\nIn 2015, Carney was honored as one of the Library of Virginia's \"Strong Men &amp; Women in Virginia History\" because of his actions during the Civil War. Carney's regiment is represented in the Memorial to Robert Gould Shaw and the Massachusetts Fifty-Fourth Regiment, located on the Boston Common and designed by Augustus Saint Gaudens.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "72734", "revid": "7061136", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72734", "title": "Cuzco, Peru", "text": ""}
{"id": "72735", "revid": "44730283", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72735", "title": "Cusco", "text": "City in Peru\nCusco or Cuzco (; or , ) is a city in southeastern Peru, near the Sacred Valley of the Andes mountain range, and the Huatanay and Urubamba rivers. It is the capital and largest city of the eponymous Cusco Province and Cusco Department. It has historically been one of the largest cultural, economic and political centers of Peru. \nThe city was originally founded in the 12th century as the capital of the Inca Empire. The region was conquered in the 16th-century by the Spanish and reestablished on 23 March 1524, with most of the city being constructed over monuments left from the Inca Empire. In 1983, Cusco was declared a World Heritage Site by UNESCO with the title \"City of Cusco\". It has become a major tourist destination, hosting over 2\u00a0million visitors a year and providing passage to numerous Incan ruins, such as Machu Picchu, one of the Seven modern wonders of the world and many others. The Constitution of Peru (1993) designates the city as the Historical Capital of Peru.\nCusco is the seventh-most populous city in Peru; in 2017, it had a population of 428,450. It is also the largest city in the Peruvian Andes and the region is the seventh-most populous metropolitan area of Peru. Its elevation is around . The largest district in the city is the Cusco District, which had a population of 114,630 in 2017, making up about one quarter of the city's total population. \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSpelling and etymology.\nThe indigenous name of this city is . Although the name was used in Southern Quechua, its origin is found in the Aymara language. The word is derived from the phrase ('rock of the owl'), related to the city's foundation myth of the Ayar siblings. According to this legend, Ayar Awqa () acquired wings and flew to the site of the future city; there he was transformed into a rock to mark the possession of the land by his (\"lineage\"):\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe Spanish conquistadors (Spanish soldiers) adopted the local name, transcribing it according to Spanish phonetics as or, less often, . was the standard spelling on official documents and chronicles in colonial times, though was also used. , pronounced as in 16th-century Spanish, seems to have been a close approximation to the Cusco Quechua pronunciation of the name at the time.\nAs both Spanish and Quechua pronunciation have evolved since then, the Spanish pronunciation of 'z' is no longer universally close to the Quechua pronunciation. In 1976, the city mayor signed an ordinance banning the traditional spelling and ordering the use of a new spelling, , in municipality publications. Nineteen years later, on 23 June 1990, the local authorities formalized a new spelling more closely related to Quechua, , but later administrations have not followed suit.\nThere is no international, official spelling of the city's name. In English-language publications both \"s\" and \"z\" can be found. The \"Oxford Dictionary of English\" and \"Merriam-Webster Dictionary\" prefer \"Cuzco\", and in scholarly writings \"Cuzco\" is used more often than \"Cusco\". The city's international airport code is CUZ, reflecting the earlier Spanish spelling.\nSymbols.\nFlag.\nThe official Flag of Cusco consists of seven horizontal stripes in the colors red, orange, yellow, green, sky blue, blue, and violet, representing the rainbow. This flag was introduced in 1973 by Ra\u00fal Montesinos Espejo in celebration of the 25th anniversary of his Tawantinsuyo Radio station. Its popularity led to its official adoption by the Municipality of Cusco in 1978. Since 2021, the flag has also included the golden , a symbol associated with the city's historical identity.\nCoat of arms.\nThe Coat of arms of Cusco was officially adopted in 1986 and is used by the city, province, and region of Cusco. The coat of arms incorporates elements from both Inca and Spanish heraldry. Historically, the city's arms included a golden castle on a red field with eight condors surrounding it. The modern design, officially adopted in 1986, features the , a golden sun emblem, as the central element, symbolizing the city's connection to its Inca heritage.\nAnthem.\nThe Anthem of Cusco was composed by Roberto Ojeda Campana with lyrics by Luis Nieto Miranda in 1944. It was officially adopted as the city's anthem and has been sung at public events since then. In 1991, the anthem was translated into Quechua by Faustino Espinoza Navarro and Mario Mej\u00eda Waman. The anthem is performed in both Spanish and Quechua, reflecting the city's cultural diversity and historical significance. In 2019, the Municipality of Cusco declared the performance of the anthem in Quechua at civic events to be of public interest and historical importance.\nHistory.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nTimeline of Cusco &lt;br&gt;\n\u00a0Kingdom of Cusco, 1197\u20131438&lt;br&gt;\n Inca Empire, 1438\u20131532&lt;br&gt;\n Kingdom of Spain \u2013 Habsburg (Governorate of New Castile and Viceroyalty of Peru), 1532\u20131700 \n Kingdom of Spain \u2013 Bourbon (Viceroyalty of Peru), 1700\u20131808 \n Kingdom of Spain \u2013 Bonaparte (Viceroyalty of Peru), 1808\u20131813 \n Kingdom of Spain \u2013 Bourbon (Viceroyalty of Peru), 1813\u20131821 \n Protectorate of Peru, 1821\u20131822&lt;br&gt;\n Peru, 1822\u20131836&lt;br&gt;\n Peru\u2013Bolivian Confederation (Republic of South Peru), 1836\u20131839 &lt;br&gt;\n Peru, 1839\u2013present\nKillke culture.\nThe Killke people occupied the region from 900 to 1200 AD, prior to the arrival of the Inca in the 13th century. Carbon-14 dating of Saksaywaman, the walled complex outside Cusco, established that Killke constructed the fortress about 1100 AD. The Inca later expanded and occupied the complex in the 13th century. In March 2008, archeologists discovered the ruins of an ancient temple, roadway and aqueduct system at Saksaywaman. The temple covers some and contains 11 rooms thought to have held idols and mummies, establishing its religious purpose. Together with the results of excavations in 2007, when another temple was found at the edge of the fortress, this indicates a longtime religious as well as military use of the facility.\nInca period.\nCusco was long an important center of indigenous people. It was the capital of the Inca Empire (13th century \u2013 1532). Many believe that the city was planned as an effigy in the shape of a puma, a sacred animal. How Cusco was specifically built, or how its large stones were quarried and transported to the site remain undetermined. Under the Inca, the city had two sectors: the and . Each was divided to encompass two of the four provinces, Chinchasuyu (NW), Antisuyu (NE), Kuntisuyu (SW) and Qullasuyu (SE). A road led from each quarter to the corresponding quarter of the empire.\nEach local leader was required to build a house in the city and live part of the year in Cusco, restricted to the quarter that corresponded to the quarter in which he held territory. After the rule of Pachacuti, when an Inca died, his title went to one son and his property was given to a corporation controlled by his other relatives (split inheritance). Each title holder had to build a new house and add new lands to the empire in order to own land for his family to keep after his death.\nAccording to Inca legend, the city was rebuilt by Sapa Inca Pachacuti, the man who transformed the Kingdom of Cusco from a sleepy city-state into the vast empire of . Archeological evidence, however, points to a slower, more organic growth of the city beginning before Pachacuti. The city was constructed according to a definite plan in which two rivers were channeled around the city. Archeologists have suggested that this city plan was replicated at other sites.\nThe city fell to the sphere of Hu\u00e1scar during the Inca Civil War after the death of Huayna Capac in 1528. It was captured by the generals of Atahualpa in April 1532 in the Battle of Quipaipan. Nineteen months later, Spanish explorers invaded the city after kidnapping and murdering Atahualpa (see Battle of Cuzco), and gained control.\nSpanish period.\nThe first three Spaniards arrived in the city in May 1533, after the Battle of Cajamarca, collecting for Atahualpa's Ransom Room. On 15 November 1533 Francisco Pizarro officially arrived in Cusco. \"The capital of the Incas\u00a0... astonished the Spaniards by the beauty of its edifices, the length and regularity of its streets.\" The great square was surrounded by several palaces, since \"each sovereign built a new palace for himself.\" Another member of the invading party recorded that \"In the delicacy of the stone work, the natives far excelled the Spaniards.\" The fortress had three parapets and was composed of \"heavy masses of rock\". \"Through the heart of the capital ran a river\u00a0... faced with stone.\u00a0... The most sumptuous edifice in Cuzco\u00a0... was undoubtedly the great temple dedicated to the Sun\u00a0... studded with gold plates\u00a0... surrounded by convents and dormitories for the priests.\u00a0... The palaces were numerous and the troops lost no time in plundering them of their contents, as well as despoiling the religious edifices,\" including the royal mummies in the Coricancha.\nPizarro ceremoniously gave Manco Inca the Incan fringe as the new Peruvian leader. Pizarro encouraged some of his men to stay and settle in the city, giving out repartimientos, or land grants to do so. Alcaldes were established and regidores on 24 March 1534, which included the brothers Gonzalo Pizarro and Juan Pizarro. Pizarro left a garrison of 90 men and departed for Jauja with Manco Inca.\nPizarro renamed it as the \"very noble and great city of Cuzco\". Buildings often constructed after the Spanish invasion have a mixture of Spanish influence and Inca indigenous architecture, including the Santa Clara and San Blas neighborhoods. The Spanish destroyed many Inca buildings, temples and palaces. They used the remaining walls as bases for the construction of a new city, and this stone masonry is still visible.\nFather Vincente de Valverde became the Bishop of Cusco and built his cathedral facing the plaza. He supported construction of the Dominican Order monastery (Santo Domingo Convent) on the ruins of the Corichanca, House of the Sun, and a convent at the former site of the House of the Virgins of the Sun.\nDuring the Siege of Cuzco of 1536 by Manco Inca Yupanqui, a leader of the Sapa Inca, he took control of the city from the Spanish. Although the siege lasted 10 months, it was ultimately unsuccessful. Manco's forces were able to reclaim the city for only a few days. He eventually retreated to Vilcabamba, the capital of the newly established small Neo-Inca State. There his state survived another 36 years but he was never able to return to Cuzco. Throughout the conflict and years of the Spanish colonization of the Americas, many Incas died of smallpox epidemics, as they had no acquired immunity to a disease by then endemic among Europeans.\nCusco was built on layers of cultures. The Tawantinsuyu (former Inca Empire) was built on Killke structures. The Spanish replaced indigenous temples with Catholic churches, and Inca palaces with mansions for the invaders.\nCusco was the center for the Spanish colonization and spread of Christianity in the Andean world. It became very prosperous thanks to agriculture, cattle raising and mining, as well as its trade with Spain. The Spanish colonists constructed many churches and convents, as well as a cathedral, university and archdiocese.\nRepublican era.\nA major earthquake on 21 May 1950 damaged more than one third of the city's structures. The Dominican Priory and Church of Santo Domingo, which were built on top of the impressive (Temple of the Sun), were among the affected colonial era buildings. Inca architecture withstood the earthquake. Many of the old Inca walls were at first thought to have been lost after the earthquake, but the granite retaining walls of the were exposed, as well as those of other ancient structures throughout the city. Restoration work at the Santo Domingo complex exposed the Inca masonry formerly obscured by the superstructure without compromising the integrity of the colonial heritage. Many of the buildings damaged in 1950 had been impacted by an earthquake only nine years previously.In the 1990s, during the mayoral administration of Mayor Daniel Estrada P\u00e9rez, the city underwent a new process of beautification through the restoration of monuments and the construction of plazas, fountains and monuments. Likewise, thanks to the efforts of this authority, various recognitions were achieved, such as the declaration as \"Historical Capital of Peru\" contained in the text of the Political Constitution of Peru of 1993. It was also decided to change the coat of arms of Cusco, leaving aside the colonial coat of arms and adopting the as the new coat of arms. Additionally, the change of the official name of the city was proposed to adopt the Quechua word , but this change was reversed a few years later.\nCurrently, Cusco is the most important tourist destination in Peru. Under the administration of mayor Daniel Estrada P\u00e9rez, a staunch supporter of the , between 1983 and 1995 the Quechua name was officially adopted for the city. Tourism in the city was drastically affected by the COVID-19 pandemic in Peru and the 2022\u20132023 Peruvian protests, with the latter event costing the area 10 million soles daily.\nGeography.\nLocation.\nCusco extends throughout the Huatanay (or Watanay) river valley. Located on the eastern end of the Knot of Cusco, its elevation is around . To its north is the Vilcabamba mountain range with mountains. The highest peak is Salcantay () about northwest of Cusco.\nClimate.\nCusco has a subtropical highland climate (K\u00f6ppen: \"Cwb\", Trewartha: \"Cwll\"). It is generally dry and temperate, with two defined seasons. Winter occurs from April through September, with abundant sunshine and occasional nighttime frosts; July is the coldest month with an average of . Summer occurs from October through to March, with warm temperatures and abundant rainfall; November is the warmest month, averaging . Although frost and hail are common, the last reported snowfall was in June 1911. Temperatures usually range from , but the all-time extreme temperature range is between . Sunshine hours peak in July, the equivalent of January in the Northern Hemisphere. In contrast, February, the equivalent of August in the Northern Hemisphere, has the least sunshine.\nIn 2006, Cusco was found to be the populated location on Earth with the highest average ultraviolet light levels.\nGovernment.\nDuring the Inca period, Cusco was the main political center of the region from which the Inca Empire was ruled and where the political and religious elite lived. After its Spanish foundation, it lost prominence due to Francisco Pizarro's decision to establish the capital of the new territories in the city of Lima because it had close access to the sea and communication with the metropolis. However, Cusco continued to be an important city within the viceregal political scheme to the point of being the first city in the entire Viceroyalty to have a bishop. Its participation in the trade routes during the viceroyalty guaranteed its political importance, as it remained the capital of the corregimiento established in these territories and, later, of the Intendancy of Cusco and, towards the end of the viceroyalty, of the Royal Audience of Cusco.\nDuring the republic, Cusco's political role languished due to its isolation from the capital, coastline, and trade routes of the 19th and 20th centuries. However, it maintained its status as the main city in southern Peru, although subordinated to the importance that Arequipa was gaining, better connected with the rest of the country. Cusco has always remained the capital of the department of Cusco\nPolitically, according to the results of elections held in the second half of the 20th century, Cusco has been a stronghold of leftist parties in Peru. In the 1970s and 1980s, the socialist leader Daniel Estrada P\u00e9rez brought together this political tendency under the banner of the United Left alliance. Since his death, Cusco has been a major city for parties such as the Peruvian Nationalist Party and the Broad Front for Justice, Life and Liberty, as well as regional movements. Traditional Peruvian parties, such as the Peruvian Aprista Party and Acci\u00f3n Popular, have recorded eventual electoral victories, while those that represent a right-wing political position, such as the Popular Christian Party and Fujimorism itself, have had little presence among the elected authorities.\nDemographics.\nThe population reached 47,000 inhabitants in the 1840s. The city had a population of about 348,935 people in 2007 and 428,450 people in 2017 according to INEI.\nEconomy.\nEconomic activity in Cusco includes agriculture, especially maize and native tubers. The local industry is related to extractive activities and to food and beverage products, such as beer, carbonated waters, coffee, chocolates, among others. However, the relevant economic activity of its inhabitants is the reception of tourism, with increasingly better infrastructure and services. It is the second city in this country that has and maintains full employment. The city has recently grown in the industrial sector\nTourism.\nTourism has been the backbone to the Cusco economy since the early 2000s, bringing in more than 1.2\u00a0million tourists per year. In 2019, Cusco was the region that reached the highest number of tourists in Peru with more than 2.7 million tourists. In 2002, the income Cusco received from tourism was US$837\u00a0million. In 2009, that number increased to US$2.47\u00a0billion. Most tourists visiting the city are there to tour the city and the Incan Ruins, especially the top destination, Machu Picchu, which is one of the New Seven Modern Wonders of the World.\nCulture.\nArchitecture.\nDue to its antiquity and significance, the center of the city preserves many buildings, squares and streets from pre-Columbian times as well as colonial constructions. That is why the city was declared in 1972 as Cultural Heritage of the Nation by Supreme Resolution No. 2900-72-ED.In 1983, during the VII session of the UNESCO World Heritage Committee, it was decided to declare this area as a World Heritage Site by establishing a central zone that constitutes the World Heritage Site proper and a buffer zone.\nOne of the characteristics that the Incas achieved with their urban plan in Cusco was the respect for the geographical matrix when building their fabric, since they responded with different design strategies to the rugged topography of the Andean area at 3399 meters above sea level\nLanguage.\nThe native language is Quechua, although the city's inhabitants mostly speak Spanish. The Quechua people are the last living descendants of the Inca Empire. \nMuseums.\nCusco has the following important museums:\nThere are also some museums located at churches, like the Museum and Convent of San Francisco and the Museum of Qoricancha Temple\nReligion.\nThe most common practiced religion in Cusco is Catholicism. The Inca religion is also practiced by the Quechua people. Cusco hosts the great mass ceremonies and imperial festivities, such as the Inti Raymi or Festival of the Sun, which continues to take place during the winter solstice \u2013 the solar new year \u2013 which is celebrated every 24 June on the esplanade of Sacsayhuam\u00e1n.\nCurrently, the majority of the population belongs to the Catholic Church, with Cuzco being the archbishopric. The largest and oldest cathedral is the Cusco Cathedral. It is home to the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Cusco.\nCuisine.\nAs capital to the Inca Empire, Cusco was an important agricultural region. It was a natural reserve for thousands of native Peruvian species, including around 3,000 varieties of potato cultivated by the people. Fusion and neo-Andean restaurants developed in Cusco, in which the cuisine is prepared with modern techniques and incorporates a blend of traditional Andean and international ingredients. Cuy (guinea pig), a native animal in Cusco, is a popular dish in the city.\nThe local gastronomy presents a diversified array of dishes resulting from the mestizaje and fusion of its pre-Inca, Inca, colonial, and modern traditions. It is a variation of Andean Peruvian cuisine, although it maintains some typical cultural traits of southern Peru.\nAlthough the list of typical dishes may vary among individuals, Tapia and Garc\u00eda present a list of foods and beverages usually found in a Cusco picanter\u00eda:\nFoods.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nOther dishes include chairo, adobo, rocoto relleno, kapchi, lawas or creams made with corn or chu\u00f1o, and Timpu, a dish originating from Cusco served during Carnival\nChiri Uchu.\n is a typical dish of the locality not offered in picanter\u00edas, as it is consumed in June during the Cusco festivities of Inti Raymi and, primarily, during the Corpus Christi. It is considered one of the most authentic gastronomic expressions of Cusco as it blends both native flavors of the Andes and those brought by the Spanish conquistadors. It is a cold dish that includes various meats (cuy, boiled chicken, charqui, morcilla (blood sausage), salchicha (sausage)), potatoes, cheese, corn cake, fish roe, and lake algae.\nMusic.\nCentro Qosqo de Arte Nativo.\nA folkloric institution established in 1924. It is considered the most important folkloric institution in the city and was recognized by the Peruvian government as the first folkloric institution in the country and by the regional government as a Living Cultural Heritage of the Cusco region.\nCusco Symphony Orchestra.\nIt is a permanent artistic group of the Decentralized Directorate of Culture of the Cusco Regional Government, created by Directoral Resolution No. 021/INC-Cusco on 10 March 2009. It performs more than 50 concerts a year and uses the Cusco Municipal Theater.\nSport.\nThe most popular sport in the city is football (soccer), with three main clubs. Cienciano participates in the Liga 1 (First Division) and is the only Peruvian club to win an international tournament, winning the 2003 Copa Sudamericana and 2004 Recopa Sudamericana.\nAnother historic team is Deportivo Garcilaso, which was promoted to Liga 1 after winning the Copa Per\u00fa 2022. There is also Cusco Football Club, formerly known as Real Garcilaso, which played in the First Division from 2012 to 2021 after winning the Copa Per\u00fa in 2011. In 2022, it was promoted again to Liga 1 after winning the Second Division of Peru. Among other events, the Cusco was a venue for the 2004 Copa Am\u00e9rica, hosting the third-place match between the Colombia and Uruguay national teams.\nCinema.\nThe International Short Film Festival (FENACO) was an important international film festival in southern Peru, held every November since 2004 in the imperial city of Cusco.\nOriginally, it was a national event dedicated to the short film format (up to 30 minutes in length), with international showcases, hence its name FENACO (), a name popularized in Peru and worldwide to recognize the festival. However, due to the reception and response from filmmakers, producers, and distributors from different countries, it evolved into an international festival, reaching 354 short films in competition from 37 countries in its sixth edition.\nMedia.\nIn the city of Cusco, the media is essential for addressing local issues, educating the public, and conserving cultural heritage. Media outlets in the city that serve both Spanish-speaking and Quechua-speaking communities include newspapers, radio, television, and digital platforms. Local news, culture, tourism, and indigenous rights are the main topics of media outlets in Cusco, a historic and popular tourist destination.\nRegional coverage is provided by newspapers like and , while national publications like \"El Comercio\" and \"La Rep\u00fablica\" also cover social, political, and economic issues in Cusco. Indigenous communities are largely reached by Quechua-language media, like Cronicawan, which guarantees greater access to news and cultural preservation.\nWith stations like Radio Tawantinsuyo and Radio Universal transmitting talk shows, music, and news, radio is still a dominant medium. Regional news can be found on local television channels, and Cusque\u00f1os are increasingly using digital platforms, such as social media and online news portals.\nNewspapers.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nMain sites.\nThe indigenous Killke culture built the walled complex of Sacsayhuam\u00e1n about 1100. The Killke built a major temple near Saksaywaman, as well as an aqueduct (Pukyus) and roadway connecting prehistoric structures. Sacsayhuam\u00e1n was expanded by the Inca.\nThe Spanish explorer Pizarro sacked much of the Inca city in 1535. Remains of the palace of the Incas, Qurikancha (the Temple of the Sun), and the Temple of the Virgins of the Sun still stand. Inca buildings and foundations in some cases proved to be stronger during earthquakes than foundations built in present-day Peru. Among the most noteworthy Spanish colonial buildings of the city is the Cathedral of Santo Domingo.\nThe major nearby Inca sites are Pachacuti's presumed winter home, Machu Picchu, which can be reached on foot by the Inca Trail to Machu Picchu or by train; and the \"fortress\" at Ollantaytambo.\nLess-visited ruins include: Incahuasi, the highest of all Inca sites at ; Vilcabamba, the capital of the Inca after the Spanish capture of Cusco; the sculpture garden at \u00d1usta Hisp'ana (aka Chuqip'allta, Yuraq Rumi); Tip\u00f3n, with working water channels in wide terraces; as well as Willkaraqay, Patallaqta, Chuqik'iraw, Moray, Vitcos and many others.\nThe surrounding area, located in the Watanay Valley, is strong in gold mining and agriculture, including corn, barley, quinoa, tea and coffee.\nArchitectural heritage.\nBecause of its antiquity and importance, the city center retains many buildings, plazas, streets and churches from colonial times, and even some pre-Columbian structures, which led to its declaration as a World Heritage Site by UNESCO in 1983. Among the main sights of the city are:\n\"Barrio de San Blas\".\nThis neighborhood houses artisans, workshops and craft shops. It is one of the most picturesque sites in the city. Its streets are steep and narrow with old houses built by the Spanish over important Inca foundations. It has an attractive square and the oldest parish church in Cusco, built in 1563, which has a carved wooden pulpit considered the epitome of Colonial era woodwork in Cusco.\nThe Quechua name of this neighborhood is , which means the opening of the salt.\nHatun Rumiyuq.\nThis street is the most visited by tourists. On the street Hatun Rumiyoq (\"the one with the big stone\") was the palace of Inca Roca, which was converted to the Archbishop's residence.\nAlong this street that runs from the Plaza de Armas to the Barrio de San Blas, one can see the Stone of Twelve Angles, which is viewed as a marvel of ancient stonework and has become emblematic of the city's history.\nBas\u00edlica de la Merced.\nIts foundation dates from 1536. The first complex was destroyed by the earthquake of 1650. Its rebuilding was completed in 1675.\nIts cloisters of Baroque Renaissance style, choir stalls, colonial paintings and wood carvings are highlights, now a popular museum.\nAlso on view is an elaborate monstrance made of gold and gemstones that weighs and is in height.\nCathedral.\nThe first cathedral built in Cusco is the , built in 1539 on the foundations of the Palace of Viracocha Inca. Today, this church is an auxiliary chapel of the cathedral.\nThe main basilica cathedral of the city was built between 1560 and 1664. The main material used was stone, which was extracted from nearby quarries, although some blocks of red granite were taken from the fortress of Saksaywaman.\nThis great cathedral presents late-Gothic, Baroque and plateresque interiors and has one of the most outstanding examples of colonial goldwork. Its carved wooden altars are also important.\nThe city developed a distinctive style of painting known as the \"Cuzco School\" and the cathedral houses a major collection of local artists of the time. The cathedral is known for a Cusco School painting of the Last Supper depicting Jesus and the twelve apostles feasting on guinea pig, a traditional Andean delicacy.\nThe cathedral is the seat of the Archdiocese of Cuzco.\nPlaza de Armas de Cusco.\nKnown as the \"Square of the warrior\" in the Inca era, this plaza has been the scene of several important events, such as the proclamation by Francisco Pizarro in the conquest of Cuzco.\nSimilarly, the Plaza de Armas was the scene of the death of T\u00fapac Amaru II, considered the indigenous leader of the resistance. The Spanish built stone arcades around the plaza which endure to this day. The main cathedral and the Church of La Compa\u00f1\u00eda both open directly onto the plaza.\nThe cast iron fountain in Plaza de Armas was manufactured by Janes, Beebe &amp; Co.\n\"Iglesia de la Compa\u00f1\u00eda de Jes\u00fas\".\nThis church (Church of the Society of Jesus), whose construction was initiated by the Jesuits in 1576 on the foundations of the or the palace of the Inca ruler Wayna Qhapaq, is considered one of the best examples of colonial baroque style in the Americas.\nIts fa\u00e7ade is carved in stone and its main altar is made of carved wood covered with gold leaf. It was built over an underground chapel and has a valuable collection of colonial paintings of the Cusco School, the first school established in Peru and also in the Americas.\nThe church is situated in the Plaza de Armas and to the left of the Cusco Cathedral, which is home to the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Cusco.\nQurikancha and Convent of Santo Domingo.\nThe or ('golden place') was the most important sanctuary dedicated to the Sun God (Inti) at the time of the Inca Empire. According to ancient chronicles written by Garcilaso de la Vega (chronicler), Qurikancha was said to have featured a large solid golden disc that was studded with precious stones and represented the Inca Sun God \u2013 Inti. Spanish chroniclers describe the Sacred Garden in front of the temple as a garden of golden plants with leaves of beaten gold, stems of silver, solid gold corn-cobs and 20 life-size llamas and their herders all in solid gold.\nThe temple was destroyed by its Spanish invaders who, as they plundered, were determined to rid the city of its wealth, idolaters and shrines. Nowadays, only a curved outer wall and partial ruins of the inner temple remain at the site.\nWith this structure as a foundation, colonists built the Convent of Santo Domingo in the Renaissance style. The building, with one baroque tower, exceeds the height of many other buildings in this city.\nInside is a large collection of paintings from the Cuzco School.\nInfrastructure.\nTransport.\nAir.\nCusco's main international airport is Alejandro Velasco Astete International Airport, which provides service to 5 domestic destinations and 3 international ones. It is named in honor of Peruvian pilot Alejandro Velasco Astete who was the first person to fly across the Andes in 1925 when he made the first flight from Lima to Cusco. The airport is the second busiest in Peru after Lima's Jorge Ch\u00e1vez International Airport. It will soon be replaced by Chinchero International Airport. which will provide access to North America and Europe.\nRail.\nCusco is connected by rail to the cities of Juliaca and Arequipa through the Southern Section of the Southern Railway, whose terminus in the city is the W\u00e1nchaq station. Additionally, from the San Pedro station, the South East Section of the Southern Railroad (former \"Cusco-Santa Ana-Quillabamba Railway\") departs from the city, which is the route to the ancient Inca citadel of Machu Picchu. PeruRail is the largest Peruvian railway company and provides service to stations in Cusco.\nRoad.\nBy road, it is connected to the cities of Puerto Maldonado, Arequipa, Abancay, Juliaca and Puno. The road that connects it with the city of Abancay is also the fastest to reach Lima after a journey of more than 20 hours crossing the departments of Apur\u00edmac, Ayacucho, Ica and Lima.\nHealthcare.\nCusco, as the administrative and economic center of the region, hosts numerous public and private health facilities. Public healthcare is provided by the Ministry of Health, including the Regional Hospital and Hospital Antonio Lorena. Additionally, operates several institutions, such as Adolfo Guevara Velazco Hospital, Metropolitan Polyclinic, San Sebasti\u00e1n Polyclinic, Santiago Polyclinic, and La Recoleta Polyclinic.\nTwin towns \u2013 sister cities.\nCusco is twinned with:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Sister-inline/styles.css\"/&gt; travel guide from Wikivoyage"}
{"id": "72736", "revid": "170", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72736", "title": "Underground Railway", "text": ""}
{"id": "72737", "revid": "11952314", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72737", "title": "Imaginary nation", "text": ""}
{"id": "72738", "revid": "1481857", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72738", "title": "Imaginary country", "text": ""}
{"id": "72740", "revid": "50467884", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72740", "title": "Slave name", "text": "Name given to an enslaved person\nA slave name is the personal name given by others to an enslaved person, or a name inherited from enslaved ancestors. \nAncient Rome.\nIn Rome, slaves were given a single name by their owner. A slave who was freed might keep their slave name and adopt the former owner's name as a praenomen and nomen. As an example, one historian says that \"a man named Publius Larcius freed a male slave named Nicia, who was then called Publius Larcius Nicia.\"\nHistorian Harold Whetstone Johnston writes of instances in which a slave's former owner chose to ignore custom and simply chose a name for the freedman.\nMiddle East.\nBy Islamic law, non-Muslim foreigners (kafir) were by definition legitimate targets for enslavement, since the Muslim world of dar al-Islam was by definition at war with the non-Muslim world of dar al-harb (\"House of War\"), and non-Muslim war captives were legitimate to enslave.\nAfter capture, non-Muslim slaves were normally converted to Islam and given a new name. \nIn the Ottoman Imperial Harem during the era of slavery in the Ottoman Empire, for example, the new cariye slave girls and concubines (sex slaves) were upon arrival customarily converted to Islam and given a new name, typically a Persian or Turkish name signifying the name of a flower or a bird, such as for example \"Nil\u00fcfer\" ('water lily'). Since a person in Ottoman society was normally referred to by the name of their father after their personal name, female slaves, whose fathers were unknown and not Muslims, were given a paternal name associated with God, normally Abdallah: according to preserved records, 97 percent of female palace slaves at the Ottoman Imperial Harem were named \"bint\" ('daughter of') \"Abdallah\".\nExample of this were G\u00fclbahar Hatun (mother of Selim I). The discovery of inscriptions (\"vakfiye\") and others documents, where she was called \"Ay\u015fe G\u00fclbahar bint Abd\u00fcllah\", proves that she had Christian slave origins, since this is the traditional slave name by which slaves who converted to Islam were indicated.\nUnited States.\nAfter they became free, African-American former slaves were free to choose their own names. Many chose names like \"Freeman\" to denote their new status, while others picked names of famous people or people they admired, such as US Presidents like George Washington. Other commonly chosen names were \"Johnson\", \"Brown\" and \"Williams\", which had been popular before emancipation.\nIn his 1965 book, \"Message to the Blackman in America\", Elijah Muhammad wrote, \"You must remember that slave-names will keep you a slave in the eyes of the civilized world today. You have seen, and recently, that Africa and Asia will not honor you or give you any respect as long as you are called by the white man's name.\"\nEchoing this, Malcolm X said: \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"The slave master who owned us put his last name on us to denote that we were his property. So when you see a negro today who's named Johnson, if you go back in his history you will find that his grandfather, or one of his forefathers, was owned by a white man who was named Johnson. My father didn't know his last name. My father got his last name from his grandfather, and his grandfather got it from his grandfather, who got it from the slave master. The real names of our people were destroyed during slavery.\"\nAs a result, some organizations, including Muhammad's Nation of Islam and the black nationalist US Organization encourage African Americans to abandon their slave names. In reality some ex-slaves did choose to take the name of their former owner, but generally that was not the case.\nSome African-Americans would later change their name after a religious conversion (Muhammad Ali changed his name from Cassius Clay, el-Hajj Malik el-Shabazz (Malcolm X) from Malcolm Little, Kareem Abdul-Jabbar from Ferdinand Lewis Alcindor Jr, and Louis Farrakhan changed his from Louis Eugene Walcott, for example) or involvement with the black nationalist movement, in this latter case usually adopting names of African origin (e.g., Amiri Baraka and Assata Shakur).\nOther references.\nIrish singer Sin\u00e9ad O'Connor stated in 2017 that she had changed her legal name to Magda Davitt, saying in an interview that she wished to be \"free of the patriarchal slave names.\" On her conversion to Islam in 2018, she adopted the Muslim name Shuhada' Sadaqat.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "72741", "revid": "1522828", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72741", "title": "Kristen Nygaard", "text": "Norwegian computer scientist and mathematician\nKristen Nygaard (27 August 1926 \u2013 10 August 2002) was a Norwegian computer scientist, programming language pioneer, and politician. Internationally, Nygaard is acknowledged as the co-inventor of object-oriented programming and the programming language Simula with Ole-Johan Dahl in the 1960s. Nygaard and Dahl received the 2001 A. M. Turing Award for their contribution to computer science.\nEarly life and career.\nNygaard was born in Oslo and received his master's degree in mathematics at the University of Oslo in 1956. His thesis on abstract probability theory was entitled \"Theoretical Aspects of Monte Carlo methods\".\nNygaard worked full-time at the Norwegian Defense Research Establishment from 1948 to 1960, in computing and programming (1948\u20131954) and operational research (1952\u20131960).\nFrom 1957 to 1960, he was head of the first operations research groups in the Norwegian defense establishment. He was cofounder and first chairman of the Norwegian Operational Research Society (1959\u20131964). In 1960, he was hired by the Norwegian Computing Center (NCC), responsible for building up the NCC as a research institute in the 1960s, becoming its Director of Research in 1962.\nObject-oriented programming.\nWith Ole-Johan Dahl, he developed the initial ideas for object-oriented programming (OOP) in the 1960s at the Norwegian Computing Center (Norsk Regnesentral (NR)) as part of the Simula I (1961\u20131965) and Simula 67 (1965\u20131968) simulation programming languages, which began as an extended variant and superset of ALGOL 60. The languages introduced the core concepts of object-oriented programming: objects, classes, inheritance, virtual quantities, and multi-threaded (quasi-parallel) program execution. In 2004, the Association Internationale pour les Technologies Objets (AITO) established an annual prize in the name of Ole-Johan Dahl and Kristen Nygaard to honor their pioneering work on object-orientation. This Dahl\u2013Nygaard Prize is awarded annually to two individuals that have made significant technical contributions to the field of object-orientation. The work should be in the spirit of the pioneer conceptual and/or implementation work of Dahl and Nygaard which shaped the present view of object-oriented programming. The prize is presented each year at the ECOOP conference. The prize consists of two awards given to a senior and a junior professional.\nHe conducted research for Norwegian trade unions on planning, control, and data processing, all evaluated in light of the objectives of organised labour (1971\u20131973), working together with Olav Terje Bergo. His other research and development work included the social impact of computer technology, and the general system description language DELTA (1973\u20131975), working with Erik Holbaek-Hanssen and Petter Haandlykken.\nNygaard was a professor at Aarhus University, Denmark (1975\u20131976) and then became professor emeritus at the University of Oslo (part-time from 1977, full-time 1984\u20131996). His work in Aarhus and Oslo included research and education in system development and the social impact of computer technology, and became the foundation of the Scandinavian School in System Development, which is closely linked to the field of participatory design.\nStarting in 1976, he was engaged in developing and (since 1986) implementing the general object-oriented programming language BETA, together with Bent Bruun Kristensen, Ole Lehrmann Madsen, and Birger M\u00f8ller-Pedersen. The language is now available on a wide range of computers.\nLater career.\nIn the first half of the 1980s, Nygaard was chairman of the steering committee of the Scandinavian research program System Development and Profession Oriented Languages (SYDPOL), coordinating research and supporting working groups in system development, language research, and artificial intelligence. Also in the 1980s, he was chairman of the steering committee for the Cost-13 (European Common Market Commission)-financed research project on the extensions of profession-oriented languages necessary when artificial intelligence and information technology are becoming part of professional work.\nNygaard's research from 1995 to 1999 was related to distributed systems. He was the leader of General Object-Oriented Distributed Systems (GOODS), a three-year Norwegian Research Council-supported project starting in 1997, aiming at enriching object-oriented languages and system development methods by new basic concepts that make it possible to describe the relation between layered and/or distributed programs and the computer hardware and people carrying out these computer programs. The GOODS team also included Haakon Bryhni, Dag Sj\u00f8berg, and Ole Sm\u00f8rdal.\nNygaard's final research interests were studies of the introductory teaching of programming, and creating a process-oriented conceptual platform for informatics. These subjects are to be developed in a new research project named Comprehensive Object-Oriented Learning (COOL), together with several international test sites. He was giving lectures and courses on these subjects in Norway and elsewhere. In November 1999, he became chair of an advisory committee on Broadband Communication for the Norwegian Department for Municipal and Regional Affairs. He held a part-time position at Simula Research Laboratory from 2001, when the research institute was opened.\nRecognition.\nIn June 1990, he received an honorary doctorate from Lund University, Sweden. In June 1991, he became the first individual to be given an honorary doctorate by Aalborg University, Denmark. He became a member of the Norwegian Academy of Sciences.\nIn October 1990, Computer Professionals for Social Responsibility awarded him its Norbert Wiener Award for Social and Professional Responsibility.\nIn 1999, he and Dahl became the first people to receive the then new Rosing Prize, awarded by the Norwegian Data Association for exceptional professional achievements.\nIn June 2000, he was awarded an Honorary Fellowship for \"his originating of object technology concepts\" by the Object Management Group, a technical standards group for object-orientation, which maintains several International Organization for Standardization (ISO) standards.\nIn November 2001, the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE) awarded Nygaard and Dahl the IEEE John von Neumann Medal \"For the introduction of the concepts underlying object-oriented programming through the design and implementation of Simula 67\".\nIn February 2002, he was given, once more with Ole-Johan Dahl, the 2001 A. M. Turing Award by the Association for Computing Machinery (ACM), with the citation: \"For ideas fundamental to the emergence of object-oriented programming, through their design of the programming languages Simula I and Simula 67.\"\nIn August 2000, he was made Commander of the Royal Norwegian Order of St. Olav by then King Harald V of Norway.\nOther activities.\nIn 1984 and 1985, Nygaard was chairman of the Informatics Committee of the University of Oslo, and active in the design of the university's plan for developing research, education and computing and communication facilities at all faculties of the university.\nHe was the first chairman of the Environment Protection Committee of the Norwegian Association for the Protection of Nature.\nHe was for 10 years (in the 1970s) Norwegian representative in the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) activities on information technology. He has been a member of the Research Committee of the Norwegian Federation of Trade Unions, and cooperated with unions in many countries.\nFor several years, he was engaged in running an experimental social institution trying new ways to create humane living conditions for socially outcast alcoholics.\nNygaard was active in Norwegian politics. In the mid and late 1960s, he was a member of the National Executive Committee of the Norwegian Liberal Party, and chair of that party's Strategy Committee. He was a minor ballot candidate in the 1949 parliamentary election. During the intense political fight before the 1972 referendum on whether Norway should become a member of the European Common Market (later the European Union), he worked as coordinator for the many youth organisations that worked against membership.\nFrom 1971 to 2001, Nygaard was a member of the Labour Party, and a member of their committees on research policies.\nIn November 1988, he became chair of the Information Committee on Norway and the EEC, in August 1990 reorganized as \"Nei til EF\" an organization disseminating information about Norway's relation to the Common Market, and coordinating the efforts to keep Norway outside. (No to European Union membership for Norway, literally \"No to the EU\"). In 1993, when the EEC ratified the Maastricht Treaty and became the European Union the organization changed its name to reflect this. \"Nei til EF\" became the largest political organization in Norway (145,000 members in 1994, from a population of 4 million). Nygaard worked with Anne Enger Lahnstein, leader of the anti-EU Centre Party, in this campaign. In the referendum on 28 November 1994, \"Nei til EU\" succeeded: 52.2% of the electorate voted \"No\", and the voter participation was the highest ever in Norway's history: 88.8%. The strategy of the campaign, insisted by Nygaard, was that it had to be \"for\" something as well as against, i.e., the Scandinavian welfare state Nygaard considered threatened by the Maastricht Agreement.\nHe resigned as chair in 1995, and was later the chair of the organization's strategy committee and a member of its council.\nIn 1996 and 1997, Nygaard was the coordinator of the efforts to establish The European Anti-Maastricht Movement (TEAM), a cooperative network between national organizations opposing the Economic and Monetary Union of the European Union (EMU) and the Maastricht Treaty in European countries within and outside the EU. The European Alliance of EU-critical Movements (TEAM) was successfully started 3 March 1997.\nPersonal life.\nKristen Nygaard married Johanna Nygaard in 1951. She worked at the Norwegian Agency for Aid to Developing Countries. She specialized for a number of years in recruiting and giving administrative support to specialists working in East Africa. Johanna and Kristen Nygaard had three children and seven grandchildren.\nNygaard died of a heart attack in 2002.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "72742", "revid": "48643156", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72742", "title": "Kumbakonam", "text": "Kumbakonam (formerly spelt as Coombaconum or Combaconum), or Kudanthai, is a city municipal corporation in the Thanjavur district in the Indian state of Tamil Nadu. It is located from Thanjavur and from Chennai and is the headquarters of the Kumbakonam taluk of Thanjavur district. It is the second largest city in the district after Thanjavur. The city is bounded by two rivers, the Kaveri River to the north and Arasalar River to the south. Kumbakonam is known as a \"Temple City\" due to the prevalence of a number of temples here and is noted for its Mahamaham festival, which happens once in 12 years, attracting people from all over the country.\nKumbakonam dates back to the Sangam period and was ruled by the Early Cholas, Pallavas, Mutharaiyar dynasty, Medieval Cholas, Later Cholas, Pandyas, the Vijayanagara Empire, Madurai Nayaks, Thanjavur Nayaks and the Thanjavur Marathas. It rose to be a prominent town between the seventh and ninth centuries AD, when it served as a capital of the Medieval Cholas. The city reached the zenith of its prosperity during the British Raj when it was a prominent centre of European education and Hindu culture; and it acquired the cultural name, the \"Cambridge of South India\". In 1866, Kumbakonam was officially constituted as a municipality, which today comprises 48 wards, making it the second largest local civil body in Thanjavur district. It became a municipal corporation on 24 August 2021.\nEtymology.\nThe name \"Kumbakonam\", roughly translated in English as the \"Pot's Corner\", is believed to be an allusion to the mythical pot (\"kumbha\") of the Hindu god Brahma that contained the seed of all living beings on earth. The \"kumbha\" is believed to have been displaced by a \"pralaya\" (dissolution of the universe) and ultimately came to rest at the spot where the town of Kumbakonam now stands. This event is now commemorated in the Mahamaham festival held every 12 years. Kumbakonam is also known as Baskarashetram and Kumbam from time immemorial and as Kudanthai in ancient times. Kumbakonam is also spelt as Coombaconum in the records of British India. Kumbakonam was also formerly known by the Tamil name of Kudamukku. Kumbakonam is also identified with the Sangam age settlement of Kudavayil.\nHistory.\nThe region around Kumbakonam was inhabited as early as the Sangam Age (third century BC to third century AD). The present-day Kumbakonam is believed to be the site of the ancient town of Kudavayil where the Early Chola king Karikala held his court. Some scholars identify Kumbakonam as the site of the fabled prison of Kudavayir-kottam where the Chera king Kanaikkal Irumporai was imprisoned by the Early Chola king Kocengannan. Kumbakonam is identified with the town of Malaik\u016brram which had served as the Chola capital as early as the seventh century and with the town of Solamaligai which had also served as a Chola capital. According to the Sinnamanur plates, Kumbakonam was the site of a battle between the Pallava king Sri Vallabha and the then Pandya king in 859 and between the Pandya king Srimara Pandya and a confederacy of the Cholas and Gangas.\nKumbakonam came into the limelight during the rule of the Medieval Cholas who ruled from the ninth century to the twelfth century. The town of Pazhaiyaarai, from Kumbakonam was the capital of the Chola Empire in the ninth century.\nFollowing the decline of the Chola kingdom, Kumbakonam was conquered by the Pandyas in 1290. Following the demise of the Pandya kingdom in the 14th century, Kumbakonam was conquered by the Vijayanagar Empire. Krishnadevaraya (1509\u201329), the emperor of Vijayanagara visited the town in 1524 and is believed to have bathed in the famous Mahamaham tank during the Mahamaham festival. Kumbakonam was ruled by the Madurai Nayaks and the Thanjavur Nayaks from 1535 to 1673 when it fell to the Marathas. Each of these dynasties had a considerable impact on the demographics and culture of the region. When the Vijayanagar Empire fell in 1565, there was a mass influx of poets, musicians and cultural artists from the kingdom.\nAccording to the chronicles of the Hindu monastic institution, the Kanchi matha, the \"matha\" was temporarily transferred to Kumbakonam in the 1780s following an invasion of Kanchipuram by Hyder Ali of Mysore. When Tipu Sultan invaded the east coast of South India in 1784, Kumbakonam bore the brunt of his invasion. The produce fell sharply and the economy collapsed. Kumbakonam did not recover from the calamity until the beginning of the 19th century.\nKumbakonam was eventually ceded to the British East India Company in 1799 by the Thanjavur Maratha ruler Serfoji II (1777\u20131832) and reached the zenith of its prosperity in the late 19th and early 20th century when it emerged as an important center of Brahminism, Hindu religion and European education in the Madras Presidency. The opening of the Suez Canal in 1869 fostered trade contacts with the United Kingdom. In 1877, railway lines were completed linking Kumbakonam with the ports of Madras, Tuticorin and Nagapattinam. The Tanjore district court was established in Kumbakonam in 1806 and functioned from 1806 to 1863.\nKumbakonam continued to grow even after India's independence though it fell behind the nearby town of Thanjavur in terms of population and administrative importance. The population growth rate began to fall sharply after 1981. This decline has been attributed to limited land area and lack of industrial potential. However the peripheral areas of Kumbakonam population increased as evident from the successive census data. During the Mahamaham festival of 1992, there was a major stampede in which 48 people were killed and 74 were injured. On 16 July 2004, a devastating fire accident in the Sri Krishna school killed 94 children.\nGeography.\nKumbakonam is located at . It is situated south of Chennai, east of Tiruchirappalli, about north-east of Thanjavur., and about 35\u00a0km (22\u00a0mi) south-west of Mayiladuthurai. It lies in the region called the \"Old delta\" which comprises the north-western taluks of Thanjavur district that have been naturally irrigated by the waters of the Cauvery and its tributaries for centuries in contrast to the \"New Delta\" comprising the southern taluks that were brought under irrigation by the construction of the Grand Anicut canal and the Vadavar canal in 1934. It has an average elevation of 26\u00a0metres (85\u00a0ft). The town is bounded by two rivers, the Cauvery River on the north and Arasalar River on the south.\nAlthough the Cauvery delta is usually hot, the climate of Kumbakonam and other surrounding towns is generally healthy and moderate. Kumbakonam is cooler than Chennai, the capital of Tamil Nadu. The maximum temperature in summer is about while the minimum temperature is about . Kumbakonam receives an annual rainfall of every year. The region is covered with mainly alluvial or black soil which is conducive for rice cultivation. Other crops grown in Kumbakonam include mulberry, cereals and sugarcane.\nThe town of Kumbakonam is surrounded by extensive paddy fields. Methods of irrigation were considerably improved following the opening of the Mettur Dam in 1934. The fauna of the Cauvery Delta is limited to cattle and goats. The town is situated at the western flank of the Kumbakonam-Shiyali ridge which runs along the Kollidam river basin separating the Ariyalur-Puducherry depression from the Nagapattinam depression. This granular ridge projects further eastwards penetrating the Puducherry depression and forms a hard layer of cretaceous rock underneath the sedimentary topsoil.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAccording to 2011 census, Kumbakonam had a population of 140,156 with a sex-ratio of 1,021 females for every 1,000 males, much above the national average of 929. A total of 12,791 were under the age of six, constituting 6,495 males and 6,296 females. The average literacy of the town was 83.21%, compared to the national average of 72.99%. There were a total of 9,519 workers, comprising 32 cultivators, 83 main agricultural labourers, 1,206 in household industries, 7,169 other workers, 1,029 marginal workers, 24 marginal cultivators, 45 marginal agricultural labourers, 212 marginal workers in household industries and 0 other marginal workers.\nKumbakonam has a strong Hindu majority, but it also has sizeable Muslim and Christian populations. Among Hindus, Vanniyars, Kallars, Brahmins and Dalits are the numerically dominant Tamil-speaking groups. Brahmins are more numerous and affluent in Kumbakonam than in other parts of Tamil Nadu. There are also large populations of Moopanars, Konars and Nadars. Amongst Muslims, the Tamil Muslims are dominant. Most of the Muslims are Rowthers. The majority of Muslims in Kumbakonam are involved in commerce or maritime trade. Kumbakonam also has a large population of Protestant Christians largely due to the efforts of the German missionary Christian Friedrich Schwarz. The Catholics in Kumbakonam are mainly affiliated to the Roman Catholic Diocese of Kumbakonam which was separated from the Archdiocese of Pondicherry in 1899.\nThe population of Kumbakonam is predominantly Tamil-speaking. The commonly used dialects is the Central Tamil dialect. There are significant minorities speaking Thanjavur Marathi, Saurashtra and other regional languages as their mother tongue.\nResidential areas make up 32.09% of the town's total area while commercial enterprises and industrial units make up 2.75% and 1.21%, respectively. The non-urban portion of the town constitutes about 44.72% of the total area. Kumbakonam has a total of 45 slums with a population of 49,117.\nAs per the religious census of 2011, Kumbakonam had 86.07% Hindus, 9.57% Muslims, 3.99% Christians, 0.% Sikhs, 0.% Buddhists, 0.23% Jains, 0.13% following other religions and 0.% following no religion or did not indicate any religious preference.\nAdministration and Politics.\nMunicipal Corporation.\nThe Kumbakonam municipality was officially constituted in the year 1866. Initially, the municipality exercised its jurisdiction over an area of and its affairs were administered by a town-level committee or municipal committee. Later it was constituted special-grade municipality and currently, exercises its authority over an area of out of the town's total area of . It comprises 48 wards and is the biggest municipality in Thanjavur district. The town was upgraded to a Municipal Corporation on 24 August 2021, with an administration authority area of .\nThe functions of the municipality are devolved into six departments: General, Engineering, Revenue, Public Health, Town planning and the Computer Wing. All these departments are under the control of a Municipal Commissioner who is the supreme executive head. The legislative powers are vested in a body of 48 members, one each from each of the 48 wards. The legislative body is headed by an elected chairperson who is assisted by a deputy chairperson.\nPolitics.\nKumbakonam is a part of the Kumbakonam Legislative Assembly constituency and elects a member to the Tamil Nadu Legislative Assembly once every five years. Despite being a hub of militant Communism in the 1950s, Kumbakonam voted for the Indian National Congress in the first five state elections held between 1952 and 1977. The Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam won the elections in 1977 and between 1977 and 1989, the seat was alternatively held by the Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam, All India Anna Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam or the Indian National Congress. Since 1989, barring an interregnum of five years between 1991 and 1996, the seat has been held by Ko. Si. Mani of the Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam. Kumbakonam was a part of the Kumbakonam Lok Sabha constituency from 1952 until 1977, when the constituency was disbanded. The assembly segments in the erstwhile Kumbakonam Lok Sabha constituency were included in the Mayiladuthurai Lok Sabha constituency and have remained so ever since.\nLaw Enforcement.\nLaw and order in Kumbakonam in maintained by the Thanjavur subdivision of the Tamil Nadu Police headed by a Deputy Superintendent of Police (DSP). There are four police stations in the town, one of them being an all-women police station. There are special units like prohibition enforcement, district crime, social justice and human rights, district crime records and special branch that operate at the district level police division headed by a Superintendent of Police (SP). Suburban localities are under the jurisdiction of Swamimalai, Patteswarm, Nachiyarkovil, Tiruvidamarudhur, Thiruneelakudi police stations. Recently, the government has established one police station at Cholapuram by reorganizing Kumbakonam Taluk, Swamimalai and Thirupanandal Police station.\nEconomy.\nThe important products of Kumbakonam include brass, bronze, copper and pewter vessels, silk and cotton cloths, sugar, indigo and pottery. Kumbakonam is considered to be the chief commercial centre for the Thanjavur region. In 1991, around 30% of the population was engaged in economic activity. Rice production is an important activity in Kumbakonam. Of 194 industrial units in Kumbakonam, 57 are rice and flour mills. Kumbakonam is also a leading producer of betel leaves and nuts; the betel leaves produced in Kumbakonam are ranked amongst the best in the world in terms of quality. The A. R. R. Agencies, a leading manufacturer of arecanut slices has its factory in Kumbakonam. The main administrative offices of T. S. R. &amp; Co., a cosmetic company, are also based in Kumbakonam. Kumbakonam is also famous for its metal works. The Tamil Nadu Handicraft Development Corporation had been established in the nearby town of Swamimalai in order to train bronze artisans. Kumbakonam is an important silk-weaving centre and more than 5,000 families were employed either directly or indirectly in silk weaving. Silk weaved in Kumbakonam is regarded as one of the finest in the subcontinent. They are largely used in the manufacture of Thirubuvanam silk sarees. Kumbakonam was also an important salt-manufacturing area during British rule. The town lends its name to the Kumbakonam Degree Coffee, a blend of coffee prepared using undiluted pure milk. In recent times, Kumbakonam has emerged as an important manufacturer of fertilizers.\nApart from manufacturing, tourism is also a major source of income for the town. Many lodges and resorts from budget to high-end categories are functioning in Kumbakonam. The Hindu temples and colonial-era buildings have been recognised for their tourism potential. The 12th-century Airavatesvara Temple in the town of Darasuram near Kumbakonam is an UNESCO World Heritage Site. Kumbakonam is also frequented by art collectors interested in handloom cloth and other curios. Banks such as the Axis Bank, Bank of Baroda, IDBI Bank, State Bank of India, Tamilnad Mercantile Bank, Canara Bank, Indian Bank, Indian Overseas Bank, Bank of India, Union Bank of India, Corporation Bank, Lakshmi Vilas Bank, ICICI Bank, ING Vysya Bank, Karur Vysya Bank, Punjab National Bank, Syndicate Bank and Vijaya Bank have their branches in Kumbakonam. The City Union Bank was founded in Kumbakonam in 1904 as the Kumbakonam Bank Limited and it is headquartered in the town.\nUtility services.\nElectricity supply to Kumbakonam is regulated and distributed by the Kumbakonam circle of Tamil Nadu Electricity Board (TNEB). Power Substations are existing viz. Kumabakonam Urban 33/11 kV SS at Rajan Thottam, Kumbakonam Township (Nagariyam) 110 kV at Needamangalm Road, 110 kV SS at Sakottai and Patteswaram 230/110 kV. Water supply is provided by the Kumbakonam municipality from Cauvery river and Coleroon river; the distribution is managed through head works located at Valayapettai and Kudithangi, supplying of water to the town. About of solid waste is collected from the town everyday; 53% domestic wastes and 32% commercial wastes. The collected wastes are dumped in yards outside the town and segregated to produce organic manure. Kumbakonam municipality has partial underground drainage connectivity and the municipality is implementing the underground drainage to the uncovered areas. The major sewerage system for disposal of sullage is through septic tanks and public conveniences. Roadside drains carry untreated sewage out of the town to let out raw into the sea or accumulate in a low-lying area.\nKumbakonam comes under the Cauvery River Delta Area (CRDA) of the Bharat Sanchar Nigam Limited (BSNL), India's state-owned telecom and internet services provider. Apart from telecom, BSNL also provides broadband internet service. Kumbakonam hosts the district headquarters hospital, Thanjavur District at Kumbakonam and Coronation Municipal Hospital, Melakaveri Urban Primary Health Centre, 34 private hospitals &amp; clinics and numerous medical shops catering to the healthcare need of the town.\nLandmarks.\nTemples.\nKumbakonam is known for its temples and \"matha\"s (monasteries). There are around 188 Hindu temples within the municipal limits of Kumbakonam. Apart from these, there several thousand temples around the town thereby giving the town the sobriquets \"Temple Town\" and \"City of temples\".\nAdi Kumbeswarar Temple is considered to be the oldest Shaiva (the sect of the god Shiva) shrine in the town, believed to be constructed by the Cholas in the seventh century. The Nageswaraswamy Temple has a separate shrine for the Sun god Surya who is believed to have worshipped Shiva at this place. Adi Kumbeswarar temple, Nageswaraswamy temple and Kasi Viswanathar temple are Shiva temples in the town revered in the \"Tevaram\", a Tamil Shaiva canonical work of the seventh to the eighth century. Kumbakonam has one of the few temples dedicated to the god Brahma.\nSarangapani temple is the largest Vaishnava (the sect of the god Vishnu) shrine present in Kumbakonam. The present structure of the temple having a twelve-storey high tower was constructed by Nayak kings in the 15th century. It is one of the \"Divya Desams\", the 108 temples of Vishnu revered by the 12 Alvar saint-poets. The Ramaswamy temple, which has scenes from the Hindu epic \"Ramayana\" depicted on its walls, was constructed by Govinda Dikshitar, the minister of successive Nayak rulers, Achuthappa Nayak (1560\u20131614) and Raghunatha Nayak (1600\u201334). He added a commercial corridor between the temple and the older Chakrapani temple, which in modern times is called Chinna Kadai Veethi, a commercial street in the town. Pilgrims from all parts of India take a holy dip once every 12 years during the Mahamaham festival in the Mahamaham tank. Over 40 lakh pilgrims participated in the festival during the 2016 event which is also known as the Southern Kumbha mela. Govinda Dikshitar constructed the sixteen mandapams (shrines) and stone steps around this tank. Kumbakonam is one of the few places in India that still predominantly follow the Vadakalai tradition, in Vishnu temples in and around Kumbakonam.\nKumbakonam also has a number of \"matha\"s. The Sri Sankara matha of Kanchipuram was moved to Kumbakonam during the reign of Pratap Singh (1739\u201363) and remained in Kumbakonam until the 1960s. There are also two Vellalar mathas in the nearby towns of Dharmapuram and Thiruppanandal and a Raghavendra matha in Kumbakonam. There is also a branch of the Vaishnava Ahobila mutt in Kumbakonam, who administers Thirupulamboothangudi and Aadanur ,having influence in Thirunaraiyur, Thirukudanthai, and Thiruvinnagar.\nThe Thenupuriswarar Temple at Patteeswaram, the Oppiliappan Kovil and the Swamimalai Murugan temple are located in the vicinity of Kumbakonam. The Airavatesvara Temple in Darasuram locality of Kumbakonam built by Rajaraja Chola II (1146\u201373) during 12th century is a UNESCO World Heritage Site, along with the Brihadeeswara Temple at Thanjavur and the Gangaikondacholisvaram Temple at Gangaikonda Cholapuram that are collectively referred as the Great Living Chola Temples.\nTransport.\nKumbakonam is connected by road and rail. The National highway NH-36 connects Vikravandi - Manamadurai, passes through this town. The nearest international airport is at Tiruchirapalli, which is from Kumbakonam. The nearest seaport is located at Nagapattinam which is about away. The town has around of roads, 544 municipal roads making up . There are also around of state highways running through Kumbakonam. Over 87% of the municipal roads are paved. There are regular government and private bus services to Chennai, Thanjavur, Mannargudi, Tiruchirapalli, Chidambaram, Thiruvarur, Mayiladuthurai, Nagapattinam, Coimbatore, Tiruppur, Palani, Thoothukudi, Rameswaram, Tiruchendur, Salem, Edapaddi, Vellore, Kumuli, Cumbum, Karaikudi, Pudukkottai, Neyveli, Madurai, Sivagangai, Thiruthuraipoondi, Pattukkottai, Muthupet, Puducherry, and Tirunelveli. The Karnataka State Road Transport Corporation (KSRTC) and State Express Transport Corporation (Tamil Nadu)(SETC) operates daily services from Bengaluru and mysuru to Kumbakonam. On 1 March 1972, the Cholan Roadways Corporation was established by the Government of Tamil Nadu with its headquarters in Kumbakonam in order to improve transportation facilities in the districts of central Tamil Nadu. The organisation acquired the fleets of buses earlier owned by private operators \u2013 Sri Ramavilas Service, Raman and Raman Limited and Sathi Vilas. On 1 July 1997, the organization was renamed Tamil Nadu State Transport Corporation, Kumbakonam and presently forms division no. 1 of the Tamil Nadu State Transport Corporation. The corporation runs a reconditioning unit and a tyre re-threading unit in Kumbakonam.\nKumbakonam is connected by rail with towns and cities in South India. The Mysore\u2013Mayiladuthurai Express connects Kumbakonam with Mysuru and Bengaluru. There are regular express trains that connect Kumbakonam with major cities in the state like Chennai, Coimbatore, Madurai and Tiruchirapalli. There are passenger trains that connect Kumbakonam with Thanjavur, Tiruchirapalli, Chidambaram and Mayiladuthurai. The upgrading of NH 36 from two-lane to four-line is under progress, which upon completion will greatly reduce to time of travel to Thanjavur and Chennai.\nThe traditional modes of transportation are bullock carts. It is recorded that as late as the 1950s, landlords and rich farmers travelled mostly by bullock carts except for rare long journeys which they undertook by buses or motor vehicles. Kumbakonam has an efficient local bus transportation system. The town bus stand is located just opposite the Arignar Anna Bus Stand where the long-distance buses are stationed. There are occasional ferries that transport people and goods across the Cauvery. Till the beginning of the 20th century, students of the Government Arts College used to cross the Cauvery on coracle ferries to attend college. Since the construction of a bridge in 1944, the practice of transporting men and goods by coracles has greatly diminished.\nEducation.\nThe Raja Veda Padasala, established by Govinda Dikshitar during 1542 in Kumbakonam, teaches Sanskrit vedic scriptures in specialised fields of Rig Veda, Yajur Veda, Sama Veda, \"Agamas\" and \"Sastras\". Kumbakonam emerged as an important centre of education in the late 19th century and was known as the \"Cambridge of South India\". The Government Arts College, established in Kumbakonam in 1867, is one of the oldest educational institutions in the Madras Presidency. It began as a provincial school on 19 October 1854, before being upgraded to a government college in 1867. It was affiliated to the Madras University in 1877. One of the early principals of the college was William Archer Porter, a Cambridge Wrangler, who, along with T. Gopala Rao, was instrumental in its elevation to a government college. He is also credited with framing the college's acclaimed educational policy. In 1881, it became a full-fledged college and high school courses ceased to be taught. Notable faculty members included U. V. Swaminatha Iyer (1855\u20131942) while the Indian mathematician Srinivasa Ramanujan (1887\u20131920) who studied from 1904 until 1906 when he dropped out and V. S. Srinivasa Sastri (1869\u20131946), an Indian politician and administrator, are its notable alumni. The Government Arts College for Women was started in 1963 and had a total strength of 2,597 pupils in February 2006. The college offers various undergraduate courses and one post-graduate course and is affiliated to the Bharathidasan University. Other colleges in Kumbakonam include Idhya Colleges of Arts and Sciences, Annai College of Arts and Science, Annai Engineering College, Mass College, Sankara Arts college, PRIST University Kumbakonam Campus, Government College Of Fine Arts and Arasu Engineering College, KSK Engineering college, As Slam Engineering college at nearby Thirumanglakudi. The Shanmugha Arts, Science, Technology &amp; Research Academy has a satellite campus based in Kumbakonam where disciplines of Engineering(electronics and communication Engineering &amp; computer science Engineering), arts and sciences are taught.\nThe Native High School, founded in 1876, and the Town Higher Secondary School, one of whose students was Srinivasa Ramanujan, were some of the oldest schools in the Madras Presidency. At present, there a total of 36 government and private schools in Kumbakonam.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "72745", "revid": "28969463", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72745", "title": "Croesus", "text": "Croesus ( ; ; Latin: ; reigned: c.\u2009585\u00a0\u2013 c.\u2009546 BC)\nwas the king of Lydia, who reigned from 585 BC until his defeat by the Persian king Cyrus the Great in 546 or 547 BC. According to Herodotus, he reigned 14 years. Croesus was renowned for his wealth; Herodotus and Pausanias noted that his gifts were preserved at Delphi.\nThe fall of Croesus had a profound effect on the Greeks, providing a fixed point in their calendar. \"By the fifth century at least\", J. A. S. Evans has remarked, \"Croesus had become a figure of myth, who stood outside the conventional restraints of chronology.\"\nName.\nThe name of Croesus was not attested in contemporary inscriptions in the Lydian language. In 2019, D. Sasseville and K. Euler published a research of Lydian coins apparently minted during his rule, where the name of the ruler was rendered as \"Q\u03bbd\u00e3ns\".\nThe name comes from the Latin transliteration of the Greek , which was thought by J.M. Kearns to be the ancient Hellenic adaptation of the reconstructed Lydian name . This putative name was analyzed as a compound term consisting of the proper name , of a glide () and of the Lydian term , perhaps meaning \"master, lord, noble\". According to J. M. Kearns, Croesus's real personal name would have been , while would have been a honorific name meaning \"The noble Karo\u015b\".\nLife and reign.\nCroesus was born in 620 BC to the king Alyattes of Lydia and one of his queens, a Carian noblewoman whose name is unknown. Croesus had at least one full sister, Aryenis, as well as a half-brother named Pantaleon, born from an Ionian wife of Alyattes.\nUnder his father's reign, Croesus had been a governor of Adramyttium, which Alyattes had rebuilt as a centre of operations for military actions against the Cimmerians, a nomadic people from the Pontic steppe who had invaded Western Asia, and attacked Lydia over the course of several invasions during which they killed Alyattes's great-grandfather Gyges, and possibly his grandfather Ardys and his father Sadyattes. As governor of Adramyttium, Croesus had to provide his father with Ionian Greek mercenaries for a military campaign in Caria.\nDuring Croesus's tenure as governor of Adramyttium itself, a rivalry had developed between him and his step-brother Pantaleon, who might have been intended by Alyattes to be his successor. Following Alyattes's death in 585 BC, this rivalry became an open succession struggle out of which Croesus emerged victorious.\nConquests.\nOnce Croesus's position as king was secure, he immediately launched a military campaign against the Ionian city of Ephesus. The ruling dynasty of Ephesus had engaged in friendly relations with Lydia consolidated by diplomatic marriages from the reign of Gyges until that of Alyattes: the Ephesian tyrant Pindar, who had previously supported Pantaleon in the Lydian succession struggle, was the son of a daughter of Alyattes, and was thus a nephew of Croesus. After Pindar rejected an envoy by Croesus demanding Ephesus to submit to Lydia, the Lydian king started to pressure the city and demanded that Pindar leave it and go into exile. After Pindar accepted these terms, Croesus annexed Ephesus into the Lydian Empire. Once Ephesus was under Lydian rule, Croesus provided patronage for the reconstruction of the Temple of Artemis, to which he offered a large number of marble columns as dedication to the goddess.\nMeanwhile the Ionian city of Miletus had been willingly sending tribute to Mena in exchange for being spared from Lydian attacks because the overthrow of the city's last tyrants, Thoas and Damasenor, and the replacement of the tyranny by a system of magistrates had annulated the relations of friendship initiated by Alyattes and the former Milesian tyrant Thrasybulus.\nCroesus continued his attacks against the other Greek cities of the western coast of Asia Minor until he had subjugated all of mainland Ionia, Aeolis, and Doris, but he abandoned his plans of annexing the Greek city-states on the islands and he instead concluded treaties of friendship with them, which might have helped him participate in the lucrative trade the Aegean Greeks carried out with Egypt at Naucratis.\nOther domains of the Lydian Empire under Croesus.\nThe Lydians had already conquered Phrygia under the rule of Alyattes, who took advantage of the weakening of the various polities all across Anatolia by the Cimmerian raids and used the lack of a centralised Phrygian state and the traditionally friendly relations between the Lydian and Phrygian elites to extend Lydian rule eastwards to Phrygia. Lydian presence in Phrygia is archaeologically attested by the existence of a Lydian citadel in the Phrygian capital of Gordion, as well as Lydian architectural remains in northwest Phrygia, such as in Dascylium, and in the Phrygian Highlands at Midas City. Lydian troops might have been stationed in the aforementioned locations as well as in Hac\u0131tu\u011frul, Afyonkarahisar, and Konya, which would have provided to the Lydian kingdom access to the produce and roads of Phrygia. The presence of a Lydian ivory plaque at Kerkenes Da\u01e7 suggests that Alyattes's control of Phrygia might have extended to the east of the Halys River to include the city of Pteria, with the possibility that he may have rebuilt this city and placed a Phrygian ruler there: Pteria's strategic location would have been useful in protecting the Lydian Empire from attacks from the east, and its proximity to the Royal Road would have made of the city an important centre from which caravans could be protected. Phrygia under Lydian rule would continue to be administered by its local elites, such as the ruler of Midas City who held Phrygian royal titles such as (king) and (commander of the armies), but were under the authority of the Lydian kings of Sardis and had a Lydian diplomatic presence at their court, following the framework of the traditional vassalage treaties used since the period of the Hittite and Assyrian empires, and according to which the Lydian king imposed on the vassal rulers a \"treaty of vassalage\" which allowed the local Phrygian rulers to remain in power, in exchange of which the Phrygian vassals had the duty to provide military support and sometimes offer rich tribute to the Lydian kingdom.\nThis situation continued under the rule of Croesus, with one inscription attesting of the presence of Croesus's son Atys at the court of one local ruler of Midas City himself named Midas. At Midas City, Atys held the position of priest of the sacred fire of the mother goddess Aryastin, and through him Croesus provided patronage to the building of the religious monument in the city now known as the Midas Monument.\nThe presence of Atys at the court of this Midas might have inspired the legend recounted by Herodotus, according to which Croesus had a dream in which Atys was killed by an iron spear, after which he prevented his son from leading military activities, but Atys nevertheless found death while hunting a wild boar which was ravaging Lydia, during which he was accidentally hit by the spear thrown by the Phrygian prince Adrastus, who had previously exiled himself to Lydia after accidentally killing his own brother.\nCroesus also brought Caria, whose various city-states had since Gyges been allied to the Mermnad dynasty, and from where Croesus's own mother originated, under the direct control of the Lydian Empire.\nThus, according to Herodotus, Croesus ruled over all the peoples to the west of the Halys River - the Lydians, Phrygians, Mysians, Mariandyni, Chalybes, Paphlagonians, Thyni and Bithyni Thracians, Carians, Ionians, Dorians, Aeolians, and Pamphylians. However information only about the relations between the Lydians and the Phrygians is attested in both literary and archaeological sources, and there is no available data concerning relations between the other mentioned peoples and the Lydian kings; moreover, given this was the situation detailed by Herodotus under the reign of Croesus, it is very likely that a number of these populations had already been conquered under Alyattes. The only populations Herodotus claimed were independent of the Lydian Empire were the Lycians, who lived in a mountainous country which would not have been accessible to the Lydian armies, and the Cilicians, who had already been conquered by Neo-Babylonian Empire. Modern estimates nevertheless suggest that it is not impossible that the Lydians might have subjected Lycia, given that the Lycian coast would have been important for the Lydians because it was close to a trade route connecting the Aegean region, the Levant, and Cyprus. Modern studies also consider doubtful the Greek historian's traditional account of the Halys River as having been set as the border between the Lydian and the Median kingdom, which appears to have been a retroactive narrative construction based on symbolic role assigned by Greeks to the Halys as the separation between Lower Asia and Upper Asia as well as on the Halys being a later provincial border within the Achaemenid Empire. The eastern border of the kingdom of Croesus would thus have instead been further to the east of the Halys, at an undetermined point in eastern Anatolia.\nInternational relations.\nCroesus continued the friendly relations with the Medes concluded by his father Alyattes and the Median king Cyaxares after five years of war in 585 BC, shortly before both their respective deaths that same year. As part of the peace treaty ending the war between Media and Lydia, Croesus's sister Aryenis had married Cyaxares's son and successor Astyages, who thus became Croesus's brother-in-law, while a daughter of Cyaxares might have been married to Croesus. Croesus continued these good relations with the Medes after he succeeded Alyattes and Astyages succeeded Cyaxares.\nUnder Croesus's rule, Lydia continued its good relations started by Gyges with the Saite Egyptian kingdom, then ruled by the pharaoh Amasis II. Both Croesus and Amasis had common interests in fostering trade relations at Naucratis with the Greeks, including with the Milesians who were under Lydian authority. These trade relations also functioned as an access point for Greek mercenaries serving the Saite pharaohs.\nCroesus also established trade and diplomatic relations with the Neo-Babylonian Empire of Nabonidus, which ensured the transition of Lydian products towards Babylonian markets.\nVotive offerings to Delphi.\nCroesus also continued the good relations between Lydia and the sanctuary of the god Apollo in Delphi on continental Greece first established by his great-great-grandfather Gyges and maintained by his father Alyattes, and just like his ancestors, Croesus offered the sanctuary rich presents in dedication, including a lion made of gold and weighing ten talents. In exchange for the offerings of Croesus to the sanctuary of Apollo, the Lydians obtained precedence in consulting its oracle, were exempt from taxes, were allowed to sit at the first rank, and were granted the permission to become Delphian priests. These exchanges of gifts for privileges in turn meant that strong relations of hospitality existed between Lydia and Delphi due to which the Delphians had the duty to welcome, protect, and ensure the well-being of Lydian ambassadors.\nCroesus further increased his contacts with the Greeks on the European continent by establishing relations with the city-state of Sparta, to whom he provided the gold they needed to gild a statue of the god Apollo after the oracle of Delphi told them they would obtain this gold from Croesus.\nCoinage.\nCroesus is credited with issuing the first true gold coins with a standardised purity for general circulation, the Croeseid (following on from his father Alyattes who invented minting with electrum coins). Indeed, the invention of coinage had passed into Greek society through Hermodike II. Hermodike II, the daughter of an Agamemnon of Cyme, claimed descent from the original Agamemnon who conquered Troy. She was likely one of Alyattes\u2019 wives, so may have been Croesus\u2019 mother, because the bull imagery on the croeseid symbolises the Hellenic Zeus\u2014see Europa (consort of Zeus). Zeus, through Hercules, was the divine forefather of his family line.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;While the pyre was burning, it is said that a cloud passed under Hercules and with a peal of thunder wafted him up to heaven. Thereafter, he obtained immortality... by Omphale he had Agelaus, from whom the family of Croesus was descended...\nMoreover, the first coins were quite crude and made of electrum, a naturally occurring pale yellow alloy of gold and silver. The composition of these first coins was similar to alluvial deposits found in the silt of the Pactolus river (made famous by Midas), which ran through the Lydian capital, Sardis. Later coins, including some in the British Museum, were made from gold purified by heating with common salt to remove the silver.\nIn Greek and Persian cultures the name of Croesus became a synonym for a wealthy man. He inherited great wealth from his father Alyattes, who had become associated with the Midas myth because Lydian precious metals came from the river Pactolus, in which King Midas supposedly washed away his ability to turn all he touched into gold. In reality, Alyattes' tax revenues may have been the real 'Midas touch' financing his and Croesus' conquests. Croesus' wealth remained proverbial beyond classical antiquity: in English, expressions such as \"rich as Croesus\" or \"richer than Croesus\" are used to indicate great wealth to this day. The earliest known such usage in English was John Gower's in \"Confessio amantis\" (1390):\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nInterview with Solon.\nAccording to Herodotus, Croesus encountered the Greek sage Solon and showed him his enormous wealth. Croesus, secure in his own wealth and happiness, asked Solon who the happiest man in the world was, and was disappointed by Solon's response that three had been happier than Croesus: Tellus, who died fighting for his country, and the brothers Kleobis and Biton who died peacefully in their sleep after their mother prayed for their perfect happiness because they had demonstrated filial piety by drawing her to a festival in an oxcart themselves.\nSolon goes on to explain that Croesus cannot be the happiest man because the fickleness of fortune means that the happiness of a man's life cannot be judged until after his death. Sure enough, Croesus' hubristic happiness was reversed by the tragic deaths of his accidentally killed son and, according to Ctesias, his wife's suicide at the fall of Sardis, not to mention his defeat at the hands of the Persians.\nThe interview is in the nature of a philosophical disquisition on the subject \"Which man is happy?\" It is legendary rather than historical. Thus, the \"happiness\" of Croesus is presented as a moralistic \"exemplum\" of the fickleness of Tyche, a theme that gathered strength from the fourth century, revealing its late date. The story was later retold and elaborated by Ausonius in \"The Masque of the Seven Sages\", in the \"Suda\" (entry \"\u039c\u1fb6\u03bb\u03bb\u03bf\u03bd \u1f41 \u03a6\u03c1\u03cd\u03be,\" which adds Aesop and the Seven Sages of Greece), and by Tolstoy in his short story \"Croesus and Fate\".\nWar against Persia and defeat.\nIn 550 BC, Croesus's brother-in-law, the Median king Astyages, was overthrown by his own grandson, the Persian king Cyrus the Great. In a likely legendary event recounted by Herodotus, Croesus responded by consulting the oracle of Delphi, who told him that he would \"destroy a great empire\" should he attack Cyrus. This answer of the Delphian oracle remains one of the famous oracular statements from Delphi. \nLikely also legendary were the responses of the oracles of Delphi and Amphiaraus telling Croesus to ally with the strongest of all Greeks. Croesus found this to be the state of Sparta to which he had previously offered the gold used for gilding a statue of Apollo, shortly after Sparta's victory over the Greek city-state of Argos in 547 BC. The claim of Herodotus that Croesus, Amasis, and Nabonidus formed a defensive alliance against Cyrus of Persia appears to have been a retroactive exaggeration of the existing diplomatic and trade relations between Lydia, Egypt, and Babylon.\nCroesus first attacked Pteria, the capital of a Phrygian state vassal to the Lydians which might have attempted to rebel against Lydian suzerainty and instead declare its allegiance to the new Persian Empire of Cyrus. Cyrus retaliated by intervening in Cappadocia and attacking the Lydians at Pteria in a battle in which Croesus was defeated. After this first battle, Croesus burnt down Pteria to prevent Cyrus from using its strategic location and returned to Sardis. However, Cyrus followed Croesus and defeated the Lydian army again at Thymbra before besieging and capturing the Lydian capital of Sardis, thus bringing an end to the rule of the Mermnad dynasty and to the Lydian Empire. Lydia would never regain its independence and would remain a part of various successive empires.\nAlthough the dates for the battles of Pteria and Thymbra and of end of the Lydian empire have been traditionally fixed to 547 BC, more recent estimates suggest that Herodotus's account being unreliable chronologically concerning the fall of Lydia means that there are currently no ways of dating the fall of Sardis; theoretically, it may even have taken place after the fall of Babylon in 539 BC.\nLater life and death.\nCroesus's fate after the Persian conquest of Lydia is uncertain: Herodotus, the poet Bacchylides and Nicolaus of Damascus claimed that Croesus either tried to commit suicide on a pyre or was condemned by the Persians to be burnt at the stake until a thunderstorm's rain water extinguished the fire after either his or his son's prayers to the god Apollo (or after Cyrus heard Croesus calling the name of Solon). In most versions of the story, Cyrus kept Croesus as his advisor, although Bacchylides claimed that the god Zeus carried Croesus away to Hyperborea. Xenophon similarly claimed that Cyrus kept Croesus as his advisor, while Ctesias claimed that Cyrus appointed Croesus as the governor of the city of Barene in Media.\nA passage from the Nabonidus Chronicle was long held to have referred to a military campaign of Cyrus against a country whose name has been largely erased except for the first cuneiform character which had been interpreted as \"Lu\", extrapolated to be the first syllable of an Akkadian name for Lydia. This passage in the Nabonidus Chronicle would thus have referred to a campaign by Cyrus against Lydia around 547 BC during which he \"marched against the country, killed its king, took his possessions, and put there a garrison of his own\". However, the verb used in the Nabonidus Chronicle could be used both in the sense \"to kill\" and \"to destroy as a military power\", making any precise deduction of the fate of Croesus from it impossible. More recent studies have moreover concluded that the non-erased cuneiform sign was not \"Lu\", but rather \u00da, making untenable the interpretation of the text as talking of a campaign against Lydia, and instead suggesting that the campaign was against Urartu.\nThe scholar Max Mallowan argued that there is no evidence that Cyrus the Great killed Croesus, in particular rejected the account of burning on a pyre, and interpreted Bacchylides' narration as Croesus attempting suicide and then being saved by Cyrus.\nThe historian Kevin Leloux instead maintained the reading of the Nabonidus Chronicle as referring to a campaign of Cyrus against Lydia to argue that Croesus was indeed executed by Cyrus. According to him, the story of Croesus and the pyre would have been imagined by the Greeks based on the fires started during the Persian capture of Sardis throughout the lower city, where the buildings were made largely of wood.\nLegacy.\nAfter defeating Croesus, Cyrus adopted the use of gold coinage as the main currency of his kingdom. The use of croesid coins under the Persian Empire would continue under Cyrus, and would end only after Darius the Great replaced them by the Persian daric. These late croesid coins bearing \"bull and lion\" images used under Cyrus differed from previous Mermnad croesids in that they were lighter and their weight was closer to those of the early golden darics and silver sigloi.\nIn popular culture.\nAccording to the Armenian historian Movses Khorenatsi (c. 410\u2013490s AD), who wrote a monumental \"History of Armenia\", the Armenian king Artaxias I accomplished many military deeds, which include the capture of Croesus and the conquest of the Lydian kingdom (2.12\u201313). References to Croesus' legendary power and wealth, often as a symbol of human vanity, are numerous in literature.\nThe following, by Isaac Watts, is from the poem \"False Greatness\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAnother literary example is \"Croesus and Fate\", a short story by Leo Tolstoy that is a retelling of the account of Croesus as told by Herodotus and Plutarch.\n\"Cr\u0153sus, King of Lydia\", is a tragedy in five parts by Alfred Bate Richards, first published in 1845.\nTo be \"riche comme Cr\u00e9sus\" is a popular French saying to describe the wealthiest of the wealthy, and gave its name to a TF1 game show \"Cr\u00e9sus\", where the king is reimagined as a CGI skeleton, who has returned from the dead to give some of his money away to lucky contestants.\nOn \"The Simpsons\", the wealthy Montgomery Burns lives at the corner of Croesus and Mammon Streets.\nIn \"The Sopranos\" season 4 episode 6, Ralph Cifaretto tells Artie Bucco \u201cWith what you take out of that bar, you must be sitting on money like King Croesus.\u201d\nIn \"Squidbillies\" season 6 episode 8, Dan Halen remarks that he paid Early Cuyler, who he said \"left with cash in hand, rich as Croesus\".\nIn \"Ghosts (2019 TV series)\" season 1 episode 5, Julian Fawcett (played by Simon Farnaby) compares Barclays Beg-Chetwynde (played by Geoffrey McGivern) to Croesus, \"Oh I remember this berk... rich as Croesus, loves the sound of his own voice.\"\nIn \"East of Eden\" Chapter 34, John Steinbeck refers to Croesus to explain living a righteous life. Wealth will vanish as did with Croesus. So, the question one should ask to determine whether one lived a good life or not is \u201cWas he loved or was he hated? Is his death felt as a loss or does a kind of joy come of it?\u201d\nIn 1968, English psychedelic pop band, World of Oz, released its single titled \"King Croesus.\"\nIn \"The Gilded Age (TV Series)\" season 3, episode 6, Mrs. Van Rhijin, played by \"Christine Baranski\", describes her recently wealthy servant as \u201cour Croesus-like footman.\u201d\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWorks cited.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "72746", "revid": "10202399", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72746", "title": "560 BC", "text": "Calendar year\n \nThe year 560 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. In the Roman Empire, it was known as year 194 \"Ab urbe condita\". \nThe denomination 560 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "72750", "revid": "51063105", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72750", "title": "Prosthesis", "text": "Artificial device that replaces a missing body part\nIn medicine, a prosthesis (pl.: prostheses; from ), or a prosthetic implant, is an artificial device that replaces a missing body part, which may be lost through physical trauma, disease, or a condition present at birth (congenital disorder). Prostheses may restore the normal functions of the missing body part, or may perform a cosmetic function.\nA person who has undergone an amputation is sometimes referred to as an amputee, Rehabilitation for someone with an amputation is primarily coordinated by a physiatrist as part of an inter-disciplinary team consisting of physiatrists, prosthetists, nurses, physical therapists, and occupational therapists. Prostheses can be created by hand or with computer-aided design (CAD), a software interface that helps creators design and analyze the creation with computer-generated 2-D and 3-D graphics as well as analysis and optimization tools.\nTypes.\nA person's prosthetic device should be designed and assembled to meet their individual appearance and functional needs. Depending on personal circumstances, co-morbidities, budget or health insurance coverage, and access to medical care, decisions may need to balance aesthetics and function. In addition, for some individuals, a myoelectric device, a body-powered device, or an activity-specific device may be appropriate options. The person's future goals and vocational aspirations and potential capabilities may help them choose between one or more devices.\nCraniofacial prostheses\ninclude intra-oral and extra-oral prostheses. Extra-oral prostheses are further divided into hemifacial, auricular (ear), nasal, orbital and ocular. Intra-oral prostheses include dental prostheses, such as dentures, obturators, and dental implants.\nProstheses of the neck include larynx substitutes, trachea and upper esophageal replacements,\nSome prostheses of the torso include breast prostheses which may be either single or bilateral, full breast devices or nipple prostheses.\nPenile prostheses are used to treat erectile dysfunction, perform phalloplasty procedures in men, and to build a new penis in female-to-male gender reassignment surgeries.\nLimb prostheses.\nLimb prostheses include both upper- and lower-extremity prostheses.\nUpper-extremity prostheses are used at varying levels of amputation: forequarter, shoulder disarticulation, transhumeral prosthesis, elbow disarticulation, transradial prosthesis, wrist disarticulation, full hand, partial hand, finger, partial finger. A transradial prosthesis is an artificial limb that replaces an arm missing below the elbow.\nUpper limb prostheses can be categorized in three main categories: Passive devices, Body Powered devices, and Externally Powered (myoelectric) devices. Passive devices can either be passive hands, mainly used for cosmetic purposes, or passive tools, mainly used for specific activities (e.g. leisure or vocational). An extensive overview and classification of passive devices can be found in a literature review by Maat \"et.al.\" A passive device can be static, meaning the device has no movable parts, or it can be adjustable, meaning its configuration can be adjusted (e.g. adjustable hand opening). Despite the absence of active grasping, passive devices are very useful in bimanual tasks that require fixation or support of an object, or for gesticulation in social interaction. According to scientific data a third of the upper limb amputees worldwide use a passive prosthetic hand. Body Powered or cable-operated limbs work by attaching a harness and cable around the opposite shoulder of the damaged arm. A recent body-powered approach has explored the utilization of the user's breathing to power and control the prosthetic hand to help eliminate actuation cable and harness. The third category of available prosthetic devices comprises myoelectric arms. This particular class of devices distinguishes itself from the previous ones due to the inclusion of a battery system. This battery serves the dual purpose of providing energy for both actuation and sensing components. While actuation predominantly relies on motor or pneumatic systems, a variety of solutions have been explored for capturing muscle activity, including techniques such as Electromyography, Sonomyography, Myokinetic, and others. These methods function by detecting the minute electrical currents generated by contracted muscles during upper arm movement, typically employing electrodes or other suitable tools. Subsequently, these acquired signals are converted into gripping patterns or postures that the artificial hand will then execute.\nIn the prosthetics industry, a trans-radial prosthetic arm is often referred to as a \"BE\" or below elbow prosthesis.\nLower-extremity prostheses provide replacements at varying levels of amputation. These include hip disarticulation, transfemoral prosthesis, knee disarticulation, transtibial prosthesis, Syme's amputation, foot, partial foot, and toe. The two main subcategories of lower extremity prosthetic devices are trans-tibial (any amputation transecting the tibia bone or a congenital anomaly resulting in a tibial deficiency) and trans-femoral (any amputation transecting the femur bone or a congenital anomaly resulting in a femoral deficiency).\nA transfemoral prosthesis is an artificial limb that replaces a leg missing above the knee. Transfemoral amputees can have a very difficult time regaining normal movement. In general, a transfemoral amputee must use approximately 80% more energy to walk than a person with two whole legs. This is due to the complexities in movement associated with the knee. In newer and more improved designs, hydraulics, carbon fiber, mechanical linkages, motors, computer microprocessors, and innovative combinations of these technologies are employed to give more control to the user. In the prosthetics industry, a trans-femoral prosthetic leg is often referred to as an \"AK\" or above the knee prosthesis.\nA transtibial prosthesis is an artificial limb that replaces a leg missing below the knee. A transtibial amputee is usually able to regain normal movement more readily than someone with a transfemoral amputation, due in large part to retaining the knee, which allows for easier movement. Lower extremity prosthetics describe artificially replaced limbs located at the hip level or lower. In the prosthetics industry, a trans-tibial prosthetic leg is often referred to as a \"BK\" or below the knee prosthesis.\nProstheses are manufactured and fit by clinical prosthetists. Prosthetists are healthcare professionals responsible for making, fitting, and adjusting prostheses and for lower limb prostheses will assess both gait and prosthetic alignment. Once a prosthesis has been fit and adjusted by a prosthetist, a rehabilitation physiotherapist (called physical therapist in America) will help teach a new prosthetic user to walk with a leg prosthesis. To do so, the physical therapist may provide verbal instructions and may also help guide the person using touch or tactile cues. This may be done in a clinic or home. There is some research suggesting that such training in the home may be more successful if the treatment includes the use of a treadmill. Using a treadmill, along with the physical therapy treatment, helps the person to experience many of the challenges of walking with a prosthesis.\nIn the United Kingdom, 75% of lower limb amputations are performed due to inadequate circulation (dysvascularity). This condition is often associated with many other medical conditions (co-morbidities) including diabetes and heart disease that may make it a challenge to recover and use a prosthetic limb to regain mobility and independence. For people who have inadequate circulation and have lost a lower limb, there is insufficient evidence due to a lack of research, to inform them regarding their choice of prosthetic rehabilitation approaches.\nLower extremity prostheses are often categorized by the level of amputation or after the name of a surgeon:\nProsthetic raw materials.\nProsthetic are made lightweight for better convenience for the amputee. Some of these materials include:\nWheeled prostheses have also been used extensively in the rehabilitation of injured domestic animals, including dogs, cats, pigs, rabbits, and turtles.\nOrgan prostheses.\nOrgan prostheses include artificial hearts, and artificial kidneys.\nHistory.\nProsthetics originate from the ancient Near East circa 3000 BCE, with the earliest evidence of prosthetics appearing in ancient Egypt and Iran. The earliest recorded mention of eye prosthetics is from the Egyptian story of the Eye of Horus dated circa 3000 BC, which involves the left eye of Horus being plucked out and then restored by Thoth. Circa 3000-2800 BC, the earliest archaeological evidence of prosthetics is found in ancient Iran, where an eye prosthetic is found buried with a woman in Shahr-i Sh\u014dkhta. It was likely made of bitumen paste that was covered with a thin layer of gold. The Egyptians were also early pioneers of foot prosthetics, as shown by the wooden toe found on a body from the New Kingdom circa 1000 BC. Another early textual mention is found in South Asia circa 1200 BC, involving the warrior queen Vishpala in the Rigveda. Roman bronze crowns have also been found, but their use could have been more aesthetic than medical.\nAn early mention of a prosthetic comes from the Greek historian Herodotus, who tells the story of Hegesistratus, a Greek diviner who cut off his own foot to escape his Spartan captors and replaced it with a wooden one.\nWood and metal prosthetics.\nPliny the Elder also recorded the tale of a Roman general, Marcus Sergius, whose right hand was cut off while campaigning and had an iron hand made to hold his shield so that he could return to battle. A famous and quite refined historical prosthetic arm was that of G\u00f6tz von Berlichingen, made at the beginning of the 16th century. The first confirmed use of a prosthetic device, however, is from 950 to 710 BC. In 2000, research pathologists discovered a mummy from this period buried in the Egyptian necropolis near ancient Thebes that possessed an artificial big toe. This toe, consisting of wood and leather, exhibited evidence of use. When reproduced by bio-mechanical engineers in 2011, researchers discovered that this ancient prosthetic enabled its wearer to walk both barefoot and in Egyptian style sandals. Previously, the earliest discovered prosthetic was an artificial leg from Capua.\nAround the same time, Fran\u00e7ois de la Noue is also reported to have had an iron hand, as is, in the 17th century, Ren\u00e9-Robert Cavalier de la Salle. Henri de Tonti had a prosthetic hook for a hand. During the Middle Ages, prosthetics remained quite basic in form. Debilitated knights would be fitted with prosthetics so they could hold up a shield, grasp a lance or a sword, or stabilize a mounted warrior. Only the wealthy could afford anything that would assist in daily life.\nOne notable prosthesis was that belonging to an Italian man, who scientists estimate replaced his amputated right hand with a knife. Scientists investigating the skeleton, which was found in a Longobard cemetery in Povegliano Veronese, estimated that the man had lived sometime between the 6th and 8th centuries AD. Materials found near the man's body suggest that the knife prosthesis was attached with a leather strap, which he repeatedly tightened with his teeth.\nDuring the Renaissance, prosthetics developed with the use of iron, steel, copper, and wood. Functional prosthetics began to make an appearance in the 1500s.\nTechnology progress before the 20th century.\nAn Italian surgeon recorded the existence of an amputee who had an arm that allowed him to remove his hat, open his purse, and sign his name. Improvement in amputation surgery and prosthetic design came at the hands of Ambroise Par\u00e9. Among his inventions was an above-knee device that was a kneeling peg leg and foot prosthesis with a fixed position, adjustable harness, and knee lock control. The functionality of his advancements showed how future prosthetics could develop.\nOther major improvements before the modern era:\nAt the end of World War II, the NAS (National Academy of Sciences) began to advocate better research and development of prosthetics. Through government funding, a research and development program was developed within the Army, Navy, Air Force, and the Veterans Administration.\nLower extremity modern history.\nAfter the Second World War, a team at the University of California, Berkeley including James Foort and C.W. Radcliff helped to develop the quadrilateral socket by developing a jig fitting system for amputations above the knee. Socket technology for lower extremity limbs saw a further revolution during the 1980s when John Sabolich C.P.O., invented the Contoured Adducted Trochanteric-Controlled Alignment Method (CATCAM) socket, later to evolve into the Sabolich Socket. He followed the direction of Ivan Long and Ossur Christensen as they developed alternatives to the quadrilateral socket, which in turn followed the open ended plug socket, created from wood. The advancement was due to the difference in the socket to patient contact model. Prior to this, sockets were made in the shape of a square shape with no specialized containment for muscular tissue. New designs thus help to lock in the bony anatomy, locking it into place and distributing the weight evenly over the existing limb as well as the musculature of the patient. Ischial containment is well known and used today by many prosthetist to help in patient care. Variations of the ischial containment socket thus exists and each socket is tailored to the specific needs of the patient. Others who contributed to socket development and changes over the years include Tim Staats, Chris Hoyt, and Frank Gottschalk. Gottschalk disputed the efficacy of the CAT-CAM socket- insisting the surgical procedure done by the amputation surgeon was most important to prepare the amputee for good use of a prosthesis of any type socket design.\nThe first microprocessor-controlled prosthetic knees became available in the early 1990s. The Intelligent Prosthesis was the first commercially available microprocessor-controlled prosthetic knee. It was released by Chas. A. Blatchford &amp; Sons, Ltd., of Great Britain, in 1993 and made walking with the prosthesis feel and look more natural. An improved version was released in 1995 by the name Intelligent Prosthesis Plus. Blatchford released another prosthesis, the Adaptive Prosthesis, in 1998. The Adaptive Prosthesis utilized hydraulic controls, pneumatic controls, and a microprocessor to provide the amputee with a gait that was more responsive to changes in walking speed. Cost analysis reveals that a sophisticated above-knee prosthesis will be about $1\u00a0million in 45 years, given only annual cost of living adjustments.\nIn 2019, a project under AT2030 was launched in which bespoke sockets are made using a thermoplastic, rather than through a plaster cast. This is faster to do and significantly less expensive. The sockets were called Amparo Confidence sockets.\nUpper extremity modern history.\nIn 2005, DARPA started the Revolutionizing Prosthetics program. According to DARPA, the goal of the $100 million program was to \"develop an advanced electromechanical prosthetic upper limb with near-natural control that would dramatically enhance independence and quality of life for amputees.\" In 2014, the LUKE Arm developed by Dean Kamen and his team at DEKA Research and Development Corp. became the first prosthetic arm approved by FDA that \"translates signals from a person's muscles to perform complex tasks,\" according to FDA. Johns Hopkins University and the U.S. Department of Veteran Affairs also participated in the program.\nDesign trends moving forward.\nThere are many steps in the evolution of prosthetic design trends that are moving forward with time. Many design trends point to lighter, more durable, and flexible materials like carbon fiber, silicone, and advanced polymers. These not only make the prosthetic limb lighter and more durable but also allow it to mimic the look and feel of natural skin, providing users with a more comfortable and natural experience. This new technology helps prosthetic users blend in with people with normal ligaments to reduce the stigmatism for people who wear prosthetics. Another trend points towards using bionics and myoelectric components in prosthetic design. These limbs utilize sensors to detect electrical signals from the user's residual muscles. The signals are then converted into motions, allowing users to control their prosthetic limbs using their own muscle contractions. This has greatly improved the range and fluidity of movements available to amputees, making tasks like grasping objects or walking naturally much more feasible. Integration with AI is also on the forefront to the prosthetic design. AI-enabled prosthetic limbs can learn and adapt to the user's habits and preferences over time, ensuring optimal functionality. By analyzing the user's gait, grip, and other movements, these smart limbs can make real-time adjustments, providing smoother and more natural motions.\nPatient procedure.\nA prosthesis is a functional replacement for an amputated or congenitally malformed or missing limb. Prosthetists are responsible for the prescription, design, and management of a prosthetic device.\nIn most cases, the prosthetist begins by taking a plaster cast of the patient's affected limb. Lightweight, high-strength thermoplastics are custom-formed to this model of the patient. Cutting-edge materials such as carbon fiber, titanium and Kevlar provide strength and durability while making the new prosthesis lighter. More sophisticated prostheses are equipped with advanced electronics, providing additional stability and control.\nCurrent technology and manufacturing.\nOver the years, there have been advancements in artificial limbs. New plastics and other materials, such as carbon fiber, have allowed artificial limbs to be stronger and lighter, limiting the amount of extra energy necessary to operate the limb. This is especially important for trans-femoral amputees. Additional materials have allowed artificial limbs to look much more realistic, which is important to trans-radial and transhumeral amputees because they are more likely to have the artificial limb exposed.\nIn addition to new materials, the use of electronics has become very common in artificial limbs. Myoelectric limbs, which control the limbs by converting muscle movements to electrical signals, have become much more common than cable operated limbs. Myoelectric signals are picked up by electrodes, the signal gets integrated and once it exceeds a certain threshold, the prosthetic limb control signal is triggered which is why inherently, all myoelectric controls lag. Conversely, cable control is immediate and physical, and through that offers a certain degree of direct force feedback that myoelectric control does not. Computers are also used extensively in the manufacturing of limbs. Computer Aided Design and Computer Aided Manufacturing are often used to assist in the design and manufacture of artificial limbs.\nMost modern artificial limbs are attached to the residual limb (stump) of the amputee by belts and cuffs or by suction. The residual limb either directly fits into a socket on the prosthetic, or\u2014more commonly today\u2014a liner is used that then is fixed to the socket either by vacuum (suction sockets) or a pin lock. Liners are soft and by that, they can create a far better suction fit than hard sockets. Silicone liners can be obtained in standard sizes, mostly with a circular (round) cross section, but for any other residual limb shape, custom liners can be made. The socket is custom made to fit the residual limb and to distribute the forces of the artificial limb across the area of the residual limb (rather than just one small spot), which helps reduce wear on the residual limb.\nProduction of prosthetic socket.\nThe production of a prosthetic socket begins with capturing the geometry of the residual limb; this process is called shape capture. The goal of this process is to create an accurate representation of the residual limb, which is critical to achieve good socket fit. The custom socket is created by taking a plaster cast of the residual limb or, more commonly today, of the liner worn over their residual limb, and then making a mold from the plaster cast. The commonly used compound is called Plaster of Paris. In recent years, various digital shape capture systems have been developed which can be input directly to a computer allowing for a more sophisticated design. In general, the shape capturing process begins with the digital acquisition of three-dimensional (3D) geometric data from the amputee's residual limb. Data are acquired with either a probe, laser scanner, structured light scanner, or a photographic-based 3D scanning system.\nAfter shape capture, the second phase of the socket production is called rectification, which is the process of modifying the model of the residual limb by adding volume to bony prominence and potential pressure points and remove volume from load bearing area. This can be done manually by adding or removing plaster to the positive model, or virtually by manipulating the computerized model in the software. Lastly, the fabrication of the prosthetic socket begins once the model has been rectified and finalized. The prosthetists would wrap the positive model with a semi-molten plastic sheet or carbon fiber coated with epoxy resin to construct the prosthetic socket. For the computerized model, it can be 3D printed using a various of material with different flexibility and mechanical strength.\nOptimal socket fit between the residual limb and socket is critical to the function and usage of the entire prosthesis. If the fit between the residual limb and socket attachment is too loose, this will reduce the area of contact between the residual limb and socket or liner, and increase pockets between residual limb skin and socket or liner. Pressure then is higher, which can be painful. Air pockets can allow sweat to accumulate that can soften the skin. Ultimately, this is a frequent cause for itchy skin rashes. Over time, this can lead to breakdown of the skin. On the other hand, a very tight fit may excessively increase the interface pressures that may also lead to skin breakdown after prolonged use.\nArtificial limbs are typically manufactured using the following steps:\nBody-powered arms.\nCurrent technology allows body-powered arms to weigh around one-half to one-third of what a myoelectric arm does.\nSockets.\nCurrent body-powered arms contain sockets that are built from hard epoxy or carbon fiber. These sockets or \"interfaces\" can be made more comfortable by lining them with a softer, compressible foam material that provides padding for the bone prominences. A self-suspending or supra-condylar socket design is useful for those with short to mid-range below elbow absence. Longer limbs may require the use of a locking roll-on type inner liner or more complex harnessing to help augment suspension.\nWrists.\nWrist units are either screw-on connectors featuring the UNF 1/2-20 thread (USA) or quick-release connector, of which there are different models.\nVoluntary opening and voluntary closing.\nTwo types of body-powered systems exist, voluntary opening \"pull to open\" and voluntary closing \"pull to close\". Virtually all \"split hook\" prostheses operate with a voluntary opening type system.\nMore modern \"prehensors\" called GRIPS utilize voluntary closing systems. The differences are significant. Users of voluntary opening systems rely on elastic bands or springs for gripping force, while users of voluntary closing systems rely on their own body power and energy to create gripping force.\nVoluntary closing users can generate prehension forces equivalent to the normal hand, up to or exceeding one hundred pounds. Voluntary closing GRIPS require constant tension to grip, like a human hand, and in that property, they do come closer to matching human hand performance. Voluntary opening split hook users are limited to forces their rubber or springs can generate which usually is below 20 pounds.\nFeedback.\nAn additional difference exists in the biofeedback created that allows the user to \"feel\" what is being held. Voluntary opening systems once engaged provide the holding force so that they operate like a passive vice at the end of the arm. No gripping feedback is provided once the hook has closed around the object being held. Voluntary closing systems provide directly proportional control and biofeedback so that the user can feel how much force that they are applying.\nIn 1997, the Colombian Prof. \u00c1lvaro R\u00edos Poveda, a researcher in bionics in Latin America, developed an upper limb and hand prosthesis with sensory feedback. This technology allows amputee patients to handle prosthetic hand systems in a more natural way.\nA recent study showed that by stimulating the median and ulnar nerves, according to the information provided by the artificial sensors from a hand prosthesis, physiologically appropriate (near-natural) sensory information could be provided to an amputee. This feedback enabled the participant to effectively modulate the grasping force of the prosthesis with no visual or auditory feedback.\nIn February 2013, researchers from \u00c9cole Polytechnique F\u00e9d\u00e9rale de Lausanne in Switzerland and the Scuola Superiore Sant'Anna in Italy, implanted electrodes into an amputee's arm, which gave the patient sensory feedback and allowed for real time control of the prosthetic. With wires linked to nerves in his upper arm, the Danish patient was able to handle objects and instantly receive a sense of touch through the special artificial hand that was created by Silvestro Micera and researchers both in Switzerland and Italy.\nIn July 2019, this technology was expanded on even further by researchers from the University of Utah, led by Jacob George. The group of researchers implanted electrodes into the patient's arm to map out several sensory precepts. They would then stimulate each electrode to figure out how each sensory precept was triggered, then proceed to map the sensory information onto the prosthetic. This would allow the researchers to get a good approximation of the same kind of information that the patient would receive from their natural hand. Unfortunately, the arm is too expensive for the average user to acquire, however, Jacob mentioned that insurance companies could cover the costs of the prosthetic.\nTerminal devices.\nTerminal devices contain a range of hooks, prehensors, hands or other devices.\nHooks.\nVoluntary opening split hook systems are simple, convenient, light, robust, versatile and relatively affordable.\nA hook does not match a normal human hand for appearance or overall versatility, but its material tolerances can exceed and surpass the normal human hand for mechanical stress (one can even use a hook to slice open boxes or as a hammer whereas the same is not possible with a normal hand), for thermal stability (one can use a hook to grip items from boiling water, to turn meat on a grill, to hold a match until it has burned down completely) and for chemical hazards (as a metal hook withstands acids or lye, and does not react to solvents like a prosthetic glove or human skin).\nHands.\nProsthetic hands are available in both voluntary opening and voluntary closing versions and because of their more complex mechanics and cosmetic glove covering require a relatively large activation force, which, depending on the type of harness used, may be uncomfortable. A recent study by the Delft University of Technology, The Netherlands, showed that the development of mechanical prosthetic hands has been neglected during the past decades. The study showed that the pinch force level of most current mechanical hands is too low for practical use. The best tested hand was a prosthetic hand developed around 1945. In 2017 however, a research has been started with bionic hands by Laura Hruby of the Medical University of Vienna. A few open-hardware 3-D printable bionic hands have also become available. Some companies are also producing robotic hands with integrated forearm, for fitting unto a patient's upper arm and in 2020, at the Italian Institute of Technology (IIT), another robotic hand with integrated forearm (Soft Hand Pro) was developed.\nCommercial providers and materials.\nHosmer and Otto Bock are major commercial hook providers. Mechanical hands are sold by Hosmer and Otto Bock as well; the Becker Hand is still manufactured by the Becker family. Prosthetic hands may be fitted with standard stock or custom-made cosmetic looking silicone gloves. But regular work gloves may be worn as well. Other terminal devices include the V2P Prehensor, a versatile robust gripper that allows customers to modify aspects of it, Texas Assist Devices (with a whole assortment of tools) and TRS that offers a range of terminal devices for sports. Cable harnesses can be built using aircraft steel cables, ball hinges, and self-lubricating cable sheaths. Some prosthetics have been designed specifically for use in salt water.\nLower-extremity prosthetics.\nLower-extremity prosthetics describes artificially replaced limbs located at the hip level or lower. Concerning all ages Ephraim et al. (2003) found a worldwide estimate of all-cause lower-extremity amputations of 2.0\u20135.9 per 10,000 inhabitants. For birth prevalence rates of congenital limb deficiency they found an estimate between 3.5 and 7.1 cases per 10,000 births.\nThe two main subcategories of lower extremity prosthetic devices are trans-tibial (any amputation transecting the tibia bone or a congenital anomaly resulting in a tibial deficiency), and trans-femoral (any amputation transecting the femur bone or a congenital anomaly resulting in a femoral deficiency). In the prosthetic industry, a trans-tibial prosthetic leg is often referred to as a \"BK\" or below the knee prosthesis while the trans-femoral prosthetic leg is often referred to as an \"AK\" or above the knee prosthesis.\nOther, less prevalent lower extremity cases include the following:\nSocket.\nThe socket serves as an interface between the residuum and the prosthesis, ideally allowing comfortable weight-bearing, movement control and proprioception. Socket problems, such as discomfort and skin breakdown, are rated among the most important issues faced by lower-limb amputees.\nShank and connectors.\nThis part creates distance and support between the knee-joint and the foot (in case of an upper-leg prosthesis) or between the socket and the foot. The type of connectors that are used between the shank and the knee/foot determines whether the prosthesis is modular or not. Modular means that the angle and the displacement of the foot in respect to the socket can be changed after fitting. In developing countries prosthesis mostly are non-modular, in order to reduce cost. When considering children modularity of angle and height is important because of their average growth of 1.9\u00a0cm annually.\nFoot.\nProviding contact to the ground, the foot provides shock absorption and stability during stance. Additionally it influences gait biomechanics by its shape and stiffness. This is because the trajectory of the center of pressure (COP) and the angle of the ground reaction forces is determined by the shape and stiffness of the foot and needs to match the subject's build in order to produce a normal gait pattern. Andrysek (2010) found 16 different types of feet, with greatly varying results concerning durability and biomechanics. The main problem found in current feet is durability, endurance ranging from 16 to 32 months These results are for adults and will probably be worse for children due to higher activity levels and scale effects. Evidence comparing different types of feet and ankle prosthetic devices is not strong enough to determine if one mechanism of ankle/foot is superior to another. When deciding on a device, the cost of the device, a person's functional need, and the availability of a particular device should be considered.\nKnee joint.\nIn case of a trans-femoral (above knee) amputation, there also is a need for a complex connector providing articulation, allowing flexion during swing-phase but not during stance. As its purpose is to replace the knee, the prosthetic knee joint is the most critical component of the prosthesis for trans-femoral amputees. The function of the good prosthetic knee joint is to mimic the function of the normal knee, such as providing structural support and stability during stance phase but able to flex in a controllable manner during swing phase. Hence it allows users to have a smooth and energy efficient gait and minimize the impact of amputation. The prosthetic knee is connected to the prosthetic foot by the shank, which is usually made of an aluminum or graphite tube.\nOne of the most important aspect of a prosthetic knee joint would be its stance-phase control mechanism. The function of stance-phase control is to prevent the leg from buckling when the limb is loaded during weight acceptance. This ensures the stability of the knee in order to support the single limb support task of stance phase and provides a smooth transition to the swing phase. Stance phase control can be achieved in several ways including the mechanical locks, relative alignment of prosthetic components, weight activated friction control, and polycentric mechanisms.\nMicroprocessor control.\nTo mimic the knee's functionality during gait, microprocessor-controlled knee joints have been developed that control the flexion of the knee. Some examples are Otto Bock's C-leg, introduced in 1997, Ossur's Rheo Knee, released in 2005, the Power Knee by Ossur, introduced in 2006, the Pli\u00e9 Knee from Freedom Innovations and DAW Industries' Self Learning Knee (SLK).\nThe idea was originally developed by Kelly James, a Canadian engineer, at the University of Alberta.\nA microprocessor is used to interpret and analyze signals from knee-angle sensors and moment sensors. The microprocessor receives signals from its sensors to determine the type of motion being employed by the amputee. Most microprocessor controlled knee-joints are powered by a battery housed inside the prosthesis.\nThe sensory signals computed by the microprocessor are used to control the resistance generated by hydraulic cylinders in the knee-joint. Small valves control the amount of hydraulic fluid that can pass into and out of the cylinder, thus regulating the extension and compression of a piston connected to the upper section of the knee.\nThe main advantage of a microprocessor-controlled prosthesis is a closer approximation to an amputee's natural gait. Some allow amputees to walk near walking speed or run. Variations in speed are also possible and are taken into account by sensors and communicated to the microprocessor, which adjusts to these changes accordingly. It also enables the amputees to walk downstairs with a step-over-step approach, rather than the one step at a time approach used with mechanical knees. There is some research suggesting that people with microprocessor-controlled prostheses report greater satisfaction and improvement in functionality, residual limb health, and safety. People may be able to perform everyday activities at greater speeds, even while multitasking, and reduce their risk of falls.\nHowever, some have some significant drawbacks that impair its use. They can be susceptible to water damage and thus great care must be taken to ensure that the prosthesis remains dry.\nMyoelectric.\nA myoelectric prosthesis uses the electrical tension generated every time a muscle contracts, as information. This tension can be captured from voluntarily contracted muscles by electrodes applied on the skin to control the movements of the prosthesis, such as elbow flexion/extension, wrist supination/pronation (rotation) or opening/closing of the fingers. A prosthesis of this type utilizes the residual neuromuscular system of the human body to control the functions of an electric powered prosthetic hand, wrist, elbow or foot. This is different from an electric switch prosthesis, which requires straps and/or cables actuated by body movements to actuate or operate switches that control the movements of the prosthesis. There is no clear evidence concluding that myoelectric upper extremity prostheses function better than body-powered prostheses. Advantages to using a myoelectric upper extremity prosthesis include the potential for improvement in cosmetic appeal (this type of prosthesis may have a more natural look), may be better for light everyday activities, and may be beneficial for people experiencing phantom limb pain. When compared to a body-powered prosthesis, a myoelectric prosthesis may not be as durable, may have a longer training time, may require more adjustments, may need more maintenance, and does not provide feedback to the user.\n has been working for several years on a non-invasive and affordable solution to this feedback problem. He considers that: \"Prosthetic limbs that can be controlled with thought hold great promise for the amputee, but without sensorial feedback from the signals returning to the brain, it can be difficult to achieve the level of control necessary to perform precise movements. When connecting the sense of touch from a mechanical hand directly to the brain, prosthetics can restore the function of the amputated limb in an almost natural-feeling way.\" He presented the first Myoelectric prosthetic hand with sensory feedback at the \"XVIII World Congress on Medical Physics and Biomedical Engineering\", 1997, held in Nice, France.\nThe USSR was the first to develop a myoelectric arm in 1958, while the first myoelectric arm became commercial in 1964 by the Central Prosthetic Research Institute of the USSR, and distributed by the Hangar Limb Factory of the UK. Myoelectric prosthesis are expensive, require regular maintenance, and are sensitive to sweat and moisture.\nRobotic prostheses.\nRobots can be used to generate objective measures of patient's impairment and therapy outcome, assist in diagnosis, customize therapies based on patient's motor abilities, and assure compliance with treatment regimens and maintain patient's records. It is shown in many studies that there is a significant improvement in upper limb motor function after stroke using robotics for upper limb rehabilitation.\nIn order for a robotic prosthetic limb to work, it must have several components to integrate it into the body's function: Biosensors detect signals from the user's nervous or muscular systems. It then relays this information to a microcontroller located inside the device, and processes feedback from the limb and actuator, e.g., position or force, and sends it to the controller. Examples include surface electrodes that detect electrical activity on the skin, needle electrodes implanted in muscle, or solid-state electrode arrays with nerves growing through them. One type of these biosensors are employed in myoelectric prostheses.\nA device known as the controller is connected to the user's nerve and muscular systems and the device itself. It sends intention commands from the user to the actuators of the device and interprets feedback from the mechanical and biosensors to the user. The controller is also responsible for the monitoring and control of the movements of the device.\nAn actuator mimics the actions of a muscle in producing force and movement. Examples include a motor that aids or replaces original muscle tissue.\nTargeted muscle reinnervation (TMR) is a technique in which motor nerves, which previously controlled muscles on an amputated limb, are surgically rerouted such that they reinnervate a small region of a large, intact muscle, such as the pectoralis major. As a result, when a patient thinks about moving the thumb of their missing hand, a small area of muscle on their chest will contract instead. By placing sensors over the reinnervated muscle, these contractions can be made to control the movement of an appropriate part of the robotic prosthesis.\nA variant of this technique is called targeted sensory reinnervation (TSR). This procedure is similar to TMR, except that sensory nerves are surgically rerouted to skin on the chest, rather than motor nerves rerouted to muscle. Recently, robotic limbs have improved in their ability to take signals from the human brain and translate those signals into motion in the artificial limb. DARPA, the Pentagon's research division, is working to make even more advancements in this area. Their desire is to create an artificial limb that ties directly into the nervous system.\nRobotic arms.\nAdvancements in the processors used in myoelectric arms have allowed developers to make gains in fine-tuned control of the prosthetic. The Boston Digital Arm is a recent artificial limb that has taken advantage of these more advanced processors. The arm allows movement in five axes and allows the arm to be programmed for a more customized feel. Recently the I-LIMB Hand, invented in Edinburgh, Scotland, by David Gow has become the first commercially available hand prosthesis with five individually powered digits. The hand also possesses a manually rotatable thumb which is operated passively by the user and allows the hand to grip in precision, power, and key grip modes.\nAnother neural prosthetic is Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics Laboratory Proto 1. Besides the Proto 1, the university also finished the Proto 2 in 2010. Early in 2013, Max Ortiz Catalan and Rickard Br\u00e5nemark of the Chalmers University of Technology, and Sahlgrenska University Hospital in Sweden, succeeded in making the first robotic arm which is mind-controlled and can be permanently attached to the body (using osseointegration).\nAn approach that is very useful is called arm rotation which is common for unilateral amputees which is an amputation that affects only one side of the body; and also essential for bilateral amputees, a person who is missing or has had amputated either both arms or legs, to carry out activities of daily living. This involves inserting a small permanent magnet into the distal end of the residual bone of subjects with upper limb amputations. When a subject rotates the residual arm, the magnet will rotate with the residual bone, causing a change in magnetic field distribution. EEG (electroencephalogram) signals, detected using small flat metal discs attached to the scalp, essentially decoding human brain activity used for physical movement, is used to control the robotic limbs. This allows the user to control the part directly.\nRobotic transtibial prostheses.\nThe research of robotic legs has made some advancement over time, allowing exact movement and control.\nResearchers at the Rehabilitation Institute of Chicago announced in September 2013 that they have developed a robotic leg that translates neural impulses from the user's thigh muscles into movement, which is the first prosthetic leg to do so. It is currently in testing.\nHugh Herr, head of the biomechatronics group at MIT's Media Lab developed a robotic transtibial leg (PowerFoot BiOM).\nThe Icelandic company \u00d6ssur has also created a robotic transtibial leg with motorized ankle that moves through algorithms and sensors that automatically adjust the angle of the foot during different points in its wearer's stride. Also there are brain-controlled bionic legs that allow an individual to move his limbs with a wireless transmitter.\nProsthesis design.\nThe main goal of a robotic prosthesis is to provide active actuation during gait to improve the biomechanics of gait, including, among other things, stability, symmetry, or energy expenditure for amputees. There are several powered prosthetic legs currently on the market, including fully powered legs, in which actuators directly drive the joints, and semi-active legs, which use small amounts of energy and a small actuator to change the mechanical properties of the leg but do not inject net positive energy into gait. Specific examples include The emPOWER from BionX, the Proprio Foot from Ossur, and the Elan Foot from Endolite. Various research groups have also experimented with robotic legs over the last decade. Central issues being researched include designing the behavior of the device during stance and swing phases, recognizing the current ambulation task, and various mechanical design problems such as robustness, weight, battery-life/efficiency, and noise-level. However, scientists from Stanford University and Seoul National University has developed artificial nerves system that will help prosthetic limbs feel. This synthetic nerve system enables prosthetic limbs sense braille, feel the sense of touch and respond to the environment.\nUse of recycled materials.\nProsthetics are being made from recycled plastic bottles and lids around the world.\nDirect bone attachment and osseointegration.\nMost prostheses are attached to the exterior of the body in a non-permanent way. The stump and socket method can cause significant pain for the person, which is why direct bone attachment has been explored extensively. \nOsseointegration is a method of attaching the artificial limb to the body by a prosthetic implant. \nThis method is also sometimes referred to as \"exoprosthesis\" (attaching an artificial limb to the bone), or \"endo-exoprosthesis\".\n\"Endoprosthesis\" are prosthetic joint implants which remain wholly inside the body such as knee and hip replacement implants.\nThe method works by inserting a titanium bolt into the bone at the end of the stump. After several months the bone attaches itself to the titanium bolt and an abutment is attached to the titanium bolt. The abutment extends out of the stump and the (removable) artificial limb is then attached to the abutment. Some of the benefits of this method include the following:\nThe main disadvantage of this method is that amputees with the direct bone attachment cannot have large impacts on the limb, such as those experienced during jogging, because of the potential for the bone to break.\nCosmesis.\nCosmetic prosthesis has long been used to disguise injuries and disfigurements. With advances in modern technology, cosmesis, the creation of lifelike limbs made from silicone or PVC, has been made possible. Such prosthetics, including artificial hands, can now be designed to simulate the appearance of real hands, complete with freckles, veins, hair, fingerprints and even tattoos.\nCustom-made cosmeses are generally more expensive (costing thousands of U.S. dollars, depending on the level of detail), while standard cosmeses come premade in a variety of sizes, although they are often not as realistic as their custom-made counterparts. Another option is the custom-made silicone cover, which can be made to match a person's skin tone but not details such as freckles or wrinkles. Cosmeses are attached to the body in any number of ways, using an adhesive, suction, form-fitting, stretchable skin, or a skin sleeve.\nCognition.\nUnlike neuromotor prostheses, neurocognitive prostheses would sense or modulate neural function in order to physically reconstitute or augment cognitive processes such as executive function, attention, language, and memory. No neurocognitive prostheses are currently available but the development of implantable neurocognitive brain-computer interfaces has been proposed to help treat conditions such as stroke, traumatic brain injury, cerebral palsy, autism, and Alzheimer's disease.\nThe recent field of Assistive Technology for Cognition concerns the development of technologies to augment human cognition. Scheduling devices such as Neuropage remind users with memory impairments when to perform certain activities, such as visiting the doctor. Micro-prompting devices such as PEAT, AbleLink and Guide have been used to aid users with memory and executive function problems perform activities of daily living.\nProsthetic enhancement.\nIn addition to the standard artificial limb for everyday use, many amputees or congenital patients have special limbs and devices to aid in the participation of sports and recreational activities.\nWithin science fiction, and, more recently, within the scientific community, there has been consideration given to using advanced prostheses to replace healthy body parts with artificial mechanisms and systems to improve function. The morality and desirability of such technologies are being debated by transhumanists, other ethicists, and others in general. Body parts such as legs, arms, hands, feet, and others can be replaced.\nThe first experiment with a healthy individual appears to have been that by the British scientist Kevin Warwick. In 2002, an implant was interfaced directly into Warwick's nervous system. The electrode array, which contained around a hundred electrodes, was placed in the median nerve. The signals produced were detailed enough that a robot arm was able to mimic the actions of Warwick's own arm and provide a form of touch feedback again via the implant.\nThe DEKA company of Dean Kamen developed the \"Luke arm\", an advanced nerve-controlled prosthetic. Clinical trials began in 2008, with FDA approval in 2014 and commercial manufacturing by the Universal Instruments Corporation expected in 2017. The price offered at retail by Mobius Bionics is expected to be around $100,000.\nFurther research in April 2019, there have been improvements towards prosthetic function and comfort of 3D-printed personalized wearable systems. Instead of manual integration after printing, integrating electronic sensors at the intersection between a prosthetic and the wearer's tissue can gather information such as pressure across wearer's tissue, that can help improve further iteration of these types of prosthetic.\nOscar Pistorius.\nIn early 2008, Oscar Pistorius, the \"Blade Runner\" of South Africa, was briefly ruled ineligible to compete in the 2008 Summer Olympics because his transtibial prosthesis limbs were said to give him an unfair advantage over runners who had ankles. One researcher found that his limbs used twenty-five percent less energy than those of a non-disabled runner moving at the same speed. This ruling was overturned on appeal, with the appellate court stating that the overall set of advantages and disadvantages of Pistorius' limbs had not been considered.\nPistorius did not qualify for the South African team for the Olympics, but went on to sweep the 2008 Summer Paralympics, and has been ruled eligible to qualify for any future Olympics. He qualified for the 2011 World Championship in South Korea and reached the semi-final where he ended last timewise, he was 14th in the first round, his personal best at 400m would have given him 5th place in the finals. At the 2012 Summer Olympics in London, Pistorius became the first amputee runner to compete at an Olympic Games. He ran in the 400\u00a0metres race semi-finals, and the 4\u00a0\u00d7\u00a0400\u00a0metres relay race finals. He also competed in 5 events in the 2012 Summer Paralympics in London.\nDesign considerations.\nThere are multiple factors to consider when designing a transtibial prosthesis. Manufacturers must make choices about their priorities regarding these factors.\nPerformance.\nNonetheless, there are certain elements of socket and foot mechanics that are invaluable for the athlete, and these are the focus of today's high-tech prosthetics companies:\nOther.\nThe buyer is also concerned with numerous other factors:\nDesign for Prosthetics.\nA key feature of prosthetics and prosthetic design is the idea of \"designing for disabilities.\" This might sound like a good idea in which people with disabilities can participate in equitable design but this is unfortunately not true. The idea of designing for disabilities is first problematic because of the underlying meaning of disabilities. It tells amputees that there is a right and wrong way to move and walk and that if amputees are adapted to the surrounding environment by their own means, then that is the wrong way. Along with that underlying meaning of disabilities, many people designing for disabilities are not actually disabled. \"Design for disability\" from these experiences, takes disability as the object - with the feeling from non-disabled designers that they have properly learned about their job from their own simulation of the experience. The simulation is misleading and does a disservice to disabled people - so the design that flows from this is highly problematic. Engaging in disability design should be\u2026 with, ideally, team members who have the relevant disability and are part of communities that matter to the research. This leads to people, who do not know what the day-to-day personal experiences are, designing materials that do not meet the needs or hinder the needs of people with actual disabilities.\nCost and source freedom.\nHigh-cost.\nIn the United States, a typical prosthetic limb costs anywhere between $15,000 and $90,000, depending on the type of limb desired by the patient. With medical insurance, a patient will typically pay 10%\u201350% of the total cost of a prosthetic limb, while the insurance company will cover the rest of the cost. The percent that the patient pays varies on the type of insurance plan, as well as the limb requested by the patient. In the United Kingdom, much of Europe, Australia and New Zealand the entire cost of prosthetic limbs is met by state funding or statutory insurance. For example, in Australia prostheses are fully funded by state schemes in the case of amputation due to disease, and by workers compensation or traffic injury insurance in the case of most traumatic amputations. The National Disability Insurance Scheme, which is being rolled out nationally between 2017 and 2020 also pays for prostheses.\nTransradial (below the elbow amputation) and transtibial prostheses (below the knee amputation) typically cost between US $6,000 and $8,000, while transfemoral (above the knee amputation) and transhumeral prosthetics (above the elbow amputation) cost approximately twice as much with a range of $10,000 to $15,000 and can sometimes reach costs of $35,000. The cost of an artificial limb often recurs, while a limb typically needs to be replaced every 3\u20134 years due to wear and tear of everyday use. In addition, if the socket has fit issues, the socket must be replaced within several months from the onset of pain. If height is an issue, components such as pylons can be changed.\nNot only does the patient need to pay for their multiple prosthetic limbs, but they also need to pay for physical and occupational therapy that come along with adapting to living with an artificial limb. Unlike the reoccurring cost of the prosthetic limbs, the patient will typically only pay the $2000 to $5000 for therapy during the first year or two of living as an amputee. Once the patient is strong and comfortable with their new limb, they will not be required to go to therapy anymore. Throughout one's life, it is projected that a typical amputee will go through $1.4\u00a0million worth of treatment, including surgeries, prosthetics, as well as therapies.\nLow-cost.\nLow-cost above-knee prostheses often provide only basic structural support with limited function. This function is often achieved with crude, non-articulating, unstable, or manually locking knee joints. A limited number of organizations, such as the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC), create devices for developing countries. Their device which is manufactured by CR Equipments is a single-axis, manually operated locking polymer prosthetic knee joint.\nTable. List of knee joint technologies based on the literature review.\nA plan for a low-cost artificial leg, designed by S\u00e9bastien Dubois, was featured at the 2007 International Design Exhibition and award show in Copenhagen, Denmark, where it won the . It would be able to create an energy-return prosthetic leg for US $8.00, composed primarily of fiberglass.\nPrior to the 1980s, foot prostheses merely restored basic walking capabilities. These early devices can be characterized by a simple artificial attachment connecting one's residual limb to the ground.\nThe introduction of the Seattle Foot (Seattle Limb Systems) in 1981 revolutionized the field, bringing the concept of an Energy Storing Prosthetic Foot (ESPF) to the fore. Other companies soon followed suit, and before long, there were multiple models of energy storing prostheses on the market. Each model utilized some variation of a compressible heel. The heel is compressed during initial ground contact, storing energy which is then returned during the latter phase of ground contact to help propel the body forward.\nSince then, the foot prosthetics industry has been dominated by steady, small improvements in performance, comfort, and marketability.\nWith 3D printers, it is possible to manufacture a single product without having to have metal molds, so the costs can be drastically reduced.\n\"Jaipur foot\", an artificial limb from Jaipur, India, costs about US$40.\nOpen-source robotic prosthesis.\nThere is currently an open-design Prosthetics forum known as the \"Open Prosthetics Project\". The group employs collaborators and volunteers to advance Prosthetics technology while attempting to lower the costs of these necessary devices. Open Bionics is a company that is developing open-source robotic prosthetic hands. They utilize 3D printing to manufacture the devices and low-cost 3D scanners to fit them onto the residual limb of a specific patient. Open Bionics' use of 3D printing allows for more personalized designs, such as the \"Hero Arm\" which incorporates the users favourite colours, textures, and even aesthetics to look like superheroes or characters from \"Star Wars\" with the aim of lowering the cost. A review study on a wide range of printed prosthetic hands found that 3D printing technology holds a promise for individualised prosthesis design, is cheaper than commercial prostheses available on the market, and is more expensive than mass production processes such as injection molding. The same study also found that evidence on the functionality, durability and user acceptance of 3D printed hand prostheses is still lacking.\nLow-cost prosthetics for children.\nIn the USA an estimate was found of 32,500 children (&lt;21 years) had a major paediatric amputation, with 5,525 new cases each year, of which 3,315 congenital.\nCarr et al. (1998) investigated amputations caused by landmines for Afghanistan, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Cambodia and Mozambique among children (&lt;14 years), showing estimates of respectively 4.7, 0.19, 1.11 and 0.67 per 1000 children. Mohan (1986) indicated in India a total of 424,000 amputees (23,500 annually), of which 10.3% had an onset of disability below the age of 14, amounting to a total of about 43,700 limb deficient children in India alone.\nFew low-cost solutions have been created specially for children. Examples of low-cost prosthetic devices include:\nPole and crutch.\nThis hand-held pole with leather support band or platform for the limb is one of the simplest and cheapest solutions found. It serves well as a short-term solution, but is prone to rapid contracture formation if the limb is not stretched daily through a series of range-of motion (RoM) sets.\nBamboo, PVC or plaster limbs.\nThis also fairly simple solution comprises a plaster socket with a bamboo or PVC pipe at the bottom, optionally attached to a prosthetic foot. This solution prevents contractures because the knee is moved through its full RoM. The David Werner Collection, an online database for the assistance of disabled village children, displays manuals of production of these solutions.\nAdjustable bicycle limb.\nThis solution is built using a bicycle seat post up side down as foot, generating flexibility and (length) adjustability. It is a very cheap solution, using locally available materials.\nSathi Limb.\nIt is an endoskeletal modular lower limb from India, which uses thermoplastic parts. Its main advantages are the small weight and adaptability.\nMonolimb.\nMonolimbs are non-modular prostheses and thus require more experienced prosthetist for correct fitting, because alignment can barely be changed after production. However, their durability on average is better than low-cost modular solutions.\nCultural and social theory perspectives.\nA number of theorists have explored the meaning and implications of prosthetic extension of the body. Elizabeth Grosz writes, \"Creatures use tools, ornaments, and appliances to augment their bodily capacities. Are their bodies lacking something, which they need to replace with artificial or substitute organs?...Or conversely, should prostheses be understood, in terms of aesthetic reorganization and proliferation, as the consequence of an inventiveness that functions beyond and perhaps in defiance of pragmatic need?\" Elaine Scarry argues that every artifact recreates and extends the body. Chairs supplement the skeleton, tools append the hands, clothing augments the skin. In Scarry's thinking, \"furniture and houses are neither more nor less interior to the human body than the food it absorbs, nor are they fundamentally different from such sophisticated prosthetics as artificial lungs, eyes and kidneys. The consumption of manufactured things turns the body inside out, opening it up \"to\" and \"as\" the culture of objects.\" Mark Wigley, a professor of architecture, continues this line of thinking about how architecture supplements our natural capabilities, and argues that \"a blurring of identity is produced by all prostheses.\" Some of this work relies on Freud's earlier characterization of man's relation to objects as one of extension.\nNegative social implications.\nProsthetics play a vital role in how a person perceives themselves and how other people perceive them. The ability to conceal such use enabled participants to ward off social stigmatization that in turn enabled their social integration and the reduction of emotional problems surrounding such disability. People that lose a limb first have to deal with the emotional result of losing that limb. Regardless of the reasons for amputation, whether due to traumatic causes or as a consequence of illness, emotional shock exists. It may have a smaller or larger amplitude depending on a variety of factors such as patient age, medical culture, medical cause, etc. As a result of amputation, the research participants' reports were loaded with drama. The first emotional response to amputation was one of despair, a severe sense of self-collapse, something almost unbearable. Emotional factors are just a small part of looking at social implications. Many people who lose a limb may have lots of anxiety surrounding prosthetics and their limbs. After surgery, for an extended period of time, the interviewed patients from the National Library of Medicine noticed the appearance and increase of anxiety. A lot of negative thoughts invaded their minds. Projections about the future were grim, marked by sadness, helplessness, and even despair. Existential uncertainty, lack of control, and further anticipated losses in one's life due to amputation were the primary causes of anxiety and consequently ruminations and insomnia. From losing a leg and getting a prosthetics there were also many factors that can happen including anger and regret. The amputation of a limb is associated not only with physical loss and change in body image but also with an abrupt severing in one's sense of continuity. For participants with amputation as a result of physical trauma the event is often experienced as a transgression and can lead to frustration and anger.\nEthical concerns.\nThere are also many ethical concerns about how the prosthetics are made and produced. A wide range of ethical issues arise in connection with experiments and clinical usage of sensory prostheses: animal experimentation; informed consent, for instance, in patients with a locked-in syndrome that may be alleviated with a sensory prosthesis; unrealistic expectations of research subjects testing new devices. How prosthetics come to be and testing of the usability of the device is a major concern in the medical world. Although many positives come when a new prosthetic design is announced, how the device got to where it is leads to some questioning the ethics of prosthetics.\nDebates.\nThere are also many debates among the prosthetic community about whether they should wear prosthetics at all. This is sparked by whether prosthetics help in day-to-day living or make it harder. Many people have adapted to their loss of limb making it work for them and do not need a prosthesis in their life. Not all amputees will wear a prosthesis. In a 2011 national survey of Australian amputees, Limbs 4 Life found that 7 percent of amputees do not wear a prosthesis, and in another Australian hospital study, this number was closer to 20 percent. Many people report being uncomfortable in prostheses and not wanting to wear them, even reporting that wearing a prosthetic is more cumbersome than not having one at all. These debates are natural among the prosthetic community and help us shed light on the issues that they are facing.\nMythological.\nNuada, mythical king loses his arm in battle but is given a silver arm in its place.\nVisphala, mentioned in the Rigveda as losing a leg in battle, but being given \"leg of iron\" \nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "72751", "revid": "50752588", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72751", "title": "August Hlond", "text": "Polish Roman Catholic cardinal priest (1881\u20131948)\nAugust Hlond, SDB (5 July 1881 \u2013 22 October 1948) was a Polish Salesian prelate who served as Archbishop of Pozna\u0144 and Gniezno and as Primate of Poland. He was later appointed Archbishop of Gniezno and Warsaw and was made a cardinal of the Catholic Church by Pope Pius XI in 1927.\nHe was the only member of the College of Cardinals to be arrested and taken into custody by the Gestapo during World War II. For the final years of his life, he was a critic of the Soviet-backed communist regime in Poland.\nHis cause of beatification commenced in 1992, and he was granted the title Servant of God. On 19 May 2018, he was named venerable after Pope Francis confirmed his heroic virtue.\nEarly life and ordination.\nThe second son of a railway worker, he was born in the Upper Silesian village of Brz\u0119czkowice (), then ruled by Germany, now part of Mys\u0142owice (), on 5 July 1881. Aged 12, Hlond went to Turin, Italy, to study for the priesthood in the Salesian congregation. He later studied a doctorate of philosophy in Rome, returned to Poland to complete theology and was ordained in Krak\u00f3w in 1905.\nIn 1909, Hlond was sent to Vienna to be the headmaster at a boys' secondary school. He remained in the city for 13 years, worked with spiritual and charitable organisations for Poles and becoming the Provincial of the Salesians for Austria, Hungary and Germany in 1919. After the end of Austria-Hungary after World War I, Hlond was appointed by Pope Pius XI as Apostolic Administrator for Polish Upper Silesia in 1922, and Hlond became the first Bishop of the Diocese of Katowice in 1925.\nBishop and cardinal.\nHlond was consecrated as Bishop of Katowice on 3 January 1926. He succeeded Cardinal Edmund Dalbor as Primate of Poland soon afterward and in 1927 was appointed Cardinal-Priest of Santa Maria della Pace by Pope Pius XI. In the tumultuous 1930s, Hlond condemned \"escapism\"; called on the Church to challenge the evil realities of the times; and, speaking 12 languages, became an influential member of the College of Cardinals on the international stage.\nIn 1932, together with Father Ignacy Posadzy, he founded the Society of Christ.\nWorld War II.\nThe invasion of predominantly-Catholic Poland by Nazi Germany in 1939 ignited World War II. The Germans' plans for Poland entailed the destruction of the Polish nation, which necessarily required attacking the Polish Church, particularly in the areas that were annexed to Greater Germany. In the territories annexed to Greater Germany, the Germans set about systematically dismantling the Catholic Church by arresting its leaders, exiling its clergymen, closing its churches, monasteries and convents. Many clergymen were murdered. Elsewhere in occupied Poland, the suppression was less severe though still harsh. The papal nuncio to Poland, Fillipo Cortesi, had abandoned Warsaw along with the diplomatic corps after the invasion. Other channels existed for communications, including Hlond.\nOn 18 September 1939, at the request of the Polish government, Hlond left Poland with part of the Army to reach Rome, report on the Germans' actions in Poland and inform the world by the Vatican radio and press. Hlond submitted an official account of the persecutions of the Polish Church to the Vatican and reported the seizures of church property and the abuse of clergy and nuns in the annexed regions:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Many priests are imprisoned, suffering humiliations, blows, maltreatment. A certain number were deported to Germany... Others have been detained in concentration camps... It is not rare to see a priest in the midst of labour gangs working in the fields... Some of them have even been shut up for the night in pigsties, barbarously beaten and subjected to other tortures... The Canon Casimir Stepczynski... was forced in company with a Jew to carry away the human excrement... the curate who wished to take the place of the venerable priest was brutally beaten with a rifle butt\u2014\u200a\nIn his final observations for Pius XII, Hlond wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Hitlerism aims at the systematic and total destruction of the Catholic Church in the rich and fertile territories of Poland which have been incorporated into the Reich... It is known for certain that 35 priests have been shot, but the real number of victims... undoubtedly amounts to more than a hundred... In many districts the life of the Church has been completely crushed, the clergy have been almost all expelled; the Catholic churches and cemeteries are in the hands of the invaders... Catholic worship hardly exists any more... Monasteries and convents have been methodically suppressed... [Church properties] all have been pillaged by the invaders.\u2014\u200a\nIn 1939, Hlond spent several months in Rome for the that year's conclave. In January 1940, Vatican Radio broadcast Hlond's reports of the German's persecution of Jews and the Polish Catholic clergy. Those reports were included in the Polish government's report to the Nuremberg Trials after the war.\nIn March 1940, Hlond went on a pilgrimage to Lourdes, France. After the Fall of France, he remained in the country, staying at Hautecombe Abbey, in Savoie. He remained there and was unable to leave until Heinrich Himmler ordered the Gestapo to arrest him in February 1944 (he was the only member of the Sacred College of Cardinals to be arrested by the Germans). The Gestapo held him at its headquarters in Paris for two months and, with the Soviet Army now driving the Germans back from Russia, attempted to have him declare public support for the war against the Soviet Union to secure his release. The Gestapo offered to make him Regent of Poland, but according to \"The Tablet\", \"The withdrawal of all German troops from Poland was necessary, the Cardinal implacably insisted, before he could even discuss any matter whatsoever with a German officer\". Hlond remained in the custody of the Gestapo, first at a convent at Bar-le-Duc, until the Allied advance forced the Germans to shift him to Wiedenbrtick, in Westphalia, where he remained for seven months, until released by American troops in 1945. The Americans flew Hlond to Paris, and then to Rome on April 25, finally returning to war ravaged Poland on 20 July 1945.\nHlond reported in August 1941 to the Cardinal Secretary of State, Luigi Maglione, that the Polish people believed Pius XII had abandoned them in light of the Nazi persecution of the Polish Church and clergy.\nLater life.\nPius XII appointed Hlond as Archbishop of Warsaw on 4 March 1946, and he was installed on 30 May amid immense crowds of supporters. The Polish Church faced great challenges since thousands of Polish clergy had been killed by the Nazis, and the Church and the new Soviet-sponsored regime in Poland were soon to clash. Hlond set about placing bishops on the empty sees and reconnecting the Church with Rome.\nHe spoke out against the communist persecution of the Church. He issued a series of pastoral letters on behalf of the Polish Church regarding the new Poland, but they faced censorship at the hands of the new regime, and the government launched a nationalisation of church schools. In a May 1947 pastoral letter, Hlond wrote, \"Since the days of St. Peter, the Church has not been subjected to a persecution such as that to which she is subjected today\". After Hlond's death in 1948, \"The Tablet\" noted that \"the nations of Eastern Europe which lie today beneath the police-regimes imposed from Moscow lost their most powerful spokesman\".\nDeath and burial.\nHe was buried in the crypt of St. John's cathedral in Warsaw. In March 2006, his body was transferred to the Chapel of St. John the Baptist.\nControversies.\nRelations with Polish Jews.\nIn 1936, Cardinal Hlond, as Primate of Poland, issued a pastoral letter on Catholic moral principles. The long (5,600-word) letter covered Catholic ethics policy, ethics principles and a section on \"sins\" (\"Z Naszych Grzech\u00f3w\") that addressed Christian shortcomings to love one's neighbours in accordance with God's law. That section included a brief discussion of the \"Jewish problem\" (\"Problem \u017cydowski\"):\nSo long as Jews remain Jews, a Jewish problem exists and will continue to exist (...) It is a fact that Jews are waging war against the Catholic church, that they are steeped in free-thinking, and constitute the vanguard of atheism, the Bolshevik movement, and revolutionary activity. It is a fact that Jews have a corruptive influence on morals and that their publishing houses are spreading pornography. It is true that Jews are perpetrating fraud, practicing usury, and dealing in prostitution. It is true that, from a religious and ethical point of view, Jewish youth are having a negative influence on the Catholic youth in our schools.\nHlond tempered those remarks with an admission that \"not all Jews are this way\" and forbade assaults on Jews or attacks on their property: \nThere are very many Jews who are believers, honest, just, kind, and philanthropic. There is a healthy, edifying sense of family in very many Jewish homes. We know Jews who are ethically outstanding, noble, and upright. One may love one's own nation more, but one may not hate anyone. Not even Jews. (...) it is forbidden to demolish a Jewish store, damage their merchandise, break windows, or throw things at their homes (...) it is forbidden to assault, beat up, maim, or slander Jews. One should honor and love Jews as human beings and neighbors\nHowever, despite a warning to Catholics not to take an anti-Jewish moral stance, interspersed in the letter's words of friendship was an explicit condemnation of Jewish culture and also Judaism for its rejection of Jesus Christ. \nIt is good to prefer your own kind when shopping, to avoid Jewish stores and Jewish stalls in the marketplace (...) One should stay away from the harmful moral influence of Jews, keep away from their anti-Christian culture, and especially boycott the Jewish press and demoralizing Jewish publications. (...) We do not honor the indescribable tragedy of that nation, which was the guardian of the idea of the Messiah and from which was born the Savior. When divine mercy enlightens a Jew to sincerely accept his and our Messiah, let us greet him into our Christian ranks with joy.\nHlond's letter was criticised by Polish Jewish groups who saw it as offering support and a rationalization for antisemitism.\nAnother controversy was caused by Hlond's reaction to the Kielce pogrom, which took place in Polish town of Kielce on 4 July 1946. While condemning murders, Hlond denied the racist nature of that crime. He saw the pogrom as a reaction against Jewish bureaucrats allegedly serving Communist regime, a common excuse among Polish antisemites. That position was echoed by Cardinal Adam Stefan Sapieha, who was reported to have said that the Jews brought it on themselves.\nThe American Jewish Committee questioned Pope Francis's decision in a letter sent to Cardinal Kurt Koch to name Hlond a venerable (the letter was also sent to the CCS and to Cardinal Pietro Parolin). The AJC noted that Hlond had been anti-Semitic in his writings. The AJC's letter further argued that after the 1946 pogrom, Hlond called the Jewish victims communists and said that they had themselves to blame.\nRemoval of ethnic German bishops.\nAfter 1945, Hlond forced ethnic Germans to resign their church posts in favour of Poles, thereby supporting the Polish integration of the territories of eastern Germany that had been given to Poland by the Allies as compensation for Polish territory taken by the Soviet Union. Maximilian Kaller was one of the bishops to be removed from his diocese and deported to West Germany and is now in process of beatification. Another bishop forced out was Carl Maria Splett, Bishop of Danzig.\nCause for beatification.\nThe process of beatification commenced in 1992, and he was granted the title of Servant of God. Professor Franz Scholz, who is a German theologian, and many others have expressed their opposition to the proposed beatification of Cardinal Hlond. Scholz opposes his actions against postwar German expellees and civilians from territories ceded by Allies to the Polish Republic.\nDocumentation (a \"positio\") was submitted to the Congregation for the Causes of Saints (CCS) in 2008. On 9 March 2017, a group of nine theologians approved naming Hlond \"Venerable\" with 8 votes in favour and 1 abstention. The members of the CCS approved the cause on 15 May 2018, and Pope Francis confirmed Hlond's heroic virtue, which allowed Hlond to be named a venerable on 19 May.\nThe current postulator for the cause is the Salesian priest Pierluigi Cameroni.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "72754", "revid": "1316494130", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72754", "title": "Organic farming", "text": "Type of agriculture that emphasizes natural and environmentally friendly techniques\nOrganic farming, also known as organic agriculture or ecological farming or biological farming, is an agricultural system that emphasizes the use of naturally occurring, non-synthetic inputs, such as compost manure, green manure, and bone meal and places emphasis on techniques such as crop rotation, companion planting, and mixed cropping. Biological pest control methods such as the fostering of insect predators are also encouraged. Organic agriculture can be defined as \"an integrated farming system that strives for sustainability, the enhancement of soil fertility and biological diversity while, with rare exceptions, prohibiting synthetic pesticides, antibiotics, synthetic fertilizers, genetically modified organisms, and growth hormones\". It originated early in the 20th century in reaction to rapidly changing farming practices. Certified organic agriculture accounted for globally in 2019, with over half of that total in Australia.\nOrganic standards are designed to allow the use of naturally occurring substances while prohibiting or severely limiting synthetic substances. For instance, naturally occurring pesticides, such as garlic extract, bicarbonate of soda, or pyrethrin (which is found naturally in the \"Chrysanthemum\" flower), are permitted, while synthetic fertilizers and pesticides, such as glyphosate, are prohibited. Synthetic substances that are allowed only in exceptional circumstances may include copper sulfate, elemental sulfur, and veterinary drugs. Genetically modified organisms, nanomaterials, human sewage sludge, plant growth regulators, hormones, and antibiotic use in livestock husbandry are prohibited. Broadly, organic agriculture is based on the principles of health, care for all living beings and the environment, ecology, and fairness. Organic methods champion sustainability, self-sufficiency, autonomy and independence, health, animal welfare, food security, and food safety. It is often seen as part of the solution to the impacts of climate change.\nOrganic agricultural methods are internationally regulated and legally enforced by transnational organizations such as the European Union and also by individual nations, based in large part on the standards set by the International Federation of Organic Agriculture Movements (IFOAM), an international umbrella organization for organic farming organizations established in 1972, with regional branches such as IFOAM Organics Europe and IFOAM Asia. Since 1990, the market for organic food and other products has grown rapidly, reaching $150 billion worldwide in 2022 \u2013 of which more than $64 billion was earned in North America and EUR 53 billion in Europe. This demand has driven a similar increase in organically managed farmland, which grew by 26.6 percent from 2021 to 2022. As of 2022, organic farming is practiced in 188 countries and approximately worldwide were farmed organically by 4.5 million farmers, representing approximately 2 percent of total world farmland.\nOrganic farming can be beneficial on biodiversity and environmental protection at local level; however, because organic farming can produce lower yields compared to intensive farming, leading to increased pressure to convert more non-agricultural land to agricultural use in order to produce similar yields, it can cause loss of biodiversity and negative climate effects.\nHistory.\nAgriculture was practiced for thousands of years without the use of artificial chemicals. Artificial fertilizers were first developed during the mid-19th century. These early fertilizers were cheap, powerful, and easy to transport in bulk. Similar advances occurred in chemical pesticides in the 1940s, leading to the decade being referred to as the \"pesticide era\". These new agricultural techniques, while beneficial in the short-term, had serious longer-term side-effects, such as soil compaction, erosion, and declines in overall soil fertility, along with health concerns about toxic chemicals entering the food supply. In the late 1800s and early 1900s, soil biology scientists began to seek ways to remedy these side effects while still maintaining higher production.\nIn 1921 the founder and pioneer of the organic movement, Albert Howard, and his wife Gabrielle Howard accomplished botanists, founded an Institute of Plant Industry to improve traditional farming methods in India. Among other things, they brought improved implements and improved animal husbandry methods from their scientific training; then by incorporating aspects of Indian traditional methods, developed protocols for the rotation of crops, erosion prevention techniques, and the systematic use of composts and manures. Stimulated by these experiences of traditional farming, when Albert Howard returned to Britain in the early 1930s he began to promulgate a system of organic agriculture.\nIn 1924 Rudolf Steiner gave a series of eight lectures on agriculture with a focus on influences of the moon, planets, non-physical beings and elemental forces. They were held in response to a request by adherent farmers who noticed degraded soil conditions and a deterioration in the health and quality of crops and livestock resulting from the use of chemical fertilizers. The lectures were published in November 1924; the first English translation appeared in 1928 as \"The Agriculture Course\".\nIn July 1939, Ehrenfried Pfeiffer, the author of the standard work on biodynamic agriculture (\"Bio-Dynamic Farming and Gardening\"), came to the UK at the invitation of Walter James, 4th Baron Northbourne as a presenter at the Betteshanger Summer School and Conference on Biodynamic Farming at Northbourne's farm in Kent. One of the chief purposes of the conference was to bring together the proponents of various approaches to organic agriculture in order that they might cooperate within a larger movement. Howard attended the conference, where he met Pfeiffer. In the following year, Northbourne published his manifesto of organic farming, \"Look to the Land\", in which he coined the term \"organic farming\". The Betteshanger conference has been described as the 'missing link' between biodynamic agriculture and other forms of organic farming.\nIn 1940, Howard published his \"An Agricultural Testament\". In this book he adopted Northbourne's terminology of \"organic farming\". Howard's work spread widely, and he became known as the \"father of organic farming\" for his work in applying scientific knowledge and principles to various traditional and natural methods. In the United States J. I. Rodale, who was keenly interested both in Howard's ideas and in biodynamics, founded in the 1940s both a working organic farm for trials and experimentation, The Rodale Institute, and Rodale, Inc., in Emmaus, Pennsylvania, to teach and advocate organic methods to the wider public. These became important influences on the spread of organic agriculture. Further work was done by Lady Eve Balfour (the Haughley Experiment) in the United Kingdom, and many other places across the world.\nThe term \"eco-agriculture\" was coined in 1970 by Charles Walters, founder of \"Acres Magazine\", to describe agriculture which does not use \"man-made molecules of toxic rescue chemistry\", effectively another name for organic agriculture.\nIncreasing environmental awareness in the general population in modern times has transformed the originally supply-driven organic movement to a demand-driven one. Premium prices and some government subsidies attracted farmers. In the developing world, many producers farm according to traditional methods that are comparable to organic farming, but not certified, and that may not include the latest scientific advancements in organic agriculture. In other cases, farmers in the developing world have converted to modern organic methods for economic reasons.\nTerminology.\nThe term \"organic,\" as popularized by Howard and Rodale, specifically pertains to the utilization of Soil organic matter from plant compost and animal manures to enhance soil humus content, based on the research of early soil scientists who pioneered the concept of \"humus farming.\" Since the early 1940s, the two factions have increasingly converged.\nBiodynamic agriculturists, on the other hand, used the term \"organic\" to indicate that a farm should be viewed as a living organism, in the sense of the following quotation:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;An organic farm, properly speaking, is not one that uses certain methods and substances and avoids others; it is a farm whose structure is formed in imitation of the structure of a natural system that has the integrity, the independence and the benign dependence of an organism\u2014\u200a\nThey based their work on Steiner's spiritually-oriented alternative biodynamic agriculture which includes various esoteric concepts.\nMethods.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"Organic agriculture is a production system that sustains the health of soils, ecosystems and people. It relies on ecological processes, biodiversity and cycles adapted to local conditions, rather than the use of inputs with adverse effects. Organic agriculture combines tradition, innovation and science to benefit the shared environment and promote fair relationships and a good quality of life for all involved...\"\u2014\u200a\nOrganic farming methods combine scientific knowledge of ecology and some modern technology with traditional farming practices based on naturally occurring biological processes. Organic farming methods are studied in the field of agroecology. While conventional agriculture uses synthetic pesticides and water-soluble synthetically purified fertilizers, organic farmers are restricted by regulations to using natural pesticides and fertilizers. An example of a natural pesticide is pyrethrin, which is found naturally in the Chrysanthemum flower. The principal methods of organic farming include crop rotation, green manures and compost, biological pest control, and mechanical cultivation. These measures use the natural environment to enhance agricultural productivity: legumes are planted to fix nitrogen into the soil, natural insect predators are encouraged, crops are rotated to confuse pests and renew soil, and natural materials such as potassium bicarbonate and mulches are used to control disease and weeds. Genetically modified seeds and animals are excluded.\nWhile organic is fundamentally different from conventional because of the use of carbon-based fertilizers compared with highly soluble synthetic based fertilizers and biological pest control instead of synthetic pesticides, organic farming and large-scale conventional farming are not entirely mutually exclusive. Many of the methods developed for organic agriculture have been borrowed by more conventional agriculture. For example, Integrated Pest Management is a multifaceted strategy that uses various organic methods of pest control whenever possible, but in conventional farming could include synthetic pesticides only as a last resort. Examples of beneficial insects that are used in organic farming include ladybugs and lacewings, both of which feed on aphids. The use of IPM lowers the possibility of pest developing resistance to pesticides that are applied to crops.\nCrop diversity.\nOrganic farming encourages crop diversity by promoting polyculture (multiple crops in the same space). Planting a variety of vegetable crops supports a wider range of beneficial insects, soil microorganisms, and other factors that add up to overall farm health. Crop diversity helps the environment to thrive and protects species from going extinct. The science of Agroecology has revealed the benefits of polyculture, which is often employed in organic farming. Agroecology is a scientific discipline that uses ecological theory to study, design, manage, and evaluate agricultural systems that are productive and resource-conserving, and that are also culturally sensitive, socially just, and economically viable.\nIncorporating crop diversity into organic farming practices can have several benefits. For instance, it can help to increase soil fertility by promoting the growth of beneficial soil microorganisms. It can also help to reduce pest and disease pressure by creating a more diverse and resilient agroecosystem. Furthermore, crop diversity can help to improve the nutritional quality of food by providing a wider range of essential nutrients.\nSoil management.\nOrganic farming relies more heavily on the natural breakdown of organic matter than the average conventional farm, using techniques like green manure and composting, to replace nutrients taken from the soil by previous crops. This biological process, driven by microorganisms such as mycorrhiza and earthworms, releases nutrients available to plants throughout the growing season. Farmers use a variety of methods to improve soil fertility, including crop rotation, cover cropping, reduced tillage, and application of compost. By reducing fuel-intensive tillage, less soil organic matter is lost to the atmosphere. This has an added benefit of carbon sequestration, which reduces greenhouse gases and helps reverse climate change. Reducing tillage may also improve soil structure and reduce the potential for soil erosion.\nPlants need a large number of nutrients in various quantities to flourish. Supplying enough nitrogen and particularly synchronization, so that plants get enough nitrogen at the time when they need it most, is a challenge for organic farmers. Crop rotation and green manure (\"cover crops\") help to provide nitrogen through legumes (more precisely, the family Fabaceae), which fix nitrogen from the atmosphere through symbiosis with rhizobial bacteria. Intercropping, which is sometimes used for insect and disease control, can also increase soil nutrients, but the competition between the legume and the crop can be problematic and wider spacing between crop rows is required. Crop residues can be ploughed back into the soil, and different plants leave different amounts of nitrogen, potentially aiding synchronization. Organic farmers also use animal manure and certain processed fertilizers, such as seed meal and various mineral powders such as rock phosphate and green sand, a naturally occurring form of potash that provides potassium. In some cases, pH may need to be amended. Natural pH amendments include lime and sulfur, but in the U.S. some compounds, such as iron sulfate, aluminum sulfate, magnesium sulfate, and soluble boron products are allowed in organic farming.\nMixed farms with both livestock and crops can operate as ley farms, whereby the land gathers fertility through growing nitrogen-fixing forage grasses, such as white clover or alfalfa, \nand grows cash crops or cereals when fertility is established. Farms without livestock (\"stockless\") may find it more difficult to maintain soil fertility and may rely more on external inputs, such as imported manure, as well as grain legumes and green manures, although grain legumes may fix limited nitrogen because they are harvested. Horticultural farms that grow fruits and vegetables in protected conditions often rely even more on external inputs. Manure is very bulky and is often not cost-effective to transport more than a short distance from the source. Manure for organic farms may become scarce if a sizable number of farms become organically managed.\nWeed management.\nOrganic weed management promotes weed suppression, rather than weed elimination, by enhancing crop competition and phytotoxic effects on weeds. Organic farmers integrate cultural, biological, mechanical, physical and chemical tactics to manage weeds without synthetic herbicides.\nOrganic standards require rotation of annual crops, meaning that a single crop cannot be grown in the same location without a different, intervening crop. Organic crop rotations frequently include weed-suppressive cover crops and crops with dissimilar life cycles to discourage weeds associated with a particular person. Research is ongoing to develop organic methods to promote the growth of natural microorganisms that suppress the growth or germination of common weeds.\nOther cultural practices used to enhance crop competitiveness and reduce weed pressure include selection of competitive crop varieties, high-density planting, tight row spacing, and late planting into warm soil to encourage rapid crop germination.\nMechanical and chemical weed control practices used on organic farms can be broadly grouped as:\nSome naturally sourced chemicals are allowed for herbicidal use. These include certain formulations of acetic acid (concentrated vinegar), corn gluten meal, and essential oils. A few selective bioherbicides based on fungal pathogens have also been developed. At this time, however, organic herbicides and bioherbicides play a minor role in the organic weed control toolbox.\nWeeds can be controlled by grazing. For example, geese have been used successfully to weed a range of organic crops including cotton, strawberries, tobacco, and corn, reviving the practice of keeping cotton patch geese, common in the southern U.S. before the 1950s. Similarly, some rice farmers introduce ducks and fish to wet paddy fields to eat both weeds and insects.\nControlling other organisms.\nOrganisms aside from weeds that cause problems on farms include arthropods (e.g., insects, mites), nematodes, fungi and bacteria. Practices include, but are not limited to:\nExamples of predatory beneficial insects include minute pirate bugs, big-eyed bugs, and to a lesser extent ladybugs (which tend to fly away), all of which eat a wide range of pests. Lacewings are also effective, but tend to fly away. Praying mantis tend to move more slowly and eat less heavily. Parasitoid wasps tend to be effective for their selected prey, but like all small insects can be less effective outdoors because the wind controls their movement. Predatory mites are effective for controlling other mites.\nNaturally derived insecticides allowed for use on organic farms include \"Bacillus thuringiensis\" (a bacterial toxin), pyrethrum (a chrysanthemum extract), spinosad (a bacterial metabolite), neem (a tree extract) and rotenone (a legume root extract). Fewer than 10% of organic farmers use these pesticides regularly; a 2003 survey found that only 5.3% of vegetable growers in California use rotenone while 1.7% use pyrethrum. These pesticides are not always more safe or environmentally friendly than synthetic pesticides and can cause harm. The main criterion for organic pesticides is that they are naturally derived, and some naturally derived substances have been controversial. Controversial natural pesticides include rotenone, copper, nicotine sulfate, and pyrethrums Rotenone and pyrethrum are particularly controversial because they work by attacking the nervous system, like most conventional insecticides. Rotenone is extremely toxic to fish and can induce symptoms resembling Parkinson's disease in mammals. Although pyrethrum (natural pyrethrins) is more effective against insects when used with piperonyl butoxide (which retards degradation of the pyrethrins), organic standards generally do not permit use of the latter substance.\nNaturally derived fungicides allowed for use on organic farms include the bacteria \"Bacillus subtilis\" and \"Bacillus pumilus\"; and the fungus \"Trichoderma harzianum\". These are mainly effective for diseases affecting roots. Compost tea contains a mix of beneficial microbes, which may attack or out-compete certain plant pathogens, but variability among formulations and preparation methods may contribute to inconsistent results or even dangerous growth of toxic microbes in compost teas.\nSome naturally derived pesticides are not allowed for use on organic farms. These include nicotine sulfate, arsenic, and strychnine.\nSynthetic pesticides allowed for use on organic farms include insecticidal soaps and horticultural oils for insect management; and Bordeaux mixture, copper hydroxide and sodium bicarbonate for managing fungi. Copper sulfate and Bordeaux mixture (copper sulfate plus lime), approved for organic use in various jurisdictions, can be more environmentally problematic than some synthetic fungicides disallowed in organic farming. Similar concerns apply to copper hydroxide. Repeated application of copper sulfate or copper hydroxide as a fungicide may eventually result in copper accumulation to toxic levels in soil, and admonitions to avoid excessive accumulations of copper in soil appear in various organic standards and elsewhere. Environmental concerns for several kinds of biota arise at average rates of use of such substances for some crops. In the European Union, where replacement of copper-based fungicides in organic agriculture is a policy priority, research is seeking alternatives for organic production.\nLivestock.\nRaising livestock and poultry, for meat, dairy and eggs, is another traditional farming activity that complements growing. Organic farms attempt to provide animals with natural living conditions and feed. Organic certification verifies that livestock are raised according to the USDA organic regulations throughout their lives. These regulations include the requirement that all animal feed must be certified organic.\nOrganic livestock may be, and must be, treated with medicine when they are sick, but drugs cannot be used to promote growth, their feed must be organic, and they must be pastured.\nAlso, horses and cattle were once a basic farm feature that provided labour, for hauling and plowing, fertility, through recycling of manure, and fuel, in the form of food for farmers and other animals. While today, small growing operations often do not include livestock, domesticated animals are a desirable part of the organic farming equation, especially for true sustainability, the ability of a farm to function as a self-renewing unit.\nGenetic modification.\nA key characteristic of organic farming is the exclusion of genetically engineered plants and animals. On 19 October 1998, participants at IFOAM's 12th Scientific Conference issued the Mar del Plata Declaration, where more than 600 delegates from over 60 countries voted unanimously to exclude the use of genetically modified organisms in organic food production and agriculture.\nAlthough opposition to the use of any transgenic technologies in organic farming is strong, agricultural researchers Luis Herrera-Estrella and Ariel Alvarez-Morales continue to advocate integration of transgenic technologies into organic farming as the optimal means to sustainable agriculture, particularly in the developing world. Organic farmer Raoul Adamchak and geneticist Pamela Ronald write that many agricultural applications of biotechnology are consistent with organic principles and have significantly advanced sustainable agriculture.\nAlthough GMOs are excluded from organic farming, there is concern that the pollen from genetically modified crops is increasingly penetrating organic and heirloom seed stocks, making it difficult, if not impossible, to keep these genomes from entering the organic food supply. Differing regulations among countries limits the availability of GMOs to certain countries, as described in the article on regulation of the release of genetic modified organisms.\nTools.\nOrganic farmers use a number of traditional farm tools to do farming, and may make use of agricultural machinery in similar ways to conventional farming. In the developing world, on small organic farms, tools are normally constrained to hand tools and diesel powered water pumps.\nStandards.\nStandards regulate production methods and in some cases final output for organic agriculture. Standards may be voluntary or legislated. As early as the 1970s private associations certified organic producers. In the 1980s, governments began to produce organic production guidelines. In the 1990s, a trend toward legislated standards began, most notably with the 1991 EU-Eco-regulation developed for European Union, which set standards for 12 countries, and a 1993 UK program. The EU's program was followed by a Japanese program in 2001, and in 2002 the U.S. created the National Organic Program (NOP). As of 2007 over 60 countries regulate organic farming (IFOAM 2007:11). In 2005 IFOAM created the Principles of Organic Agriculture, an international guideline for certification criteria. Typically the agencies accredit certification groups rather than individual farms.\nProduction materials used for the creation of USDA Organic certified foods require the approval of a NOP accredited certifier.\nEU-organic production-regulation on \"organic\" food labels define \"organic\" primarily in terms of whether \"natural\" or \"artificial\" substances were allowed as inputs in the food production process.\nComposting.\nUsing manure as a fertilizer risks contaminating food with animal gut bacteria, including pathogenic strains of E. coli that have caused fatal poisoning from eating organic food. To combat this risk, USDA organic standards require that manure must be sterilized through high temperature thermophilic composting. If raw animal manure is used, 120 days must pass before the crop is harvested if the final product comes into direct contact with the soil. For products that do not directly contact soil, 90 days must pass prior to harvest.\nIn the US, the Organic Food Production Act of 1990 (OFPA) as amended, specifies that a farm can not be certified as organic if the compost being used contains any synthetic ingredients. The OFPA singles out commercially blended fertilizers [composts] disallowing the use of any fertilizer [compost] that contains prohibited materials.\nEconomics.\nThe economics of organic farming, a subfield of agricultural economics, encompasses the entire process and effects of organic farming in terms of human society, including social costs, opportunity costs, unintended consequences, information asymmetries, and economies of scale.\nLabour input, carbon and methane emissions, energy use, eutrophication, acidification, soil quality, effect on biodiversity, and overall land use vary considerably between individual farms and between crops, making general comparisons between the economics of organic and conventional agriculture difficult.\nIn the European Union \"organic farmers receive more subsidies under agri-environment and animal welfare subsidies than conventional growers\".\nGeographic producer distribution.\nThe markets for organic products are strongest in North America and Europe, which as of 2001 are estimated to have $6 and $8 billion respectively of the $20 billion global market. As of 2007, Australasia has 39% of the total organic farmland, including Australia's but 97% of this land is sprawling rangeland (2007:35). US sales are 20x as much. Europe farms 23% of global organic farmland (), followed by Latin America and the Caribbean with 20% (). Asia has 9.5% while North America has 7.2%. Africa has 3%.\nBesides Australia, the countries with the most organic farmland are Argentina (), China (), and the United States (). Much of Argentina's organic farmland is pasture, like that of Australia (2007:42). Spain, Germany, Brazil (the world's largest agricultural exporter), Uruguay, and England follow the United States in the amount of organic land (2007:26).\nIn the European Union (EU25) 3.9% of the total utilized agricultural area was used for organic production in 2005. The countries with the highest proportion of organic land were Austria (11%) and Italy (8.4%), followed by the Czech Republic and Greece (both 7.2%). The lowest figures were shown for Malta (0.2%), Poland (0.6%), and Ireland (0.8%).\nIn 2009, the proportion of organic land in the EU grew to 4.7%. The countries with the highest share of agricultural land were Liechtenstein (26.9%), Austria (18.5%), and Sweden (12.6%). 16% of all farmers in Austria produced organically in 2010. By the same year the proportion of organic land increased to 20%. In 2005, of land in Poland was under organic management. In 2012, were under organic production, and there were about 15,500 organic farmers; retail sales of organic products were EUR 80 million in 2011. As of 2012 organic exports were part of the government's economic development strategy.\nAfter the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991, agricultural inputs that had previously been purchased from Eastern bloc countries were no longer available in Cuba, and many Cuban farms converted to organic methods out of necessity. Consequently, organic agriculture is a mainstream practice in Cuba, while it remains an alternative practice in most other countries. Cuba's organic strategy includes development of genetically modified crops; specifically corn that is resistant to the palomilla moth.\nGrowth.\nIn 2001, the global market value of certified organic products was estimated at US$20 billion. By 2002, this was US$23 billion and by 2015 more than US$43 billion. By 2014, retail sales of organic products reached US$80 billion worldwide. North America and Europe accounted for more than 90% of all organic product sales. In 2018 Australia accounted for 54% of the world's certified organic land with the country recording more than .\nOrganic agricultural land increased almost fourfold in 15 years, from in 1999 to in 2014. Between 2013 and 2014, organic agricultural land grew by worldwide, increasing in every region except Latin America. During this time period, Europe's organic farmland increased to (+2.3%), Asia's increased to (+4.7%), Africa's increased to total (+4.5%), and North America's increased to total (+1.1%). As of 2014, the country with the most organic land was Australia (), followed by Argentina (), and the United States (). Australia's organic land area has increased at a rate of 16.5% per annum for the past eighteen years.\nIn 2013, the number of organic producers grew by almost 270,000, or more than 13%. By 2014, there were a reported 2.3 million organic producers in the world. Most of the total global increase took place in the Philippines, Peru, China, and Thailand. Overall, the majority of all organic producers are in India (650,000 in 2013), Uganda (190,552 in 2014), Mexico (169,703 in 2013) and the Philippines (165,974 in 2014).\nIn 2016, organic farming produced over of bananas, over of soybean, and just under of coffee.\nProductivity.\nA 2012 meta-analysis found that productivity is on average 25% lower for organic farming than conventional farming. Yield differences between organic and conventional farming are highly context-dependent, varying with system and site characteristics. Organic yields can be about 5% lower for rain-fed legumes and perennials grown on weakly acidic to weakly alkaline soils, around 13% lower when best organic management practices are applied, and up to 34% lower when conventional and organic systems are most directly comparable.\nAnother meta-analysis published in the journal \"Agricultural Systems\" in 2011 analyzed 362 datasets and found that organic yields were on average 80% of conventional yields. The authors found that there are relative differences in this yield gap based on crop type with crops like soybeans and rice scoring higher than the 80% average and crops like wheat and potato scoring lower. Across global regions, Asia and Central Europe were found to have relatively higher yields and Northern Europe relatively lower than the average.\nLong term studies.\nA study published in 2005 compared conventional cropping, organic animal-based cropping, and organic legume-based cropping on a test farm at the Rodale Institute over 22 years. The study found that \"the crop yields for corn and soybeans were similar in the organic animal, organic legume, and conventional farming systems\". It also found that \"significantly less fossil energy was expended to produce corn in the Rodale Institute's organic animal and organic legume systems than in the conventional production system. There was little difference in energy input between the different treatments for producing soybeans. In the organic systems, synthetic fertilizers and pesticides were generally not used\". As of 2013 the Rodale study was ongoing and a thirty-year anniversary report was published by Rodale in 2012.\nA long-term field study comparing organic/conventional agriculture carried out over 21 years in Switzerland concluded that \"Crop yields of the organic systems averaged over 21 experimental years at 80% of the conventional ones. The fertilizer input, however, was 34 \u2013 51% lower, indicating an efficient production. The organic farming systems used 20 \u2013 56% less energy to produce a crop unit and per land area this difference was 36 \u2013 53%. In spite of the considerably lower pesticide input the quality of organic products was hardly discernible from conventional analytically and even came off better in food preference trials and picture creating methods.\"\nProfitability.\nIn the United States, organic farming has been shown to be 2.7 to 3.8 times more profitable for the farmer than conventional farming when prevailing price premiums are taken into account. Globally, organic farming is 22\u201335% more profitable for farmers than conventional methods, according to a 2015 meta-analysis of studies conducted across five continents.\nThe profitability of organic agriculture can be attributed to a number of factors. First, organic farmers do not rely on synthetic fertilizer and pesticide inputs, which can be costly. In addition, organic foods currently enjoy a price premium over conventionally produced foods, meaning that organic farmers can often get more for their yield.\nThe price premium for organic food is an important factor in the economic viability of organic farming. In 2013 there was a 100% price premium on organic vegetables and a 57% price premium for organic fruits. These percentages are based on wholesale fruit and vegetable prices, available through the United States Department of Agriculture's Economic Research Service. Price premiums exist not only for organic versus nonorganic crops, but may also vary depending on the venue where the product is sold: farmers' markets, grocery stores, or wholesale to restaurants. For many producers, direct sales at farmers' markets are most profitable because the farmer receives the entire markup, however this is also the most time and labour-intensive approach.\nThere have been signs of organic price premiums narrowing in recent years, which lowers the economic incentive for farmers to convert to or maintain organic production methods. Data from 22 years of experiments at the Rodale Institute found that, based on the current yields and production costs associated with organic farming in the United States, a price premium of only 10% is required to achieve parity with conventional farming. A separate study found that on a global scale, price premiums of only 5-7% were needed to break even with conventional methods. Without the price premium, profitability for farmers is mixed.\nFor markets and supermarkets organic food is profitable as well, and is generally sold at significantly higher prices than non-organic food.\nEnergy efficiency.\nCompared to conventional agriculture, the energy efficiency of organic farming depends upon crop type and farm size.\nTwo studies \u2013 both comparing organically- versus conventionally-farmed apples \u2013 declare contradicting results, one saying organic farming is more energy efficient, the other saying conventionally is more efficient.\nIt has generally been found that the labour input per unit of yield was higher for organic systems compared with conventional production.\nSales and marketing.\nMost sales are concentrated in developed nations. In 2008, 69% of Americans claimed to occasionally buy organic products, down from 73% in 2005. One theory for this change was that consumers were substituting \"local\" produce for \"organic\" produce.\nDistributors.\nThe United States Department of Agriculture requires that distributors, manufacturers, and processors of organic products be certified by an accredited state or private agency. In 2007, there were 3,225 certified organic handlers, up from 2,790 in 2004.\nOrganic handlers are often small firms; 48% reported sales below $1 million annually, and 22% between $1 and $5 million per year. Smaller handlers are more likely to sell to independent natural grocery stores and natural product chains whereas large distributors more often market to natural product chains and conventional supermarkets, with a small group marketing to independent natural product stores. Some handlers work with conventional farmers to convert their land to organic with the knowledge that the farmer will have a secure sales outlet. This lowers the risk for the handler as well as the farmer. In 2004, 31% of handlers provided technical support on organic standards or production to their suppliers and 34% encouraged their suppliers to transition to organic. Smaller farms often join in cooperatives to market their goods more effectively.\n93% of organic sales are through conventional and natural food supermarkets and chains, while the remaining 7% of U.S. organic food sales occur through farmers' markets, foodservices, and other marketing channels.\nDirect-to-consumer sales.\nIn the 2012 Census, direct-to-consumer sales equalled $1.3 billion, up from $812 million in 2002, an increase of 60 percent. The number of farms that utilize direct-to-consumer sales was 144,530 in 2012 in comparison to 116,733 in 2002. Direct-to-consumer sales include farmers' markets, community supported agriculture (CSA), on-farm stores, and roadside farm stands. Some organic farms also sell products direct to retailer, direct to restaurant and direct to institution. According to the 2008 Organic Production Survey, approximately 7% of organic farm sales were direct-to-consumers, 10% went direct to retailers, and approximately 83% went into wholesale markets. In comparison, only 0.4% of the value of convention agricultural commodities were direct-to-consumers.\nWhile not all products sold at farmer's markets are certified organic, this direct-to-consumer avenue has become increasingly popular in local food distribution and has grown substantially since 1994. In 2014, there were 8,284 farmer's markets in comparison to 3,706 in 2004 and 1,755 in 1994, most of which are found in populated areas such as the Northeast, Midwest, and West Coast.\nLabour and employment.\nOrganic production is more labour-intensive than conventional production. Increased labour cost is one factor that contributes to organic food being more expensive. Organic farming's increased labour requirements can be seen in a good way providing more job opportunities for people. The 2011 UNEP Green Economy Report suggests that \"[a]n increase in investment in green agriculture is projected to lead to growth in employment of about 60 per cent compared with current levels\" and that \"green agriculture investments could create 47 million additional jobs compared with BAU2 over the next 40 years\".\nMuch of the growth in women labour participation in agriculture is outside the \"male dominated field of conventional agriculture\". Organic farming has a greater percentage of women working in the farms with 21% compared to farming in general with 14%.\nWorld's food security.\nIn 2007, the United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) said that organic agriculture often leads to higher prices and hence a better income for farmers, so it should be promoted. However, FAO stressed that organic farming could not feed the current human population, much less the larger future population. Both data and models showed that organic farming was far from sufficient. Therefore, chemical fertilizers were needed to avoid hunger. Others have argued that organic farming is particularly well-suited to food-insecure areas, and therefore could be \"an important part of increased food security\" in places like sub-Saharan Africa\nFAO stressed that fertilizers and other chemical inputs can increase production, particularly in Africa where fertilizers are currently used 90% less than in Asia. For example, in Malawi the yield has been boosted using seeds and fertilizers.\nAlso NEPAD, a development organization of African governments, announced that feeding Africans and preventing malnutrition requires fertilizers and enhanced seeds.\nAccording to a 2012 study from McGill University, organic best management practices show an average yield only 13% less than conventional. In the world's poorer nations where most of the world's hungry live, and where conventional agriculture's expensive inputs are not affordable for the majority of farmers, adopting organic management actually increases yields 93% on average, and could be an important part of increased food security.\nCapacity building in developing countries.\nOrganic agriculture can contribute to ecological sustainability, especially in poorer countries. The application of organic principles enables employment of local resources (e.g., local seed varieties, manure, etc.) and therefore cost-effectiveness. Local and international markets for organic products show tremendous growth prospects and offer creative producers and exporters excellent opportunities to improve their income and living conditions.\nOrganic agriculture is knowledge intensive. Globally, capacity building efforts are underway, including localized training material, to limited effect. As of 2007, the International Federation of Organic Agriculture Movements hosted more than 170 free manuals and 75 training opportunities online.\nIn 2008 the United Nations Environmental Programme (UNEP) and the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD) stated that \"organic agriculture can be more conducive to food security in Africa than most conventional production systems, and that it is more likely to be sustainable in the long-term\" and that \"yields had more than doubled where organic, or near-organic practices had been used\" and that soil fertility and drought resistance improved.\nMillennium Development Goals.\nThe value of organic agriculture (OA) in the achievement of the Millennium Development Goals (MDG), particularly in poverty reduction efforts in the face of climate change, is shown by its contribution to both income and non-income aspects of the MDGs. These benefits are expected to continue in the post-MDG era. A series of case studies conducted in selected areas in Asian countries by the Asian Development Bank Institute (ADBI) and published as a book compilation by ADB in Manila document these contributions to both income and non-income aspects of the MDGs. These include poverty alleviation by way of higher incomes, improved farmers' health owing to less chemical exposure, integration of sustainable principles into rural development policies, improvement of access to safe water and sanitation, and expansion of global partnership for development as small farmers are integrated in value chains.\nA related ADBI study also sheds on the costs of OA programs and set them in the context of the costs of attaining the MDGs. The results show considerable variation across the case studies, suggesting that there is no clear structure to the costs of adopting OA. Costs depend on the efficiency of the OA adoption programs. The lowest cost programs were more than ten times less expensive than the highest cost ones. However, further analysis of the gains resulting from OA adoption reveals that the costs per person taken out of poverty was much lower than the estimates of the World Bank, based on income growth in general or based on the detailed costs of meeting some of the more quantifiable MDGs (e.g., education, health, and environment).\nExternalities.\nAgriculture imposes negative externalities upon society through public land and other public resource use, biodiversity loss, erosion, pesticides, nutrient pollution, and assorted other problems. Positive externalities include self-reliance, entrepreneurship, respect for nature, and air quality. Organic methods differ from conventional methods in the impacts of their respective externalities, dependent on implementation and crop type. Overall land use is generally higher for organic methods, but organic methods generally use less energy in production. The analysis and comparison of externalities is complicated by whether the comparison is done using a per unit area measurement or per unit of production, and whether analysis is done on isolated plots or on farm units as a whole.\nMeasurements of biodiversity are highly variable between studies, farms, and organism groups. \"Birds, predatory insects, soil organisms and plants responded positively to organic farming, while non-predatory insects and pests did not. A 2005 review found that the positive effects of organic farming on abundance were prominent at the plot and field scales, but not for farms in matched landscapes.\"\nOther studies that have attempted to examine and compare conventional and organic systems of farming and have found that organic techniques reduce levels of biodiversity less than conventional systems do, and use less energy and produce less waste when calculated per unit area, although not when calculated per unit of output. \"Farm comparisons show that actual (nitrate) leaching rates per hectare[/acre] are up to 57% lower on organic than on conventional fields. However, the leaching rates per unit of output were similar or slightly higher.\" \"On a per-hectare[/-acre] scale, the CO2 emissions are 40\u00a0\u2013 60% lower in organic farming systems than in conventional ones, whereas on a per-unit output scale, the CO2 emissions tend to be higher in organic farming systems.\"\nIt has been proposed that organic agriculture can reduce the level of some negative externalities from (conventional) agriculture. Whether the benefits are private, or public depends upon the division of property rights.\nIssues.\nAccording to a meta analysis published in 2017, compared to conventional agriculture, biological agriculture has a higher land requirement per yield unit, a higher eutrophication potential, a higher acidification potential and a lower energy requirement, but is associated with similarly high greenhouse gas emissions.\nA 2003 to 2005 investigation by the Cranfield University for the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs in the UK found that it is difficult to compare the global warming potential, acidification and eutrophication emissions but \"Organic production often results in increased burdens, from factors such as nitrogen leaching and N2O emissions\", even though primary energy use was less for most organic products. N2O is always the largest global warming potential contributor except in tomatoes. However, \"organic tomatoes always incur more burdens (except pesticide use)\". Some emissions were lower \"per area\", but organic farming always required 65 to 200% more field area than non-organic farming. The numbers were highest for bread wheat (200+ % more) and potatoes (160% more).\nEnvironmental impact and emissions.\nResearchers at Oxford University analysed 71 peer-reviewed studies and observed that organic products are sometimes worse for the environment. Organic milk, cereals, and pork generated higher greenhouse gas emissions per product than conventional ones but organic beef and olives had lower emissions in most studies. Usually organic products required less energy, but more land. Per unit of product, organic produce generates higher nitrogen leaching, nitrous oxide emissions, ammonia emissions, eutrophication, and acidification potential than conventionally grown produce. Other differences were not significant. The researchers concluded that public debate should consider various manners of employing conventional or organic farming, and not merely debate conventional farming as opposed to organic farming. They also sought to find specific solutions to specific circumstances.\nA 2018 review article in the \"Annual Review of Resource Economics\" found that organic agriculture is more polluting per unit of output and that widespread upscaling of organic agriculture would cause additional loss of natural habitats.\nProponents of organic farming have claimed that organic agriculture emphasizes closed nutrient cycles, biodiversity, and effective soil management providing the capacity to mitigate and even reverse the effects of climate change and that organic agriculture can decrease fossil fuel emissions. \"The carbon sequestration efficiency of organic systems in temperate climates is almost double () that of conventional treatment of soils, mainly owing to the use of grass clovers for feed and of cover crops in organic rotations.\" However, studies acknowledge organic systems require more acreage to produce the same yield as conventional farms. By converting to organic farms in developed countries where most arable land is accounted for, increased deforestation would decrease overall carbon sequestration.\nSmith et al. (2019) analysed the net greenhouse gas emissions resulting from a hypothetical full conversion of agriculture in England and Wales to 100% organic production. They estimated that such a transition would lead to a 40% reduction in food production compared to conventional farming. Domestic greenhouse gas emissions would decrease by 6%, but the lower yields would require increased food imports, resulting in land-use change abroad. In the medium scenario\u2014where half of the additional land is converted from grassland and moderate soil carbon sequestration is assumed\u2014this would lead to a 21% increase in global greenhouse gas emissions emissions compared to the conventional system.\nNutrient leaching.\nAccording to a 2012 meta-analysis of 71 studies, nitrogen leaching, nitrous oxide emissions, ammonia emissions, eutrophication potential and acidification potential were higher for organic products. Specifically, the emission per area of land is lower, but per amount of food produced is higher. This is due to the lower crop yield of organic farms. Excess nutrients in lakes, rivers, and groundwater can cause algal blooms, eutrophication, and subsequent dead zones. In addition, nitrates are harmful to aquatic organisms by themselves.\nLand use.\nA 2012 Oxford meta-analysis of 71 studies found that organic farming requires 84% more land for an equivalent amount of harvest, mainly due to lack of nutrients but sometimes due to weeds, diseases or pests, lower yielding animals and land required for fertility building crops. While organic farming does not necessarily save land for wildlife habitats and forestry in all cases, the most modern breakthroughs in organic are addressing these issues with success.\nProfessor Wolfgang Branscheid says that organic animal production is not good for the environment, because organic chicken requires twice as much land as \"conventional\" chicken and organic pork a quarter more. According to a calculation by Hudson Institute, organic beef requires three times as much land. On the other hand, certain organic methods of animal husbandry have been shown to restore desertified, marginal, and/or otherwise unavailable land to agricultural productivity and wildlife. Or by getting both forage and cash crop production from the same fields simultaneously, reduce net land use.\nSRI methods for rice production, without external inputs, have produced record yields on some farms, but not others.\nPesticides.\nIn organic farming the use of synthetic pesticides and certain natural compounds that are produced using chemical synthesis are prohibited. The organic labels restrictions are not only based on the nature of the compound, but also on the method of production.\nA non-exhaustive list of organic approved pesticides with their median lethal doses:\nFood quality and safety.\nWhile there may be some differences in the amounts of nutrients and anti-nutrients when organically produced food and conventionally-produced food are compared, the variable nature of food production and handling makes it difficult to generalize results, and there is insufficient evidence to make claims that organic food is safer or healthier than conventional food.\nSoil conservation.\nSupporters claim that organically managed soil has a higher quality and higher water retention. This may help increase yields for organic farms in drought years. Organic farming can build up soil organic matter better than conventional no-till farming, which suggests long-term yield benefits from organic farming. An 18-year study of organic methods on nutrient-depleted soil concluded that conventional methods were superior for soil fertility and yield for nutrient-depleted soils in cold-temperate climates, arguing that much of the benefit from organic farming derives from imported materials that could not be regarded as self-sustaining.\nIn \"Dirt: The Erosion of Civilizations\", geomorphologist David Montgomery outlines a coming crisis from soil erosion. Agriculture relies on roughly one meter of topsoil, and that is being depleted ten times faster than it is being replaced. No-till farming, which some claim depends upon pesticides, is one way to minimize erosion. However, a 2007 study by the USDA's Agricultural Research Service has found that manure applications in tilled organic farming are better at building up the soil than no-till.\nGunsmoke Farms, a organic farming project in South Dakota, suffered from massive soil erosion as result of tilling after it switched to organic farming.\nBiodiversity.\nNearly all non-crop, naturally occurring species observed in comparative farm land practice studies show a preference for organic farming both by abundance and diversity. An average of 30% more species inhabit organic farms, however this does not account for possible loss of biodiversity due to decreased yields because more land is needed. Birds, butterflies, soil microbes, beetles, earthworms, spiders, vegetation, and mammals are particularly affected. Lack of herbicides and pesticides improve biodiversity fitness and population density. Many weed species attract beneficial insects that improve soil qualities and forage on weed pests. Soil-bound organisms often benefit because of increased bacteria populations due to natural fertilizer such as manure, while experiencing reduced intake of herbicides and pesticides. Increased biodiversity, especially from beneficial soil microbes and mycorrhizae have been proposed as an explanation for the high yields experienced by some organic plots, especially in light of the differences seen in a 21-year comparison of organic and control fields.\nA wide range of organisms benefit from organic farming, but it is unclear whether organic methods confer greater benefits than conventional integrated agri-environmental programs. Organic farming is often presented as a more biodiversity-friendly practice, but the generality of the beneficial effects of organic farming is debated as the effects appear often species- and context-dependent, and current research has highlighted the need to quantify the relative effects of local- and landscape-scale management on farmland biodiversity. In this context, two landscape management strategies are traditionally opposed: land sparing (which combines intensive farming and nature reserves) and land sharing via organic farming. A 2018 literature review of empirical studies indicates that land sparing is generally favored for conserving tropical forest biodiversity (67% of relevant studies).\nOrganic farming supports higher biodiversity than conventional farming, but at the cost of lower yields. A meta-analysis found that organic farming had on average a 23% increase in biodiversity with a similar reduction in yield. The authors also evaluated whether biodiversity gains outweigh yield losses at the landscape level and concluded that organic farming is advantageous when surrounding unfarmed land is less than 2.4 times as biodiverse as conventional farmland. However, semi-natural habitats and uncropped field margins often exceed this threshold, suggesting that conventional farming combined with land sparing may be preferable in many landscapes.\nHodgson et al. found that conventional farming combined with setting aside land as nature reserves is more beneficial for butterfly populations when the yield of organic farming falls below 87% of that of conventional farming.\nA 2018 review article in the \"Annual Review of Resource Economics\" found that widespread upscaling of organic agriculture would cause additional loss of natural habitats because more land is needed due to lower yields in organic farming.\nLabour standards.\nOrganic agriculture is often considered to be more socially just and economically sustainable for farmworkers than conventional agriculture. However, there is little social science research or consensus as to whether or not organic agriculture provides better working conditions than conventional agriculture. As many consumers equate organic and sustainable agriculture with small-scale, family-owned organizations it is widely interpreted that buying organic supports better conditions for farmworkers than buying with conventional producers. Organic agriculture is generally more labour-intensive due to its dependence on manual practices for fertilization and pest removal. Although illnesses from inputs pose less of a risk, hired workers still fall victim to debilitating musculoskeletal disorders associated with agricultural work. The USDA certification requirements outline growing practices and ecological standards but do nothing to codify labour practices. Independent certification initiatives such as the Agricultural Justice Project, Domestic Fair Trade Working Group, and the Food Alliance have attempted to implement farmworker interests but because these initiatives require voluntary participation of organic farms, their standards cannot be widely enforced. Despite the benefit to farmworkers of implementing labour standards, there is little support among the organic community for these social requirements. Many actors of the organic industry believe that enforcing labour standards would be unnecessary, unacceptable, or unviable due to the constraints of the market.\nRegional support for organic farming.\nThe following is a selected list of support given in some regions.\nEurope.\nThe EU-organic production-regulation is a part of the European Union regulation that sets rules about the production of organic agricultural and livestock products and how to label them. In the EU, organic farming and organic food are more commonly known as ecological or biological.\nThe regulation is derived from the guidelines of the International Federation of Organic Agriculture Movements (IFOAM), which is an association of about 800 member organizations in 119 countries.\nAs in the rest of the world, the organic market in Europe continues to grow and more land is farmed organically each year. \"More farmers cultivate organically, more land is certified organic, and more countries report organic farming activities\" as per the 2016 edition of the study \"http:// \" according to data from the end of 2014 published by FiBL and IFOAM in 2016.\nDenmark.\nDenmark has a long ongoing support for converting conventional farming into organic farming, which has been taught in academic classes in universities since 1986. The state began substitutes and has promoted a special national label for products that qualify as organic since 1989. Denmark is thus the first country in the world to substitute organic farming, promoting the concept and organizing the distribution of organic products. Today the government accept applicants for financial support during conversion years, as in Danish regulations farms must not have utilized conventional farming methods such as the usage of pesticides for several years before products can be assessed for qualification as organic. This financial support has in recent years been cut due to organic farming increasing in profitability, and some goods surpassing the profitability of conventional farming in domestic markets. In general, the financial situation of organic farmers in Denmark boomed between 2010 and 2018, while in 2018 serious nationwide long-lasting droughts stagnated the economic results of organic farmers; however, the average farmer still achieved a net positive result that year. In 2021 Denmark's (and Europe's) largest slaughterhouse, Danish Crown, publicized its expectations of stagnating sales of conventional pork domestically, however it expected increasing sales of organic pork and especially free range organic pork. Besides the conversion support, there are still base subsidies for organic farming paid per area of qualified farm land.\nThe first Danish private development organisation, Sams\u00d8kologisk, was established in 2013, by veteran organic farmers from the existing organisation \u00d8kologisk Sams\u00f8. The development organisation has intentions to buy and invest in farmland and then lend the land to young and aspiring farmers seeking to get into farming, especially organic farming. This organisation reports 300 economical active members as of 2021, but does not publish the amount of acquired land or active lenders.\nHowever, the organic farming concept in Denmark is often not limited to organic farming as the definition is globally. Instead, the majority of organic farming is instead \"ecological farming\". The development of this concept has been parallel with the general organic farming movement, and is most often used interchangeable with organic farming. Thus, there is a much stronger focus on the environmental and especially the ecological impact of ecological farming than organic farming. E.g. besides the base substitute for organic farming, farmers can qualify for an extra substitute equal to 2/3 of the base for realizing a specific reduction in the usage of added nitrogen to the farmland (also by organic means). There are also parallels to the extended organic movements of regenerative agriculture, although far from all concepts in regenerative agriculture are included in the national strategy at this time, but exist as voluntary options for each farmer. For these reasons, international organic products do not fulfill the requirements of ecological farming and thus do not receive the domestic label for ecological products, rather they receive the standard European Union organic label.\nUkraine.\nThe Ministry of Agrarian Policy and Food of Ukraine is the central executive body that develops the regulatory framework for the organic sector in Ukraine, maintains the state registers of certification bodies, operators and organic seeds and planting material, and provides training and professional development for organic inspectors.\nThanks to the hard work on organic legislation by the Ministry of Agrarian Policy and Food of Ukraine and the organic working group that includes the main players of the Ukraine's organic sector, on 10 July 2018, the Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine (the Ukrainian Parliament) adopted the https://, which was enacted on 2 August 2019. As of April 2024, organic production, circulation and labelling of organic products in Ukraine is regulated by this law as well as relevant https://.\nOne more important governmental institution of the organic sector of Ukraine is the https://. It is the central executive body authorised to conduct state supervision (control) in the field of organic production, circulation and labelling of organic products in accordance with the organic legislation of Ukraine. This includes state supervision (control) over compliance with the legislation in the field of organic production, circulation and labelling of organic products: inspection of certification bodies; random inspection of operators; monitoring of organic products on the market to prevent the entry of non-organic products labelled as organic.\nThe https://\u202f(EEPO, Ukraine) contributes to the development of the Ukrainian organic exporters' potential, promotion of the organic sector and formation of a positive image of Ukraine as a reliable supplier of organic products abroad. EEPO actively supports and organises various events for organic exporters, including national pavilions at key international trade fairs, such as BIOFACH (Nuremberg, Germany), Anuga (Cologne, Germany), SIAL (Paris, France), and Middle East Organic &amp; Natural Products Expo (Dubai, UAE). EEPO also created the Catalogue of Ukrainian Exporters of Organic Products in partnership with https:// certification body.\nOrganic farming is Ukraine is also supported by international technical assistance projects and programmes implementation of which is funded and supported by Switzerland, Germany, and other countries. These project/programmes are the Swiss-Ukrainian program https://, financed by Switzerland and implemented by the Research Institute of Organic Agriculture (FiBL, Switzerland) in partnership with SAFOSO AG (Switzerland); the Swiss-Ukrainian program https://, financed by Switzerland through the Swiss State Secretariat for Economic Affairs (SECO) and implemented by IFOAM \u2013 Organics International in partnership HELVETAS Swiss Intercooperation and the Research Institute of Organic Agriculture (FiBL, Switzerland); http://.\nThe project/programme representatives provide their expertise during development of the organic legislative framework and implementation of the legislation in the field of organic production, circulation and labelling of organic products and support various activities related to organic farming and production.\nChina.\nThe Chinese government, especially the local government, has provided various supports for the development of organic agriculture since the 1990s. Organic farming has been recognized by local governments for its potential in promoting sustainable rural development. It is common for local governments to facilitate land access of agribusinesses by negotiating land leasing with local farmers. The government also establishes demonstration organic gardens, provides training for organic food companies to pass certifications, subsidizes organic certification fees, pest repellent lamps, organic fertilizer and so on. The government has also been playing an active role in marketing organic products through organizing organic food expos and branding supports.\nIndia.\nIn India, in 2016, the northern state of Sikkim achieved its goal of converting to 100% organic farming. Other states of India, including Kerala, Mizoram, Goa, Rajasthan, and Meghalaya, have also declared their intentions to shift to fully organic cultivation.\nThe South Indian state of Andhra Pradesh is also promoting organic farming, especially Zero Budget Natural Farming (ZBNF), which is a form of regenerative agriculture.\nAs of 2018, India has the largest number of organic farmers in the world and constitutes more than 30% of organic farmers globally. India has 835,000 certified organic producers. However, the total land under organic cultivation is around 2% of overall farmland. The current level food production is 1.5 times greater than what's needed to feed the world. It is thus sufficient to feed 10 billion people which is the projected population peak of 2050 (Holt-Gimenez, 2012). Yet one in nine people remain hungry in the world today (FAO, IFAD, and WFP, 2015).\nDominican Republic.\nThe Dominican Republic has successfully converted a large amount of its banana crop to organic. The Dominican Republic accounts for 55% of the world's certified organic bananas.\nSouth Korea.\nThe most noticeable change in Korea's agriculture occurred throughout the 1960s and 1970s. More specifically, the \"Green Revolution\" program where South Korea experienced reforestations and agricultural revolution. Due to a food shortage during Park Chung Hee's presidency, the government encouraged rice varieties suited for organic farming. Farmers were able to strategize risk minimization efforts by breeding a variety of rice called Japonica with Tongil. They also used less fertilizer and made other economic adjustments to alleviate potential risk factors.\nIn modern society, organic farming and food policies have changed, more specifically since the 1990s. As expected, the guidelines focus on basic dietary recommendations for consumption of nutrients and Korean-style diets. The main reason for this encouragement is that around 88% of countries across the world face forms of malnutrition. Then in 2009, the https:// was passed, restricting foods low in energy and poor in nutrients. It also focused on other nutritional problems Korean students may have had as well.\nThailand.\nIn Thailand, the &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Visible anchor/styles.css\" /&gt;Institute for Sustainable Agricultural Communities (ISAC) was established in 1991 to promote organic farming (among other sustainable agricultural practices). The national target via the National Plan for Organic Farming is to attain, by 2021, of organically farmed land. Another target is for 40% of the produce from these farmlands to be consumed domestically.\nMuch progress has been made:\nUnited States.\nThe United States Department of Agriculture Rural Development (USDARD) was created in 1994 as a subsection of the USDA that implements programs to stimulate growth in rural communities. One of the programs that the USDARD created provided grants to farmers who practiced organic farming through the Organic Certification Cost Share Program (OCCSP). During the 21st century, the United States has continued to expand its reach in the organic foods market, doubling the number of organic farms in the U.S. in 2016 when compared to 2011.\nEmployment on organic farms offers potentially large numbers of jobs for people, and this may better manage the Fourth Industrial Revolution. Moreover, sustainable forestry, fishing, and mining, and other conservation-oriented activities provide larger numbers of jobs than more fossil fuel and mechanized work.\nSri Lanka.\nAs was the case with most countries, Sri Lanka made the transition away from organic farming upon the arrival of the Green Revolution, whereupon it started depending more on chemical fertilizers. This became a highly popularized method when the nation started offering subsidies on the import of artificial fertilizers to increase rice paddy production, and to incentivize farmers to switch from growing traditional varieties into using high yielding varieties (HYVs). This was especially true for young farmers who saw short-term economic profit as more sustainable to their wellbeing, compared to the long term drawbacks to the environment. However, due to the various health concerns with inorganic farming including the possibility of a chronic kidney disease being associated with chemical fertilizers, many middle aged and experienced farmers displayed skepticism towards these new approaches. Some even resorted to organic farming or utilizing insecticide free fertilizers for their crops. In a study conducted by F. Horgan and E. Kudavidanage, the researchers compared crop yields of farmers in Sri Lanka who employed distinct farming techniques including organic farmers who grew traditional varieties, and insecticide-free fertilizer users and pesticide users who grew modern varieties. No significant difference was found among the yield productions and in fact, organic farmers and insecticide-free fertilizer users lamented less about insects such as planthoppers as a challenge to their production. Regardless, many farmers continued to use insecticides to avoid the predicted dangers of pests to their crops, and the cheap sale of agrochemicals provided an easy approach to augment crop growth. Additionally, while organic farming has health benefits, it's a strenuous task which requires more man power. Although that presented a great opportunity for increased employment in Sri Lanka, the economic compensation was not enough to suffice the living expenses of those employed. Thus, most farmers relied on modern methods to run their household, especially after the economic stressors brought on by COVID-19.\nHowever, while Sri Lanka was still facing the new challenges of the pandemic, in the 2019 presidential election campaign, the president, Gotabaya Rajapaksa proposed a 10-year, national transition to organic farming to declare Sri Lanka as the first nation to be known for its organic produce. On April 27, 2021, the country issued an order prohibiting the import of any inorganic pesticides or fertilizers, creating chaos among farmers. While such a change was made over concerns for the nation's ecosystems and the health of citizens where pesticide poisonings prevailed over other health related deaths, the precipitous decision was met with criticism from the agriculture industry. This included fears that the mandate would harm the yields of the country's major crops (despite claims to the contrary), that the country would not be able to produce enough organic fertilizer domestically, and organic farming being more expensive and complex than conventional agriculture. To put this into perspective, 7.4% of Sri Lanka's GDP is reliant on agriculture and 30% of citizens work in this sector. This means that about \u2153 of its population is dependent on this sector for jobs, making its maintenance highly crucial for the prosperity of the nation's social and economic status. Of special concern was rice and tea, which are a staple food and major export respectively.\nDespite it being a record crop in the first half of 2021, the tea crop began to decline in July of that year. Rice production fell by 20% over the first six months of the ban, and prices increased by around 50%. Contrary to its past success at self-sustainability, the country had to import US$450 million worth of rice to meet domestic demand. In late August, the government acknowledged the ban had created a critical dependency on supplies of imported organic fertilizers, but by then food prices had already increased twofold in some cases. In September 2021, the government declared an economic emergency, citing the ban's impact on food prices, as well as inflation from the devaluation of Sri Lankan currency due to the crashing tea industry, and a lack of tourism induced by COVID-19 restrictions.\nIn November 2021, the country partially lifted the ban on inorganic farming for certain key crops such as rubber and tea, and began to offer compensation and subsidies to farmers and rice producers in an attempt to cover losses. The previous subsidies on synthetic fertilizer imports were not reintroduced.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "72758", "revid": "37005538", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72758", "title": "BBC Radio 4", "text": "British national radio station\nBBC Radio 4 is a British national radio station owned and operated by the BBC. The station replaced the BBC Home Service on 30 September 1967 and broadcasts a wide variety of spoken-word programmes from the BBC's headquarters at Broadcasting House, London. Since 2019, the station controller has been Mohit Bakaya. He replaced Gwyneth Williams, who had been the station controller since 2010.\nRadio 4 is broadcast throughout the United Kingdom, the Isle of Man and the Channel Islands on FM, LW and DAB, and on BBC Sounds, it can also be received in the eastern counties of Ireland, northern France and Northern Europe. It is available internationally via the BBC.com website and app. It currently reaches over 9.2 million listeners, making it the UK's second most-popular radio station after BBC Radio 2.\nBBC Radio 4 broadcasts news programmes such as \"Today\", \"The World at One\" and \"PM\" heralded on air by the Greenwich Time Signal pips or the chimes of Big Ben. Radio 4 also broadcasts the Shipping Forecast, which is over 150 years old.\nAccording to RAJAR, the station broadcasts to a weekly audience of 9.2 million with a listening share of 11.1% as of December 2023.\nOverview.\nBBC Radio 4 broadcasts a wide variety of speech-related programming, including news, drama, comedy, science and history. Music is broadcast as in documentaries relating to various forms of both popular and classical music, and the long-running music-based \"Desert Island Discs\". Sport is not part of the station's output, apart from during news bulletins, although between 1994 and 2023, the station's longwave frequency was used to broadcast ball-by-ball commentaries of most Test cricket matches played by England. Consequently, for around 70 days a year, listeners had to rely on FM broadcasts or DAB for mainstream Radio 4 broadcasts \u2013 the number relying solely on longwave was now a small minority. The cricket broadcasts took precedence over on-the-hour news bulletins, but not the Shipping Forecast, carried since Radio 4's move to longwave in 1978 because longwave can be received clearly at sea.\nThe station is available on FM in most of Great Britain, parts of Ireland and the north of France; LW throughout the UK and in parts of Northern Europe, and the Atlantic north of the Azores to about 20 degrees west; DAB; Digital TV including Freeview, Freesat, Sky and Virgin Media, and on the Internet. Freesat, Sky and Virgin formerly had a separate channel for Radio 4 LW output in mono, in addition to the FM output, but these were removed after the separate schedule for LW ended in April 2024.\nBBC Radio 4 is the second-most-popular British domestic radio station by total hours, after Radio 2. It recorded its highest audience, of 11\u00a0million listeners, in May 2011, and was \"UK Radio Station of the Year\" at the 2003, 2004, 2008 and 2023 Radio Academy Awards. It also won a Peabody Award in 2002 for \"File on 4: Export Controls\". Costing \u00a387 million (2024/5), it is the BBC's most expensive national radio network. There is no comparable British commercial network: Channel 4 abandoned plans to launch its own speech-based digital radio station in October 2008 as part of a \u00a3100m cost-cutting review.\nThe longwave signal is part of the Royal Navy's system of letters of last resort. In the event of a suspected catastrophic attack on Britain, submarine captains, in addition to other checks, check for a broadcast signal from Radio 4 on 198\u00a0kHz longwave to verify the annihilation of organised society in the United Kingdom.\nHistory.\nInitially the power was 100 watts on 350 metres (857\u00a0kHz). 2LO was allowed to transmit for seven minutes, after which the \"operator\" had to listen on the wavelength for three minutes for possible instructions to close down. On 14 November 1922 the station was transferred to the new British Broadcasting Company which in 1923 took up the nearby Savoy Hill for its broadcasting studios. At midnight on New Year's Eve 1923, the twelve chimes of Big Ben were broadcast for the first time to mark the new year.\nThe British Broadcasting Company began transmissions in London on 14 November 1922 from station 2LO in the Strand, which it had inherited from the Marconi Company (one of six commercial companies which created), but technology did not yet exist either for national coverage or joint programming between transmitters. While it was possible to combine large numbers of trunk telephone lines to link transmitters for individual programmes, the process was expensive and not encouraged by the General Post Office as it tied up large parts of the telephone network. The stations that followed the establishment of 2LO in London were therefore autonomously programmed using local talent and facilities.\nBy May 1923, simultaneous broadcasting was technically possible at least between main transmitters and relay stations, the quality was not felt to be high enough to provide a national service or regular simultaneous broadcasts. In 1924, it was felt that technical standards had improved enough for London to start to provide the majority of the output, cutting the local stations back to providing items of local interest.\nThe company became the British Broadcasting Corporation in 1927. On 9 March 1930, 2LO was replaced by the BBC Regional Programme and the BBC National Programme. The letters \"LO\" continued to be used internally as a designation in the BBC for technical operations in the London area (for example, the numbering of all recordings made in London contained \"LO\"). The code \"LO\" was changed to \"LN\" in the early 1970s.\nMain stations.\nEach of these main stations were broadcast at approximately 1 kilowatt (kW):\nRelay stations.\nEach of these relay stations were broadcast at approximately 120 watts (W):\nThe BBC Home Service was the predecessor of Radio 4 and broadcast between 1939 and 1967. It had regional variations and was broadcast on medium wave with a network of VHF FM transmitters being added from 1955. Radio 4 replaced it on 30 September 1967, when the BBC restructured and renamed its domestic radio stations, in response to the challenge of offshore radio. It moved to long wave in November 1978, taking over the 200\u00a0kHz frequency (1,500 metres) previously held by Radio 2 - later moved to 198\u00a0kHz as a result of international agreements aimed at avoiding interference (all ITU Region 1 MW/LW broadcast frequencies are divisible by 9). At this point, Radio 4 became available across all of the UK for the first time and the station officially became known as Radio 4 UK, a title that remained until 29 September 1984.\nFor a time during the 1970s Radio 4 carried regional news bulletins Monday to Saturday. These were broadcast twice at breakfast, at lunchtime and at 17:55. There were also programme variations for the parts of England not served by BBC Local Radio stations. These included \"Roundabout East Anglia\", a VHF opt-out of the \"Today\" programme broadcast from BBC East's studios in Norwich each weekday from 6.45\u00a0a.m. to 8.45\u00a0a.m. \"Roundabout East Anglia\" came to an end in August 1980, ahead of the launch of BBC Radio Norfolk.\nAll regional news bulletins broadcast from BBC regional news bases around England ended in August 1980, apart from in the southwest as until January 1983 there was no BBC Local Radio in the southwest so these news bulletins and its weekday morning regional programme, \"Morning Sou'West\", continued to be broadcast from the BBC studios in Plymouth on VHF and on the Radio 4 medium wave Plymouth relay until 31 December 1982.\nThe launch of Radio 5 on 27 August 1990 saw the removal of Open University, schools programming, children's programmes and the \"Study on 4\"/\"Options\" adult education slot from Radio 4's FM frequencies. Consequently, the full Radio 4 schedule became available on FM for the first time. However, adult educational and Open University programming returned to Radio 4 in 1994 when Radio 5 was closed to make way for the launch of BBC Radio 5 Live and were broadcast until the end of the 1990s on Sunday evenings on longwave only.\nBetween 17 January 1991 and 2 March 1991 FM broadcasts were replaced by a continuous news service devoted to the Gulf War, Radio 4 News FM, with the main Radio 4 service transferring to long wave. Before this, Radio 4's FM frequencies had occasionally been used for additional news coverage, generally for live coverage of statements and debates in Parliament.\nBy the start of the 1990s, Radio 4 had become available on FM in most of the UK - previously FM coverage had been restricted mainly to England and south Wales. This meant that it was possible for the main Radio 4 service to be transferred from LW to FM, and this took place on 16 September 1991 with opt-outs - extra shipping forecasts, \"Daily Service\", \"Yesterday in Parliament\" coverage of Prime Ministers Questions and other occasional extra news coverage, joined in 1994 by \"Test Match Special\" - transferring to long wave. However, 1994 did see the end of the extra news coverage on longwave due to the launch of BBC Radio 5 Live, although occasional broadcasts of services continued with the last being when Pope Benedict XVI visited Britain in 2010.\nOn 30 May 2023, the BBC announced that Radio 4 will stop broadcasting opt-outs on long wave with the last opt-outs airing on 31 March 2024. The two displaced programmes, \"Daily Service\" and \"Yesterday in Parliament\" moved to BBC Radio 4 Extra, although the latter was returned to the early morning Radio 4 schedule in April 2025. The daily amount of \"Shipping Forecasts\" was reduced to be broadcast 2 times on weekdays and 3 times on weekends. \"Test Match Special\" moved to BBC Radio 5 Sports Extra on 31 July 2023. These end ahead of a planned switch-off of long wave transmissions by 26 September 2026.\nOn 15 April 2024 at 12:27 PM BST, Radio 4's medium wave frequencies were switched off. These previously served as relays in areas with a weak longwave signal to provide reception of Radio 4 longwave, such as Northern Ireland and south west England. A continuous closedown loop message was broadcast until 30 April 2024, informing listeners to retune to other methods of reception.\nProgrammes and schedules.\nDaily schedule.\nAs of April 2025, Radio 4 is on air from 05:00 to 01:00 every Monday to Friday, and 05:30 to 01:00 every Saturday and Sunday. The station simulcasts the BBC World Service during its downtime overnight. An online schedule page lists the running order of programmes.\nProduction.\nThe station broadcasts a mix of live and pre-recorded programmes. Live programming includes breakfast programme \"Today\", magazine programme \"Woman's Hour\", consumer affairs programme \"You and Yours\", and (often) the music, film, books, arts and culture programme \"Front Row\". Continuity is managed from Broadcasting House with news bulletins, including the hourly summaries and longer programmes such as the \"Six O'Clock News\" and \"Midnight News\", and news programmes such as \"Today\", \"The World at One\" and \"PM\", which by early 2013 had returned to Broadcasting House after 15 years at BBC Television Centre in White City. The news returning to Broadcasting House has also meant that newsreaders can provide cover for continuity, which regularly occurs at 23:00 each night and 16:00 on a Sunday. This has reduced the total number of continuity announcers required each day down from four to three.\nThe Greenwich Time Signal, popularly known as \"the pips\", is broadcast every hour to herald the news bulletin, except at midnight and 18:00, and 22:00 on Sunday, when the chimes of Big Ben are played. There is no Greenwich Time Signal at 15:00 on Saturday or 11:00 and 12:00 on Sunday due to the Saturday Afternoon drama and the omnibus edition of \"The Archers\" respectively. Only pips broadcast on FM and LW are accurate. On digital platforms there is a delay of between three and five seconds, and up to 23 seconds online.\nProgrammes.\nRadio 4 programmes cover a wide variety of genre including news and current affairs, history, culture, science, religion, arts, comedy, drama and entertainment. A number of the programmes on Radio 4 take the form of a \"magazine\" show, featuring numerous small contributions over the course of the programme\u2014\"Woman's Hour\", \"From Our Own Correspondent\", \"You and Yours\". The rise of these magazine shows is primarily due to the work of Tony Whitby, controller of Radio 4 from 1970 to 1975. The station hosts a number of long-running programmes, many of which have been broadcast for over 40 years.\nMost programmes are available for 30 days or over a year after broadcast as streaming audio from Radio 4's \"listen again\" page and via BBC Sounds. A selection of programmes is also available as podcasts or downloadable audio files. Many comedy and drama programmes from the Radio 4 archives are broadcast on BBC Radio 4 Extra.\nDue to the capacity limitations of DAB and increasing sport broadcasts on BBC Radio 5 Sports Extra, BBC Radio 4 DAB has to reduce its bit rate most evenings, such that after 7 p.m. its DAB output is usually in mono, even though many of its programmes are made in stereo (including its flagship drama \"The Archers\"), these can be heard in stereo only on FM, Digital TV on Freeview &amp; Freesat (Ch. 704), Sky, Virgin and on line via BBC Sounds. BBC World Service, which uses BBC Radio 4 FM &amp; DAB frequencies between 01:00 and 05:20, is in stereo, but only on Radio 4 FM &amp; DAB and not on its own dedicated DAB channel. BBC Radio 4 Extra broadcasts in mono on DAB, but has always been in stereo on Digital TV (Freeview / Freesat Ch 708), Sky, Virgin and online.\nNotable continuity announcers and newsreaders.\nAnnouncers carry out the following duties from Broadcasting House:\nNewsreaders read hourly summaries and longer bulletins from New Broadcasting House. In 2012 the BBC announced that it would be reducing its main presentation team from 12 to ten.\nBBC.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nFreelance.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nFormer.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nCriticisms.\nCriticism voiced by centre-right newspapers in recent years have a perceived left political bias across a range of issues, as well as sycophancy in interviews, particularly on the popular morning news magazine \"Today\" as part of a reported perception of a general \"malaise\" at the BBC. Conversely, the journalist Mehdi Hasan has criticised the station for an overtly \"socially and culturally conservative\" approach.\nThere has been criticism of \"Today\" in particular for a lack of female broadcasters. In September 1972, Radio 4 employed the first female continuity announcers\u2014Hylda Bamber and Barbara Edwards. For quite some time, the introduction of female newsreaders led to complaints from listeners; women discussing topics of feminist interest led to similar complaints. In addition, there has been long-running criticism by atheist and humanist groups of \"Thought for the Day\", a slot dedicated exclusively to religious discussion during Radio 4's flagship morning news programme.\nRadio 4 has been criticised for being \"too middle class\" and of \"little interest\" to non-white listeners.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "72760", "revid": "1296291410", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72760", "title": "Square kilometre", "text": "Unit of area\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nThe square kilometre (square kilometer in American spelling; symbol: km2) is a multiple of the square metre, the SI unit of area or surface area. In the SI unit of area (m2), 1 km2 is equal to 1M(m2).\n1\u00a0km2 is equal to:\nIt is also approximately equal to:\nConversely:\nThe symbol \"km2\" means (km)2, square kilometre and not k(m2), kilo\u2013square metre. For example, 3\u00a0km2 is equal to = 3,000,000\u00a0m2, not 3,000\u00a0m2.\nExamples of areas of 1 square kilometre.\nTopographical map grids.\nTopographical map grids are worked out in metres, with the grid lines being 1,000 metres apart.\nIn each case, the grid lines enclose one square kilometre.\nMedieval city centres.\nThe area enclosed by the walls of many European medieval cities were about one square kilometre. These walls are often either still standing or the route they followed is still clearly visible, such as in Brussels, where the wall has been replaced by a ring road, or in Frankfurt, where the wall has been replaced by gardens. The approximate area of the old walled cities can often be worked out by fitting the course of the wall to a rectangle or an oval (ellipse). Examples include:\nThe walled city of Delft was approximately rectangular.\nThe approximate length of rectangle was about .\nThe approximate width of the rectangle was about .\nA perfect rectangle with these measurements has an area of 1.30\u00d70.75 = 0.9\u00a0km2\nThe medieval city is roughly rectangular with rounded north-east and north-west corners.\nThe maximum distance from east to west is .\nThe maximum distance from north to south is .\nA perfect rectangle of these dimensions would be 1.36\u00d70.80 = 1.088\u00a0km2.\nThe medieval city of Bruges, a major centre in Flanders, was roughly oval or elliptical in shape with the longer or semi-major axis running north and south.\nThe maximum distance from north to south (semi-major axis) is .\nThe maximum distance from east to west (semi-minor axis) is .\nA perfect ellipse of these dimensions would be 2.53 \u00d7 1.81 \u00d7 (\u03c0/4) = 3.597\u00a0km2.\nChester is one of the smaller English cities that has a near-intact city wall.\nThe distance from Northgate to Watergate is about 855\u00a0metres.\nThe distance from Eastgate to Westgate is about 589\u00a0metres.\nA perfect rectangle of these dimensions would be (855/1000) \u00d7 (589/1000) = 0.504\u00a0km2.\nParks.\nParks come in all sizes; a few are almost exactly one square kilometre in area. Here are some examples:\nGolf courses.\nUsing the figures published by golf course architects Crafter and Mogford, a course should have a fairway width of 120 metres and 40 metres clear beyond the hole. Assuming a 18-hole course, an area of 80 hectares (0.8 square kilometre) needs to be allocated for the course itself. Examples of golf courses that are about one square kilometre include:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "72761", "revid": "5042921", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72761", "title": "Franz Scholz", "text": "Franz Scholz (10 December 1909 \u2013 1 September 1998) was a German priest and professor of theology from Breslau, Silesia. He had eight brothers and two sisters. His youngest brother Gerhard is now 86. He studied at Breslau's Catholic St.-Matthias-Gymnasium, then Caritas Science at Freiburg. He studied the Polish language at Krak\u00f3w and Lublin. In 1934 he became a priest and took up a position as chaplain at Cross Church in Breslau. In this office Schulz attended to the spiritual needs of Polish seasonal workers in the Silesian capital city. After receiving his doctorate he transferred to St. Bonifacius Church in G\u00f6rlitz.\nIn 1945, the eastern part of the city of G\u00f6rlitz was split off and became known as Zgorzelec when the Polish-German border was redrawn. Because of his knowledge of Polish, Scholz was able to remain in Zgorzelec, but he chose to leave in 1946 when Germans who remained in the city were forced to adopt Polish citizenship.\nScholz went to the nearby city of Cottbus, but when it became part of the German Democratic Republic in 1949, he moved to West Germany. There, Scholz taught many classes dealing with morals and theology and he received many honors, including Papal Honorary Titles.\nProfessor Scholz was a theologian with many years of practical experience with parishioners and inmates, and he had experience with Polish life and people. He left a large volume of written material. He was especially opposed to the proposed beatification of the Primate of Poland, August Cardinal Hlond."}
{"id": "72764", "revid": "50664068", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72764", "title": "Claw", "text": "Curved, pointed appendage at the end of a digit of a mammal, bird, or reptile\nA claw is a curved, pointed appendage found at the end of a toe or finger in most amniotes (mammals, reptiles, birds). Some invertebrates such as beetles and spiders have somewhat similar fine, hooked structures at the end of the leg or tarsus for gripping a surface as they walk. The pincers of crabs, lobsters and scorpions, more formally known as their chelae, are sometimes called claws.\nA true claw is made of a hard protein called keratin. Claws are used to catch and hold prey in carnivorous mammals such as cats and dogs, but may also be used for such purposes as digging, climbing trees, self-defense and grooming, in those and other species.\nSimilar appendages that are flat and do not come to a sharp point are called nails instead. Claw-like projections that do not form at the end of digits but spring from other parts of the foot are properly named spurs.\nTetrapods.\nIn tetrapods, claws are made of keratin and consist of two layers. The unguis is the harder external layer, which consists of keratin fibers arranged perpendicular to the direction of growth and in layers at an oblique angle. The subunguis is the softer, flaky underside layer whose grain is parallel to the direction of growth. The claw grows outward from the nail matrix at the base of the unguis and the subunguis grows thicker while travelling across the nail bed. The unguis grows outward faster than the subunguis to produce a curve and the thinner sides of the claw wear away faster than their thicker middle, producing a more or less sharp point. Tetrapods use their claws in many ways, commonly to grasp or kill prey, to dig and to climb and hang.\nMammals.\nAll carnivorans have claws, which vary considerably in length and shape. Claws grow out of the third phalanges of the paws and are made of keratin. Many predatory mammals have protractile claws that can partially hide inside the animal's paw, especially the cat family, Felidae, almost all of whose members have fully protractible claws. Outside of the cat family, retractable claws are found only in certain species of the Viverridae (and the extinct Nimravidae). A claw that is retractable is protected from wear and tear.\nMost cats and dogs also have a dewclaw on the inside of the front paws. It is much less functional than the other claws but does help the cats to grasp prey. Because the dew claw does not touch the ground, it receives less wear and tends to be sharper and longer.\nA nail is homologous to a claw but is flatter and has a curved edge instead of a point. A nail that is big enough to bear weight is called a \"hoof\". (Nevertheless, one side of the cloven-hoof of artiodactyl ungulates may also be called a claw). \nEvery so often, the growth of claws stops and restarts, as does hair. In a hair, this results in the hair falling out and being replaced by a new one. In claws, this results in an abscission layer, and the old segment breaks off. This process takes several months for human thumbnails. Cats are often seen working old unguis layers off on wood or on boards made for the purpose. Ungulates' hooves wear or self-trim by ground contact. Domesticated equids (horses, donkeys and mules) usually need regular trimming by a farrier, as a consequence of reduced activity on hard ground.\nPrimates.\nPrimate nails consist of the unguis alone, as the subunguis has disappeared. With the evolution of grasping hands and feet, claws are no longer necessary for locomotion, and instead most digits exhibit nails. However, claw-like nails are found in small-bodied callitrichids on all digits except the hallux or big toe. A laterally flattened grooming claw, used for grooming, can be found on the second toe in living strepsirrhines, and the second and third in tarsiers. Aye-ayes have functional claws on all other digits except the hallux, including a grooming claw on the second toe. Less commonly known, a grooming claw is also found on the second pedal digit of night monkeys (\"Aotus\"), titis (\"Callicebus\"), and possibly other New World monkeys.\nReptiles.\nMost reptiles have well-developed claws. Most lizards have toes ending in stout claws. In snakes, feet and claws are absent, but in many boids such as \"Boa constrictor\", remnants of highly reduced hind-limbs emerge with a single claw as \"spurs\" on each side of the anal opening.\nLizard claws are used as aids in climbing, and in holding down prey in carnivorous species.\nBirds.\nA talon is the claw of a bird of prey, its primary hunting tool. The talons are very important; without them, most birds of prey would not be able to catch their food. Some birds also use claws for defensive purposes. Cassowaries use claws on their inner toe (digit\u00a0I) for defence and have been known to disembowel people. All birds, however, have claws, which are used as general holdfasts and protection for the tip of the digits.\nThe hoatzin and turaco are unique among extant birds in having functional claws on the thumb and index finger (digits\u00a0I and II) on the forelimbs as chicks, allowing them to climb trees until the adult plumage with flight feathers develop. However, several birds have a claw- or nail-like structure hidden under the feathers at the end of the hand digits, notably ostriches, emus, ducks, geese and kiwis.\nAmphibians.\nThe only amphibians to bear claws are the African clawed frogs. Claws evolved separately in the amphibian and amniote (reptiliomorph) line. However, the hairy frog has claw analogues on its feet; the frog intentionally dislocates the tips of its fingers to unsheathe the sharp points of its last phalanges.\nArthropods.\nThe scientifically correct term for the \"claw\" of an arthropod, such as a lobster or crab, is a chela (plural \"chelae\"). Legs bearing a chela are called chelipeds. Chelae are also called pincers.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "72766", "revid": "1287993671", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72766", "title": "Dundee (disambiguation)", "text": "Dundee is the fourth-largest city in Scotland by population.\nDundee may also refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "72767", "revid": "15534247", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72767", "title": "Christian fundamentalism", "text": "Religious movement emphasizing biblical literalism\nChristian fundamentalism, also known as fundamental Christianity or fundamentalist Christianity, is a religious movement emphasizing biblical literalism. In its modern form, it began in the late 19th and early 20th centuries among British and American Protestants as a reaction to theological liberalism and cultural modernism. Fundamentalists argued that 19th-century modernist theologians had misunderstood or rejected certain doctrines, especially biblical inerrancy, which they considered the fundamentals of the Christian faith.\nFundamentalists are almost always described as upholding beliefs in biblical infallibility and biblical inerrancy, in keeping with traditional Christian doctrines concerning biblical interpretation, the role of Jesus in the Bible, and the role of the church in society. Fundamentalists usually believe in a core of Christian beliefs, typically called the \"Five Fundamentals\". These arose from the Presbyterian Church issuance of \"The Doctrinal Deliverance of 1910\". Topics included are statements on the historical accuracy of the Bible and all of the events which are recorded in it as well as the Second Coming of Jesus Christ.\nFundamentalism manifests itself in various denominations which believe in various theologies, rather than a single denomination or a systematic theology. The ideology became active in the 1910s after the release of \"The Fundamentals\", a twelve-volume set of essays, apologetic and polemic, written by conservative Protestant theologians in an attempt to defend beliefs which they considered Protestant orthodoxy. The movement became more organized within U.S. Protestant churches in the 1920s, especially among Presbyterians, as well as Baptists and Methodists. Many churches which embraced fundamentalism adopted a militant attitude with regard to their core beliefs. Reformed fundamentalists lay heavy emphasis on historic confessions of faith, such as the Westminster Confession of Faith, as well as uphold Princeton theology. Since 1930, many fundamentalist churches in the Baptist tradition (who generally affirm dispensationalism) have been represented by the Independent Fundamental Churches of America (renamed IFCA International in 1996), while many theologically conservative connexions in the Methodist tradition (who adhere to Wesleyan theology) align with the Interchurch Holiness Convention; in various countries, national bodies such as the American Council of Christian Churches exist to encourage dialogue between fundamentalist bodies of different denominational backgrounds. Other fundamentalist denominations have little contact with other bodies.\nA few scholars label Catholic activist conservative associations who reject modern Christian theology in favor of more traditional doctrines as fundamentalists. The term is sometimes mistakenly confused with the term \"evangelical\".\nTerminology.\nThe term \"fundamentalism\" entered the English language in 1922, and it is often capitalized when it is used in reference to the religious movement. By the end of the 20th century, the term \"fundamentalism\" acquired a pejorative connotation, denoting religious fanaticism or extremism, especially when such labeling extended beyond the original movement which coined the term and those who self-identify as fundamentalists.\nSome who hold certain, but not all beliefs in common with the original fundamentalist movement reject the label \"fundamentalism\", due to its perceived pejorative nature, while others consider it a banner of pride. In certain parts of the United Kingdom, using the term \"fundamentalist\" with the intent to stir up religious hatred is a violation of the \"Racial and Religious Hatred Act\" of 2006.\nHistory.\nThe movement has its origins in 1878 in a meeting of the \"Believers' Meeting for Bible Study\" (Niagara Bible Conference) in the United States, where 14 fundamental beliefs were established by evangelical pastors.\nFundamentalism draws from multiple traditions in British and American theologies during the 19th century. According to authors Robert D. Woodberry and Christian S. Smith,\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHowever, the split does not mean that there were just two groups: modernists and fundamentalists. There were also people who considered themselves neo-evangelicals, separating themselves from the extreme components of fundamentalism. These neo-evangelicals also wanted to separate themselves from both the fundamentalist movement and the mainstream evangelical movement due to their anti-intellectual approaches.\nFrom 1910 until 1915, a series of essays titled \"The Fundamentals: A Testimony to the Truth\" was published by the Testimony Publishing Company of Chicago.\nThe Northern Presbyterian Church (now Presbyterian Church in the United States of America) influenced the movement with the definition of the five \"fundamentals\" in 1910, namely\nThe Princeton theology, which responded to higher criticism of the Bible by developing from the 1840s to 1920 the doctrine of inerrancy, was another influence in the movement. This doctrine, also called biblical inerrancy, stated that the Bible was divinely inspired, religiously authoritative, and without error. The Princeton Seminary professor of theology Charles Hodge insisted that the Bible was inerrant because God inspired or \"breathed\" his exact thoughts into the biblical writers (2 Timothy 3:16). Princeton theologians believed that the Bible should be read differently than any other historical document, and they also believed that Christian modernism and liberalism led people to Hell just like non-Christian religions did.\nBiblical inerrancy was a particularly significant rallying point for fundamentalists. This approach to the Bible is associated with conservative evangelical hermeneutical approaches to Scripture, ranging from the historical-grammatical method to biblical literalism.\nThe Dallas Theological Seminary, founded in 1924 in Dallas, would have a considerable influence in the movement by training students who will establish various independent Bible Colleges and fundamentalist churches in the southern United States.\nIn the 1930s, fundamentalism was viewed by many as a \"last gasp\" vestige of something from the past but more recently, scholars have shifted away from that view.\nIn the early 1940s, evangelicals and fundamentalist Christians began to part ways over whether to separate from modern culture (the fundamentalist approach) or engage with it. An organization very much on the side of separation from modernity was the American Council of Christian Churches, founded in 1941 by Rev. Carl McIntire. Another group \"for conservative Christians who wanted to be culturally engaged\" was the National Association of Evangelicals (NAE) founded in 1942, by Harold Ockenga.\nChanging interpretations.\nThe interpretations given the fundamentalist movement have changed over time, with most older interpretations being based on the concepts of social displacement or cultural lag. Some in the 1930s, including H. Richard Niebuhr, understood the conflict between fundamentalism and modernism to be part of a broader social conflict between the cities and the country. In this view the fundamentalists were country and small-town dwellers who were reacting against the progressivism of city dwellers. Fundamentalism was seen as a form of anti-intellectualism during the 1950s; in the early 1960s American intellectual and historian Richard Hofstadter interpreted it in terms of status anxiety, social displacement, and 'Manichean mentality'.\nBeginning in the late 1960s, the movement began to be seen as \"a bona fide religious, theological and even intellectual movement in its own right\". Instead of interpreting fundamentalism as a simple anti-intellectualism, Paul Carter argued that \"fundamentalists were simply intellectual in a way different than their opponents\". Moving into the 1970s, Earnest R. Sandeen saw fundamentalism as arising from the confluence of Princeton theology and millennialism.\nGeorge Marsden defined fundamentalism as \"militantly anti-modernist Protestant evangelicalism\" in his 1980 work \"Fundamentalism and American Culture\". \"Militant\" in this sense does not mean 'violent', it means 'aggressively active in a cause'. Marsden saw fundamentalism arising from a number of preexisting evangelical movements that responded to various perceived threats by joining forces. He argued that Christian fundamentalists were American evangelical Christians who in the 20th century opposed \"both modernism in theology and the cultural changes that modernism endorsed. Militant opposition to modernism was what most clearly set off fundamentalism.\" Others viewing militancy as a core characteristic of the fundamentalist movement include Philip Melling, Ung Kyu Pak and Ronald Witherup. Donald McKim and David Wright (1992) argue that \"in the 1920s, militant conservatives (fundamentalists) united to mount a conservative counter-offensive. Fundamentalists sought to rescue their denominations from the growth of modernism at home.\"\nAccording to Marsden, recent scholars differentiate \"fundamentalists\" from \"evangelicals\" by arguing the former were more militant and less willing to collaborate with groups considered \"modernist\" in theology. In the 1940s the more moderate faction of fundamentalists maintained the same theology but began calling themselves \"evangelicals\" to stress their less militant position. Roger Olson (2007) identifies a more moderate faction of fundamentalists, which he calls \"postfundamentalist\", and says \"most postfundamentalist evangelicals do not wish to be called fundamentalists, even though their basic theological orientation is not very different\". According to Olson, a key event was the formation of the National Association of Evangelicals (NAE) in 1942. Barry Hankins (2008) has a similar view, saying \"beginning in the 1940s...militant and separatist evangelicals came to be called fundamentalists, while culturally engaged and non-militant evangelicals were supposed to be called evangelicals.\"\nTimothy Weber views fundamentalism as \"a rather distinctive modern reaction to religious, social and intellectual changes of the late 1800s and early 1900s, a reaction that eventually took on a life of its own and changed significantly over time\".\nBy region.\nNorth America.\nFundamentalist movements existed in most North American Protestant denominations by 1919 following attacks on modernist theology in Presbyterian and Baptist denominations. Fundamentalism was especially controversial among Presbyterians.\nCanada.\nPeter Wiley Philpott (1865\u20131957) founded the United Christian Workers in Hamilton, Ontario, in 1892. This working-class religious movement later became the fundamentalist Associated Gospel Churches of Canada. In his speech at the 1919 World Conference on Christian Fundamentals in Philadelphia, he asserted that personal experience of conversion cannot be reasoned against or argued away.\nAn early fundamentalist leader was English-born Thomas Todhunter Shields (1873\u20131955), who led 80 churches out of the Baptist federation in Ontario in 1927 and formed the Union of Regular Baptist Churches of Ontario and Quebec. He was affiliated with the Baptist Bible Union, based in the United States. His newspaper, \"The Gospel Witness,\" reached 30,000 subscribers in 16 countries, giving him an international reputation. He was one of the founders of the international Council of Christian Churches.\nOswald J. Smith (1889\u20131986), reared in rural Ontario and educated at Moody Church in Chicago, set up The Peoples Church in Toronto in 1928. A dynamic preacher and leader in Canadian fundamentalism, Smith wrote 35 books and engaged in missionary work worldwide. Billy Graham called him \"the greatest combination pastor, hymn writer, missionary statesman, an evangelist of our time.\"\nUnited States.\nA leading organizer of the fundamentalist campaign against modernism in the United States was William Bell Riley, a Northern Baptist based in Minneapolis, where his Northwestern Bible and Missionary Training School (1902), Northwestern Evangelical Seminary (1935), and Northwestern College (1944) produced thousands of graduates. At a large conference in Philadelphia in 1919, Riley founded the World Christian Fundamentals Association (WCFA), which became the chief interdenominational fundamentalist organization in the 1920s. Some mark this conference as the public start of Christian fundamentalism. Although the fundamentalist drive to take control of the major Protestant denominations failed at the national level during the 1920s, the network of churches and missions fostered by Riley showed that the movement was growing in strength, especially in the U.S. South. Both rural and urban in character, the flourishing movement acted as a denominational surrogate and fostered a militant evangelical Christian orthodoxy. Riley was president of WCFA until 1929, after which the WCFA faded in importance. The Independent Fundamental Churches of America became a leading association of independent U.S. fundamentalist churches upon its founding in 1930. The American Council of Christian Churches was founded for fundamental Christian denominations as an alternative to the National Council of Churches.\nMuch of the enthusiasm for mobilizing fundamentalism came from Protestant seminaries and Protestant \"Bible colleges\" in the United States. Two leading fundamentalist seminaries were the dispensationalist Dallas Theological Seminary, founded in 1924 by Lewis Sperry Chafer, and the Reformed Westminster Theological Seminary, formed in 1929 under the leadership and funding of former Princeton Theological Seminary professor J. Gresham Machen. Many Bible colleges were modeled after the Moody Bible Institute in Chicago. Dwight Moody was influential in preaching the imminence of the Kingdom of God that was so important to dispensationalism. Bible colleges prepared ministers who lacked college or seminary experience with intense study of the Bible, often using the \"Scofield Reference Bible\" of 1909, a King James Version of the Bible with detailed notes which interprets passages from a dispensational perspective.\nAlthough U.S. fundamentalism began in the North, the movement's largest base of popular support was in the South, especially among Southern Baptists, where individuals (and sometimes entire churches) left the convention and joined other Baptist denominations and movements which they believed were \"more conservative\" such as the Independent Baptist movement. By the late 1920s the national media had identified it with the South, largely ignoring manifestations elsewhere. In the mid-twentieth century, several Methodists left the mainline Methodist Church and established fundamental Methodist denominations, such as the Evangelical Methodist Church and the Fundamental Methodist Conference (cf. \"conservative holiness movement\"); others preferred congregating in Independent Methodist churches, many of which are affiliated with the Association of Independent Methodists, which is fundamentalist in its theological orientation. By the 1970s Protestant fundamentalism was deeply entrenched and concentrated in the U.S. South. In 1972\u20131980 General Social Surveys, 65 percent of respondents from the \"East South Central\" region (comprising Tennessee, Kentucky, Mississippi, and Alabama) self-identified as fundamentalist. The share of fundamentalists was at or near 50 percent in \"West South Central\" (Texas to Arkansas) and \"South Atlantic\" (Florida to Maryland), and at 25 percent or below elsewhere in the country, with the low of nine percent in New England. The pattern persisted into the 21st century; in 2006\u20132010 surveys, the average share of fundamentalists in the East South Central Region stood at 58 percent, while, in New England, it climbed slightly to 13 percent.\nEvolution.\nIn the 1920s, Christian fundamentalists \"differed on how to understand the account of creation in Genesis\" but they \"agreed that God was the author of creation and that humans were distinct creatures, separate from animals, and made in the image of God.\" While some of them advocated the belief in Old Earth creationism and a few of them even advocated the belief in evolutionary creation, other \"strident fundamentalists\" advocated Young Earth Creationism and \"associated evolution with last-days atheism.\" These \"strident fundamentalists\" in the 1920s devoted themselves to fighting against the teaching of evolution in the nation's schools and colleges, especially by passing state laws that affected public schools. William Bell Riley took the initiative in the 1925 Scopes Trial by bringing in famed politician William Jennings Bryan and hiring him to serve as an assistant to the local prosecutor, who helped draw national media attention to the trial. In the half century after the Scopes Trial, fundamentalists had little success in shaping government policy, and they were generally defeated in their efforts to reshape the mainline denominations, which refused to join fundamentalist attacks on evolution. Particularly after the Scopes Trial, liberals saw a division between Christians in favor of the teaching of evolution, whom they viewed as educated and tolerant, and Christians against evolution, whom they viewed as narrow-minded, tribal, and obscurantist.\nEdwards (2000), however, challenges the consensus view among scholars that in the wake of the Scopes trial, fundamentalism retreated into the political and cultural background, a viewpoint which is evidenced in the movie \"Inherit the Wind\" and the majority of contemporary historical accounts. Rather, he argues, the cause of fundamentalism's retreat was the death of its leader, Bryan. Most fundamentalists saw the trial as a victory rather than a defeat, but Bryan's death soon afterward created a leadership void that no other fundamentalist leader could fill. Unlike the other fundamentalist leaders, Bryan brought name recognition, respectability, and the ability to forge a broad-based coalition of fundamentalist religious groups to argue in favor of the anti-evolutionist position.\nGatewood (1969) analyzes the transition from the anti-evolution crusade of the 1920s to the creation science movement of the 1960s. Despite some similarities between these two causes, the creation science movement represented a shift from religious to pseudoscientific objections to Darwin's theory. Creation science also differed in terms of popular leadership, rhetorical tone, and sectional focus. It lacked a prestigious leader like Bryan, utilized pseudoscientific argument rather than religious rhetoric, and was a product of California and Michigan rather than the Southern United States.\nWebb (1991) traces the political and legal struggles between strict creationists and Darwinists to influence the extent to which evolution would be taught as science in Arizona and California schools. After Scopes was convicted, creationists throughout the United States sought similar anti-evolution laws for their states. These included Reverends R. S. Beal and Aubrey L. Moore in Arizona and members of the Creation Research Society in California, all supported by distinguished laymen. They sought to ban evolution as a topic for study, or at least relegate it to the status of unproven theory perhaps taught alongside the biblical version of creation. Educators, scientists, and other distinguished laymen favored evolution. This struggle occurred later in the Southwestern United States than in other US areas and persisted through the Sputnik era.\nIn recent times, the courts have heard cases on whether or not the Book of Genesis's creation account should be taught in science classrooms alongside evolution, most notably in the 2005 federal court case \"Kitzmiller v. Dover Area School District\". Creationism was presented under the banner of intelligent design, with the book \"Of Pandas and People\" being its textbook. The trial ended with the judge deciding that teaching intelligent design in a science class was unconstitutional as it was a religious belief and not science.\nThe original fundamentalist movement divided along clearly defined lines within conservative evangelical Protestantism as issues progressed. Many groupings, large and small, were produced by this schism. Neo-evangelicalism, the Heritage movement, and Paleo-Orthodoxy have all developed distinct identities, but none of them acknowledge any more than an historical overlap with the fundamentalist movement, and the term is seldom used of them. The broader term \"evangelical\" includes fundamentalists as well as people with similar or identical religious beliefs who do not engage the outside challenge to the Bible as actively.\nWriting in 2023, conservative Christian journalist David French quotes a former president of the Southern Baptist Convention's Ethics &amp; Religious Liberty Commission, Richard Land, as identifying fundamentalism as \"far more a psychology than a theology,\" with characteristics shared by competing Christian theologies and competing religions. According to French, that psychology is one that shares \"three key traits\": certainty (of a mind unclouded by doubt), ferocity (against perceived enemies of their religion) and solidarity (of \"comrades in the foxhole\", a virtue surpassing even piety in importance).\nChristian right.\nThe latter half of the twentieth century witnessed a surge of interest in organized political activism by U.S. fundamentalists. Dispensational fundamentalists viewed the 1948 establishment of the state of Israel as an important sign of the fulfillment of biblical prophecy, and support for Israel became the centerpiece of their approach to U.S. foreign policy. United States Supreme Court decisions also ignited fundamentalists' interest in organized politics, particularly \"Engel v. Vitale\" in 1962, which prohibited state-sanctioned prayer in public schools, and \"Abington School District v. Schempp\" in 1963, which prohibited mandatory Bible reading in public schools. By the time Ronald Reagan ran for the presidency in 1980, fundamentalist preachers, like the prohibitionist ministers of the early 20th century, were organizing their congregations to vote for supportive candidates.\nLeaders of the newly political fundamentalism included Rob Grant and Jerry Falwell. Beginning with Grant's American Christian Cause in 1974, Christian Voice throughout the 1970s and Falwell's Moral Majority in the 1980s, the Christian Right began to have a major impact on American politics. In the 1980s and 1990s, the Christian Right was influencing elections and policy with groups such as the Family Research Council (founded 1981 by James Dobson) and the Christian Coalition (formed in 1989 by Pat Robertson) helping conservative politicians, especially Republicans, to win state and national elections.\nAustralia.\nA major organization of fundamentalist, pentecostal churches in Australia is the International Network of Churches, formerly known as the \"Christian Outreach Centre\".\nA former influential group was the Logos Foundation. The Logos Foundation, led by Howard Carter, was a controversial Christian ministry in the 1970s and 1980s that promoted Reconstructionist, Restorationist, and Dominionist theology. They also actively campaigned for several candidates for Queensland, Australia public office that shared their values (e.g., anti-abortion). The Logos Foundation disbanded shortly after an adulterous affair by Carter became public in 1990.\nRussia.\nIn Russia, Christian fundamentalism is often based around the Russian Orthodox Church or the Russian Orthodox Old-Rite Church. Orthodox Christian fundamentalism was often connected strongly to a sense of Russian nationalism, since the Russian Orthodox Church often has a strong connection to the Russian state. This Church-state connection has arguably existed since the time of Vladimir the Great's conversion.\nIn 2013, composer Andrei Kormukhin and athlete Vladimir Nosov founded the Orthodox fundamentalist and conservative Christian organization known as the Sorok Sorokov Movement. The Sorok Sorokov Movement was founded in reaction to Pussy Riot's 2012 protests, which were themselves against increasingly socially conservative policies in Russia, including moves towards decriminalizing wifebeating and criminalizing homosexuality. The Sorok Sorokov Movement has received support from many priests of the Russian Orthodox Church, most notably celebrate priest Vsevolod Chaplin. Chaplin in particular supported the creation of \"Orthodox squads\" in order to punish people from carrying out \"blasphemous acts\" in religious places. Some have argues that the Sorok Sorkov Movement has been involved in protecting the construction of Russian Orthodox churches in Moscow, though the facts have been hard to verify with this. Just as many sources have argued that these acts were more in line with violent vigilantism against LGBT people in Russia. The Sorok Sorokov Movement has also been connected to the Russian far-right, including neo-Nazis and Third Positionists. The Sorok Sorokov Movement has its own political party as well, called For the Family.\nMany far-right Russian Christian nationalists have been highly supportive of Russia's unprovoked war with Ukraine. One such group supportive of Russian Orthodox Christian fundamentalist-nationalism is the Union of Orthodox Banner-Bearers. Known for their book burnings and political rallies, their primary goal is to see a return of the Russian Tsar as supreme autocrat of Russia. The group as a particular affinity for Tsar Nicolas II. The group has at times referred to Russian president Vladimir Putin as a modern Tsar, though it is unclear as to whether or not this is a message of support for Putin or not.\nBy denomination.\nIndependent Baptist Churches.\nBible Baptist Churches, Fundamental Baptist Churches or Independent Baptist Churches refuse any form of ecclesial authority other than that of the local church. Great emphasis is placed on the literal interpretation of the Bible as the primary method of Bible study as well as the biblical inerrancy and the infallibility of their interpretation. Dispensationalism is common among Independent Baptists. They are opposed to any ecumenical movement with denominations that do not have the same beliefs. Many Independent Fundamentalist Baptist (IFB) churches adhere to only using the King James Version, a position known as King James Onlyism.\nMethodism.\nFundamental Methodism includes several connexions, such as the Evangelical Methodist Church and Fundamental Methodist Conference, along with their seminaries such as Breckbill Bible College. Additionally, Methodist connexions in the conservative holiness movement, such as the Allegheny Wesleyan Methodist Connection and Evangelical Methodist Church Conference, herald the beliefs of \"separation from the world, from false doctrines, from other ecclesiastical connections\" as well as place heavy emphasis on practicing holiness standards.\nNondenominationalism.\nIn nondenominational Christianity of the evangelical variety, the word \"biblical\" or \"independent\" often appears in the name of the church or denomination. The independence of the church is claimed and affiliation with a Christian denomination is infrequent, although there are fundamentalist denominations.\nReformed fundamentalism.\nReformed fundamentalism includes those denominations in the Reformed tradition (which includes the Continental Reformed, Presbyterian, Reformed Anglican and Reformed Baptist Churches) who adhere to the doctrine of biblical infallibility and lay heavy emphasis on historic confessions of faith, such as the Westminster Confession.\nExamples of Reformed fundamentalist denominations include the Orthodox Presbyterian Church and the Free Presbyterian Church of Ulster.\nCriticism.\nFundamentalists' literal interpretation of the Bible has been criticized by practitioners of biblical criticism for failing to take into account the circumstances in which the Christian Bible was written. Critics claim that this \"literal interpretation\" is not in keeping with the message which the scripture intended to convey when it was written, and it also uses the Bible for political purposes by presenting God \"more as a God of judgement and punishment than as a God of love and mercy.\"\nIn contrast to the higher criticism, fundamentalism claims to keep the Bible open for the people. However, through the complexity of the dispensational framework, it has actually forced lay readers to remain dependent upon the inductive methods of Bible teachers and ministers.\nChristian fundamentalism has been linked to child abuse as well as corporal punishment, with a number of practitioners believing that the Bible tells them to spank their children. Artists have addressed the issues of Christian fundamentalism, with one providing a slogan \"America's Premier Child Abuse Brand.\"\nResearchers find evidence anchoring Christian fundamentalism with beliefs in conspiracy theories such as modern flat Earth beliefs. Fundamentalists have attempted and continue to attempt to teach intelligent design, a hypothesis with creationism as its base, in lieu of evolution in public schools. This has resulted in legal challenges such as the federal case of \"Kitzmiller v. Dover Area School District\" which resulted in the United States District Court for the Middle District of Pennsylvania ruling the teaching of intelligent design to be unconstitutional due to its religious roots.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "72768", "revid": "16247599", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72768", "title": "Jacob Riis", "text": "American photographer, journalist and activist (1849\u20131914)\nJacob August Riis ( ; May 3, 1849 \u2013 May 26, 1914) was a Danish-American social reformer, \"muck-raking\" journalist, and social documentary photographer. He contributed significantly to the cause of urban reform in the United States of America at the turn of the twentieth century. He is known for using his photographic and journalistic talents to help the impoverished in New York City; those impoverished New Yorkers were the subject of most of his prolific writings and photography.\nRiis endorsed the implementation of \"model tenements\" in New York with the help of humanitarian Lawrence Veiller. He was an early proponent of the newly practicable casual photography and one of the first to adopt photographic flash. While living in New York, Riis experienced poverty and became a police reporter writing about the quality of life in the slums. He attempted to alleviate the poor living conditions of poor people by exposing these conditions to the middle and upper classes.\nEarly life.\nBorn in May 3, 1849 in Ribe, Denmark, Jacob Riis was the third of 15 children (one of whom, an orphaned niece, was fostered) of Niels Edward Riis, a schoolteacher and writer for the local Ribe newspaper, and Carolina Riis (\"n\u00e9e\" Bendsine Lundholm), a homemaker. Of the 15, only Jacob, one sister, and the foster sister survived into the twentieth century. Riis was influenced by his father, whose school Riis delighted in disrupting. His father persuaded him to read and improve his English via Charles Dickens's magazine \"All the Year Round\" and the novels of James Fenimore Cooper.\nJacob reportedly had a happy childhood, but experienced tragedy at the age of eleven when his brother Theodore, a year younger, drowned. He never forgot his mother's grief.\nAt age eleven or twelve, he donated all the money he had to a poor Ribe family, living in a squalid house if they cleaned it. The tenants took the money and obliged. When he told his mother, she went to help.\nThough his father hoped that Jacob would have a literary career, Jacob wanted to be a carpenter. When he was 16, he became fond of Elisabeth Gj\u00f8rtz, the 12-year-old adopted daughter of the owner of the company for which he worked as an apprentice carpenter. The father disapproved of the boy's blundering attentions, and Riis was forced to travel to Copenhagen to complete his carpentry apprenticeship. In 1868, Riis returned to Ribe at age 19. Discouraged by poor job availability in the region and Gj\u00f8rtz's disfavor of his marriage proposal, Riis decided to emigrate to the United States.\nMigration to the United States.\nRiis immigrated to America in 1870, when he was 21 years old, seeking employment as a carpenter. He first traveled in a small boat from Copenhagen to Glasgow, where on May 18 he boarded the steamer \"Iowa\", traveling in steerage. He carried $40 donated by friends (he had paid $50 for the passage himself); a gold locket with a strand of Elisabeth's hair, presented by her mother; and letters of introduction to the Danish Consul, Mr. Goodall (later president of the American Bank Note Company), a friend of the family since his rescue from a shipwreck at Ribe.\nRiis disembarked in New York on June 5, on that day spending half of the $40 his friends had given him on a revolver for defense against human or animal predators.\nWhen Riis arrived in New York City, he was one of a large number of migrants and immigrants, seeking prosperity in a more industrialized environment, who came to urban areas in the years after the American Civil War. Twenty-four million people relocated to urban areas, causing their population to increase eightfold. The demographics of American urban areas became significantly more heterogeneous as many immigrants arrived, creating ethnic enclaves often more populous than many of the cities of their homelands. \"In the 1880s 334,000 people were crammed into a single square mile of the Lower East Side, making it the most densely populated place on earth. They were packed into filthy, disease-ridden tenements, 10 or 15 to a room, and the well-off knew nothing about them and cared less.\"\nAfter five days, during which he used almost all his money, Riis found work as a carpenter at Brady's Bend Iron Works on the Allegheny River above Pittsburgh. After a few days of that, he began mining for increased pay, but quickly resumed carpentry. Learning on July 19, 1870, that France had declared war on Germany, he expected that Denmark would join France to avenge the Prussian seizure of Schleswig, and determined to fight for France. He returned to New York, and, having pawned most of his possessions and without money, attempted to enlist at the French consulate, but was told that there was no plan to send a volunteer army from America. Pawning his revolver, he walked out of New York City and collapsed from exhaustion. On waking, he walked to Fordham College where a Catholic priest served him breakfast.\nAfter a brief period of farm working and odd jobs at Mount Vernon, New York, Riis returned to New York City, where he read in The New York \"Sun\" that the newspaper was recruiting soldiers for the war. Riis rushed there to enlist, but the editor, whom he later realized was Charles Anderson Dana, claimed or affected ignorance, but offered the famished Riis a dollar for breakfast; Riis indignantly refused. Riis was destitute, at one time sleeping on a tombstone and surviving on windfall apples. Still, he found work at a brickyard at Little Washington in New Jersey, and was there for six weeks until he heard that a group of volunteers was going to the war. Thereupon he left for New York.\nOn arrival, Riis found that the rumor was true but that he had arrived too late. He pleaded with the French consul, who expelled him. He made other attempts to enlist, none successful. As autumn began, Riis was destitute, without a job. He survived on scavenged food and handouts from Delmonico's Restaurant, and slept in public areas or in a foul-smelling police lodging-house. At one point, Riis's only companion was a stray dog. One morning he awoke in a police lodging-house to find that his gold locket, with its strand of Elisabeth's hair, had been stolen. He complained to the sergeant, who became enraged and expelled him. Riis was devastated. The story became a favorite of Riis's. \nOne of his personal victories, he later confessed, was not using his eventual fame to ruin the career of the offending officer. Disgusted, he left New York, buying a passage on a ferry with the silk handkerchief that was his last possession. By doing odd jobs and stowing away on freight trains, Riis eventually reached Philadelphia, where he appealed to the Danish Consul, Ferdinand Myhlertz, for help and was cared for, for two weeks by the Consul and his wife.\nMyhlertz sent Riis, now dressed properly in a suit, to the home of an old classmate in Jamestown, New York, in the western part of the state. Riis worked as a carpenter throughout the Scandinavian enclave in surrounding communities, and performed a variety of other assorted jobs. He achieved sufficient financial stability to find the time to experiment as a writer, in both Danish and English, although his attempt to get a job at a Buffalo, New York newspaper was unsuccessful, and magazines repeatedly rejected his submissions.\nRiis was in much demand as a carpenter, a major reason being the low prices he charged. After a while, Riis returned to New York City. He was most successful as a salesman, particularly of flatirons and fluting irons, becoming promoted to the sales representative of them for the state of Illinois. In Chicago, he was cheated of both his money and his stock and had to return to an earlier base in Pittsburgh where he found that the subordinates he had left to sell in Pennsylvania had cheated him in the same manner. With funds tight, and while bedridden with a fever, Riis learned from a letter that Elisabeth, the former object of his affection, was engaged to a cavalry officer. Once recovered from his illness, Riis returned to New York City, selling flatirons along the way.\nIn his earlier years, Riis had lost six of his brothers to tuberculosis, which was occurring in alarming proportions in Europe and the United States. In 1906 Riis received a letter from a family member in Denmark, with a postage stamp and Christmas seal affixed to it, informing him of the great success Christmas seals were experiencing in Denmark in raising funds to fight tuberculosis. Given the plight that befell his brothers, Riis became very interested, especially in the efforts of Einar Holb\u00f8ll who was responsible for issuing the Christmas seals sold in Danish post offices. The sale of Christmas seals had experienced great success in Denmark and Sweden.\nInspired by the news, Riis was compelled to write an article in a magazine about the dreaded disease and the success of Christmas seals, entitled \"Christmas stamps\", urging that such a program be adopted in the United States. Though his idea was supported by a few doctors and hospitals, it was generally shrugged off by the wider population, who assumed there was simply no way to deal with the disease. When Emily Bissell, secretary of the Delaware Red Cross, read Riis's article she thought the idea had great promise. After overcoming initial skepticism she persuaded a printer to produce 50,000 Christmas seals on credit. After getting permission from the Delaware Postmaster, they were sold in various post offices in Delaware. The idea quickly took hold. Through the efforts of Jacob Riis and Emily Bissell, along with the Red Cross, the first Christmas seals saw great success in raising funds in the United States in 1907 and thereafter.\nCareer.\nEarly journalism.\nRiis noticed an advertisement by a Long Island newspaper looking for an editor, he applied and was appointed city editor. He quickly realized why the job had been available: the editor-in-chief was dishonest and indebted. Riis left within two weeks.\nOnce again unemployed, Riis returned to the Five Points neighborhood. He was sitting outside the Cooper Union one day when the principal of the school where he had earlier learned telegraphy happened to notice him. He said that if Riis had nothing better to do, then the New York News Association was looking for a trainee. After one more night and a hurried wash in a horse trough, Riis went for an interview. Despite his disheveled appearance, he was sent for a test assignment to observe and write about a luncheon at the Astor House. Riis covered the event competently and got the job.\nRiis was able to write about both the rich and impoverished immigrant communities. He did his job well and was promoted to editor of a weekly newspaper, the \"News\". However, this newspaper, the periodical of a political group, soon became bankrupt. Around the same time, Riis got a letter from home informing him that both his older brothers, an aunt, and Elisabeth Gj\u00f8rtz's fianc\u00e9 had died. Riis wrote to Elisabeth to propose, and with $75 of his savings and promissory notes, he bought the \"News\" company.\nRiis worked hard at his newspaper and soon paid his debts. Newly independent, he was able to target the politicians who had previously been his employers. Meanwhile, he received a provisional acceptance from Elisabeth, who asked him to come to Denmark for her, saying \"We will strive together for all that is noble and good\". Conveniently, the politicians offered to buy back the newspaper for five times the price Riis had paid; he was thus able to arrive in Denmark with a substantial amount of money.\nAfter some months in Denmark, the newly married couple arrived in New York. Riis worked briefly as editor of a south Brooklyn newspaper, the \"Brooklyn News.\" To supplement his income, he used a \"magic lantern\" projector to advertise in Brooklyn, projecting either onto a sheet hung between two trees or onto a screen behind a window. The novelty was a success, and Riis and a friend relocated to upstate New York and Pennsylvania as itinerant advertisers. However, this enterprise ended when the pair became involved in an armed dispute between striking railroad workers and the police, after which Riis quickly returned to New York City.\nYears at the \"Tribune\".\nA neighbor of Riis, who was the city editor of the \"New-York Tribune\", recommended Riis for a short-term contract. Riis did well and was offered the job of police reporter. He was based in a press office across from police headquarters on Mulberry Street. \"Nicknamed 'Death's Thoroughfare'\", Riis's biographer Alexander Alland writes, \"It was here, where the street crooks its elbow at the Five Points, that the streets and numerous alleys radiated in all directions, forming the foul core of the New York slums.\"\nDuring these stints as a police reporter, Riis worked the most crime-ridden and impoverished slums of the city. Through his own experiences in the poorhouses, and witnessing the conditions of the poor in the city slums, he decided to make a difference for them. Working night-shift duty in the immigrant communities of Manhattan's Lower East Side, Riis developed a tersely melodramatic writing style and he became one of the earliest reformist journalists.\nPhotography.\nRiis wondered how to show the squalor of which he wrote more vividly than his words could express. He tried sketching but was incompetent at it. Camera lenses of the 1880s were slow, as was the emulsion of photographic plates; photography thus did not seem to be of any use for reporting about conditions of life in dark interiors. In early 1887, Riis was startled to read that \"a way had been discovered to take pictures by flashlight. The darkest corner might be photographed that way.\" The German innovation, by Adolf Miethe and Johannes Gaedicke, flash powder was a mixture of magnesium with potassium chlorate and some antimony sulfide for added stability; the powder was used in a pistol-like device that fired cartridges. This was the introduction of flash photography.\nRecognizing the potential of the flash, Riis informed a friend, John Nagle, chief of the Bureau of Vital Statistics in the City Health Department who was also a keen amateur photographer. Nagle found two more photographer friends, Henry Piffard and Richard Hoe Lawrence, and the four of them began to photograph the slums. Their first report was published in the New York newspaper \"The Sun\" on February 12, 1888; it was an unsigned article by Riis which described its author as \"an energetic gentleman, who combines in his person, though not in practice, the two dignities of deacon in a Long Island church and a police reporter in New York\". The \"pictures of Gotham's crime and misery by night and day\" are described as \"a foundation for a lecture called 'The Other Half: How It Lives and Dies in New York.' to give at church and Sunday school exhibitions, and the like.\" The article was illustrated by twelve line drawings based on the photographs.\nRiis and his photographers were among the first Americans to use flash photography. Pistol lamps were dangerous and looked threatening, and would soon be replaced by another method for which Riis lit magnesium powder on a frying pan. The process involved removing the lens cap, igniting the flash powder and replacing the lens cap; the time taken to ignite the flash powder sometimes allowed a visible image blurring created by the flash.\nRiis's first team soon grew tired of the late hours, and Riis had to find other help. Both his assistants were lazy and one was dishonest, selling plates for which Riis had paid. Riis sued him in court successfully. Nagle suggested that Riis should become self-sufficient, so in January 1888, Riis paid $25 for a 4\u00d75 box camera, plate holders, a tripod and equipment for developing and printing. He took the equipment to the potter's field cemetery on Hart Island to practice, making two exposures. The result was seriously overexposed but successful.\nFor three years, Riis combined his own photographs with others commissioned of professionals, donations by amateurs and purchased lantern slides, all of which formed the basis for his photographic archive.\nBecause of the nighttime work, he was able to photograph the worst elements of the New York slums, the dark streets, tenement apartments, and \"stale-beer\" dives, and documented the hardships faced by the poor and criminals, especially in the vicinity of notorious Mulberry Street.\nIn 1897, his photojournalism of Mulberry Street caused New York officials to transform the slum's \"foul core\" of Mulberry Bend into Mulberry Park. The park, today known as Columbus Park, significantly improved conditions in the neighborhood. Riis praised the park's creation, expressing that the youth now had a place to \"romp in\" and play, rather than \"smashing lamps and windows and getting themselves arrested.\"\nPublic speaking.\nRiis accumulated a supply of photography and attempted to submit illustrated essays to magazines. But when an editor at \"Harper's New Monthly\" Magazine said that he liked the photographs but not the writing, and would find another writer, Riis was despondent about magazine publication and instead thought of speaking directly to the public.\nThis was not easy. The obvious venue would be a church, but several churches\u2014including Riis's own\u2014demurred, fearing either that the talks would offend the churchgoers' sensibilities or that they would offend rich and powerful landlords. Adolph Schauffler (of the City Mission Society) and Josiah Strong arranged to sponsor Riis's lecture at the Broadway Tabernacle church. Lacking money, Riis partnered with W.\u00a0L. Craig, a Health Department clerk.\nRiis and Craig's lectures, illustrated with lantern slides, made little money for the pair, but they both greatly increased the number of people exposed to what Riis had to say and also enabled him to meet people who had the power to effect change, notably Charles Henry Parkhurst and an editor of \"Scribner's Magazine\", who invited him to submit an illustrated article.\nBooks.\nAn eighteen-page article by Riis, \"How the Other Half Lives\", appeared in the Christmas 1889 edition of \"Scribner's Magazine\". It included nineteen of his photographs rendered as line drawings. Its publication brought an invitation to expand the material into an entire book. Riis, who favored Henry George's 'single tax' system and absorbed George's theories and analysis, used that opportunity to attack landlords \"with Georgian fervor\".\nRiis had already been thinking of writing a book and began writing it during nights. Days were for reporting for the \"New York Sun\", evenings for public speaking. \"How the Other Half Lives\", subtitled \"Studies Among the Tenements of New York\", was published in 1890. The book reused the eighteen line drawings that had appeared in the \"Scribner's\" article and also seventeen reproductions using the halftone method, and thus \"[representing] the first extensive use of halftone photographic reproductions in a book\". The magazine \"Sun and Shade\" had done the same for a year or so beginning 1888.\n\"How the Other Half Lives\" sold well and was much quoted. Reviews were generally good, although some reviewers criticized it for oversimplifying and exaggerating. Riis attributed the success to a popular interest in social amelioration stimulated by William Booth's \"In Darkest England and the Way Out\", and also to Ward McAllister's \"Society as I Have Found It\", a portrait of the moneyed class. The book encouraged imitations such as \"Darkness and Daylight; or, Lights and Shadows of New York Life\" (1892), which somehow appropriated Riis's own photographs.\n\"Children of the Poor\" (1892) was a sequel in which Riis wrote of particular children he had encountered.\n\"The Making of an American\" (1901), an autobiography, follows Riis's early life in Denmark and his struggles as an immigrant in the United States. The book also describes how Riis became a reporter and how his work in immigrant enclaves kindled his desire for social reforms. Riis organized his autobiography chronologically, but each chapter illustrates a broader theme that America is a land of opportunity for those who are bold enough to take chances on their future. The autobiography is mostly straightforward, but Riis is not sure if his past should be told as a \"love story\", \"if I am, to tell the truth ... I don't see how it can be helped.\" Although much of it is biographical, Riis also lays out his opinions about how immigrants like himself can succeed in the United States. Chapter 7 is distinct because Riis's wife, Elizabeth, describes her life in Denmark before she married Riis.\nWhereas \"How the Other Half Lives\", and some of Riis's other books received praise from critics, he received a mixed reception for his autobiography. A \"New York Times\" reviewer dismissed it as a vanity project written for \"close and intimate friends\". He admired Riis's \"dogged pluck\" and \"indomitable optimism\", but dismissed an \"almost colossal egotism\u2014made up of equal parts of vanity and conceit\" as a major characteristic of the author. The reviewer anticipated the book would be \"eagerly read by that large majority who have a craving and perennial interest in the personal and emotional incidents\" within Riis's life. \nRiis anticipated such a critique, \"I have never been able to satisfactorily explain the great run 'How The Other Half Lives' had ... like Topsy, it grew.\" Other newspapers, such as the \"New York Tribune\", published kinder reviews. Two years later, another reviewer reported that Riis's story was widely reprinted and dubbed him as one of the \"best-known authors and ... one of the most popular lecturers in the United States.\"\nThe value of Riis's autobiography lies in the description of his origins as a social reformer. His early experiences in Ribe gave Riis a yardstick with which to measure tenement dwellers' quality of life. The account of the development of his powers of observation through his experiences as a poor immigrant lent authenticity to his news articles and larger works. Its themes of self-sufficiency, perseverance, and material success are prime examples of an archetype that successful Europeans like Riis used to demonstrate the exceptional opportunities that seem to exist only in the United States. In spite of its triumphalist outlook, \"The Making of an American\" remains useful as a source for students of immigration history and sociology who want to learn more about the author of \"How The Other Half Lives\" and the social reform movement that he helped to define.\nTheodore Roosevelt.\nJacob Riis had both a close friendship and on-going, professional relationship with political figure Theodore Roosevelt. Their relationship began in 1895 when Roosevelt was appointed as president of the Board of Commissioners of the New York City Police Department. He asked Riis to show him nighttime police work. During their first tour, the pair found that nine out of ten patrolmen were missing. Riis wrote about this for the next day's newspaper, and for the rest of Roosevelt's term the force was more attentive. Riis then continued to serve as an advisor to Roosevelt both on the local and eventually federal level.\nRoosevelt was greatly inspired by Riis's work. He personally ensured the closure of the police-managed lodging rooms in which Riis had suffered during his first years in New York. After reading the expos\u00e9s, Roosevelt was so deeply affected by Riis's sense of justice that he befriended Riis for life, later remarking, \"Jacob Riis, whom I am tempted to call the best American I ever knew, although he was already a young man when he came hither from Denmark\".\nAfter Roosevelt became president, he wrote a tribute to Riis in the March 1901 edition of \"McClure's\" Magazine. He wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Recently a man, well qualified to pass judgment, alluded to Mr. Jacob A. Riis as \"the most useful citizen of New York\". Those fellow citizens of Mr. Riis who best know his work will be most apt to agree with this statement. The countless evils which lurk in the dark corners of our civic institutions, which stalk abroad in the slums, and have their permanent abode in the crowded tenement houses, have met in Mr. Riis the most formidable opponent ever encountered by them in New York City.\nRoosevelt's three-page tribute honored Jacob Riis for his gift of expression and his ability to make others see what he saw and feel what he felt. Roosevelt viewed Riis as a powerful promoter of change who allowed no failure to stop him from seeking reform. As long as Riis continued pursuing useful work, Roosevelt believed he would have no trouble receiving more than enough support.\nRoosevelt believed society would benefit from more active reformers such as Riis. In fact, it was in part due to Riis's influence that Roosevelt instituted the White House Conference on Children as a means to aid the children exposed in \"How the Other Half Lives\" and \"Children of the Tenements\".\nFor his part, Riis wrote a campaign biography of Roosevelt that praised him.\nPublic works.\nA particularly important effort by Riis was his exposure of the condition of New York's water supply. His five-column story \"Some Things We Drink\", in the August 21, 1891, edition of the New York \"Evening Sun\", included six photographs (later lost). Riis wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I took my camera and went up in the watershed photographing my evidence wherever I found it. Populous towns sewered directly into our drinking water. I went to the doctors and asked how many days a vigorous cholera bacillus may live and multiply in running water. About seven, said they. My case was made.\nThe story resulted in the purchase by New York City of areas around the New Croton Reservoir, and may well have saved New Yorkers from an epidemic of cholera.\nRiis tried hard to have the slums around Five Points demolished and replaced with a park. His writings resulted in the Drexel Committee investigation of unsafe tenements; this resulted in the Small Park Act of 1887. Riis was not invited to the eventual opening of the park on June 15, 1897, but went all the same, together with Lincoln Steffens. In the last speech, the street cleaning commissioner credited Riis for the park and led the public in giving him three cheers of \"Hooray, Jacob Riis!\" Other parks also were created, and Riis was popularly credited with them as well.\nLater life and death.\nIn 1901, Riis wrote his autobiography, \"The Making of an American\". His daughter, Clara C. Riis, married William Clarence Fiske. His son, John Riis (1882\u20131946), served in Gifford Pinchot's new United States Forest Service from 1907 to 1913 as a ranger and forest supervisor on national forests in Utah, California and Oregon. He chronicled his time in the Forest Service in his 1937 book, \"Ranger Trails\". Another son, Edward V. Riis, was appointed US Director of Public Information in Copenhagen toward the end of World War I; he spoke against antisemitism. \nA third son, Roger Williams Riis (1894\u20131953), was also a reporter and activist. In 1905, Jacob Riis's wife Elisabeth became ill and died. Riis remarried in 1907, and with his new wife, Mary Phillips, relocated to a farm in Barre, Massachusetts.\nRiis died at the farm on May 26, 1914. His grave is marked by an unmarked granite boulder in Riverside Cemetery, in Barre, Massachusetts.\nHis second wife lived until 1967, continuing work on the farm, working on Wall Street and teaching classes at Columbia University.\nSocial attitudes.\nRiis's concern for the poor and destitute often caused people to assume he disliked the rich. However, Riis showed no sign of discomfort among the affluent, often asking them for their support. Although seldom involved with party politics, Riis was sufficiently disgusted by the corruption of Tammany Hall to change from being an endorser of the Democratic Party to endorse the Republican Party. \nThe period just before the Spanish\u2013American War was difficult for Riis. He was approached by liberals who suspected that protests of alleged Spanish mistreatment of the Cubans was merely a ruse intended to provide a pretext for US expansionism; perhaps to avoid offending his friend Roosevelt, Riis refused the offer of good payment to investigate this and made nationalist statements.\nCriticism.\nWhile the impact of Riis's work on social reform is undeniable, Riis's own biases, especially against Jewish immigrants, are also present in his work. His audience included middle-class reformers, and critics say that he had no love for the traditional lifestyles of the people he portrayed. Stange (1989) argues that Riis \"recoiled from workers and working-class culture\" and appealed primarily to the anxieties and fears of his middle-class audience. Riis portrayed a widespread fear among Anglo-Saxons that America was quickly changing as a result of the influx of immigrants, and that \u201cAmerican family values\u201d were fading. \nRiis has been criticized for allowing his Christian beliefs to affect his work. Riis's work often utilized elements of the social gospel, which at the time didn't draw criticism, but current critics note that this framework led to some of his biases against immigrant populations. In 2008, Swienty wrote, \"Riis was quite impatient with most of his fellow immigrants; he was quick to judge and condemn those who failed to assimilate, and he did not refrain from expressing his contempt.\" Riis's photography is also criticized for representing immigrant groups as monochromatic.\nSome critics have questioned his right to interfere with the lives and choices of others. Libertarian economist Thomas Sowell (2001) argues that immigrants during Riis's time were typically willing to live in cramped, unpleasant circumstances as a deliberate short-term strategy that allowed them to save more than half their earnings to help family members come to America, with every intention of relocating to more comfortable lodgings eventually. Many tenement renters physically resisted the well-intentioned relocation efforts of reformers like Riis, Sowell states, because other lodgings were too costly to permit the high rate of savings possible in the tenements.\nThere were other reform attempts to relocate immigrants further outside the city, such as Williamsburg or Brownsville. These also failed, as living conditions weren't much better and those living there still had to travel into the city for work. According to Sowell, Riis's own personal experiences were the rule rather than the exception during his era: like most immigrants and low-income persons, he lived in the tenements only temporarily before gradually earning more income and relocating to different lodgings.\nThe harshest criticisms that Riis faced were for his depictions of Eastern European Jews. Gurock (1981) says Riis was insensitive to the needs and fears of East European Jewish immigrants who flooded into New York at this time. Fried (1997) criticizes what he calls Riis's \u201cimage of Jews as alien, exotic, unassimilable race, and a people resistant to the promises of Christian universalism.\" Riis's written work about the Jews invoked anti-semitic tropes such as saying \u201cmoney is their god\u201d. \nRiis saw the Jews as antiquated and mysterious. He called the area of the Lower East Side with the most Jewish immigrants Jewtown, with an \u201comnipresent and unfathomable peddler\u201d harking back to the trope of the Jewish usurer, and that entering a Jewish house of mourning meant \u201cgoing back 2000 years\u201d. Fried notes that as Riis gained popularity he moderated his comments about Jews however critics still point to his earlier works as influencing his biases later on in life.\nThe Jews weren't the only immigrant group he stereotyped in his work, in an effort to explain why these groups \u201chindered the growth of a uniform culture\u201d. In Riis's books, according to some historians, \"The Jews are nervous and inquisitive, the Orientals are sinister, the Italians are unsanitary.\" For example, early on in his career he stated that \u201cthe Chinese must go\u201d and then 20 years later \u201conly as regards to the Asiatic we have made a flat verdict of exclusion\u201d. Riis also criticized Italian immigrants stating that they \u201creproduce conditions of destitution and disorder\u201d.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "72771", "revid": "24880950", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72771", "title": "Urus", "text": "Urus may refer to:\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "72773", "revid": "34975998", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72773", "title": "Gyro Gearloose", "text": "Disney comics character\nGyro Gearloose ( ) is a cartoon character created in 1952 by Carl Barks for Disney comics. An anthropomorphic chicken, he is part of the Donald Duck universe, appearing in comic book stories as a friend of Donald Duck, Scrooge McDuck, and anyone who is associated with them. He was also featured in the animated series \"DuckTales\". Gyro first appeared in the Carl Barks comic \"Gladstone's Terrible Secret\" (\"Walt Disney's Comics and Stories\" #140, May 1952), and was the regular lead character in 4-page backup stories in Barks' issues of \"Uncle Scrooge\", starting with issue #13 (March 1956) and continuing through #41 (March 1963).\nBiography.\nGyro is Duckburg's ingenious inventor, even though his inventions sometimes do not work the way he wants them to. His outrageous productivity is presented as a factor in the quality of his inventions. Because Gyro is always coming up with new ideas, the fact that his inventions often lack an important feature will often cause trouble for both Scrooge and Donald, who are known to have frequently bought his inventions. He is known for being good-natured towards others. Gyro is often assisted by his Little Helper (or just \"Helper\"), who is a small anthropomorphic robot with a light bulb for a head. Besides Little Helper, he also has a \"thinking cap\", a hat shaped like a combination of a rooftop and a nest, with three black birds living inside it. Wearing this thinking cap helps Gyro figure out particularly difficult problems, but it only works if the birds are currently nesting in the cap. Some stories have involved the birds leaving Gyro's thinking cap, resulting in the cap becoming ineffective. \nSome of Gyro's relatives include his father Fulton Gearloose, his grandfather Ratchet Gearloose, and Newton Gearloose, his nephew. Occasionally there have been stories about Gyro's girlfriend Matilda. In some stories, Gyro's primary rival is Emil Eagle, although he is also antagonized by the Beagle Boys and Magica De Spell. With his inventions, he is also a very important ally of Donald Duck's alter ego, Paperinik, in the Italian Disney comics. Consistent with the two \"G's\" in his name, he had bins on his shelves containing odds and ends, which he labeled \"Gewgaws\", \"Gimcracks\", \"Gadgets\", and \"Gizmos\".\nAppearances in other media.\nGyro made his first animated appearance in a 1980s full-length movie, the \"Sport Goofy in Soccermania\" television special, with only one line of dialogue, voiced by Will Ryan: \"Scrooge parting with a million dollars?\" In the subsequent 1987 animated series \"DuckTales\", Gyro became a regular character, with Hal Smith supplying his voice while Barry Gordon records it in several episodes. Among Gyro's noteworthy inventions in the series was the creation of the GizmoDuck suit, intended to be worn by a security guard for Scrooge McDuck's Money Bin. Although Gyro's shop and house are on the south side of Duckburg, he was born on the north side; a sign marks his birthplace and mentions one of his inventions: topless hats.\nIn high school, young Gyro was a baseball pitcher with his \"madball\" pitch \u2014 actually only a straight-ball pitch. When Gyro is forced to pitch for the Northside, pitting an \"unhittable\" baseball against another of his inventions, an \"unmissable\" baseball bat made for the Southside team, the result is total chaos.\nGyro is a classic example of an eccentric genius. Once he persuaded the citizens of Duckburg to rebuild their metropolis into a climate-controlled \"City of the Future\". Unfortunately for Gyro, his idea worked too well. Donald Duck worked only 1 hour a day and spent 23 hours sleeping, which left him more grouchy than normal, while Uncle Scrooge's robot made him so much money that it filled up his money bin to the point where he could not even burrow into it. The final straw came when Gyro's Robot Helper makes a robot to replace Gyro as an inventor. Realizing Duckburg is not ready for the future, Gyro returns the city back to its old self.\nContrary to his entry in Don Markstein's Toonopedia, Gyro never appeared on \"House of Mouse\". Gyro, in his usual role as an inventor, is replaced with Ludwig Von Drake in \"House of Mouse\" and many other cartoons.\nIn the Toontown universe, Gyro created a robot that, when Scrooge accidentally wired it incorrectly, made the Cogs, the main antagonists of the game. They were grim businessmen-like robots who could not take a joke. So, to take care of the infestation, the Toons (the main protagonists of the game) destroyed them with gags such as squirting seltzer water and throwing pies at them.\nA reimagined Gyro appears in the 2017 reboot of \"DuckTales\" (voiced by Jim Rash), in which he maintains a lab below Scrooge's Money Bin. This Gyro merges characteristics of his harsher, early comic book self with those of his original \"DuckTales\" counterpart along with adlibbing by Rash; the result being an eccentric who struggles with social graces and has a short temper, yet still retains a good nature and makes efforts to stop his inventions from harming people. He also has a track record of inventions gaining sentience and becoming evil, though he argues that some of them are merely misunderstood (a trait that the show creators have also attributed to Gyro himself). In his debut episode, \"The Great Dime Chase!\", he unveils Little Bulb (this show's version of Little Helper), who goes out of control under Louie's supervision (though Gyro manages to fix the problem by replacing his invention's head with a lower-watt bulb). He later begins brainstorming the creation of the Gizmoduck suit under the codename \"Project Blatherskite\". In season one's subsequent episodes, he took on Fenton Crackshell-Cabrera as an intern, clashed with Scrooge's rival Mark Beaks, and forced Donald Duck to swallow a voice modulator. In the season 2 premiere, he uses a modified shrink ray invention to communicate with a microscopic civilizations in the McDuck household, only to be taken hostage when he attempted to become their god-king. Later in season 2, his oxy-chew gum (used by Della and Donald Duck to survive on the moon), Time Teaser (used by Flintheart Glomgold in a scheme against Scrooge McDuck), and Time Tub (used by Gyro himself to travel back to the Old West and by Louie as part of a get-rich-quick scheme) make appearances. In the season 2 finale, he developed a clone spray that he used on himself and produced a small army of Little Bulbs with walkie-talkie functions. In season three, Gyro's past is explored further. Decades prior to the series, he worked as an optimistic young intern under roboticist, Dr. Akita. Gyro built a child-like defense drone named 2-BO and treated him like a real boy, but Akita tampered with his programming before using him to terrorize the city of Tokyolk. Having lost his creation, Gyro became embittered and repressed his memories of the android. When Huey brought 2-BO, now B.O.Y.D., to him to be fixed, Gyro was forced to return to Tokyolk and confront his past as well as Akita. Once he learned what happened and defeated his former mentor, Gyro reconciled with B.O.Y.D.\nGearloose family members.\nRatchet Gearloose.\nRatchet Gearloose is Gyro's paternal grandfather, created by Carl Barks. He knew Scrooge McDuck: he first met him during his Mississippi riverboat days. They later met on the island of Krakatoa. Nothing was known about Ratchet since then but it is assumed that he wound up in Duckburg since his son Fulton Gearloose is one of the first three Junior Woodchucks.\nFulton Gearloose.\nFulton Gearloose is the son of Ratchet Gearloose and the father of Gyro Gearloose. Created by Don Rosa, he was first mentioned in \"Guardians of The Library\" in \"Uncle Scrooge Adventures #27\" as the inventor of The Junior Woodchucks Merit Badge, as well as the first person it was awarded to (for inventing it). He first appeared in person in \"The Life and Times of Scrooge McDuck Part 10\" as a young child and one of the first three Junior Woodchucks. He appears as an elderly man in the story \"Gyro's First Invention\".\nNewton Gearloose.\nNewton Gearloose is Gyro's nephew. He first appeared in 1960 in the Gyro Gearloose story titled 'Ting-A-Ling Trouble', written by Vic Lockman and drawn by Phil DeLara, in \"Walt Disney's Comics and Stories\" #308. Newton was a fan of his uncle's work and wanted to be an inventor like him when he grew up. Newton is also a Junior Woodchuck, as well as a friend of Huey, Dewey, and Louie. Newton went by the nickname \"Giggy\". After the early 1970s, Newton ceased appearing in new North American Disney comics. He continued to be used in some Brazilian and Danish-produced Disney comics into the 1990s, while he still appears in Dutch and Italian-produced comics. There was a similar character in the \"DuckTales\" episode \"Superdoo\". Like Newton, he was also in the Junior Woodchucks. Though his name is never spoken, he does bear a physical resemblance to Newton Gearloose.\nOther relatives.\nItalian Disney comics, which have not been translated into English, and the Gearloose family tree drawn by Marco Gervasio, have introduced other members of Gyro's family, such as his mother Sonia, his grandmother Martha Bird, his great-grandfather Copernico and great-great-uncle Cartesio.\nNames.\nOutside the English-speaking world, Gyro Gearloose has the following names:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "72775", "revid": "119438", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72775", "title": "Waterloo and City Line", "text": ""}
{"id": "72776", "revid": "39405234", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72776", "title": "Magica De Spell", "text": "Disney comics character\nMagica De Spell ( being ) is a cartoon character created in 1961 by Carl Barks for the Duck universe. An Italian sorceress, she constantly attempts to steal Scrooge McDuck's Number One Dime, which she believes will play a vital role in magically obtaining the same fabulous wealth of its owner.\nAppearance.\nMagica is an anthropomorphic white duck with a yellow-orange bill, legs, and feet. She has black hair, purple eye shadow and typically wears a black dress. In the 2017 reboot of \"DuckTales\", her feathers are green instead of white and she wears a cape with a hood. After Magica loses her magic powers at the end of the first season, her feathers became white. She later returns to her original appearance after regaining her magic in the third-season episode \"The Phantom and the Sorceress!\".\nPublication history.\nDe Spell first appeared in \"The Midas Touch\", first published in \"Uncle Scrooge\" #36 (December 1961). According to Barks, he intended to create her as another recurring antagonist for Scrooge in addition to the Beagle Boys and Flintheart Glomgold. In contrast to Witch Hazel from \"Trick or Treat\" \u2014 first released on October 10, 1952 \u2014 or Madam Mim, she would not be in the image of the ugly old hag usually associated with witches. Barks instead decided to create a witch who was young and beautiful, so he took inspiration for her look from Italian actresses Gina Lollobrigida and Sophia Loren. He also wanted her to be seductive, amoral, and somewhat threatening. In a later interview, Barks identified a similar figure from the comic strips of Charles Addams as another source of inspiration for Magica, namely Morticia Addams of \"The Addams Family\".\nAll in all, Barks drew nine stories with Magica: \"The Midas Touch\" in 1961; \"Ten-Cent Valentine\", \"The Unsafe Safe\", and \"Raven Mad\" in 1962; \"Oddball Odyssey\", \"For Old Dime's Sake\", and \"Isle of Golden Geese\" in 1963; \"The Many Faces of Magica de Spell,\" and lastly \"Rug Riders in the Sky\" in 1964. In the latter, Barks tried to increase the usability of the character by having plots turn on other magic artifacts \u2013 here, a flying carpet \u2013 not always having to repeat the joke about Scrooge's first coin. Magica also appeared as an antagonist in the \"Wizards of Mickey\" comic series as part of a trio of sorceresses who all had rivalries with each other.\nCharacter biography.\nAccording to Barks and his successors, Magica lives on the slopes of Mount Vesuvius, next to Naples, Italy. Her primary motivation is to steal Scrooge's Number One Dime and melt it in the fires of the volcano, so she can turn it into a powerful magical amulet capable of granting the Midas Touch.\nWhile she has worked with criminals \u2013 the Beagle Boys, for example \u2013 to get Scrooge's Dime, Magica typically works with individuals such as a raven named Ratface in the comics and apprentices like Samson Hex, a bungling no-hoper. Magica's family members have also appeared in the comics; her grandmother Granny De Spell, who has been no more successful in obtaining the Number One Dime despite claiming to be one of the most powerful witches; her sister, the Wicked Witch of the West; the Wicked Witch's mischievous daughter Witch Child and son Warlock, who Magica is sometimes tasked with babysitting; another niece, Minima De Spell; and a cousin named Witch Matilda, who has served under Magica as an apprentice. Another character connected to Magica is Rosolio, a dim-witted goose who claims to be her fianc\u00e9 despite always being rejected. He is supported in this by another grandmother of Magica's, Caraldina (original Italian name), created in the Italian comics. In crossover comics, one of her most frequent companions is Mad Madam Mim.\nMagica has an odd relationship with Scrooge. For example, in the 1987 \"DuckTales\" episode \"Till Nephews Do Us Part\", she and Poe are invited to and attend Scrooge's wedding. However, she has maintained an antagonistic relationship with him and his family, including Donald Duck, Huey, Dewey, and Louie, Gyro Gearloose, Gladstone Gander, as well as Daisy Duck and her nieces.\nIn animation.\n\"DuckTales\".\nMagica appears as a recurring villain on the animated television show \"DuckTales\", where she was voiced by June Foray (using a similar Eastern European accent to that of Natasha Fatale from \"Rocky &amp; Bullwinkle\"; in the Italian version, Magica's voice actress, Sonia Scotti, depicted her with a heavy Neapolitan accent). Magica appears mostly in first-season episodes of the show. Although she appears as one of the series' major villains, she is frequently a source of comic relief; for example, in Magica's final scene in the series, she attempts to send Scrooge's \"tin man back to Oz\", but instead sent herself elsewhere in a whirlwind when a Quackenyeeken Yeeker bird yeeks in fear, causing her jar of magic dust to break open and carry her away. On more than one occasion, her plan to obtain Scrooge's dime backfires so spectacularly that she is forced to work with Scrooge to prevent a greater disaster. According to the show, her brother is Poe De Spell, who was transformed into a raven and serves as her magical familiar\u00a0\u2013 in reference to Edgar Allan Poe's poem \"The Raven\" \u2013 replacing Ratface from the comics. A similar reference had already been established in the German versions of Magica comics, where her raven is called \"Nimmermehr\" (\"Nevermore\"), referring to the recurring keyword from Poe's poem.\nIn the 2017 reboot, Magica speaks with an English accent as she is voiced by Catherine Tate (former \"Doctor Who\" costar to David Tennant, who voices Scrooge McDuck in the new series). Within the reboot's storyline, Magica has a history with Clan McDuck and a vendetta against Scrooge; he caused her to accidentally turn Poe into a non-anthropomorphic raven and refused to stop him from flying away prior to the start of the series. During a climactic battle atop Mount Vesuvius (a famous setting from Tennant and Tate's tenure on \"Doctor Who\") 15 years prior, Scrooge trapped her physical body within his Number One Dime, though she was able to turn her own shadow into her \"niece\", Lena De Spell. Throughout the first season, Magica manifests herself as a shadowy specter through Lena and uses her to gain the Duck family's trust to acquire Scrooge's Dime and free herself from imprisonment. Magica eventually regains her corporeal form during an eclipse that occurred in the season one finale, and proceeded to terrorize Duckburg with her dark magical powers. However, she is defeated and forced to flee after being stripped of her powers by the combined efforts of Scrooge and his family in destroying her staff. In the second-season episode, \"A Nightmare on Killmotor Hill!\", Magica uses a telepathic helmet to invade Lena's dreams and get her to give up her magic amulet, though she is foiled once more and Lena destroys her helmet. In a later episode, \"GlomTales!\", she joins an alliance of Scrooge's greatest enemies, led by Flintheart Glomgold, in a joint effort to destroy Scrooge and his family. Glomgold ends up losing his fortune, as well as that of the other villains', to Louie Duck, causing the former's fellow villains to turn on him. In season three, Magica regained her powers while helping Lena and her friends fend off the Phantom Blot, whose village Magica destroyed in the past. In turn, she is fended off by Lena, who had gained magical abilities of her own during the fight. Magica appears along with Scrooge's other enemies to destroy him through a court trial, but fails again. Finally in the series finale, Magica and every villain the Duck family have faced were brainwashed by F.O.W.L. to fight the heroes, which was part of Bradford Buzzard's plot to rid the world of adventures. Upon his defeat, Magica is enraged by him using her and the other villains, turns him into a non-sapient buzzard in revenge, and then teleports away.\n\"Darkwing Duck\".\nMagica makes a cameo appearance in the \"Darkwing Duck\" episode \"In Like Blunt\" along with the Beagle Boys and Flintheart Glomgold, among the bidders for the secret S.H.U.S.H. agent list.\nShe had a proper role in the Darkwing Duck comic published by Boom! Studios, teaming up with Negaduck (whom she had saved from the Crimebots from \"The Duck Knight Returns\") in the story \"Crisis on Infinite Darkwings\". By combining their powers and knowledge, they intended to unleash an army of brainwashed, alternate universe Darkwing Ducks on St. Canard, as it would be of benefit to both their agendas\u00a0\u2013 her hope is to force Darkwing's ally Launchpad McQuack to lead her to Scrooge's Number One Dime. Magica and Negaduck had contempt for each other, which they kept hidden behind a 'friendly' facade; early on, Negaduck sarcastically refers to his desire for a city and hers for \"...one dime\" as being \"similar ambitions\".\nDarkwing's girlfriend Morgana McCawber, herself a witch, would assist the hero and battle Magica in magical combat. She swiftly drained Morgana's magic using a source absorber, doubling her power, but lost it thanks to the intervention of an alternate Darkwing. This ended her control over the alternate reality Darkwings and ended Negaduck's plan, and after the arrival of the monstrous demon Paddywhack, Magica fled the city.\nShe returned for the final arc of the series, a crossover with the \"DuckTales\" comic also published by Boom!, where she teamed up with other female Disney villains and exploited black \"slime\" that could turn normal people evil and villains into stronger forms. She used it to bring in an army of villains from Duckburg and St. Canard, as well as a brainwashed Phantom Blot, and tried to seize both cities so she could have all of Scrooge McDuck's assets. To her dismay, the slime turned out to be a transformed Negaduck, who seized control of the plan before all the villains were banished to another dimension. This last arc was later rendered to be non-canonical, and not included in the omnibus collecting the series.\nVideo games.\nMagica appears in the \"DuckTales\" video game for the Nintendo Entertainment System as the boss of the Transylvania stage, where she attacks Scrooge with lightning bolts and by transforming into a giant bird. In the remake \"DuckTales Remastered\", Magica uses an expanded set of attacks (such as launching energy beams at Scrooge and summoning mirrors to hide in) and also plays a larger role in the game's overall storyline. Just like in the cartoon, she is voiced by June Foray.\nOther video game appearances by Magica include \"The Lucky Dime Caper: Starring Donald Duck\", in which she kidnaps Donald's nephews and steals Scrooge's lucky dime, and in the 2000 video game \"\" as the boss of a flying mansion. Magica also appears as the second secret playable character in the 2008 trivia video game \"Disney TH!NK Fast\".\nMagica De Spell appears as a playable character in the mobile game \"Disney Heroes: Battle Mode\".\nAttributes.\nPowers and abilities.\nMagica De Spell is a very powerful witch with magical powers that include teleportation, flight, the power to conjure and transmute matter, and shapeshifting. Her actual capability to wield magic varies from writer to writer. Carl Barks' incarnation is quite powerful, with her naivete being her only prominent weakness. Don Rosa's incarnation of Magica De Spell is, however, far more limited as she usually only uses magic through magical objects and in The Quest for Kalevala, Magica acknowledges she cannot use magic without a wand.\nBeliefs.\nUnlike other people who think the Number One Dime to be a lucky charm, Magica doesn't believe it to be the source of Scrooge's wealth, but Scrooge's wealth to be the source of the dime's powers, as she only tries to steal it because it's the first coin ever earned by the richest duck (or man) on Earth. It can be noticed when she steals the dime but gives it back when she realized she somehow caused the dime to lose such status. Examples of such stories are \"Of Ducks and Dimes and Destinies\", when she travels in time to steal the dime in the very same day Scrooge earns it and gives it back after realizing that by preventing Scrooge from owning the dime, she would turn it into a coin that never belonged to him, or \"A Little Something Special\", when she teams up with Flintheart Glomgold and the Beagle Boys in a plan made by Blackheart Beagle. She gives the dime back after realizing Scrooge wouldn't be the richest man on Earth after the Beagle Boys steal his money. In Carl Barks's \"Ten-Cent Valentine\", it's revealed she believes the dime must stay in one piece until she finally melts it or the spell won't work. Huey, Dewey, and Louie trick Magica into thinking it was destroyed by a meat grinder.\nMagica believes she is the disciple of the ancient sorceress Circe.\nFamily.\nA lot of Magica's relatives appear in Italian stories.\n\"DuckTales\" familiars.\nThe 1987 \"DuckTales\" series introduces Magica's brother Poe (voiced Frank Welker), who was transformed into a non-anthropomorphic raven while maintaining his ability to speak. Although Magica has various transformation spells at her disposal, she is unable to return Poe to his original form. In Poe's debut episode, \"Send in the Clones\", Magica explains that she needs the power of Scrooge's Number One Dime to restore Poe. His name is a reference to Edgar Allan Poe.\nIn the 2017 \"DuckTales\" series, Poe is voiced by Martin Freeman. Appearing in a flashback in the episode \"The Life and Crimes of Scrooge McDuck!\", Poe ruled a village alongside his twin sister Magica, keeping her in check. After Scrooge came to their village, he angered Magica and caused her to accidentally turn Poe into a raven. Lacking the knowledge to turn Poe back, she begged Scrooge to help her, but he refused, leading to Poe flying away. Magica attempted to find Poe, but was unable to, causing her hatred against Scrooge.\nIn \"Magica's Magic Mirror\" she mentions her great-grandmother Tragica.\nThe 2017 \"DuckTales\" reboot also introduces Magica's \"niece\" Lena (voiced by Kimiko Glenn) \u2013 who is eventually revealed to be a magically created shadow creature and Magica's spy. During the series' first season, Lena meets Webby Vanderquack in order to gain access to Scrooge's Number One Dime so Magica can regain her corporeal form, but Lena befriends Webby and later sacrifices herself to save her from Magica. During the second season, Webby manages to restore Lena, allowing her to exist independently of Magica. She is also revealed to have access to Magica's powers, which initially scare her due to the possibility of becoming her. With the help of her friends, Lena overcomes her fears and uses her powers for good.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "72778", "revid": "578047", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72778", "title": "Lulubelle Loon", "text": ""}
{"id": "72779", "revid": "7436027", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72779", "title": "Grandma Duck", "text": ""}
{"id": "72780", "revid": "29615425", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72780", "title": "Newtons method", "text": ""}
{"id": "72782", "revid": "17914743", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72782", "title": "Ratchet Gearloose", "text": ""}
{"id": "72783", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72783", "title": "Honey spurge", "text": ""}
{"id": "72784", "revid": "8671575", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72784", "title": "John Rockerduck", "text": ""}
{"id": "72785", "revid": "49923712", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72785", "title": "Flintheart Glomgold", "text": "Disney comics character\nFlintheart Glomgold is a cartoon character created in 1956 by Carl Barks. He is a South African American Pekin Duck and the business rival of Scrooge McDuck, usually portrayed as an ambitious, ruthless and manipulative businessman who shares many of the same qualities as Scrooge\u2014the drive for massive wealth and the and creativity to obtain the same\u2014but he lacks any of Scrooge's tendencies towards generosity and compassion. In Don Rosa's \"The Life and Times of Scrooge McDuck\", he is said to be a Boer.\nGlomgold is one of Scrooge's main rivals along with the Beagle Boys, Magica De Spell, and John D. Rockerduck, and also holds the title of being the \"Second Richest Duck in the World\" while Scrooge is the richest. His appearance is deliberately similar to that of Scrooge, but he is usually drawn with a full beard and sideburns as opposed to simple side-whiskers, black or purple frock coat instead of Scrooge's red or blue one, and a dark tam o'shanter instead of Scrooge's top hat.\nComic history.\nUnder Carl Barks.\nGlomgold was originally created in 1956 by Scrooge McDuck artist and creator Carl Barks, the creator of much of the Duck universe. Characterized as an unrepentant miser, tycoon, plutocrat, and general villain, he rarely sees any problem with breaking the law, cheating, or using other unfair tactics in order to fulfill his goal of becoming the world's richest duck. That makes him a \"broken mirror\" of Scrooge McDuck, whose own avarice is tempered with his belief in earning money strictly through honest means.\nGlomgold first appeared in \"The Second-Richest Duck\", first published in September 1956. In this story, Scrooge, who holds the title of the Richest Duck in the World, learns that a businessman from the valley of the Limpopo, South Africa has also claimed this title. Scrooge decides to confront this claimant to his title and travels to South Africa along with his nephew Donald and three grandnephews. The rest of the story concentrates on comparing and contrasting the two rivals during a race through \"The Heart of Africa\" (a recurring phrase in the story), by seeing who has the largest ball of string, because they are shown equal in everything else, from cash to gold mines to even who has the most pumpkins. The race is supposed to determine which one of them deserves the title.\nThe two characters resemble each other both in appearance and behavior though their main common point seems to be that they are extremely competitive, and neither of them can accept the idea of someone else being equal or superior to them. Flintheart, like Scrooge, keeps a percentage of his fortune in his own Money Bin, identical to that of Scrooge (with the exception of the external logo: a dollar sign on McDuck's and a pound sign on Glomgold's), while the rest of his fortune is invested in a worldwide financial empire of his own that equals that of Scrooge, although Scrooge's main sources of wealth are his industries, while Flintheart's are his diamond mines.\nHowever, the main difference between them seems to be their way of life. Scrooge's Money Bin is at the center of Duckburg, Calisota, United States, a constantly expanding industrial city, while Flintheart's is in the center of a valley, located somewhere in the lands around Limpopo, surrounded by wildlife and away from human activities. While Scrooge finds himself surrounded by an extended family (see Clan McDuck, Duck family, and Coot Kin) and a large number of allies and rivals (see Scrooge McDuck Universe), Flintheart lives a life of solitude and seems to have no family, friends, or for that matter rivals except Scrooge himself. While Scrooge has his nephews helping him or advising him, Flintheart faces every situation alone. This appears to have hardened him \u2013 he is considerably more ruthless than Scrooge \u2013 but also leaves him vulnerable to being simply outnumbered by his rivals. Even at the end of the story, when Scrooge has won and Flintheart passes out after finding he is only second best, he has to be carried home by Huey, Dewey, and Louie because he has no one else to help him.\nThe solitary South African re-appeared to challenge Scrooge to a rematch in \"The Money Champ\", first published in September 1959. This time the confrontation takes place in Scrooge's grounds in Duckburg with the city's population witnessing the event, and they only count their wealth in cash and not their investments, so they have to liquidate much of their fortunes. Flintheart uses a number of underhand plots against Scrooge, but his plans backfire when their cost in money also costs Flintheart his chance at victory. The story adds little to what was established in the previous one. However, for the first time, some panels concentrate on Flintheart's thoughts, revealing that his insecurities about his own worth are the driving force behind both his efforts to best Scrooge and his dishonest tactics (since he doubts his ability to win in a direct confrontation), and that Flintheart believes said tactics are betrayals of his \"dear old mother's fondest hopes\".\nBarks would use Flintheart for a third and last time in \"So Far and no Safari\", first published in January 1966. This was one of the last stories Barks created before his retirement. The themes of the story are considerably darker than the two previous ones. Flintheart's intentions towards Scrooge are clearly depicted as murderous. The story starts with Scrooge planning to participate in an auction for an old South African gold mine. It is considered exhausted, but Scrooge's mechanics believe that the main vein of gold has not even been reached. While Scrooge is piloting his private plane over South Africa, with Donald, Huey, Dewey, and Louie as passengers, Flintheart appears piloting his own plane. It is equipped with machine guns, with which he shoots down Scrooge. While Scrooge is still trying to reach the auction, Flintheart repeatedly tries to get rid of him.\nWhen Scrooge manages to reach the Kalahari Desert, Flintheart's plane is revealed to be a bomber as well. Flintheart bombards Scrooge and his nephews, but misses. When he returns for a second bombing run, the Ducks have dressed some rocks with their clothing and have taken cover elsewhere. Flintheart mistakes the rocks for his targets and destroys them, noting that his rivals are now dinner for the jackals. His victory is short-lived, however. Because he was flying low, the bomb explosions damaged his plane's fuel tank. He crash-lands the plane and finds himself in no better condition than Scrooge. The rest of the story presents Scrooge's and Flintheart's rival efforts to cross the Kalahari and reach the auction. The end of the story finds them at the auction, tired from their difficult treks, but still rivaling each other, while an exhausted Donald has fallen asleep. (Who finally obtained the gold mine is not revealed.) It is considered Flintheart's darkest appearance and among his strongest and most memorable ones.\nAfter Barks.\nDuring the ten years that followed his creator's retirement the character made infrequent appearances, appearing only in four comic book stories. He was not nearly as recognizable as other rivals of Scrooge, like Italian sorceress Magica De Spell, who appeared far more often. Flintheart returned to prominence in 1979, when Egmont editors Lars Bergstr\u00f6m and Stefan Printz-P\u00e5hlson decided to revive the character. Since then, Flintheart Glomgold has appeared in more than 100 Egmont stories, some of which depict him as an influential member of Duckburg's Billionaires Club (which also includes Scrooge and John D. Rockerduck).\nIn Werner Wejp-Olsen and Daniel Branca's 1981 comic book story \"The Top Treasure in Town\", Flintheart's grandfather, Stoneheart Glomgold, who in 1870 worked as a hansom cab driver in London, is introduced. In John Lustig and Vicar's comic book story \"Family of Fore\" (2001) it is stated that Flintheart and Scrooge are both distantly related to the then-deceased Scottish golf enthusiast Bogey McDivot. McDivot has only been mentioned in that story. In Lars Jensen and Vicar's 2002 comic book story \"Happy Birthday, Flintheart Glomgold\", Glomgold's nephew, Slackjaw Snorehead, is introduced. Slackjaw is a genial slacker; very friendly and cheerful as well as a genius with a talent for business. He prefers to hang around with his friends and do nothing all day rather than use his intellect productively, which is infuriating to Glomgold. In the English translation, Slackjaw at times uses South African slang (e.g. howzit or brasse).\nIn Lars Jensen and Marco Rota's 2005 story \"The Glomgold Heritage\", Flintheart's father, Brickheart Glomgold, and mother appeared briefly. It is also revealed in this story that Flintheart's grandfather, Stoneheart, was a Scotsman who moved to London and later on, together with his son Brickheart, traveled to South Africa after being wrongly accused for theft. From this experience, the Glomgolds learned that the world was unfair and cruel, and that they had to look out for themselves even if that meant acting outside the law.\nIn the 1988 \"DuckTales\" comic book story \"The Smart Nephew\" by Bob Gregory, Cosme Quartieri, and Jorge Sanchez, another nephew of Glomgold appears: the smart and brave Junior.\nUnder Don Rosa.\nIn 1987 Keno Don Rosa created his first Scrooge McDuck story, \"The Son of the Sun\", first published in July 1987. Rosa's detailed style of drawing, references to Barks stories (by then considered classic) like \"Lost in the Andes!\", detailed references to often obscure historical figures and events and strong characterization would later make Rosa fans consider him one of Barks' most popular \"successors\". Those themes are all evident in his first story. It begins with Flintheart questioning Scrooge's many successes as a treasure-hunter. He claims that discovering riches that are already concentrated by others is not that hard and that he could do it better than Scrooge if he decided to try. Soon, he is following Scrooge and his nephews in their latest treasure hunt, locating a hidden temple of Manco C\u00e1pac, who was the legendary founder of the Inca dynasty. The temple is hidden somewhere in the tops of the Andes and, according to inscriptions earlier found by Scrooge, supposed to contain a great treasure. In the course of the story Flintheart is shown to be one of Scrooge's most charismatic, resourceful, and ruthless rivals.\nRosa, who admits to have a soft spot for the character, has used Flintheart in a growing number of stories and has offered him a sort of origin. In his stories, Flintheart is a Boer from the province of Transvaal. He was born around the same time as Scrooge and first met him during the Witwatersrand Gold Rush in 1886, a key event leading to the founding of Johannesburg. Like Scrooge, Flintheart was born in poverty and was working his way up the financial ladder. While unsuccessfully searching for diamonds, he attempted to steal the findings of more successful fellow miners. As a result, he was tied to the horns of a water buffalo and the animal was then sent running. Flintheart was found and saved by Scrooge. Flintheart offered to be the guide of the recently arrived gold miner from Scotland, since he knew the territory. Scrooge accepted him as a needed companion and friend. But at night while Scrooge was sleeping, Flintheart stole his ox-cart along with all his equipment and supplies and left him alone in the wilderness. Having underestimated Scrooge, he was surprised when Scrooge caught up to him, furious and vengeful. When Scrooge finished with him, Flintheart was publicly humiliated, thoroughly embittered, and imprisoned for theft. The two rivals made vows to themselves that helped shape some of their character traits. Scrooge vowed to never trust anybody ever again, in order not to be betrayed again. Apparently this is the source of Scrooge's distrust towards others whether they are allies, rivals, or complete strangers and the reason he is secretive about his thoughts and emotions. On the other hand, a completely defeated Flintheart vowed that he will work to become so rich that nobody can humiliate him again (see Life and Times of Scrooge McDuck \u2013 Part VI: The Terror of the Transvaal). Because Scrooge officially meets Glomgold for the first time during \"The Second Richest Duck\" in 1956, Don Rosa makes sure Glomgold's name is never mentioned until after he and Scrooge have parted ways. Since Glomgold gets Scrooge's name, some fans could think he is more interested in defeating and humiliating Scrooge as revenge for getting imprisoned rather than becoming the world's richest duck. According to Rosa's unofficial timelines, it would take him twenty years of hard work as a diamond miner till finally he became rich in 1906 by his profits. He would spend the next fifty years working his way up the financial ladder both by hard efforts and dishonest methods when needed.\nDon Rosa also revealed in at least two stories another thing that makes Flintheart a counterpart to Scrooge: the Number One Rand, the first coin Flintheart Glomgold ever earned (or stole). In \"Return to Plain Awful\", this rand makes his first appearance, a cameo, and has nothing to do with the story, alongside a framed pound note labelled as Glomgold's \"No. 1 Pound\" and a diamond under a glass dome labelled as \"My First Diamond\". In \"A Little Something Special\", the Rand makes an equally small but more relevant role. Magica De Spell teamed up with him and the Beagle Boys to get the Number One Dime. Scrooge reminds Magica he will no longer be the richest duck in the world after they steal his fortune, and the Dime will be worthless to her. Based on the advice Scrooge gives her in exchange for his dime back, Magica steals Flintheart's first rand. To make things worse for Glomgold, Magica takes the Beagle Boys with her to the Valley of Limpopo, where they carry all they can of Flintheart's cash. Despite the fact he teamed up with them in that story against Scrooge, he still dares to ask what did he do to deserve that.\nNotable is the fact that Flintheart Glomgold's first coin could not be a rand, because the South African Rand did not come into existence until 1961. Before a unified South Africa in 1910 (whereupon the South African pound was introduced), many authorities in the region issued coins and banknotes in their own currencies, often equivalent to the Pound Sterling of the Cape of Good Hope colony that had existed since 1825. Adding it to the fact that Don Rosa's stories usually take place in the 1950s, this meant it would be impossible for anyone to own a rand in such stories.\nAnimation and other appearances.\nAn animated version of the character appeared in the TV series \"DuckTales\", which started airing on September 18, 1987. The Second Richest Duck was among the series' most prominent characters, and this helped his introduction to a wider audience. But some drastic changes came to the character. He lives an elaborate but decaying mansion in Duckburg, is depicted as wearing a traditional Scottish kilt. His voice actor Hal Smith gave him a gravelly and recognisably Scottish accent. No reference to South Africa is ever made. The previously unaffiliated Beagle Boys were now depicted as working for him on an occasional basis. In \"Attack of the Metal Mites\", Glomgold sends the metal mites to eat whole money from Scrooge's bin. Glomgold almost succeeds when Fenton Crackshell stopped the metal mites and the last ones retrieved by Dijon spread in Glomgold's office. The biggest humiliation of all this is the fact Scrooge finds a way to earn honest money with the metal mites captured by Fenton. In \"\"The Golden Goose\" (Part 2)\" after stealing a magical Golden Goose, Glomgold seems to have beaten Scrooge as \"The Richest Duck In the World\" until he is turned into gold himself. \nGlomgold is also a recurring antagonist in the \"DuckTales\" comic book series, notably the series \"Scrooge's Quest\". In the final chapter of that series, \"All That Glitters Is Not Glomgold\", Glomgold has taken advantage of Scrooge's long absence and distraction to buy out all of Scrooge's assets and seize control of Duckburg. While Scrooge was a more benevolent businessman, Glomgold is determined to soak the city's people for as much money as he can, charging exorbitant prices for food and services, while keeping their lives as closely regimented as possible. Scrooge cannily uses Glomgold's own paranoia against him, wandering around town, making apparently innocuous inspections of Glomgold's businesses, and causing Glomgold to tear apart his own holdings, looking for Scrooge's sabotage. By the end of the comic, Glomgold has destroyed all of his assets in Duckburg, and Scrooge has regained his own fortune. As Scrooge explains to his nephews, \"Glomgold is so evil and sneaky that he thinks everyone is as evil and sneaky as he is.\" Yet, in the final pages of the comic, Glomgold seems to be perfectly content, living in a wooden shanty in Duckburg's slums, sharing a meager meal with one of his former clerks. As Glomgold explains, now that he has nothing left, there's nothing further that Scrooge can do to him, and Glomgold is looking forward to making himself rich again, since making a fortune is much more satisfying than having one. In this he reflects much of Scrooge's own philosophy.\nIn the Disney series \"Darkwing Duck\" episode \"In Like Blunt\", Glomgold makes a cameo appearance-along with the Beagle Boys and Magica De Spell-as a bidder for the secret S.H.U.S.H. agent list.\nFlintheart also appears in the 1989 \"DuckTales\" video game for the Nintendo Entertainment System (NES). After Scrooge completes all the regular levels, Flintheart challenges him to a race in which the winner will take all of the treasure Scrooge has acquired. Glomgold also appears in the 1993 video game sequel \"DuckTales 2\", also for the NES, once again trying to obtain the treasures that Scrooge had collected and also kidnaps Webby in order to get Scrooge to hand over the treasure. When he does Glomgold is revealed to be the final boss the D-1000. In \"\", Glomgold is voiced by Brian George (Hal Smith had died in 1994), and his role is greatly expanded. In \"Remastered\", Glomgold attacks Scrooge in the Himalayas, attempting to shoot Launchpad out of the skies, but is thwarted by Scrooge. He appears again on the Moon, attempting to collect the Green Cheese of Longevity before Scrooge does. Later, he forms an uneasy alliance with Scrooge to help him rescue his nephews from Magica De Spell, but later reveals that he was in cahoots with her all along in order to get Scrooge's Number One Dime from him for her own purposes. As in the original, Scrooge must race Glomgold and Magica in order to reclaim his Number One Dime in the end. Glomgold appeared in \"Ducktales: Scrooge's Loot\", and also as Boss in the RPG card game titled \"The Duckforce Rises\" for Android and iOS.\nGlomgold is the main antagonist in the PC game \"\". In the intro scene, he barges into Scrooge's office, lamenting about he is tired being the second richest duck in the world, and challenges Scrooge to a wealth contest sponsored by Dime Magazine: in the next 30 days, the one who collects the most treasure shall be the Duck of the Year. The contest is held in the Isle of Macaroon, which is a homage to the four-parter \"Catch as Cash Can\" episode, except that the contest gives 30 days, not 10. Just like in the episodes, Glomgold hires the Beagle Boys against Scrooge and his nephews, and will constantly try to race Scrooge to the treasure locations, or snatching treasure from other locations. The ultimate goal of the game is to collect more money, thus, beating Glomgold and becoming Duck of the Year.\nGlomgold appeared on the 2012 list of the \"Forbes Fictional 15\", a compilation of the wealthiest characters in fiction. A spike in the price of gold during the late 2000s and early 2010s allowed Glomgold to become the second-wealthiest fictional character. His nemesis, Scrooge McDuck (who has appeared in most of the \"Fictional 15\" lists to date), surpassed him in the 2013 list, in which Glomgold did not appear.\nGlomgold, now voiced by Keith Ferguson, returns as Scrooge's nemesis in the 2017 reboot of \"DuckTales\". While Glomgold now appears much stouter than in previous versions, his outfit and personality remains relatively unchanged from the 1987 version. He is also the head of Glomgold Industries, through which he builds up his fortune through personal branding and making products as cheaply as possible. Throughout the first season, it was initially implied that this Glomgold is South African but pretends to be Scottish in order to outdo Scrooge McDuck. This is confirmed in the second season episode, \"The Ballad of Duke Baloney!\", where it is revealed that Glomgold was born Duke Baloney, a shoeshine boy who did Scrooge's shoes and given a dime as payment to teach him self-reliance, only for Duke to instead feel cheated and create his \"Glomgold\" persona over the years to get revenge.\nPredecessor.\nA few years prior to Flintheart's debut, another character was described as the World's Second-Richest Duck. His only appearance took place in Carl Barks' story \"Turkey With All the Schemings\". In that story, Donald found himself unable to afford a Christmas dinner and decided to trick Scrooge into paying for dinner for him. To do so, Donald posed as a South American businessman named Petrolio de Vaselino and had Scrooge take him to the Ritz. While eating dessert, Donald accidentally ate his phony moustache, making him look like the Duke of Baloni, described by Scrooge as the World's Second-Richest Duck. By coincidence, Scrooge had a newspaper article talking about the Duke visiting Duckburg. The fact Scrooge remained willing to make business with him suggests the Duke never claimed to be richer than him. Not much else is known about the real Duke since he just made a cameo at the beginning of the last page and his only purpose in the story was cluing (via his presence) Scrooge to the fact he was dealing with an imposter. After removing Donald's wig, Scrooge was determined to make Donald pay. He asked the waiter if the restaurant was for sale and was given a price of one million dollars. In a surprising move, as he had spent the whole last night trying to make sure Donald would not leave and force him to pay the bill, Scrooge quickly pulled the required amount from his pockets and bought the restaurant. Donald then was forced to wash the dishes to pay the bill. It is never said when Flintheart became richer than the Duke or if the two ever met. However, this is homaged in the 2017 \"DuckTales\" animated series, where it is revealed that \"Duke Baloney\" is Flintheart's birth name.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "72786", "revid": "7436027", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72786", "title": "Howard Rockerduck", "text": ""}
{"id": "72787", "revid": "27693686", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72787", "title": "Brigitta MacBridge", "text": ""}
{"id": "72789", "revid": "41219559", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72789", "title": "Central line (London Underground)", "text": "London Underground line\nThe Central line is a London Underground line that runs between West Ruislip or Ealing Broadway in the west, and Epping or Woodford via Hainault in the north-east, via the West End, the City, and the East End. Printed in red on the Tube map, the line serves 49 stations over , making it the network's longest line. It is one of only two lines on the Underground network to cross the Greater London boundary, the other being the Metropolitan line. One of London's deep-level railways traversing narrow tunnels, Central line trains are smaller than those on British main lines.\nThe line was opened as the Central London Railway in 1900, crossing central London on an east\u2013west axis along the central shopping street of Oxford Street to the financial centre of the City of London. It was later extended to the western suburb of Ealing. In the 1930s, plans were created to expand the route into the new suburbs, taking over steam-hauled outer-suburban routes to the borders of London and beyond to the east. These projects were mostly realised after the Second World War, when construction stopped and the unused tunnels were used as air-raid shelters and factories. However, suburban growth was limited by the Metropolitan Green Belt: of the planned expansions one (to Denham, Buckinghamshire) was cut short and the eastern terminus of Ongar ultimately closed in 1994 due to low patronage; part of this section between Epping and Ongar later became the Epping Ongar Railway. The Central line has mostly been operated by automatic train operation since a major refurbishment in the 1990s, although all trains still carry drivers. Many of its stations are of historic interest, from turn-of-the-century Central London Railway buildings in west London to post-war modernist designs on the West Ruislip and Hainault branches, as well as Victorian-era Eastern Counties Railway and Great Eastern Railway buildings east of Stratford, from when the line to Epping was a rural branch line.\nIn terms of total passengers, the Central line is the third busiest on the Underground. In 2019, over 300\u00a0million passenger journeys were recorded on the line. As of 2013, it operated the second-most frequent service on the network, with 34 trains per hour (tph) operating for half-an-hour in the westbound direction during the morning peak, and between 27 and 30 tph during the rest of the peak. The Elizabeth line, which began most of its core operation from 24 May 2022, provides interchanges with the Central line at Stratford, Liverpool Street, Tottenham Court Road, Ealing Broadway, and Bond Street, relieving overcrowding.\nHistory.\nCentral London Railway.\nThe Central London Railway (CLR) was given permission in 1891 for a tube line between Shepherd's Bush and a station at Cornhill, and the following year an extension to Liverpool Street was authorised, with a station at Bank instead of at Cornhill. The line was built following the streets above rather than running underneath buildings, because purchase of wayleave under private properties would have been expensive. While the tracks in opposite directions mostly run side-by-side, in some places one line runs above another due to lack of space, with platforms at different levels at St Paul's, Chancery Lane and Notting Hill Gate stations. The tunnels were bored with the nominal diameter of , increased on curves, reduced to near to stations. The tunnels generally rise approaching a station, to aid braking, and fall when leaving, to aid acceleration.\nThe Central London Railway was the first underground railway to have the station platforms illuminated electrically. All the platforms were lit by Crompton automatic electric arc lamps, and other station areas by incandescent lamps. Both the City and South London Railway and the Waterloo and City Railway were lit by gas lamps, primarily because the power stations for these lines had been designed with no spare capacity to power electric lighting. With the white glazed tiling, all underground Central London Railway platforms were very brightly lit. The use of electric lighting was further made possible because the Central London was also the first tube railway to use AC electrical distribution and the substation transformers, not compatible with DC, were able to reduce the voltage to the level required for lighting. Earlier tube lines used DC power generators at the 500volts required to run the trains.\nThe line between Shepherd's Bush and Bank was formally opened on 30 June 1900, public services beginning on 30 July. With a uniform fare of 2d the railway became known as the \"Twopenny Tube\". It was initially operated by electric locomotives, with motor armatures built directly on the axles to eliminate noise-producing gearboxes, hauling carriages. This did not allow springing, and the locomotives' considerable unsprung weight caused much vibration in the buildings above the line, so that the railway rebuilt the locomotives to use geared drives. This allowed higher-speed and lighter motors to be used, which reduced the unsprung, and total, weight of the locomotive. The railway also tried an alternative approach: it converted four coaches to accommodate motors and control gear. Two of these experimental motor coaches were used in a 6-coach train, the control gear being operated by the system used on the Waterloo and City Railway. The modified locomotives were a considerable improvement, but lighter purpose-designed motor coaches were even better. The CLR ordered 64 new motor cars designed to use Sprague's recently developed traction control system. The CLR was exclusively using the resulting electric multiple units by 1903.\nIn July 1907, the fare was increased to 3d for journeys of more than seven or eight stations. The line was extended westwards with a loop serving a single platform at Wood Lane for the 1908 Franco-British Exhibition. A reduced fare of 1d, for a journey of three or fewer stations, was introduced in 1909, and season tickets became available from 1911. The extension to Liverpool Street opened the following year, providing access to the Great Eastern Railway station and the adjacent Broad Street railway station by escalators. The Central London Railway was absorbed into the Underground Group on 1 January 1913.\nIn 1911, the Great Western Railway won permission for a line from Ealing Broadway to a station near to the CLR's Shepherd's Bush station, with a connection to the West London Railway, and agreement to connect the line to the Central London Railway, and for the CLR to run trains to Ealing Broadway. Construction of the extension from the CLR to Ealing Broadway started in 1912, but opening was delayed by World War I. The CLR purchased new rolling stock for the extension, which arrived in 1915 and was stored before being lent to the Bakerloo line. The rolling stock returned when the extension opened in 1920.\nIn 1912, plans were published for a railway from Shepherd's Bush to Turnham Green and Gunnersbury, allowing the Central London Railway to run trains on London and South Western Railway (L&amp;SWR) tracks to Richmond. The route was authorised in 1913, but work had not begun by the outbreak of war the following year. In 1919, an alternative route was published, with a tunnelled link to the disused L&amp;SWR tracks south of their Shepherd's Bush station then via Hammersmith (Grove Road) railway station. Authorisation was granted in 1920, but the connection was never built, and the L&amp;SWR tracks were used by the Piccadilly line when it was extended west of Hammersmith in 1932.\nLondon Transport and the Second World War.\nOn 1 July 1933, the Central London Railway and other transport companies in the London area were amalgamated to form the London Passenger Transport Board, generally known as London Transport. The railway was known as the \"Central London Line\", becoming the \"Central line\" in 1937. The 1935\u201340 New Works Programme included a major expansion of the line. To the west new tracks were to be built parallel with the Great Western Railway's New North Main Line as far as Denham. To the east, new tunnels would run to just beyond Stratford station, where the line would be extended over the London &amp; North Eastern Railway suburban branch to Epping and Ongar in Essex, as well as a new underground line between Leytonstone and Newbury Park mostly under Eastern Avenue so as to serve the new suburbs of north Ilford and the Hainault Loop. Twenty two level crossings would also be removed, grade separating the line. Platforms at central London stations would also be lengthened to allow for 8-car trains.\nConstruction started, the tunnels through central London being expanded and realigned and the stations lengthened, but it proved impossible to modify Wood Lane station to take 8-car trains and a new station at White City was authorised in 1938. The line was converted to the London Underground four-rail electrification system in 1940. The positive outer rail is higher than on other lines, because even after reconstruction work the tunnels are slightly smaller. Most of the tunnels for the extensions to the east of London had been built by 1940, but work slowed due to the outbreak of the Second World War until eventually being suspended in June. The unused tunnels between Leytonstone and Newbury Park were equipped by the Plessey Company as an aircraft components factory, opening in March 1942 and employing 2,000 people. Elsewhere, people used underground stations as night shelters during air raids. The unopened Bethnal Green station had space for 10,000 people. In March 1943, 173 people died there in a crowd crush when a woman entering the shelter fell at the bottom of the steps and those following fell on top of her.\nPost war.\nConstruction restarted after the war, and the western extension opened as far as Greenford in 1947 and West Ruislip in 1948. The powers to extend the line to Denham were never used due to post-war establishment of the Green Belt around London, which restricted development of land in the area. The eastern extension opened as far as Stratford in December 1946, with trains continuing without passengers to reverse in the cutting south of Leyton. In 1947, the line opened to Leytonstone, and then Woodford and Newbury Park. Stations from Newbury Park to Woodford via Hainault and from Woodford to Loughton were served by tube trains from 1948. South of Newbury Park, the west-facing junction with the main line closed in the same year to allow expansion of Ilford carriage depot. The extension transferred to London Underground management in 1949, when Epping began to be served by Central line trains. The single line to Ongar was served by a steam autotrain operated by British Rail (BR) until 1957, when the line was electrified. BR trains accessed the line via a link from Temple Mills East to Leyton.\nOn 8 April 1953, 12 people were killed and 46 were injured as a result of a rear-end collision in a tunnel just to the east of Stratford station, caused by driver error after a signal failure.\nThe Central line stations east of Stratford kept their goods service for a time, being worked from Temple Mills, with the Hainault loop stations served via Woodford. The BR line south of Newbury Park closed in 1956 and Hainault loop stations lost their goods service in 1965, the rest of the stations on the line following in 1966. Early morning passenger trains from Stratford (Liverpool Street on Sundays) ran to Epping or Loughton until 1970. The single-track section from Epping to Ongar was electrified in 1957 and then operated as a shuttle service using short tube trains. However, carrying only 100 passengers a day and losing money, the section closed in 1994, and is now used by the heritage Epping Ongar Railway.\nThe entire Central line was shut between January and March 2003, after 32 passengers were injured when a train derailed at Chancery Lane due to a traction motor falling on to the track. The line was not fully reopened until June. In 2003, the infrastructure of the Central line was partly privatised in a public\u2013private partnership, managed by the Metronet consortium. Metronet went into administration in 2007, and Transport for London (TfL) took over its responsibilities.\nRoute.\nRailway line.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Routemap/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe Central line is long and serves 49 stations. The line is predominantly double-track, widened to three tracks for short sections south of Leytonstone and west of White City; no track is shared with any other line, though some sections run parallel to other routes. Total track length is , of which is in tunnel; this track is electrified with a four-rail DC system: a central conductor rail is energised at\u00a0\u2212210\u00a0V and a rail outside the running rail at +420\u00a0V, giving a potential difference of 630\u00a0V.\nThe single-track line north of Epping, which closed in 1994, is now the Epping Ongar heritage railway. Shuttle services operate, mostly on some weekends and for special events, between North Weald and Ongar and North Weald and Coopersale. These do not call at Blake Hall, as the station platform was removed by London Transport after the station closed, and the remaining building is now a private residence.\nThe section between Leyton and just south of Loughton is the oldest railway alignment in use on the current London Underground system, having been opened on 22 August 1856 by the Eastern Counties Railway (ECR). Loughton to Epping was opened on 24 April 1865 by the ECR's successor, the Great Eastern Railway (GER), along with the section to Ongar. The Hainault Loop was originally the greater part of the Fairlop Loop opened by the GER on 1 May 1903.\nThe line has three junctions:\nThe Central line is essentially self-contained, but connections to other railways currently exist indirectly via Ruislip Depot, namely to the Chiltern Main Line beside West Ruislip station, and from the same depot to the Metropolitan and Piccadilly lines. Other connections, now closed, once existed at Newbury Park (ex-GER, closed in stages 1947-1956), at Leyton (ex-GER, closed 1971), just north of White City (ex-GWR, closed 1938), at North Acton (ex-GWR, closed 1964), and at Ealing Broadway (connection to GWR, closed 1972, and siding connections to the District Line, closed 2010).\nThe line has the shortest escalator on the London Underground system, at Stratford (previously at Chancery Lane), with a rise of and, at Stratford and Greenford, the only stations where escalators take passengers \"up\" to the trains. The escalator at Greenford was the last one with wooden treads on the system until it was replaced in March 2014. They were exempt from fire regulations because they were outside the tunnel system.\nThe line has the shallowest underground Tube platforms on the system, at Redbridge, just below street level, and the sharpest curve, the Caxton Curve, between Shepherds Bush and White City.\nRolling stock.\nFormer rolling stock.\nWhen the railway opened in 1900, it was operated by electric locomotives hauling carriages with passengers boarding via lattice gates at each end. The locomotives had a large unsprung mass, which caused vibrations that could be felt in the buildings above the route. After an investigation by the Board of Trade, by 1903 the carriages had been adapted to run as trailers and formed with new motor cars into electric multiple units. The Central London Railway trains normally ran with six cars: four trailers and two motor-cars, although some trailers were later equipped with control equipment to allow trains to be formed with 3 cars. Work started in 1912 on an extension to Ealing Broadway, and new more powerful motor-cars were ordered. These arrived in 1915, but completion of the extension was delayed because of World War I, and the cars were stored. In 1917, they were lent to the Bakerloo line, where they ran on the newly opened extension to Watford Junction. Returning in 1920/21, and formed with trailers converted from the original carriages, they became the Ealing Stock. In 1925\u201328, the trains were rebuilt, replacing the gated ends with air-operated doors, allowing the number of guards to be reduced to two. After reconstruction of the Central London Railway tunnels, the trains were replaced by Standard Stock transferred from other lines and the last of the original trains ran in service in 1939.\nThe Standard Stock ran as 6-car trains until 1947, when 8-car trains became possible after Wood Lane was replaced by a new station at White City. More cars were transferred from other lines as they were replaced by 1938 Stock. In the early 1960s, there was a plan to re-equip the Piccadilly line with new trains and transfer its newer Standard Stock to the Central line to replace the older cars there, some of which had been stored in the open during the Second World War and were becoming increasingly unreliable. However, after the first deliveries of 1959 Stock were running on the Piccadilly it was decided to divert this stock to the Central line, together with extra non-driving motor cars to lengthen the trains from 7-car to 8-car. 1962 Stock was ordered to release the 1959 Stock for the Piccadilly line. The last Standard Stock train ran on the Central line in 1963, and by May 1964 all 1959 Stock had been released to the Piccadilly line.\nThe single track section from Epping to Ongar was not electrified until 1957, prior to which the service was operated by an autotrain, carriages attached to a steam locomotive capable of being driven from either end, hired from British Railways, and an experimental AEC three-car lightweight diesel multiple unit operated part of the shuttle service Monday-Friday in June 1952. Upon electrification, 1935 Stock was used, until replaced by four-car sets of 1962 Stock specially modified to cope with the limited current. The section closed in 1994, and is now the heritage Epping Ongar Railway.\nA shuttle operated on the section from Hainault to Woodford after a train of 1960 Stock was modified to test the automatic train operation system to be used on the Victoria line. As each 1967 Stock train was delivered, it ran in test for three weeks on the shuttle service.\nCurrent rolling stock.\nWhen the signalling on the Central line needed replacement by the late 1980s, it was decided to bring forward the replacement of the 1962 Stock, due at about the time as the replacement of the 1959 Stock. The signalling was to be replaced with an updated version of the Automatic Train Operation (ATO) system used on the Victoria line, the line traction supply boosted and new trains built. Prototype trains were built with two double and two single doors hung on the outside of each carriage of the train, and with electronic traction equipment that gave regenerative and rheostatic braking.\nIn accordance with this plan, the first 8-car trains of 1992 Stock entered service in 1993, and while the necessary signalling works for ATO were in progress, One Person Operation (OPO) was phased in between 1993 and 1995. Automatic train protection was commissioned from 1995 to 1997 and ATO from 1999 to 2001, with a centralised control centre in West London.\nThe five-year Central Line Improvement Programme (CLIP) to refurbish the 30-year-old trains started in 2023, as it was considered cheaper than replacing the trains. New motors, lighting, doors, and seats will be installed, and the trains will have passenger information displays, wheelchair areas and CCTV. The programme is being carried out at a new Train Modification Unit (TMU) in Acton, and had been expected to complete in late 2023. In November 2020 TfL announced that this had been delayed due to the COVID-19 pandemic, with expected completion by the end of 2025. By January 2025, with \u00a3160m of the original \u00a3500m budget spent, only one refurbished train had entered service with a further 3 expected to be completed by the end of 2025. A timetable that would improve train frequencies, relieving delays and overcrowding, would not be implemented until December 2024. An expert suggested that in hindsight, given the problems with CLIP, it would have been better to buy new trains.\nFuture rolling stock.\nIn the mid 2010s, TfL began a process of ordering new rolling stock to replace trains on the Piccadilly, Central, Bakerloo and Waterloo &amp; City lines. TfL explained that the 1992 Stock used on the Central and Waterloo &amp; City lines was significantly less reliable than more modern rolling stock. A feasibility study into the new trains showed that new generation trains and re-signalling could increase capacity on the Central line by 25%, with 36 trains per hour.\nIn June 2018, the Siemens Mobility Inspiro design was selected. These trains would have an open gangway design, wider doorways, air conditioning and the ability to run automatically with a new signalling system. TfL could only afford to order Piccadilly line trains at a cost of \u00a31.5bn. However, the contract with Siemens includes an option for 100 trains for the Central line in the future. This would take place after the delivery of the Piccadilly line trains in the 2030s.\nDepots.\nThere are three depots: Ruislip, Hainault and White City. White City depot first opened in 1900 when the initial line went into operation; Ruislip and Hainault depots were completed in 1939. During the Second World War, anti-aircraft guns were made at Ruislip Depot and the U.S. Army Transportation Corps assembled rolling stock at Hainault between 1943 and 1945. As part of the construction of the Westfield London shopping centre, the depot at White City was replaced underground, opening in 2007.\nServices.\nDuring the off-peak, services on the Central line are grouped by branch lines: trains on the West Ruislip branch run to/from Epping, while trains to/from Ealing Broadway run on the Hainault Loop. Services at peak times are less structured, and trains can run between any two terminus stations at irregular intervals (e.g. from Ealing Broadway to Epping).\nAs of \u00a02020[ [update]], the typical off-peak service, in trains per hour (tph), is:\nThe above services combine to give a total of 24 trains per hour each way (one every 2 minutes and 30 seconds) in the core section between White City and Leytonstone. At peak times, the frequency increases further, with up to 35 trains per hour each way in the core section.\nA 24-hour Night Tube service began on the Central line on 19 August 2016, running on Friday and Saturday nights. Night tube services are:\nPeak-time frequency.\nIn September 2013, the frequency in the morning peak period was increased to 35 trains per hour, giving the line the most intensive train service in the UK at the time. Before that date, the Victoria line held the record with 33 trains per hour; it regained it in May 2017 with an increased frequency of 36 trains per hour (one every 100 seconds) during peak periods.\nProposed and cancelled extensions.\nHillingdon.\nThe Central crosses over the Metropolitan and Piccadilly lines' shared Uxbridge branch near West Ruislip depot, and a single track linking the two routes was laid in 1973. In the 2010s, the London Borough of Hillingdon has lobbied TfL to divert some or all Central trains along this to Uxbridge, as West Ruislip station is located in a quiet suburb and Uxbridge is a much more densely populated regional centre. TfL has stated that the link will be impossible until the Metropolitan line's signalling is upgraded in 2017.\nAdditional stations.\nThe Central line runs directly below Shoreditch High Street station and an interchange has been desired locally since it opened in 2010. The station would lie between Liverpool Street and Bethnal Green, one of the longest gaps between stations in inner London. Although there would be benefits to this interchange, it was ruled out on grounds of cost, the disruption it would cause to the Central line while being built and because the platforms would be too close to sidings at Liverpool Street and would not be developed until after the Crossrail-developed Elizabeth line became fully operational.\nThe developers of the \"First Central\" business park at Park Royal, west London, were planning a new station between North Acton and Hanger Lane. This would have served the business park and provided a walking-distance interchange with Park Royal Piccadilly line station. This is not being actively pursued; London Underground said that the transport benefits of a Park Royal station on the Central line were not sufficient to justify the costs of construction.\nHarlow extension.\nIn 2021, Harlow District Council proposed extending the line from its eastern terminus in Epping to Harlow. They argued this would reduce travel times to Epping and London, and help with efforts to add 19,000 new homes to the town and expand the population to 130,000. However, no funding has been allocated for this proposed extension.\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "72790", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72790", "title": "Dickie Duck", "text": ""}
{"id": "72791", "revid": "31736546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72791", "title": "Trudy (Disney)", "text": ""}
{"id": "72792", "revid": "21963567", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72792", "title": "Lada Samara", "text": "Range of supermini cars produced by Lada (2004-2018)\nThe VAZ-2108, known as the Lada Samara in much of Western Europe (codenamed and later officially badged as the Lada Sputnik in its native Russia), is a series of small family cars produced by Soviet/Russian vehicle manufacturer AvtoVAZ under the Lada brand between 1984 and 2013. \nThe model name Samara originally was used only for exported models, in the Soviet Union the same model was called Sputnik (\"fellow traveler\", \"satellite\") until 1991, when the sedan version of the Samara entered in production, using the export name. \nIt was the first front-wheel drive serial car built in the Soviet Union since the LuAZ-969V. The Samara was repeatedly modified and restyled during the years of production before it was finally discontinued in December 2013.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nVAZ-2108 (1984).\nThe Samara was a car that combined a robust build and ease of maintenance with a modern style. It was produced in various three, four and five-door designs with 1.1, 1.3 and 1.5-litre petrol engines. VAZ had hoped that the Samara would enable it to compete for sales in the mainstream European car market, where the company's traditional Fiat 124-based \"Zhiguli\" models were looked upon as increasingly outmoded and out of date. It was the second autonomous design from VAZ (the first was the Niva SUV), and the first model not based on the Fiat 124 mechanicals.\nDevelopment.\nVAZ had made their first front-wheel drive prototype, the VAZ-1101, in the early 1970s. The engine from the Fiat 127 was used. Further development of this project led to the \"Ladoga\" three-door hatchback prototype in 1976. The decision to build the Samara was taken on 16 September 1978, the intention being to build a car with strong potential sales in Western European export markets. Proposals for a distinctive saloon, four-door, and both three- and five-door hatchback were considered; it was decided instead the saloon should share the three-door hatchback's sheetmetal forward of the C-pillar. (Design work on the four-door went toward the VAZ-2110 instead.) During its development, VAZ designers paid careful attention to the contemporary Renault 9, Volkswagen Golf, Ford Escort Mark III, Opel Kadett, and Volvo 340, which would be the new VAZ-2108's main competitors. Front suspension was MacPherson struts, rear by torsion bar. It also had rack and pinion steering, another Soviet first.\nOn 31 December 1979, the first VAZ-2108 prototype was completed. It strongly resembled the earlier Ladoga, and the VAZ-1106 saloon. While named \"Sputnik\" at home, it was more commonly known as the Vos'merka (\"Eighth\") after the last digit in the model code. The export version was named after the Samara River, a tributary to the Volga. The first cars left the production line on 18 December 1984. These, the three-door hatchbacks (the only model available at first), were powered by a belt-driven SOHC 1,288\u00a0cc inline-four with , and were fitted with a four-speed gearbox. The three-door was joined by a five-door, and by models with 1,099\u00a0cc (a destroked version of the 1.3) or 1,499\u00a0cc (a bored-out 1288) engines. (The head was developed in co-operation with Porsche, though most Western observers assumed Porsche's involvement went beyond just engines, and the carburetors in connection with Solex.)\nIn 1987, the model range was joined by the 21083, with a 1,499\u00a0cc engine and five-speed gearbox, and the 21081, with a , 1,099\u00a0cc engine. The 1.1 was an export-only variant. Top speeds were (1.1), (1.3) and (1.5); fuel economy was (1099), (1288), or (1499). VAZ also debuted the 2109 five-door hatchback that year, also available with the 1.1, 1.3, and 1.5-litre engines. In 1989, the 21099 saloon followed, which had a new bonnet, grille, wings, and -longer rear overhang, as well as an improved dashboard. The 21099's front-end styling was adopted on the 2109 in 1992 and the 2108 in 1994.\nA number of other minor alterations followed, including fuel-injected engines to meet emissions regulations in export markets. On the earlier Samaras the front clip had been a separate piece, surrounding the headlights. On the sedan version, the fenders go all the way up to the headlights and the lip of the bonnet dips between the headlights and meets the slimmer grille. Full production of the 21099 began in December 1990, with models 210993 (1288), 21099 (1499). The saloon, intended as a premium model compared to the hatchback, was given a distinctive branding in some export markets: Diva (Belgium), Sagona (France), Forma (Germany). Belgium also offered a locally built convertible. The 1.1 and 1.3 were eventually taken out of production, having already been withdrawn from export markets, while the 1.5's power increased to .\nSpecial models.\nA Wankel engined Samara three-door hatchback, the 2108\u201391, powered by a two-rotor VAZ-415 (with two 654\u00a0cc rotors) was sold in Russia only, and only in very small numbers. With a five-speed gearbox, it was priced at 56,000 rubles. Due to severe reliability problems, this remained rare, most commonly bought by police and other agencies to use as a pursuit vehicle, for which its top speed was ideal; it was capable of in eight seconds. The subsequent 2109-91 five-door hatchback had the same VAZ-415 and gearbox.\nThere was also a rear-engined Samara 4x4 rally car, also known as the NAMI 0290, built for the 1985 Soyuz Rally; it had permanent four-wheel drive and a 1,568\u00a0cc Zhiguli-based engine, over the rear axle. It was nicknamed Appelsin (\"orange\", for its paint), and used ZAZ-1102 doors (though the body was mostly fiberglass, weighing only ) and still using factory Samara wheels.\nThe 1987 mid-engined Samara-EVA had a turbocharged 16-valve 1,860\u00a0cc engine (with electronic fuel injection) of ; a naturally-aspirated version produced . The only component left untouched was the original Zhuguli 2106 block.\nAn even more powerful Samara S-Proto appeared in 1989, putting out . Most notably, the Samara T3 came seventh in class in the 1990 Paris-Dakar Rally and fifth in 1991, piloted by Jacky Ickx. The T3 did not contain many Samara parts however, using the Porsche 959's four-wheel drive system and a 3.6-litre Porsche flat-six. It was developed by French concessionaire Lada-Poch together with NAMI and the Tupolev aircraft factory. In the mid-1980s Lada developed its first ever convertible car on its own, then actually entering production and quickly exported to most European countries, called the Lada Natasha Cabriolet, a four-seater convertible that was based on the popular Samara 1300/1500 models with a manual opening and closing canvas roof. Also in some European car markets the LADA Niva 4X4 1600\u00a0cc engine was also available for both the Lada Natasha and Lada Samara cars during the 1990s.\nThe AvtoVAZ division VIS-AVTO produced special commercial vans and refrigerated trucks for various purposes on the VAZ 2108 platform.\nExports.\nThe Samara was sold all across the world, from Australia to Canada, in most European countries, and throughout the COMECON sphere. The build quality of the Samara was better than that of most Eastern European models. In most nations, versions and equipments were decided on and installed by the dealers themselves. These local varieties ranged from decals and badges to the convertible conversions offered in Belgium and Germany. The Samara was often sold under other names as well, in particular the VAZ 21099 (Samara Sedan), which was sold as the Sagona (France, Canada, and Spain), Diva (Belgium and the Netherlands), Forma (Germany) and Sable (Australia and New Zealand).\nIt was engineered in right-hand drive for the UK market, where it was sold from November 1987. It was sold there until VAZ withdrew from the UK market in July 1997, and was the most popular Lada model sold in the UK during the 23 years that the brand was sold there.\nIn certain markets where the tax structure benefited diesels (such as France and the Benelux), the Samara was available with a 1.5-litre Peugeot diesel engine in 1995\u201397.\nWith VAZ facing financial hardships in 1996\u20131997, exports began coming to a halt. The Lada Samara disappeared from Canada after the 1997 model year, leaving the Niva as the only Lada sold in Canada for the 1998 model year. Exports to Australia and Great Britain ended around the same time. The biggest problem was GM's reluctance to sell the fuel-injection kits necessary for exports, as they doubted VAZ's ability to pay. Faced with parts shortages, tax problems, and the chaos and criminality of Russia in the mid-nineties, export efforts languished and RHD production was no longer feasible.\nAs a partial response to this situation, a higher-quality version for the European market, the Lada EuroSamara or Samara Baltic in some markets, was assembled in Finland at the Valmet Automotive plant in Uusikaupunki. Production started in mid-1996 and ended in July 1998, with 14,000 cars made from 85 per cent Russian parts.\nLada Samara was also sold in Singapore in the 1990s. However, Lada withdrew from the Singapore market shortly after due to the COE system that made car ownership very expensive. Lada cars were proven impractical for Singapore. Furthermore, it was often criticised for low quality.\nBritish market.\nThe United Kingdom had to wait nearly three years for the Samara to go on sale, after its launch in the USSR, but sales were reasonably strong when the first versions of the car left forecourts, in November 1987.\nIn a road test conducted by \"The Motor\" magazine, it scored more than 5 points out of 10 in most aspects and was praised for having a remarkably extensive list of standard equipment, \"impressive\" engine, good visibility and performance for its price segment, lowered fuel consumption, being good at cornering and \"tolerably quiet\", but also received criticism for having a cheap-looking interior and plastic mouldings and being \"very turbulent\" on poor roads.\nThe \u00a34,795 price at introduction \"was much less expensive\" than the competing Peugeot 309 or Ford Escort 1300. The Samara remained on sale in the United Kingdom right up to 4 July 1997, when the decision was made to withdraw from Great Britain and most other export markets.\nIn countries where ruggedness was more important, it was more successful, selling reasonably well in Canada, Australia, and Finland for instance.\nThe attempt to appeal to a wider clientele failed; while an improvement over previous Ladas, the Samara's higher price pitched it against stiffer West European competition.\nBy the time of the Samara's launch, the British small family car market was effectively split into two segments: The large mainstream market was dominated by mass-market manufacturers, such as Ford, Vauxhall, and Volkswagen. The budget market consisted of Eastern European and Far Eastern brands, such as \u0160koda, FSO, Hyundai, and Proton.\nThe aging Samara came bottom of the annual 1996 and 1997 JD Power and Top Gear surveys in Great Britain.\nVersions.\nInitially sold as a three- or five-door hatchback with a 1.3 petrol engine, a 1.5 version became available in October 1988. Metallic paint became an option for the first time in November 1989 when the 1.5 SLX was launched. A new entry-level model arrived in July 1990 when the 1.1 petrol engine was added to the range (Select or L). An updated version of the Samara was launched in April 1991, with all new trim levels. This was followed by the introduction of the VAZ 21099 saloon version 15 months later. The saloon also became available as a sporty 1.5 \"Juno\" from July 1994, featuring alloy wheels, swoopy, ill-fitting sideskirts and a rear spoiler. A fuel injected engine became available on the 1.3 and 1.5 models in August 1996.\nAustralian market.\nThe Samara was introduced into the Australian market in July 1988, and was offered in three-door and convertible body styles. A three-door variant called the Bizivan was also offered, which was sold without rear seats in order to qualify as a commercial van, and therefore, lower import duties. In 1990, the range was pared down to a single five-door model, marketed as the Lada Cevaro. The 3-door returned in 1994 as the Lada Volante and the four-door was introduced as the Lada Sable. Imports had ceased by 1996.\nIn 1988, approximately 6,000 Lada Samaras were modified by Peter Brock's Special Vehicles operation that had previously made high performance Holden Commodores. The cars would be known as the Lada Samara Sedan Brock Delux and included a few subtle Brock-devised suspension tweaks to improve the car's low-speed ride, as well as a special body kit. It cost about A$3,000 more than the base model Samara.\nSamara 2 (1997).\nAfter 1997, the Samara was mostly sold in its homeland only, although it was still sold in some foreign markets with less strict emissions regulations. The Samara 2, a lightly facelifted version with a , single-point fuel-injected version of the 1,499\u00a0cc engine and a better gearbox, went on sale in limited numbers as the 2115 (four-door sedan) in 1997. The 2115 was built at the VAZ special vehicles unit. Brakes and interior were also upgraded, incorporating parts from the VAZ 2110. Full production on the main line in Togliatti began in 2000, in 2002 a five-door (2114) was added and the 2113 three-door followed in September 2004. The three-door was not originally planned to be built, but was added as a response to strong dealer demand.\nIn late 2001, the 1500 engine was updated with multi-point fuel injection, enabling it to meet Euro 3 emissions regulations. The last first generation Samara rolled off the Togliatti production line in 2004, ending 20 years of production there. Production of the \"classic\" Samara 2109/21099 continued at ZAZ in Ukraine as of 2004, and from May 2007 in Kazakhstan by Azia Avto.\nIn January 2007, an upgraded Samara 2, using the modern 1.6-litre VAZ-11183-20 engine first seen in the VAZ 2110 went on sale. While the Lada 110 and the Lada Priora have taken much of the Samara's market share at home, the Samara retains a clear price advantage and steady demand. The production of sedan Lada Samara 2 was stopped in December 2012; hatchbacks were still assembled until the end of 2013.\nAs with the VAZ 2108, the AvtoVAZ division VIS-AVTO produced special commercial vans and refrigerated trucks for various purposes.\nTechnical specifications.\nEngine type\n at 5600\u00a0rpm (1300)\n at 4800\u00a0rpm (1500)\n at 5600\u00a0rpm (1600)\n at 6000\u00a0rpm (Wankel)\nDrivetrain\nChassis\nThere are various commercial and specialty conversions.\nSafety by modern standards.\nThe RosLada-made 2109 version of the Samara scored 2.7 points out of 16 in a frontal crash test conducted by the Russian ARCAP safety assessment program in 2002, demonstrating a durable car body but lacking modern passive safety equipment. Two years later, the 2114 five-door variant was awarded half a star out of a possible four by ARCAP, showing moderate pressure on the head, neck, chest and hips of the crash test dummy but excessive on the shins.\nTrims.\nFirst generation.\nFor 2003, there were three levels trims: Standard (the notation (standing after the index model) 00, models with distributed injection of fuel 20, such as the VAZ-21083-00), Norma (the notation 01 and 21) and Luxe (the notation 02 and 22) that vehicles with different bodies differed.\nIn the version with body three-door hatchback Standard grade includes the onboard control system, tweed seat upholstery, metallic color, luggage rack, front head restraints; in version 20 were also microprocessor ignition system, the electro-door locks, immobilizer. In the configuration Norma added tweed seat covers with pockets in the front seats, door trim tweed, trim the trunk, anti-glare visor with mirror; in the version of 21 were also converter and a system for collecting gasoline vapors. In the Luxe configuration added headlamp cleaning system, exterior mirrors with antidazzle effect and tinted windows.\nIn the version with five-door hatchback body Standard equipment included a tweed seat upholstery with pockets in the front seats, fabric inserts tweed upholstered doors, trunk trim, trunk rack, front head restraints, metallic color; version of the 20 had the same differences as in other bodies. In the configuration Norma added rear headrests and anti-glare visor with mirror. In the Luxe configuration added front electric windows and fog lamps.\nIn the version with the sedan body configuration were the same as the five-door hatchback, with the exception of the fog lights that have appeared in version Norma.\nSecond generation.\nThere were two levels of equipment: Norma and Luxe. The Norma grade included steel wheels, immobilizer, central locking, tweed seat upholstery and door, height adjustable steering column, front electric windows, front head restraints, tailgate spoiler / tailgate, moldings on the doors. Luxe trim different caps on the wheels, trip computer, velvet upholstery seats and doors, athermal glass windows, rear headrests, a mirror in the sun visor of the passenger and heated front seats.\nReferences.\nCitations\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "72793", "revid": "275202", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72793", "title": "Pete (Disney)", "text": "Disney cartoon character, antagonist of Mickey Mouse\nPete (also named Peg Leg Pete, Bad Pete, and Black Pete, among other names) is a cartoon character created by Walt Disney and Ub Iwerks of The Walt Disney Company. Pete is traditionally depicted as the villainous arch-nemesis of Mickey Mouse, and was made notorious for his repeated attempts to kidnap Minnie Mouse. Pete is the oldest continuing Disney character, having debuted in the cartoon \"Alice Solves the Puzzle\" in 1925. He originally bore the appearance of an anthropomorphic bear, but with the advent of Mickey in 1928, he was defined as a cat.\nPete appeared in 67 animated short films between 1925 and 1954, having been featured in the \"Alice Comedies\" and \"Oswald the Lucky Rabbit\" cartoons, and later in the \"Mickey Mouse\", \"Donald Duck\", and \"Goofy\" cartoons. During World War II, he played the long-suffering sergeant trying to make a soldier out of Donald Duck in a series of animated shorts.\nPete's final appearance during this era was \"The Lone Chipmunks\" (1954), which was the final installment of a three-part \"Chip 'n' Dale\" series. He also appeared in the featurettes \"Mickey's Christmas Carol\" (1983) and \"The Prince and the Pauper\" (1990), the feature films \"A Goofy Movie\" (1995), \"An Extremely Goofy Movie\" (2000), \"Mickey's Once Upon a Christmas\" (1999), and \"\" (2004), and the short film \"Get a Horse!\" (2013).\nPete has also made many appearances in Disney comics. He appeared as Sylvester Shyster's dimwitted sidekick in the early \"Mickey Mouse\" comic strips before evolving into the main antagonist. In the Italian comics production he has been given a girlfriend, Trudy, and has come to be the central character in some stories. Pete later made several appearances in television, most extensively in \"Goof Troop\" (1992\u20131993) where he was given a different continuity, having a family and a regular job as a used car salesman and being a friend (albeit a poor one) to Goofy. He reprises this incarnation in 1999's \"Mickey's Once Upon a Christmas.\" Pete also appears in \"House of Mouse\" (2001\u20132003) as the greedy property owner who is always trying to exploit devious ways and loopholes to get the club shut down.\nAlthough Pete is often typecast as a villain, he has shown great versatility within the role, playing everything from a hardened criminal (\"The Dognapper\", \"The Lone Chipmunks\" and most of his depictions in comics) to a legitimate authority figure (\"Moving Day\", \"Donald Gets Drafted\", \"Mr. Mouse Takes a Trip\"), and from a menacing trouble maker (\"Building a Building\", \"Trombone Trouble\") to a victim of mischief himself (\"Timber\", \"The Vanishing Private\"). On some occasions, Pete has even played a sympathetic character, all the while maintaining his underlying menacing nature (\"Symphony Hour\", \"How to Be a Detective\"). In the animated TV series \"Mickey Mouse Clubhouse\", which is aimed at preschoolers, he is largely a friendly character, although his antics can occasionally prove an annoyance.\nTheatrical cartoons.\n\"Alice Comedies\".\nPete first appeared in the Walt Disney-produced 1920s \"Alice Comedies\" short subject series.\nHe first appeared in \"Alice Solves the Puzzle\" (February 15, 1925) as Bootleg Pete. His nickname was a reference to his career of bootlegging alcoholic beverages during Prohibition in the United States (1920-1933). In the cartoon, Pete's activities bring him to a beach in time to see Alice working on a crossword puzzle. Pete happens to be a collector of crossword puzzles, and identifies Alice's puzzle being a rare one missing from his collection. The rest of the short focuses on his antagonizing Alice and her drunken cat Julius to steal it.\nIn various later \"Alice Comedies\", the character again battled and competed with Alice and Julius, often under the aliases Putrid Pete and Pegleg Pete.\nOswald the Lucky Rabbit.\nDisney needed a villain to place against his new star Oswald the Lucky Rabbit, and Pete was introduced to his new adversary in the sixth Oswald short \"The Ocean Hop\" (September 8, 1927). Apparently inspired by Charles Lindbergh, the two enter an aeroplane race across the Atlantic Ocean. By the time producer Charles Mintz moved production of the Oswald series to his own studio, Pete had been established as the most consistently appearing supporting character to Oswald, and the character continued to appear in that role in the Oswald films directed and produced by Walter Lantz until 1937, making him essentially the only cartoon character at the time to frequently appear in shorts produced by two rival animation studios. His most notable non-Disney appearance was as a captain in \"Permanent Wave\" (September 29, 1929).\nMickey Mouse and friends.\nAfter leaving the Oswald series, Disney and his team created a cat villain for their new protagonist Mickey Mouse. Originally unnamed in the cartoons and called \"Terrible Tom\" in a January 1930 comic strip, the villain was called Pegleg Pete by April 1930, formalizing him as a new incarnation of the pre-Mickey bad guy. Animator Norm Ferguson, known for developing Pluto, also developed Pete's character in several shorts and he was made to resemble actor Wallace Beery. Pete appeared as Mickey's enemy beginning with the 1928 cartoons \"The Gallopin' Gaucho\" and \"Steamboat Willie\". While he was seen with two legs in those films, he first appeared with a peg-leg in 1930's \"The Cactus Kid\" and would speak for the first time. He would first appear in color in \"Moving Day\" (1936), which would drop the peg-leg. In the cartoons of the 1930s, Pete would be Mickey Mouse's nemesis, but would vary in professions, from an all-out outlaw (\"Gallopin' Gaucho\", \"The Cactus Kid\", \"Two-Gun Mickey\") to a brutal law-enforcer (\"Moving Day\", where Pete is a sheriff who serves Mickey and Donald Duck with an eviction notice). In the 1942 cartoon \"Symphony Hour\", Pete is a sympathetic impresario who sponsors Mickey's orchestra in a concert, which goes terribly wrong but is a great success. As Mickey's popularity declined, Pete would serve as an antagonist for Donald Duck and to a lesser extent Goofy and Chip 'n' Dale. In the 1940s, Pete would play the role of Donald's drill sergeant in several war-themed shorts (eg. \"Donald Gets Drafted\", \"The Old Army Game\")\nComics.\nIn Disney comics, Pete is consistently depicted as a professional criminal, who often teams up with Mickey Mouse enemies Sylvester Shyster, Eli Squinch, or the Phantom Blot.\nIn a promotional strip for the \"Mickey Mouse\" comic strip in early 1930, he was announced as \"Terrible Tom \u2013 The Vile Villain\", but this name was never used afterwards. In the April 24, 1930 strip, Mickey refers to him as \"Pegleg Pete\", and the name sticks. Pete first appeared in the \"Mickey Mouse\" comic strip on April 21, 1930, in the story \"Mickey Mouse in Death Valley\". This appearance is the first time since the \"Alice Comedies\" that Pete has a pegleg. Floyd Gottfredson occasionally committed goofs, with the pegleg switching from Pete's right leg to his left one. In the August 26, 1930 strip, Pete's peg swaps from right to left between one panel to the next. Pete's pegleg also appears on the left in the July 11 strip, and for the week of September 3 to 9. In Gottfredson's story \"The Mystery at Hidden River\" (1941\u201342), the pegleg disappeared, with Pete having two normal legs: when Mickey expressed surprise at this, Pete described one of his legs as a new, \"streamlined, modern\" artificial leg.\nIn 1944, Walt Disney decided to retire the character from the shorts; comics historian Alberto Becattini writes that this was \"partly because he was concerned that it seemed to be a case of mocking the afflicted, partly because the animators could never remember which leg was the wooden one.\" Pete also left the comic strip for a few years; his last appearance was in \"The World of Tomorrow\", which ran from July to September 1944.\nHowever, Pete continued to appear in the comic books \u2013 in 1945, he was the heavy in the Donald Duck comic \"Frozen Gold\" (\"Four Color\" #62, January 1945) and in Mickey's \"The Riddle of the Red Hat\" (\"Four Color\" #79, August 1945). He surfaced again in a number of \"giveaway\" comics in 1946 and 1947 \u2013 \"Mickey's Christmas Trees\" (\"Donald and Mickey Merry Christmas\", 1946), \"Donald and the Pirates\" (Cheerios Premium #W1, 1947), \"Mickey Mouse and the Haunted House\" (Cheerios Premium #W4, 1947), \"Mickey Mouse at the Rodeo\" (Cheerios Premium #X4, 1947), \"Mickey Mouse's Helicopter\" (\"Boys and Girls March of Comics Giveaway\" #8, 1947) \u2013 and came back to the comic books in \"Mickey Mouse and the Submarine Pirates\" (\"Four Color\" #141, March 1947).\nWith Pete still appearing in comic books, Gottfredson brought him back to the comic strip in \"Pegleg Pete Reforms\" (March 1947). His last appearance in the strip was in \"The Isle of Moola-La\" (April\u2013October 1952). From then on, he made many more appearances in the comic books.\nIn \"Mickey Mouse in Death Valley\" and in several subsequent storylines, Pete was portrayed as Sylvester Shyster's henchman. From 1934, he gradually started to work on his own. Sometimes, Pete also teams up with other bad guys in the Disney universe, such as Scrooge McDuck's enemies (the Beagle Boys and Magica De Spell), Mad Madam Mim, Captain Hook, and the Evil Queen. In various comics stories, his right-hand man is a skinny, bearded criminal named Scuttle. In Italian comics, his girlfriend Trudy (Trudy Van Tubb) is his frequent partner-in-crime. His cousin the \"mad scientist\" Portis is another, less frequent, accomplice.\nIn the 1943 comic strip story \"Mickey Mouse on a Secret Mission\", he was an agent of Nazi Germany, working as the henchman of Gestapo spy Von Weasel. In the 1950 comic strip story \"The Moook Treasure\", he is even portrayed as the Beria-like deputy chief of intelligence in a totalitarian state on the other side of the Iron Curtain.\nHis name in Italy has remained \"Pietro Gambadilegno\" (\"Pegleg Peter\"), or simply \"Gambadilegno\" (\"Pegleg\") even though it has been a long time since he was actually depicted with a pegleg in either comics or animated cartoons. In an Italian story by Romano Scarpa, \"Topolino e la dimensione Delta\" (\"Mickey Mouse and the Delta Dimension\", first published in 1959), Pete briefly removes his artificial leg, revealing his old foot-high pegleg underneath. Usually, Gambadilegno is depicted as the antagonist of Chief Seamus O'Hara (\"commissario Adamo Basettoni\") and Detective Casey (\"ispettore Manetta\") and is either a rival or a partner-in-crime of the Phantom Blot (\"Macchia Nera\").\nPete returned in the 2013 short \"Get a Horse!\", and was animated as having a peg left leg.\nWorld War II.\nDuring World War II, Pete was \"drafted\" by Walt Disney and appeared as the official mascot of the United States Merchant Marine. He appeared in Donald Duck's series of army films where he plays Donald's Drill Sergeant and later Sergeant and Jumpmaster. In the \"Mickey Mouse\" comic strip, he was a spy for Nazi Germany in the episode \"Mickey Mouse on a Secret Mission\" (1943), his motivation being the money.\nAncestry and family.\nComic book stories have depicted Pete as being descended from a long line of villains, highwaymen and outlaws. Even historical figures such as Attila the Hun, Blackbeard, Antonio L\u00f3pez de Santa Anna, Billy the Kid, and Cao Cao have been included among his ancestors. His mother is known only as Maw Pete and was mentioned in the story \"Donald Duck Finds Pirate Gold\" by Carl Barks and Jack Hannah (first published October 1942) as a resident of Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. Her only appearance was in \"The River Pirates\" (\"Walt Disney's Comics and Stories\" #336\u2013338, published September\u2013November 1968) by Carl Fallberg and Paul Murry. The same story introduced Li'l Pete, Black Pete's short fraternal twin brother. In December 1998, the \"Mickey Mouse\" comic strip introduced an older sister of Pete. Petula is the television host of the cooking show \"Petula's Pantry\". She finds time, however, to seek revenge against Mickey for condemning her \"baby brother\" to life imprisonment. Pete's twin brother, named Zeke appears in \"Double Trouble\", by Carl Fallberg and Paul Murry.\nBetter-known and more enduring as characters are two figures created by Romano Scarpa for Italian Disney comics. The first, Trudy Van Tubb, was introduced in (published in English as \"The Chirikawa Necklace\", first published on March 10, 1960). This female partner of Pete was presented as a childhood acquaintance of his: they are even shown as kids kidnapping Mickey when he was a baby. However, Trudy soon became Pete's girlfriend, his partner-in-crime and roommate\u2014whenever they hold residence out of prison, that is. Their relationship seems to have evolved to a long-standing common-law marriage. This is occasionally used in contrast to Mickey's eternal engagement to Minnie Mouse and Goofy's determination to remain a bachelor. Trudy and Pete also have two hellion nephews named Pierino and Pieretto who often serve as foils for Mickey or Mickey's nephews Morty and Ferdie.\nThe second character to be created by Scarpa is Pete's cousin, the criminal scientist Portis (Plottigat in the original Italian version; English name first used in \"Walt Disney's Comics and Stories\" 695, 2008). Portis first appeared in (published in English as \"The Weregoof's Curse\"; January 9, 1977).\nEd Nofziger is responsible for a third recurring character, an alternative girlfriend of Pete named Chirpy Bird. She first appeared in (\"Mickey Mouse and the Pigeon Police\", first published in December 1981) and starred as Pete's partner-in-crime in eight stories from 1981 to 1984. In France, she and Trudy are presented as the same character, being both renamed Gertrude, despite Trudy being a cat and Chirpy being a canary.\nIn \"Mickey Mouse Works\", Pete has another cousin named Zeke. Zeke is a criminal like Pete, but is wary of his cousin's attempts to double-cross him \"Just like old Times\". Mickey often uses this distrust to turn the two against one-another.\nIn \"Goof Troop\", Pete has a wife, Peg, and two children, PJ and Pistol. Alternatively, the comic book story \"Mickey's Strange Mission\" from \"Walt Disney's Comics &amp; Stories\" #245 (1961, by Carl Fallberg and Paul Murry) suggests a cultured ancestry for Pete, giving his full name as the genteel Percy P. Percival.\nIn \"Mickey Mouse Mixed-Up Adventures\", Pete has a nephew named Jimbo, who is voiced by Fred Stoller.\nIn the Italian comic story of 1998, (\"Mickey Mouse and Aunt Melinda's diary\"), Pete's grandma appears, depicted as the only honest member of his family.\nTelevision.\n\"DuckTales\".\nIn the first season of the 1987 TV series \"DuckTales\", Pete appeared in a few episodes. However, he was portrayed as a different character in each of his appearances. Because of this, he was not always a true villain, but sometimes just a selfish individual with no evil agenda. In a few episodes, he even makes peace with Scrooge's group in the end. The various Petes appear to be their own characters, as two of them lived in different time periods, and because Scrooge never \"recognizes\" him, despite any previous encounters he may have had with any of the other Petes. In all of his appearances Pete was voiced by Will Ryan.\n\"Goof Troop\".\nIn the 1992 TV series \"Goof Troop\", Pete has a family who includes his wife Peg, their two children Pete Junior (or PJ for short) and Pistol, and their dog Chainsaw with Pete taking on a more canine-like appearance. They live next door to Goofy (who went to high school with Pete) and his son Max. In the series, Pete is often the victim of Goofy's clumsiness and mishaps, usually resulting in the destruction of his property or great personal injury. Pete owns a used-car dealership, and though no longer openly villainous, is still conniving (as well as abrasive, obnoxious, truculent and suspicious) and often exploits his good-hearted and somewhat addled friend Goofy. Often, his schemes backfire, or he feels guilty about his oafish behavior and works to set things right. His wife Peg often attempts to rid Pete of his uncouth attitude, and his son PJ is a complete opposite of his father in behavior, as he is good friends with Goofy's son Max in the series and its spin-off movies \"A Goofy Movie\" (1995) and \"An Extremely Goofy Movie\" (2000). It is eventually revealed in the series' pilot episode \"Forever Goof\" that one of the reasons why Pete dislikes Goofy so much is that when Pete was a high school quarterback in a big football game, it was Goofy who accidentally caused Pete to fumble the ball and lose the game by hitting him in the face with a pom pom (Goofy was on the cheerleading squad).\n\"Mickey Mouse Works\" and \"House of Mouse\".\nAfter \"Goof Troop\", Pete reverted to his evil ways on \"Mickey Mouse Works\", where he frequently bullied the other characters and occasionally kidnapped Minnie Mouse. He would also play an average criminal (i.e. a house burglar). Then in \"House of Mouse\", he plays the role of the evil landlord. Several episodes involved his attempts to close the club by sabotaging the show, though there were times when he helped out the crew.\n\"Mickey Mouse Clubhouse\".\nPete appears in numerous episodes of \"Mickey Mouse Clubhouse\". He maintains his protagonist and semi-antagonist role, but is significantly toned down for its preschool audience\u2014he is less malicious and more mischievous.\n\"Mickey and the Roadster Racers\".\nPete also appears in \"Mickey and the Roadster Racers\" as a recurring character, either competing against Mickey and friends in races or as a civilian in various locales. He is also the proprietor of Pete's Junkyard.\nThe series also features various alter egos and/or relatives of Pete:\n\"The Iron Mouse\" episode reveals that Pete has an nephew named Jimbo (voiced by Fred Stoller). In addition, some episodes feature his mother Mama Pete (portrayed by Elayne Boosler).\n\"Mickey Mouse\" &amp; \"The Wonderful World of Mickey Mouse\".\nPete appears in the 2013 \"Mickey Mouse\" cartoon series, and its 2020 spin-off \"The Wonderful World of Mickey Mouse\". In both shows, he is designed based on his appearances in the early Mickey Mouse cartoons, complete with a peg-leg.\nFeature films and featurettes.\n\"Mickey's Christmas Carol\".\nIn the 1983 short film \"Mickey's Christmas Carol\", an adaptation of Charles Dickens' novel \"A Christmas Carol\" featuring Disney characters, Pete was cast as the Ghost of Christmas Yet to Come.\n\"The Prince and the Pauper\".\nIn this Disney version of Mark Twain's \"The Prince and the Pauper\", Pete once again played as the primary villain, this time as the English king's captain of the guard. When he saw that his ruler's life was slowly diminishing, he and his henchmen, a band of anthropomorphic weasels (from \"The Wind in the Willows\") who now act as the king's guards, seized the opportunity to terrorize England's citizens and rob them of their goods in \"favor\" of the king. After kicking out a disguised Prince, whom he mistook for the peasant boy Mickey Mouse, out of his kingdom, he later receives word from one of his guards that the Prince was seen a causing a commotion in the village, as the guard claimed that he \"acted like a nobleman and he had the royal ring!\" Pete suddenly realizes that it was indeed the Prince he \"booted out\" and seizes another opportunity out of this. That night, after the king passes away, Pete finds the \"phony prince\" (Mickey), threatening the life of his dog, Pluto, unless Mickey follows his commands. In the village, he soon finds and captures the real Prince and takes him to the castle's dungeon to lock him up. On the day of the Prince's coronation, Pete plots to get Mickey crowned as king, though Mickey is still subservient to Pete's orders. His plan, however, is thwarted when the Prince suddenly appears in the throne room, having busted out of the dungeon and evading the guards with the help of Goofy (Mickey's peasant friend) and Donald Duck (the Prince's valet). A sudden battle in the throne room (Mickey and the Prince vs. Pete; Goofy and Donald vs. the Weasel Guards) results in Pete's defeat, as Goofy's bumbling antics cause a chandelier to fall on the weasels, bundle them together, and send them rolling towards Pete. Pete, seeing this, tries to flee but is slowed down by his ripped-down pants (courtesy of the Prince's swashbuckling skills) and tripped by both the Prince and Mickey, causing him to get rolled over and caught on the chandelier, which sends him and his men rolling through a stained glass window and falling out of the castle.\n\"A Goofy Movie\" and \"An Extremely Goofy Movie\".\nPete later appeared in \"A Goofy Movie\" (1995) and its sequel, \"An Extremely Goofy Movie\" (2000), where he was still snooty and somewhat cankerous at times; despite this, he is shown in a much lighter tone as these movies are based on \"Goof Troop\". He is Goofy's best friend and always confidant in the films.\n\"Mickey's Once Upon a Christmas\".\nIn the 1999 direct-to-video film \"Mickey's Once Upon a Christmas\", Pete appears in the story \"A Very Goofy Christmas\" as Goofy's neighbor, being responsible for making Max stop believing in Santa Claus by telling him that his existence is impossible. Later he appears in the story \"Mickey and Minnie's Gift of the Magi\" as Mickey's boss selling Christmas trees.\n\"The Three Musketeers\".\nIn the 2004 made-for-video animated film \"\" (with Mickey, Donald Duck, and Goofy playing the title roles), Pete again appeared under the name Peg-Leg Pete. He served as the main antagonist of the film. Here, he was the Captain of the Musketeers, aiming to take over France, with the help of his lieutenant, Clarabelle Cow, and the Beagle Boys. To do so, he must get Princess Minnie out of the way, but it proves to be difficult for him, even when he hires the film's titular trio to be her bodyguards, believing they will not do a good job protecting her. He received his own \"bad guy song\", using the classic music piece \"In the Hall of the Mountain King\".\nOther film appearances.\nPete made a non-speaking cameo appearance during the finale of the 1988 film \"Who Framed Roger Rabbit\" as a Toontown police officer.\nIn the 2002 direct-to-video film \"Mickey's House of Villains\", Pete and other Disney villains' guest appearances from \"House of Mouse\" are featured. He takes part in the musical number \"It's Our House Now\" when villains take over the club.\nPete made a cameo appearance in the 2022 film \",\" where he is seen on a filming set for a bootleg film version of Aladdin.\nParodies.\nPete appears briefly in the episode \"Who Ate Wally's Waffles?\" of the series \"Paradise PD\" at the entrance of Disney World as one of the employees of the park.\nVideo game appearances.\n\"Kingdom Hearts\" series.\nPete appears as a recurring villain within the \"Kingdom Hearts\" video game series. He was originally a steamboat captain, with Mickey Mouse as his deck hand (as they were seen in \"Steamboat Willie\"), and later the captain of the Royal Musketeers until his plans for a coup were foiled by Mickey (as they were seen in \"The Three Musketeers\"). After Disney Castle was built, Pete began causing mischief until he was defeated by Terra, Aqua, and Ventus and banished to another dimension by Minnie Mouse. He was subsequently freed by Maleficent, to whom he became indebted, and vowed to amass an army of Heartless to return the favor.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "72794", "revid": "1754504", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72794", "title": "Plottigat", "text": ""}
{"id": "72795", "revid": "7436027", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72795", "title": "Goldie O'Gilt", "text": ""}
{"id": "72796", "revid": "20957809", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72796", "title": "Samara", "text": "City in Samara Oblast, Russia\nSamara, formerly known as Kuybyshev (1935\u20131991), is the largest city and administrative centre of Samara Oblast in Russia. The city is located at the confluence of the Volga and the Samara rivers, with a population of over 1.14 million residents, up to 1.22 million residents in the urban agglomeration, not including Novokuybyshevsk, which is not conurbated. The city covers an area of , and is the eighth-largest city in Russia and tenth agglomeration, the third-most populous city on the Volga, as well as the Volga Federal District.\nFormerly a closed city, Samara is now a large and important social, political, economic, industrial, and cultural centre in Russia and hosted the European Union\u2014Russia Summit in May 2007. It has a continental climate characterised by hot summers and cold winters. The life of Samara's citizens has always been intrinsically linked to the Volga River, which has not only served as the main commercial thoroughfare of Russia throughout several centuries, but also has a great visual appeal. Samara's riverfront is one of the main recreation sites for both local citizens and tourists.\nEtymology.\nSamara is named after the Samara River, which likely meant \"summer water\" (signifying that it froze in winter) in the Indo-Iranian language which was spoken there around the third millennium BC. The Samara city gives its name to the Samara culture, a Neolithic culture of the fifth millennium BC, and the Kurgan hypothesis associates the region with the original homeland (urheimat) of the Proto-Indo-European language.\nDuring Soviet times, the city of Samara was renamed to Kuybyshev in 1935 in honor of the Russian Bolshevik, Valerian Kuybyshev. The city reverted to its historical name of Samara on 25 January 1991.\nHistory.\nEarly history.\nSamara, together with its northern neighbour Kazan, is at the centre of the Idel-Ural historical region. Ahmad ibn Fadlan visited the area that is now Samara around 921 while on his journey to the Volga Bulgars who then controlled the region from their capital Bolghar.\nLegend has it that Alexius, Metropolitan of Kiev, later patron saint of Samara, visited the site of the city in 1357 and predicted that a great town would be erected there, and that the town would never be ravaged. The Volga port of Samara appears on Italian maps of the 14th century. Before 1586, the Samara Bend was a pirate nest. Lookouts would spot an oncoming boat and quickly cross to the other side of the peninsula so that the pirates could organize an attack. Officially, Samara started with a fortress built in 1586 at the confluence of the Volga and Samara Rivers. This fortress was a frontier post protecting the then easternmost boundaries of Russia from forays of nomads. A local customs office was established in 1600.\nAs more and more ships pulled into Samara's port, the town turned into a centre for diplomatic and economic links between Russia and the East. Samara also opened its gates to peasant war rebels headed by Stepan Razin and Yemelyan Pugachyov, welcoming them with traditional bread and salt. The town was visited by Peter the Great and later Tsars.\nIn 1780, Samara was turned into an uyezd town of Simbirsk Governorate overseen by the local Governor-General, and Uyezd and Zemstvo Courts of Justice and a Board of Treasury were established. On January\u00a01, 1851, Samara became the centre of Samara Governorate with an estimated population of 20,000. This gave a stimulus to the development of the economic, political and cultural life of the community. Samara was outside of the Pale of Settlement and as such did not have any significant Jewish population until the late 19th century. In 1877, during the Russian-Turkish War, a mission from the Samara City Duma led by Petr Alabin, as a symbol of spiritual solidarity, brought a banner tailored in Samara pierced with bullets and saturated with the blood of both Russians and Bulgarians, to Bulgaria, which has become a symbol of Russian-Bulgarian friendship.\nSoviet period.\nIn 1935, Samara was renamed Kuybyshev in honour of the Bolshevik leader Valerian Kuybyshev.\nDuring World War II, Kuybyshev was chosen to be the alternative capital of the Soviet Union should Moscow fall to the invading Germans. In October 1941, the Communist Party and governmental organisations, diplomatic missions of foreign countries, leading cultural establishments and their staff were evacuated to the city. This decision was reversed in the summer of 1943. A dugout for Joseph Stalin known as \"Stalin's Bunker\" was constructed but never used. To mark its role as wartime national capital a special Revolution Day parade was held at the city's Kuybyshev Square on November 7, 1941, and since 2011 has been remembered in an annual military parade organised by the city government.\nAs a leading industrial centre, Kuybyshev played a major role in arming the country. From the very first months of World War II the city supplied the front with aircraft, firearms, and ammunition. Health centres and most of the city's hospital facilities were turned into base hospitals. Polish and Czechoslovakian military units were formed on the territory of the Volga Military District. Samara's citizens also fought at the front, many of them volunteers.\nAfter the war the defence industry developed rapidly in Kuybyshev; existing facilities changed their profile and new factories were built, leading to Kuybyshev becoming a closed city. In 1960, Kuybyshev became the missile shield centre for the country. The launch vehicle Vostok, which delivered the first crewed spaceship to orbit, was built at the Samara Progress Plant. Yuri Gagarin, the first man to travel in space on April\u00a012, 1961, took a rest in Kuybyshev after returning to Earth. While there, he spoke to an improvised meeting of Progress workers. Kuybyshev enterprises played a leading role in the development of Soviet domestic aviation and the implementation of the Soviet space program. There is also an unusual monument situated in Samara commemorating an Ilyushin Il-2 ground-attack aircraft assembled by Kuybyshev workers in late 1942. This particular plane was shot down in 1943 over Karelia, but the heavily wounded pilot, K. Kotlyarovsky, managed to crash-land the plane near Lake Oriyarvi. The aircraft was returned to Kuybyshev in 1975, and was placed on display at the intersection of two major roads as a symbol of the deeds of home front servicemen and air force pilots during the Great Patriotic War.\nPost-Soviet period.\nIn January 1991, the historical name of Samara was given back to the city. Samara is one of the major industrial cities of Russia and has a multiethnic population. The city retains its leading positions in the region, mainly due to a number of oil and petrochemical enterprises. In September 2016, Samara was awarded the title \"City of Labor and Combat Glory\".\nIn 2018, Samara became one of the host cities of the FIFA World Cup, the matches of which were held at the Samara Arena stadium.\nOn July 2, 2020, the title \"City of Labor Valor\" was awarded to Samara. On December 10, 2021, the Memorial Complex was installed on the Alley of Labor Glory on the Young Pioneers Avenue. The central element of the memorial complex was a glass and metal stele about 26 meters high.\nGeography.\nUrban layout.\nThe development of the territory of modern Samara began in the 16th century with the foundation of the Samara fortress. Prior to the founding of the fortress, this area was home to piers for Volga ships. The official date of foundation of the settlement was the decree of Tsar Fyodor Ioannovich of 1586. The location of the town was predetermined by several factors: strategic placement in order to ensure security from the raids of nomadic tribes; expansion of the Russian state in the Middle and Lower Volga regions; convenient location in the steppe landscape, at the intersection of the Volga and Samarka rivers.\nThe fortress was wooden with 11 towers, surrounded by a rampart and a moat, and occupied 5.2 hectares. Gradually, the population of the fortress increased, and the surrounding territories were developed. Simultaneously with the fortress in 1586, Boldyrskaya Sloboda arose on the Volga slope, and around 1645, upstream the Volga, Voznesenskaya Sloboda. During the 17th century, the settlements merged into a single whole.\nIn 1688, the settlement received the status of a city, which required the development of the first boundary plan. It is known that by the beginning of the 18th century the city stretched in a narrow strip along the Volga slope. From 1703 to 1706, a new earthen, diamond-shaped form was built to the east of the old fortress. The layout was unsystematic, with small blocks of bizarre shapes. Almost the entire territory was occupied by residential buildings and administrative, commercial and military buildings were concentrated only in the fortress. The territories along the banks of the Volga and Samarka were occupied by marinas and barns. By 1717, there were 210 philistine houses and 17 houses of yasak peasants in Samara. The settlement grew slowly due to its border position and by the end of the 18th century it occupied 61.2 hectares of territory, compactly stretching along the banks of the Volga.\nIn 1763, Empress Catherine II signed an order \"On the making of all cities, their buildings and streets of special plans for each province especially.\" In the 70s, extensive activities were launched by the \u201cCommission on the Stone Buildings of St. Petersburg and Moscow\u201d to rebuild provincial cities. At the same time, the development of the first master plan for Samara began. In 1764, the settlement changed its administrative status, becoming a settlement. In 1780 it again received the status of a county town. In 1765 and 1772 it was badly damaged by fires. Despite these obstacles, in 1782 Samara received the first master plan with a rectangular grid of streets.\nAccording to the plan, the territory of the city was subject to a complete redevelopment: all buildings were liquidated, with the exception of several churches, houses and a fortress. In 1796, a second reconstruction plan was drawn up, identical to the first. As a result of its implementation, by 1804 the territory of Samara had increased to 70.4 hectares. The basis for the planning of the northern part of the city was a rectangular quarter measuring 130 \u00d7 260 m. The southern part of the settlement retained its irregular character. The main type of building of this period is a low-rise estate. The directions of the streets were determined by the direction of the channel, the so-called Samara break. The city was divided into functional zones: residential areas with trade facilities, administrative and religious buildings. Community centers were located around churches and at the ship's pier. Forges were located on the outskirts of the city. The fortress occupied 3.6 hectares, divided into a residential zone, an administrative zone (offices, a prison, a storehouse), a public one (a court, a thought), a commercial, an industrial one (warehouses, piers, forges, barns).\nIn 1804, a new plan for the reconstruction and expansion of Samara was drawn up, following the model of the previous ones. The old buildings in the south of the city were demolished, and a regular layout appeared in its place. In 1839, the plan was almost completely implemented. The territory of Samara has increased by 3.5 times (246.4 ha). The city occupied the entire territory along the watershed of the Volga and Samara rivers, the banks of which were built up with marinas, grain barns, warehouses, and small-scale industries. The Samara fortress was still preserved, but had already lost its significance.\nIn 1840, a new development plan was approved, according to which the territory of the city expanded further along the watershed, while maintaining the planning structure. The new plan reflected the nature of the prevailing wooden buildings (stone houses accounted for only 10% of the total). The size of the quarters remained the same, the city grew at the expense of adjacent agricultural land. As a major trading center, with a railroad, Samara in 1851 received the status of a provincial city. The general plan of 1853 regulated only building within the city limits, however, the settlement began to grow chaotically, numerous industrial facilities appeared: tanneries, oil mills, brick factories and mills. The development of navigation along the Volga led to the fact that piers, warehouses, sawmills and other factories occupied the entire Volga coast of the city. From 1875 to 1877, a private railway to Orenburg was built through Samara, laid along the banks of the Samara River. The residential part of the city was cut off from the banks of the industrial rivers, with the exception of a small section of the Strukovsky Garden, overlooking the Volga. By the end of the 19th century, Samara was a single planning space with a regular plan (with the exception of the Zasamarskaya settlement, which arose no later than the end of the 18th century).\n1937 General plan \u2013 Greater Kuybyshev.\nThe rapid growth of Kuybyshev required the development of a new master plan \"Big Kuibyshev\" in 1937, which was designed for the future, until 1956. It provided for a significant expansion of the city, turning it into a major industrial center. The main compositional axes arose along the watershed of the Volga and Samara rivers, and the second axis - Novo-Sadovaya Street. The structure highlights the main urban centers: Samara Square and the area of the Botanical Garden. The existing historical buildings were renovated and redeveloped, old cemeteries and churches were demolished to accommodate new public and cultural facilities.\nThe outbreak of the Great Patriotic War prevented the full implementation of the plan. In the 1940s, large defense factories were evacuated to Kuibyshev, in connection with which the area of the city during the war and the first post-war years increased by 50%, amounting to 6651.3 hectares by the end of the 40s. Factories and factories were located along the railway, east of the old city, in empty areas. Between them and the old city, new residential areas arose. New construction also unfolded in other immediate outskirts and further in the periphery.\nIn 1949, a new general plan of Samara was adopted, according to which the transport system developed (the emergence of new highways), a new industrial and residential area of Bezymyanka was built, new territories were developed, new planning units appeared: microdistricts. The development of the city proceeded at an intensive pace: the Kirovsky district, the village of Kryazh, the mouth of the Dry Samarka were built up. Landscaping work was underway, the reconstruction of squares (Kuibyshev and Chapaev squares), the laying of the TsPKiO. A new urban framework was formed by community centers and main highways connecting remote areas with the historical center.\nHowever, until the end of the 1950s, the city was a conglomeration of scattered workers' settlements, located around the largest industrial enterprises. In such a system, two centers were key: the Old City (historical merchant) and the new Bezymyanka industrial district (social city). Bezymyanka was connected with the Old Town by a railway line and bus routes. This two-part structure of the city lasted until the end of the 20th century.\nIn the 1950s, during the construction process, the local architectural school was able to form outstanding architectural ensembles that connected the workers' settlements into a single urban system. These are the buildings of Revolution Square, Kuibyshev, Samarskaya, Chapaev, Agriculture, Kirov, Pobeda Street, Kirov, Metallurgists, Yunykh Pioneers, Kuibyshev, Novo-Sadovaya, Maslennikov, the Soviet Army and the Volga embankment.\nClimate.\nSamara experiences a humid continental climate (K\u00f6ppen climate classification \"Dfb\", borders on \"Dfa\"). Samara's humidity levels are higher in the summer than many Russian cities thanks to the precipitation levels and the close proximity to the Volga. The humidity levels usually range from 29% to 98% humidity over the period of a year. There was a record high of during a severe heat wave. Being far inland, summers are very warm and winters very cold for its latitude among European cities.\nGovernance.\nAdministrative and municipal status.\nSamara is the administrative center of the oblast and, within the framework of administrative divisions, it also serves as the administrative center of Volzhsky District, even though it is not a part of it. As an administrative division, it is, together with two rural localities, incorporated separately as the city of oblast significance of Samara\u2014an administrative unit with the status equal to that of the districts. As a municipal division, the city of oblast significance of Samara is incorporated as Samara Urban Okrug. In April 2015, Samara's nine city districts were granted municipal status.\nDuma of Samara Urban Okrug.\nThe Duma of Samara Urban Okrug () is the unicameral city duma of Samara, Russia. A total of 37 deputies are elected for five-year terms.\nElectoral system.\nSince 2015, deputies are elected in a two-tier system: district deputies are elected who then elect representatives to the duma. In a 2019 law, the number of representatives was reduced from 41 to 37 while maintaining the two-tier system.\nHistory.\nThe Samara City Duma was founded in 1870 following administrative reforms that year.\nIn 2020, 210 district deputies were elected who then elected 37 representatives to the duma.\nThe next election will be in 2025.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe population of Samara was 1,173,393 in 2021, up from 1,164,685 in 2010.\nIn the 2021 Census, the following ethnic groups were listed:\nReligion.\nSamara is a multi-confessional city with various religious groups, including an Orthodox Christian majority and minorities of Armenian Apostolic Christians, Catholics, Protestants, Muslims, and Jews.\nEconomy.\nSamara is a leading industrial center in the Volga region and is among the top ten Russian cities in terms of national income and industrial production volume. Samara is known for the production of aerospace launch vehicles, satellites and various space services (Progress State Research and Production Rocket Space Center), engines (Kuznetsov Design Bureau) and cables (Volgacable, Samara Cable Company), aircraft (Aviakor) and rolled aluminum, block-module power stations; refining, chemical and cryogenic products; gas-pumping units; bearings of different sizes, drilling bits; automated electrical equipment; airfield equipment (Start plant); truck-mounted cranes; construction materials; chocolates made by the Russia Chocolate Factory; Rodnik vodka; Vektor vodka; Zhiguli beer; food processing and light industrial products.\nCulture.\nSamara has an opera and ballet theater, a philharmonic orchestra hall, and five drama theaters. There is a museum of natural history and local history studies, a city art museum, and a number of movie theaters. As a dedication to the city's contribution to the development of aerospace industry, there is a space museum (called Cosmic Samara) and an exhibition of aerospace history in Samara State Aerospace University. In the 2000s, a large number of contemporary art galleries have also been built.\n is one of the oldest museums of the Volga region, founded on November 13, 1886. The museum offers 2,500 square meters of exposition and exhibition areas, a 270-seat cinema/lecture hall, and a library with a reading hall. Museum's funds contain around 230,000 items, including abundant archaeological and scientific collections (paleontological, mineralogical, zoological, botanical), and folklore and ethnographical collections. Visitors are offered a wide choice of expositions: paleoecological \u2013 \"Natural communities of Samara region\", archaeological \u2013 \"Priceless heritage of the times gone by\", ethnographic \u2013 \"Circle of life, reflected in traditions and rituals of the Volga region indigenous peoples\", historical \u2013 \"The Crossroads of Samara history\", and other exhibition projects.\nAlabin Museum.\nThe main branch of the Alabin Museum is the House-Museum of Vladimir Lenin in Samara is an object of cultural heritage of federal significance. It is located on the site of a former city merchant's mansion, dating to the last quarter of the 19th century. The Ulyanov family rented a second floor apartment of the house of Samara merchant Ilya Rytikov in 1893. During this time Vladimir Ulyanov graduated from St. Petersburg University law school and started employment at the Samara Regional Court. The museum opened in 1940. The museum's second floor houses a permanent memorial/household exhibition \"Ulyanov family\u2019s apartment in Samara, 1890\u20131893\", recreating the living conditions and household atmosphere of the Ulyanov family. The ground floor contains a specialised display area, including a fragment of an artistic reconstruction of Ilya Rytikov's merchant shop.\nSamara has a strong rock 'n' roll scene with indie bands and great festivals like Protoka, Metafest, and Volgafest.\nAnother branch of the museum is the Exposition Museum of Art Nouveau opened in 2012. It was the mansion of Alexandra Kurlina, a merchant's wife and philanthropist. The original fa\u00e7ade and interior survive to this day, representing the works of European and Russian art nouveau masters. The museum is an exhibition space, which hosts major Russian museums\u2019 projects (The Pushkin Museum, Abramtsevo Museum-Reserve, Moscow Multimedia Art Museum), and organises exhibitions of its own collections.\nThe final branch is the House-Museum of Mikhail Frunze which opened in 1934 but its building was constructed in 1891. On February 23, 2004, on the eve of the 70th anniversary of the museum, a new, third exposition was opened, in which new materials, previously classified as top secret, were exhibited. The exposition details information on the Russian Civil War, the confrontation on the Eastern Front between the armies of Mikhail Frunze and Alexander Kolchak, about \"The Reds\", \"The Whites\" and \"The Greens\", and about the anti-Soviet uprising behind the lines of the Eastern Front.\nPublic events.\nInternational festivals, scientific congresses and other social events are held on the territory of Samara. Among them are:\nArchitecture.\nArchitecture of Samara dates back to 15th and 16th centuries. The city had numerous wooden buildings with elaborate decor and more than 2000 cultural heritage objects. However, after the 1990s many unique ensembles were destroyed by a \"concrete tsunami\" of modern office and apartment blocks.\nSports.\nSeveral sports clubs are active in the city:\nSamara is also a popular venue for National and International Ice speedway, and the City won the Russian Ice Speedway Premier League in 2012/13 season, meaning they will now compete in the Super League in the 2013/14 season. Samara is one of eleven cities hosting the 2018 FIFA World Cup with 6 matches (4 Group Stage matches, 1 Round of 16 match, 1 Quarter-Final) which will take place in the newly built Cosmos Arena stadium.\nThe stadium's seating capacity is 45,000.\nDuring the World Cup, the city hosted the FIFA Fan Fest on the Kuibysheva Square. Up to 20,000 fans were able to participate in the event at a time.\nThree new training fields have been built in the city for the FIFA World Cup. Two major roads have been repaired before the championship: the airport road and Moskovskoye Highway.\nInfrastructure; transportation.\nSamara is a major transport hub.\nHighways.\nSamara is located on the M5 highway, a major road between Moscow and the Ural region.\nRail.\nThere are rail links to Moscow and other major Russian cities. The new, unusual-looking railway station building was completed in 2001.\nRiver transport.\nSamara is a major river port, due to its location at the confluence of the Volga and Samara rivers.\nAir.\nThe Kurumoch International Airport handles flights throughout Russia, Central Asia, China and Middle East. A Russian Air Force base once existed east of the city at Bobrovka air base.\nPublic transport.\nPublic transportation includes the Samara Metro, trams, municipal and private bus lines, and trolleybuses. Local trains serve the suburbs.\nSamara Tram is an extensive light rail system covering most of Samara. First opened in 1915 it currently has 25 lines extending served by 423 tram cars. Most of all Samara trams are Tatra T3SU, modified Tatra T3E and 1 unique Tatra T3RF.\nSamara Metro is a single-line underground rapid transit system. Opened in 1987, its only line has been expanded through 2015 and currently has 10 stations. The 11th station \"Teatralnaya\" has been under construction since January 2022.\nEducation.\nSamara has 188 schools of general education, lyceums, high schools, and the college of continuous education (from primary up to higher education). Samara is a major educational and scientific centre of the Volga area. Twelve public and 13 commercial institutions of higher education as well as 26 colleges.\nSamara is the home of Samara State Aerospace University (SSAU), one of Russia's leading engineering and technical institutions. SSAU faculty and graduates have played a significant role in Russia's space program since its conception. Samara is also the hometown of Samara State University, a very respected higher-education institution in European Russia with competitive programs in Law, Sociology, and English Philology. Scientific research is also carried out in Samara. The Samara Research Center of the Russian Academy of Sciences incorporates the Samara branch of the Physical Institute, Theoretical Engineering Institute and Image Processing Systems Institute. Major research institutions operate in the city.\nSamara State Technical University (SamGTU) was founded in 1914. There are 11 faculties with over 20,000 students (2009) and 1,800 faculty members. On campus, there are four dormitory and ten study buildings. Samara State Academy of Social Sciences and Humanities was founded in 1911 as Samara Teachers Institute. Currently, the academy offers 42 various specialisations in its 12 faculties.\nHonours.\nThe asteroid 26922 Samara was named in honour of the city and the river on 1 June 2007.\nInternational relations.\nSamara is twinned with:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Sister-inline/styles.css\"/&gt; travel guide from Wikivoyage"}
{"id": "72797", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72797", "title": "Km\u00b2", "text": ""}
{"id": "72798", "revid": "46591300", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72798", "title": "Goofy", "text": "Disney cartoon character\nGoofy is a cartoon character created by the Walt Disney Company. He is a tall, anthropomorphic dog who typically wears a turtle neck and vest, with pants, shoes, white gloves, and a tall hat originally designed as a rumpled fedora. Goofy is a close friend of Mickey Mouse and Donald Duck, and is Max Goof's father. He is normally characterized as hopelessly clumsy and dim-witted, yet this interpretation is not always definitive; occasionally, Goofy is shown as intuitive and clever, albeit in his own unique, eccentric way.\nGoofy debuted in animated cartoons, starting in 1932 with \"Mickey's Revue\" as Dippy Dawg, who is older than Goofy would come to be. Later the same year, he was re-imagined as a younger character in the short \"The Whoopee Party\". During the 1930s, he was used extensively as part of a comedy trio with Mickey and Donald. Starting in 1939, Goofy was given his own series of shorts that were popular in the 1940s and early 1950s. Two shorts starring Goofy were nominated for an Oscar: \"How to Play Football\" (1944) and \"Aquamania\" (1961). He also co-starred in a short series with Donald, including \"Polar Trappers\" (1938), where they first appeared without Mickey Mouse. Three more \"Goofy\" shorts were produced in the 1960s after which Goofy was only seen in television and Disney comics. He returned to theatrical animation in 1983 with \"Mickey's Christmas Carol\". His most recent theatrical appearance was \"How to Hook Up Your Home Theater\" in 2007. Goofy has also been featured in television, most extensively in \"Goof Troop\" (1992), \"House of Mouse\" (2001\u20132003), \"Mickey Mouse Clubhouse\" (2006\u20132016), \"Mickey Mouse\" (2013\u20132019), \"Mickey and the Roadster Racers / Mickey Mouse Mixed-Up Adventures\" (2017\u20132021), \"Mickey Mouse Funhouse\" (2021\u2013present) and \"Mickey Mouse Clubhouse+\" (2025).\nOriginally known as Dippy Dawg, the character is more commonly known simply as \"Goofy\", a name used in his short film series. In his 1950s cartoons, he usually played a character called George G. Geef. Sources from the \"Goof Troop\" continuity give the character's full name as G. G. \"Goofy\" Goof, likely in reference to the 1950s name. In many other sources, both animated and comics, the surname Goof continues to be used. In other 2000s-era comics, the character's full name has occasionally been given as Goofus D. Dawg.\nCharacteristics.\nIn the comics and his pre-1992 animated appearances, Goofy was usually single and childless. Unlike Mickey and Donald, he did not have a steady girlfriend. The exception was the 1950s cartoons, in which Goofy played a character called George Geef who was married and at one point became the father of a kid named George Junior. In the \"Goof Troop\" series (1992\u20131993), however, Goofy was portrayed as a single father with a son named Max, and the character of Max made further animated appearances until 2004. This marked a division between animation and comics, as the latter kept showing Goofy as a single childless character, excluding comics taking place in the \"Goof Troop\" continuity. After 2004, Max disappeared from animation, thus removing the division between the two media. Goofy's wife was never shown, while George Geef's wife appeared\u2014but always with her face unseen\u2014in 1950s-produced cartoon shorts depicting the character as a \"family man\".\nIn the comics, Goofy usually appears as Mickey's sidekick, though he also is occasionally shown as a protagonist. Goofy lives in Mouseton in the comics and in Spoonerville in \"Goof Troop\". In comics books and strips, Goofy's closest relatives are his smarter nephew Gilbert. and his grandmother, simply called Grandma Goofy. In Italian comics, he has been given several cousins, including adventurer Arizona Goof (original Italian name: Indiana Pipps), who is a spoof of the fictional archaeologist Indiana Jones.\nGoofy's catchphrases are \"gawrsh!\" (which is his usual exclamation of surprise and his way of pronouncing \"gosh\"), along with \"ah-hyuck!\" (a distinctive chuckle) that is sometimes followed by a \"hoo hoo hoo hoo!\", and especially the Goofy holler (YAAAAAAAAH-HOO-HOO-HOO-EEEEE!). In the classic shorts, he would sometimes say \"Somethin' wrong here\" (first heard in \"Lonesome Ghosts\") whenever he suspected something was not right about the situation he was currently in, or sing a few bars of \"The World Owes Me a Livin'\" from the Silly Symphonies cartoon \"The Grasshopper and the Ants\" (the first instance of Goofy singing this song is \"On Ice\"). In \"The Grasshopper and the Ants\", the Grasshopper had an aloof character similar to Goofy and shared the same voice actor (Pinto Colvig) as him.\nAccording to biographer Neal Gabler, Walt Disney disliked the Goofy cartoons, thinking they were merely \"stupid cartoons with gags tied together\" with no larger narrative or emotional engagement and a step backward to the early days of animation. As such, he threatened constantly to terminate the series, but only continued it to provide make-work for his animators. Animation historian Michael Barrier is skeptical of Gabler's claim, saying that his source did not correspond with what was written.\nFilm history.\nOrigin and early years.\nThe character of Goofy originated with his voice actor, a former circus and vaudville actor, comedian, clown and chalk talk artist Pinto Colvig, who began working as a story man for the Disney Studio in 1930. \nAccording to Colvig, one day in 1931, he was having a conversation with Walt Disney and director Wilfred Jackson, and began to reminisce about \u201c\u2026a grinny, half-baked village nitwit back in my hometown whose mannerisms I had copied and used for one of my former stage characters, \"The Oregon Appleknocker\".\u201d Colvig later identified this \u201cvillage nitwit\u201d as a local flagman that worked at Jacksonville, Oregon's main railroad crossing, who he described as a \u201c...slow-minded guy who is the happiest fellow in the world. Each small town has one, and he always seems to hang around the depot... As a youngster I used to watch every train come in, and I knew all the details and peculiarities of that flagman's life. I impersonated that man for Disney, not in jest, but because I admired him and his simplicity. I always laughed with him rather than at him.\" \nWalt Disney was captivated by Colvig's impersonation and, eager to expand his cast of recognizable characters, decided to develop a new character around Colvig's former stage routine for Mickey's ever-growing roster of supporting players. The next day, Colvig went in front of a microphone and camera and started acting out the loose ungainly mannerisms of his \"Oregon Appleknocker\" persona, while animator Tom Palmer sketched out a character based on his performance. \u201cThus \u2018Goofy, the Guy with a Silly Laugh\u2019 was hatched\u201d, as Colvig would later declare with pride.\nThe character first appeared in \"Mickey's Revue\", released on May 27, 1932. Directed by Jackson, the short features Mickey Mouse, Minnie Mouse, Horace Horsecollar and Clarabelle Cow performing a song and dance show: a typical Mickey cartoon of the time. What set this short apart was the appearance of a new character: a dog-like member of the audience who constantly irritates his fellow spectators by noisily crunching peanuts and laughing loudly (the laugh being provided by Colvig) until two of those fellow spectators knocked him out with their mallets, before revealing they have the same exact laugh. \nThis early version of Goofy was named \"Dippy Dawg\" by Disney artist Frank Webb and was depicted as an old man with a white beard, a puffy tail, and no trousers, shorts, or undergarments. A considerably younger and more refined version of the \"Dippy Dawg\" character next appeared in \"The Whoopee Party\" (released on September 17, 1932) this time as a party guest and a friend of Mickey and his gang. \n\"Dippy Dawg\" made a total of six appearances between 1932 and 1933, but most of them were mere cameos. By his seventh appearance, in \"Orphan's Benefit\" (released on August 11, 1934), he gained the new name \"Goofy\", but was still considered a minor character.\nDevelopment under Art Babbitt.\nInspired by popular comedy trio acts of the era \u2013 such as \"The Three Stooges\" and \"The Marx Brothers\" \u2013 Walt Disney and his storymen decided to team Mickey, Goofy and the newly popular character of Donald Duck together in a cartoon entitled \"Mickey's Service Station\": directed by Ben Sharpsteen and eventually released on March 16, 1935.\nIn mid-1934, Walt held a story meeting for \"Mickey's Service Station\" where he and Sharpsteen began assigning animators to specific sequences. One of the animators assigned to the short, Art Babbitt, took a particular liking to a sequence with Goofy. \"I had to fight for that...\" Babbitt remembered years later:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"... in it [\"Mickey's Service Station\"] there's a small sequence of Goofy on this cylinder block of a car. And he reaches down in one of the holes of the cylinder block and his own hand comes up behind him. God, I wanted that... Walt was in this story meeting and I said, \u201cGee I want that.\u201d [Walt said] \u201cNah, I've got you scheduled to do Pete, Pegleg Pete\". I said \u201cI'll do Pegleg Pete, but give me Goofy, too.\u201d And so that was the final deal, I'd do Pegleg Pete and get Goofy for dessert. Goofy was originally a sort of stock character in mob scenes, so on, but nobody attempted to do anything with him, so I can't say that I created Goofy, but I was the first that made him into a character. I liked the character, there was all sorts of possibilities.\"\nBabbitt's scene with Goofy was originally timed to be 7 feet of film (just over 4 seconds); however, Babbitt padded his scene adding additional bits of comic business, with the final scene being 57 feet (38 seconds) long. Sharpsteen was furious that Babbitt had gone over his allotted time without permission, but Walt was impressed by Babbitt's work and approved his scene.\nUpon completing his sequence with Goofy in \"Mickey's Service Station\", Babbitt (who had been studying Konstantin Stanislavski's theories of method acting) not only redesigned Goofy from his earlier ganglier appearance to a more ovular streamlined version, but also psychoanalyzed the character: something no other animator had done before. Babbitt wrote a two-and-a-half page character bible of Goofy, entitled \"Character Analysis of the Goof\" that circulated the studio in late 1934. Some of what Babbitt wrote included:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In my opinion the Goof, hitherto, has been a weak cartoon character because both his physical and mental make-up were indefinite and intangible. His figure was a distortion, not a caricature, and if he was supposed to have a mind or personality, he certainly was never given sufficient opportunity to display it... In the case of the Goof, the only characteristic which formerly identified itself with him was his voice. No effort was made to endow him with appropriate business to do, a set of mannerisms or a mental attitude...\n... Think of the Goof as a composite of an everlasting optimist, a gullible Good Samaritan, a half-wit, a shiftless, good-natured colored boy and a hick... He can move fast if he has to, but would rather avoid any over-exertion, so he takes what seems the easiest way. He is a philosopher of the barber shop variety. No matter what happens, he accepts it finally as being for the best or at least amusing. He is willing to help anyone and offers his assistance even where he is not needed and just creates confusion. He very seldom, if ever, reaches his objective or completes what he has started. His brain being rather vapoury, it is difficult for him to concentrate on any one subject. Any little distraction can throw him off his train of thought and it is extremely difficult for the Goof to keep to his purpose. Yet the Goof is not the type of half-wit that is to be pitied. He doesn't dribble, drool or shriek. He is a good-natured, dumb bell who thinks he is pretty smart. He laughs at his own jokes because he can't understand any others. If he is a victim of a catastrophe, he makes the best of it immediately and his chagrin or anger melts very quickly into a broad grin. If he does something particularly stupid he is ready to laugh at himself after it all finally dawns on him. He is very courteous and apologetic and his faux pas embarrass him, but he tries to laugh off his errors. He has music in his heart even though it be the same tune forever, and I see him humming to himself while working or thinking. He talks to himself because it is easier for him to know what he is thinking if he hears it first.\nBabbitt's \"Character Analysis\" was considered highly influential within the studio, and character bibles were quickly adopted for all Disney's major stars; including Mickey, Donald and Pluto.\n\"Mickey's Service Station\" also set the template for a series of films where Mickey, Donald and Goofy attempted to perform a certain task, with each character being separated early on, and attempting to solve a problem in their own way and with their distinct style of comedy, before reuniting at the end \u2013 often resulting failure rather than success.\nWhile other animators would also animate the character of Goofy in these \"trio\" shorts (such as in \"Mickey's Fire Brigade\", released in August 1935, where an earlier Pre-Babbitt version of Goofy was animated by Wolfgang Reitherman), Art Babbitt became the Goofy specialist at the Disney studio and the authority on the character.\nBabbitt continued to develop the character of Goofy when he next animated him in \"On Ice\" (released in September 1935). Here he developed a technique he called \"breaking the joints\" \u2013 where Goofy's arms, legs, feet and other appendages would bend the wrong way for a few frames before popping back into the correct position. This gave the character a lot more loose and unpredictable movements, emphasising his stupid personality.\nBabbitt finally crystalized the character of Goofy with his third time animating the character in \"Moving Day\" (released in June 1936), where he was tasked to animate a scene of Goofy attempting to move a piano onto a truck. For this scene Babbitt created another first for animation: using his recently acquired 16mm camera, he filmed Pinto Colvig performing Goofy's movements in his \"Oregon Appleknocker\" persona, making Babbitt the first animator to use live-action reference.\nAs animation historian Michael Barrier wrote of this scene: \"Babbitt's \"Moving Day\" animation was by far his most ambitious... Babbitt's \"Goofy\" was the first Disney character after [Norm] Ferguson's \"Pluto\" to have a visible inner life and \"Goofy\", stupid though he was, was clearly more complex than \"Pluto\". For the most part, \"Pluto\" simply reacted; \"Goofy\" schemed and planned, however dimly.\"\nBen Sharpsteen directed the majority of the Mickey, Donald and Goofy trio cartoons. \"Clock Cleaners\" and \"Lonesome Ghosts\" (released on both October 15 and December 24, 1937 respectively), are considered the highlights of this series, with the former being voted Number 27 in the book \"The 50 Greatest Cartoons\".\nProgressively during the series, Mickey's part diminished in favor of Donald, Goofy, and Pluto. The reason for this was simple: between the easily frustrated Donald and Pluto and the always-living-in-a-world-of-his-own Goofy, Mickey\u2014who became progressively gentler and more laid-back\u2014seemed to act as the straight man of the trio. The studio's artists found that it had become easier coming up with new gags for Goofy or Donald than Mickey, to a point that Mickey's role had become unnecessary.\n\"Polar Trappers\", released on June 17, 1938, was the first film to feature Goofy and Donald as a duo. Mickey would return in \"The Whalers\", released on August 19, 1938, but this and \"Tugboat Mickey\", released on April 26, 1940, would be the last two shorts to feature all three characters as a team.\nSolo series.\nGoofy next starred at his first solo cartoon \"Goofy and Wilbur\" directed by Dick Huemer, first released on March 17, 1939. The short featured Goofy fishing with the help of Wilbur, his pet grasshopper.\nThe \"How to...\" series.\nJack Kinney would take over the Goofy cartoons with the second short \"Goofy's Glider\" (1940). Kinney's Goofy cartoons would feature zany, fast-paced action and gags similar to those being made at Warner Bros and MGM, and possibly influenced by Tex Avery. Kinney found Goofy to be \"a nice long, lean character that you could move; you could get poses out of him, crazy poses\". A sports fan, he would place Goofy in \"How to...\" themed shorts in which Goofy would demonstrate, poorly, how to perform certain sports.\n\"How to Ride a Horse\", a segment in the 1941 film \"The Reluctant Dragon\", would establish the tone and style of future shorts like \"The Art of Skiing\" (1941), \"How to Fish\" (1942), \"How to Swim\" (1942) and \"How to Play Golf\" (1944). Cartoon shorts like \"How to Play Baseball\" (1942), \"How to Play Football\" (1944) and \"Hockey Homicide\" (1945) would feature Goofy not as a single character but multiple characters playing the opposing teams. Animation historian Paul Wells considers \"Hockey Homicide\" to be the \"peak\" of the sports cartoons. Some of the later sports-theme cartoons, like \"Double Dribble\" (1946) and \"They're Off\" (1948) would be directed by Jack Hannah.\nPinto Colvig had a falling out with Disney in 1937 and left the studio, leaving Goofy without a voice. Kinney recalls \"so we had to use whatever was in the library; you know, his laugh and all those things. But he did have a hell of a library, of different lines of dialogue\". In addition, the studio had voice artist Danny Webb record new dialog. Kinney also paired Goofy with a narrator voiced by John McLeish: \"He had this deep voice, just a great voice, and he loved to recite Shakespeare. So I suggested, my God, we'll get McLeish for a narrator, and don't tell him that he's not doing it straight. Just let him play it\". Colvig returned to Disney in 1941 and resumed the voice until 1967.\nThe \"Everyman\" years.\nDisney had started casting Goofy as a suburban everyman in the late 1940s. And with this role came changes in depiction. Goofy's facial stubble and his protruding teeth were removed to give him a more refined look. His clothing changed from a casual style to wearing business suits. He began to look more human and less dog-like, with his ears hidden in his hat. By 1951, Goofy was portrayed as being married and having a son of his own. Neither the wife nor the son was portrayed as dog-like. The wife's face was never seen, but her form was human. The son lacked Goofy's dog-like ears. One notable short made during this era is \"Motor Mania\" (1950). Kinney disliked making most of these later shorts, stating \"...those pictures were disasters, because I didn't fight it hard enough\". Goofy would also be given a formal name in these cartoons, George Geef.\nChristopher P. Lehman connects this depiction of the character to Disney's use of humor and animal characters to reinforce social conformity. He cites as an example \"Aquamania\" (1961), where everyman Goofy drives to the lake for a boat ride. During a scene depicting a pile-up accident, every car involved has a boat hitched to its rear bumper. Goofy is portrayed as one of the numerous people who had the same idea about how to spend their day. Every contestant in the boat race also looks like Goofy. Lehman does not think that Disney used these aspects of the film to poke fun at conformity. Instead, the studio apparently accepted conformity as a fundamental aspect of the society of the United States. \"Aquamania\" was released in the 1960s, but largely maintained and prolonged the status quo of the 1950s. The decade had changed, but the Disney studio followed the same story formulas for theatrical animated shorts it had followed in the previous decade. And Lehman points that Disney received social approval for it. \"Aquamania\" itself received a nomination for the Academy Award for Best Animated Short Film.\nLater appearances.\nAfter the 1965 educational film \"Goofy's Freeway Troubles\", Goofy was mostly retired except for cameos because of the cartoons' fading popularity and the death of voice actor Pinto Colvig. Goofy had an act in the 1969 tour show \"Disney on Parade\" with costar Herbie the Love Bug. His profile began to rise again after his appearance in \"Mickey's Christmas Carol\" as the ghost of Jacob Marley. After that, he appeared in \"Sport Goofy in Soccermania\", a 1987 television special. He made a brief appearance in Academy Award-winning film \"Who Framed Roger Rabbit\", in which the titular character, Roger Rabbit, says of Goofy: \"Nobody takes a wallop like Goofy! What timing! What finesse! What a genius!\". He later appears at the end of the film with the other characters.\nIn the 1990s, Goofy got his own TV series called \"Goof Troop\". In the show, Goofy lives with his son Max and his cat Waffles, and they live next door to Pete and his family. \"Goof Troop\" eventually led to Goofy and Max starring in their own movies: \"A Goofy Movie\" (in 1995) and \"An Extremely Goofy Movie\" (in 2000); as well as starring in their own segments of \"Mickey's Once Upon a Christmas\" (in 1999) and \"Mickey's Twice Upon a Christmas\" (in 2004). While Goofy is clearly depicted as a single custodial parent in all of these appearances, by the end of \"An Extremely Goofy Movie\" he begins a romance with the character Sylvia Marpole, Max being grown and in college by this point.\nIn one episode of \"Bonkers\", Goofy has an off-screen cameo whose distinctive laugh is \"stolen\" by a disgruntled toon. In another episode, both he and Pete cameo as actors who film cartoons at Wackytoon Studios. And in a third episode, Goofy cameos as part of a group of civilians held hostage in a bank robbery.\nGoofy returned to his traditional personality in \"Mickey Mouse Works\" and appeared as a head waiter in \"House of Mouse\" (2001 to 2003). Goofy's son Max also appeared in \"House of Mouse\" as the nightclub's valet, so that Goofy juggled not only his conventional antics but also the father-role displayed in \"Goof Troop\" and its aforementioned related media. In both \"Mickey Mouse Works\" and \"House of Mouse\", Goofy also seemed to have a crush on Clarabelle Cow, as he asks her on a date in the \"House of Mouse\" episode \"Super Goof\" and is stalked by the bovine in the Mickey Mouse Works cartoon \"How To Be a Spy\". Though Clarabelle was noted as Horace Horsecollar's fianc\u00e9 in early decades, comics from the 1960s and 1970s and in later cartoons like the aforementioned \"House of Mouse\" and \"Mickey Mouse Works\", as well as \"\", imply some mutual affections between Goofy and Clarabelle; perhaps as an attempt for Disney to give Goofy a more mainstream girlfriend to match his two male co-stars.\nIn the interactive website \"Toontown Online\", Goofy previously ran his own neighborhood called Goofy Speedway until the close of Toontown. Goofy Speedway was a place where players could race cars and enter the Grand Prix. Tickets were exclusively spent on everything there, instead of the usual jellybean currency. The Grand Prix only came on \"Grand Prix Monday\" and \"Silly Saturday\". Goofy's Gag Shop was also found in almost every part of Toontown' except Cog HQs, Goofy Speedway, or Chip &amp; Dale's Acorn Acres. At Goofy's Gag Shop, Toons could buy gags.\nGoofy also appears in the children's television series, \"Mickey Mouse Clubhouse\", with his trademark attire and personality. Goofy appeared in \"The Lion King 1\u00bd\". Goofy starred in a new theatrical cartoon short called \"How to Hook Up Your Home Theater\", that premiered at the Ottawa International Animation Festival. The short received a positive review from animation historian Jerry Beck and then had a wide release on December 21, 2007, in front of \"\" and has aired on several occasions on the Disney Channel.\nIn 2011, Goofy appeared in a promotional webtoon advertising Disney Cruise Line. He is also a main character on \"Mickey and the Roadster Racers\". He has also appeared in the third season of the 2017 \"DuckTales\" TV series; based on his \"Goof Troop\" incarnation. Guest starring in the episode, \"Quack Pack\", Goofy appears as the Duck family's wacky neighbor after Donald accidentally wished them into a '90s sitcom. Donald hires him to be the photographer for a family photo, but after the Ducks realize what Donald did, Goofy helps him understand that \"normal\" does not necessarily mean the same thing between families; using the relationship he has with his son Max as an example.\nIn 2021, it was announced that Goofy would star in a new series of \"How to...\" shorts entitled \"How to Stay at Home\" in a reflection of the COVID-19 pandemic. Animator Eric Goldberg (the Genie from \"Aladdin\") served as director of the shorts as well as supervising animator on one of them, while Mark Henn (Belle and Jasmine) and Randy Haycock (Naveen in \"The Princess and the Frog\") served as supervising animators for other shorts. Bill Farmer once again voiced the Goof, with Corey Burton narrating. The shorts \"How to Wear a Mask\", \"Learning to Cook\", and \"Binge Watching\" were released on Disney+ on August 11, 2021.\nFilmography.\nTheatrical Donald and Goofy cartoons.\nBesides his solo cartoons and supporting roles in Mickey Mouse shorts, Goofy also co-starred with Donald Duck in some theatrical shorts (although these are commonly treated as part of the Donald Duck series):\nComics.\nGoofy first appeared in the \"Mickey Mouse\" comic strip drawn by Floyd Gottfredson on the Sunday January 8, 1933 panel as Dippy Dawg. He would make his regular daily strip appearance on October 9, 1933. His name was changed to Goofy by 1936. In the early years, the other members of Mickey Mouse's gang considered him a meddler and a pest but eventually warmed up to him.\nAs Donald Duck's popularity led to Donald Duck gaining his own newspaper strip, Disney decided that he was no longer allowed to appear in Gottfredson's strips. Accordingly, Goofy remained alone as Mickey's sidekick, replacing Horace Horsecollar as Mickey's fellow adventurer and companion. Similarly in comics, the Mickey Mouse world with Goofy as Mickey's sidekick was usually very separate from the Donald Duck world and crossovers were rare. Goofy also has a characteristic habit of holding his hand in front of his mouth, a trademark that was introduced by Paul Murry.\nA character called \"Glory-Bee\" was Goofy's girlfriend for some years.\nIn 1990, when Disney was publishing their own comics, Goofy starred in \"Goofy Adventures\", that featured him starring in various parodies. Perhaps because of poor sales, \"Goofy Adventures\" was the first of the company's titles to be canceled by the Disney Comics Implosion, ending at its 17th issue.\nSuper Goof.\nSuper Goof is Goofy's superhero alter ego who gets his powers by eating super goobers (peanuts). Goofy became the first Disney character to also be a superhero, but several would follow, including Donald Duck as Paperinik.\nThe initial concept was developed by Disney Publications Dept. head George Sherman and Disney United Kingdom merchandising representative Peter Woods. It was passed on to Western Publishing scripter Del Connell who refined it, including the eventual device of peanuts providing superpowers.\nThe initial version of Super Goof appeared in \"The Phantom Blot meets Super Goof\", in \"Walt Disney's The Phantom Blot\" No. 2 (Feb. 1965) by Connell (story) and Paul Murry (art). There Goofy mistakenly believes he has developed superpowers. A second version appeared as an actual superhero in the four-page story \"All's Well That Ends Awful\" in \"Donald Duck\" No. 102 (July 1965), also by Connell and Murry.\nThe third and definitive version debuted in \"The Thief of Zanzipar\" in \"Walt Disney Super Goof\" No. 1 (Oct. 1965), written by Bob Ogle and drawn by Murry, in which the origin of his powers are special peanuts Goofy finds in his backyard. In this story, Super Goof battles the Super Thief, a scientific genius who shrinks world landmarks, and holds them for ransom.\nThe effect of Super Goof's special peanuts is temporary, so the superpowers wear off after a couple of hours. Many stories use this as a comical effect with the powers wearing off at the most inappropriate time. The peanuts give similar superpowers to whoever eats them, not just Goofy. In some stories, random criminals who have accidentally eaten the peanuts have temporarily become supervillains.\nIn a crossover story, Huey, Dewey and Louie found a super goober plant sprouted by a dropped goober, and \"borrowed\" Super Goof's powers; after doing a round of super deeds, the ducks' powers faded, and they had to be rescued by the Junior Woodchucks. On occasion, Gilbert uses the super goobers to become a superhero under the name Super Gilbert, beginning with the story \"The Twister Resisters\" in \"Walt Disney Super Goof\" No. 5.\nGold Key Comics subsequently published the comic-book series \"Walt Disney Super Goof\" for 74 issues through 1984. A handful of stories were scripted by Mark Evanier. Additional Super Goof stories (both original and reprints) appeared in \"Walt Disney Comics Digest\". The Dynabrite comics imprint issued by Western in the late 1970s and \"Disney Comic Album\" No. 8 (1990) from Disney Comics contained reprints. Gemstone reprinted a Disney Studio Program story written by Evanier and drawn by Jack Bradbury as a backup in its 2006 release \"Return of the Blotman\".\nOn Disney's \"Toontown Online\" during the Halloween season, Goofy is Super Goof for the occasion. He also appeared in one episode of \"House of Mouse\" (\"Super Goof\") and in two episodes of \"Mickey Mouse Clubhouse\" (\"Goofy's Super Wish\" and \"Super Goof's Super Puzzle\"). In the television series \"Mickey Mouse\", Goofy dresses as Super Goof for the half-hour Halloween special \"\".\nIn video games.\nGoofy appears in multiple Disney video games, including in starring roles in \"Goof Troop\" (1993), \"Goofy's Hysterical History Tour\" (1994), \"Goofy's Fun House\" (2001) and \"Disney's Extremely Goofy Skateboarding\" (2001). His most notable video game appearances are in the \"Kingdom Hearts\" franchise, where he is depicted as the captain of the royal guard at Disney Castle. He appears in a prominent role throughout the series as an ally of Sora, appearing in nearly every game in the franchise.\nVoice actors.\nPinto Colvig voiced Goofy for most of his classic appearances from 1932 (\"Mickey's Revue\") to 1938 (\"The Whalers\") when he had a falling out with Disney and left the company to work on other projects. He was later replaced by Jack Bailey in 1939, and George Johnson from 1940 to 1942 (Johnson would also voice Goofy in \"No Sail\" in 1945). However, Colvig returned to Disney and resumed the role in 1944 (\"How to Be a Sailor\") until shortly before his death in 1967. One of his last known performances as the character was for the Telephone Pavilion at Expo 67. Many cartoons featured Goofy silent, recycled dialogue from earlier shorts, or had various different-sounding Goofys instead of the original. Colvig also gave Goofy a normal voice for four George Geef shorts. The famous Goofy holler was originally performed by Austrian skiier Hannes Schroll for the 1941 animated short \"The Art of Skiing\".\nStuart Buchanan voiced Goofy in \"The Mickey Mouse Theater of the Air\". Richard Edwards voiced Goofy in the end of \"Mickey's Trailer\" and some lines in \"The Whaler\". Jimmy MacDonald, the voice of Mickey Mouse, voiced Goofy in \"Californy'er Bust\", \"Lion Down\" and the 1960s Disney album, \"Donald Duck and his Friends\". Cactus Mack provided Goofy's narration voiceover in \"Californy'er Bust\". Bob Jackman took Colvig's place when he left the Disney Studios for unknown reasons and voiced Goofy in 1951 for a brief time. Gilbert Mack voiced Goofy in the 1955 Golden Records record, \"Goofy the Toreador\". Bill Lee provided the singing voice for Goofy on the 1964 record, \"Children's Riddles and Game Songs.\" Peter Hawkins voiced Goofy in the ITV children's series \"Disney Wonderland\" from 1966 to 1967. Hal Smith began voicing Goofy in 1967 after Pinto Colvig's death and voiced him until \"Mickey's Christmas Carol\" in 1983. Walker Edmiston voiced Goofy in the Disneyland record album \"An Adaptation of Dickens' Christmas Carol, Performed by The Walt Disney Players\" in 1974. Tony Pope voiced Goofy in the 1979 Disney album \"Mickey Mouse Disco\" for the song, \"Watch Out for Goofy\". He then voiced him in \"Sport Goofy in Soccermania\" in 1987 and \"Who Framed Roger Rabbit\" in 1988. Jack Wagner voiced Goofy and other Disney characters in the 1980s, primarily for live entertainment offerings in the parks, \"Disney on Ice\" shows, and live-action clips for television. Will Ryan did the voice for \"DTV Valentine\" in 1986 and \"Down and Out with Donald Duck\" in 1987. In the 2021 \"The Simpsons\" short \"Plusaversary\" (made to celebrate the 2nd anniversary of Disney+), Goofy was voiced by Hank Azaria.\nAside from those occasions, Bill Farmer has been voicing Goofy since 1987. While Tony Pope was the sole voice credit for Goofy in \"Roger Rabbit\", Farmer provided some of Goofy's lines in the film as well. Farmer closely imitated Colvig for projects like \"The Prince and the Pauper\" but began putting his own spin on the character in 1992's \"Goof Troop\". Farmer also inherited Colvig's other characters, like Pluto, Sleepy, and Practical Pig. In 2001, Jason Marsden (voice actor of Goofy's son Max) provided the voice of Goofy in the DVD storybook adaptation of the 1994 children's storybook \"Me and My Dad\", included as a bonus feature on the DVD release of \"An Extremely Goofy Movie\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "72799", "revid": "14383484", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72799", "title": "Elbe River", "text": ""}
{"id": "72804", "revid": "5862", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72804", "title": "Styles of clothing", "text": ""}
{"id": "72806", "revid": "42907343", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72806", "title": "Jefferson Airplane", "text": "American rock band\nJefferson Airplane was an American rock band formed in San Francisco in 1965. One of the pioneering bands of psychedelic rock, the group defined the San Francisco Sound and was the first from the Bay Area to achieve international commercial success. They headlined the Monterey Pop Festival (1967), the first Isle of Wight Festival (1968) in England, Woodstock (1969), and Altamont Free Concert (1969). Their 1967 breakout album \"Surrealistic Pillow\" was one of the most significant recordings of the Summer of Love. Two songs from that album, \"Somebody to Love\" and \"White Rabbit\", are among \"Rolling Stone\"'s \"500 Greatest Songs of All Time\".\nThe October 1966 to February 1970 lineup of Jefferson Airplane, consisting of Marty Balin (vocals), Paul Kantner (rhythm guitar, vocals), Grace Slick (vocals, keyboards), Jorma Kaukonen (lead guitar, vocals), Jack Casady (bass), and Spencer Dryden (drums), was inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in 1996. Balin left the band in 1971. After 1972, Jefferson Airplane effectively split into two groups. Kaukonen and Casady moved on full-time to their own band, Hot Tuna. Slick, Kantner, and the remaining members of Jefferson Airplane recruited new members and regrouped as Jefferson Starship in 1974, with Balin eventually joining them. Jefferson Airplane received a Grammy Lifetime Achievement Award in 2016.\nHistory.\n1965\u20131966: Formation and early development.\nIn 1962, 20-year-old Marty Balin recorded two singles for Challenge Records, neither of which was successful. He then played in a folk quartet, the Town Criers, from April 1963 to June 1964. With the Beatles-led British Invasion, Balin was inspired by the emerging folk rock genre to form a group in March 1965 that would follow that lead, as well as opening a nightclub for them to perform. With a group of investors, he purchased a former pizza parlor on Fillmore Street in San Francisco and converted it into a club called the Matrix. Meanwhile, he searched for like-minded musicians to form his group.\nBalin met fellow folk guitarist and singer Paul Kantner during a hootenanny at another local club, the Drinking Gourd, and invited Kantner to join him in putting together a band. A native San Franciscan, Kantner had started out performing on the Bay Area folk circuit in the early 1960s, alongside fellow folkies Jerry Garcia and David Crosby. He cited folk groups like the Kingston Trio and the Weavers as strong early influences. He briefly moved to Los Angeles in 1964 to work in a folk duo with future Airplane/Starship member David Freiberg (who subsequently joined Quicksilver Messenger Service).\nBalin and Kantner then recruited other musicians to form the house band at the Matrix. They hired bluegrass acoustic bassist Bob Harvey and former Marine Band drummer Jerry Peloquin. Both Kantner and Balin wanted the group to have a female singer. After hearing vocalist Signe Toly Anderson at the Drinking Gourd, Balin invited her to be the group's co-lead singer. Anderson sang with the band for a year and performed on their first album before departing in October 1966 after the birth of her first child.\nThey still needed a lead guitarist. Kantner recruited an old friend, blues guitarist Jorma Kaukonen, who auditioned for the group and joined them in June, completing the original lineup. Originally from Washington, D.C., Kaukonen had moved to California in the early 1960s and met Kantner at Santa Clara University in 1962. Kaukonen was invited to jam with the new band, and although initially reluctant to join, he was won over after playing his guitar through a tape delay device that was part of the sound system used by Ken Kesey for his Acid Test parties.\nKaukonen came up with the band name \"Jefferson Airplane\". It was based on the nickname \"Blind Thomas Jefferson Airplane,\" which was given to Kaukonen by his friend Richmond \"Steve\" Talbot, inspired by the name of one of Kaukonen's influences, bluesman Blind Lemon Jefferson. According to Kaukonen, \"The band was coming up with all these really stupid names and I said, 'If you want something really silly, try Jefferson Airplane.'\"\nAt a music shop near the Matrix, Peloquin encountered Matthew Katz, a music manager who was searching for a band to work with. Katz had beforehand offered to manage the Town Criers, Balin's previous group, but was turned down because of disagreements over his terms. Peloquin reintroduced Katz to Balin, who had been trying to find a manager for Jefferson Airplane. Katz enticed the band by mentioning that he had access to an unreleased Bob Dylan song, \"Lay Down Your Weary Tune\", and they appointed him as their manager, although they did not officially sign a contract with Katz until December 1965.\nAfter rehearsing throughout the summer, the group made its first public appearance as Jefferson Airplane at the opening night of The Matrix on August 13, 1965. The band expanded from its folk roots, drawing inspiration from the Beatles, the Byrds and the Lovin' Spoonful, and gradually developed a more pop-oriented electric sound. Later that month, John L. Wasserman of the \"San Francisco Chronicle\" praised the band's \"musical approach and style\"\u2014noting their blend of folk, blues, and rock and roll\u2014and remarked, \"Although there are but hints at this time, it is entirely possible that this will be the new direction of contemporary pop music.\"\nA few weeks after the group began performing, Peloquin left because of conflicts with his bandmates, in part because of his disdain for their drug use. Although he was not a drummer, singer-guitarist Skip Spence (who later co-founded Moby Grape) was then invited to replace Peloquin. Spence quickly adapted and made his debut at the Matrix in September. In October 1965, after the other members decided that Bob Harvey's bass playing was not up to par, he was replaced by guitarist-bassist Jack Casady, an old friend of Kaukonen from Washington, D.C. Casady played his first gig with the Airplane on October 30 in the Harmon Gym at the University of California, Berkeley.\nThe group's performance skills improved rapidly and they soon gained a strong following in and around San Francisco, aided by reviews from music journalist Ralph J. Gleason, the jazz critic of the \"San Francisco Chronicle\". After seeing them at the Matrix, Gleason wrote in the September 13 edition of his \"On the Town\" column that the band, still without a record deal, would \"obviously record for someone\" eventually. Gleason's support raised the band's profile considerably, and within three months Katz was fielding offers from recording companies, although they had yet to perform outside the San Francisco Bay Area.\nTwo significant early concerts featuring the Airplane were held in late 1965. The first was the historic dance at the Longshoremen's Hall in San Francisco on October 16, 1965, the first of many \"happenings\" in the Bay Area, where Gleason first saw them perform. At this concert they were supported by a local folk-rock group, the Great Society, that featured Grace Slick as lead singer, and it was here that Kantner met Slick for the first time. A few weeks later, on November 6, they appeared at a benefit concert for the San Francisco Mime Troupe, the first of many promotions by rising Bay Area entrepreneur Bill Graham, who later became the band's manager.\nBy late 1965, Jefferson Airplane, under Katz's management, had turned down recording offers from Capitol, Valiant, Fantasy, Elektra, and London. In November 1965, Jefferson Airplane signed a recording contract with RCA Victor, which included a then unheard-of advance of $25,000 (). Before this, they had recorded a demo for Columbia Records of \"The Other Side Of This Life\" with Harvey on bass, which was immediately rejected by the label. On December 10, 1965, the Airplane played at the first Bill Graham-promoted show at the Fillmore Auditorium, supported by the Great Society and others. The Airplane also appeared at numerous Family Dog shows promoted by Chet Helms at the Avalon Ballroom.\nThe group's first single was Balin's \"It's No Secret\" (a tune he wrote with Otis Redding in mind); the B-side was \"Runnin' Round This World\", the song that led to the band's first clash with RCA Victor over the lyric \"The nights I've spent with you have been fantastic trips\". After their debut LP was completed in March 1966, Skip Spence quit the band and he was eventually replaced by Spencer Dryden, who played his first show with the Airplane at the Berkeley Folk Festival on July 4, 1966. Dryden had previously played with a Los Angeles group called the Ashes, which later became the Peanut Butter Conspiracy.\nOriginal manager Katz was fired in August, sparking a long-running legal battle that continued until 1987, and Balin's friend and roommate Bill Thompson was installed as road manager and temporary band manager. It was Thompson, a friend and staunch supporter of the band and a former \"Chronicle\" staffer, who had convinced reviewers Ralph Gleason and John Wasserman to see the band at the Matrix. Thanks to Gleason's influence, Thompson was able to book the group for appearances at the Monterey Jazz Festival.\nThe group's debut LP \"Jefferson Airplane Takes Off\" was released on August 15, 1966. The album was dominated by Balin, who provided most of the lead vocals and had a hand in writing all of the original material, including \"It's No Secret\" and \"Come Up the Years.\" It also contained covers of \"Tobacco Road\", Dino Valente's \"Let's Get Together\", and \"Chauffeur Blues\", which became a signature tune for Anderson. RCA Victor initially pressed only 15,000 copies, but it sold more than 10,000 in San Francisco alone, prompting the label to reprint it. For the re-pressing, the company deleted \"Runnin' Round This World\" (which had appeared on early mono pressings), because executives objected to the word \"trip\" in the lyrics. For similar reasons, RCA Victor substituted altered versions for two other tracks: \"Let Me In\", changing the line \"I gotta get in/you know where\" to \"you shut your door/now it ain't fair.\" In the same song, they also switched the lyric \"Don't tell me you want money\" to \"Don't tell me it ain't funny\". \"Run Around\" was also edited, changing the line \"flowers that sway as you lay under me\" to \"flowers that sway as you stay here by me\". The original pressings of the LP featuring \"Runnin' 'Round This World\" and the uncensored versions of \"Let Me In\" and \"Run Around\" are collector's items.\nSigne Anderson gave birth to her daughter in May 1966, and in October she announced her departure from the band. Her final performance with the Airplane took place at the Fillmore on October 15, 1966. A recording of the performance, subtitled \"Signe's Farewell\", was released in 2010.\n1966\u20131967: Commercial breakthrough.\nThe next night, Anderson's successor, Grace Slick made her first appearance. Slick had seen the Airplane at the Matrix in 1965, and her previous group, the Great Society, had often supported them in concert.\nSlick's recruitment proved pivotal to the Airplane's commercial breakthrough\u2014she possessed a powerful and supple contralto voice that complemented Balin's and was well-suited to the group's amplified psychedelic music. A former model, her good looks and stage presence greatly enhanced the group's live impact. \"White Rabbit\" was written by Slick while she was still with The Great Society. The first album she recorded with Jefferson Airplane was \"Surrealistic Pillow\", its 1967 breakout album. Slick provided two songs from her previous group: her own \"White Rabbit\" and \"Somebody to Love\", written by her brother-in-law Darby Slick. Both songs became breakout successes for Jefferson Airplane and have ever since been associated with that band.\nThe Great Society had recorded an early version of \"Somebody to Love\" (under the title \"Someone to Love\") as the B-side of their only single, \"Free Advice\", produced by Sylvester Stewart (soon to become famous as Sly Stone). It reportedly took more than 50 takes to achieve a satisfactory rendition. The Great Society split up in late 1966 and played its last show on September 11. Soon after, Slick was asked to join Jefferson Airplane by Casady (whose musicianship was a major influence on her decision) and her Great Society contract was bought out for $750.\nIn December 1966, Jefferson Airplane was featured in a \"Newsweek\" article about the booming San Francisco music scene, one of the first in a welter of similar media reports that prompted a massive influx of young people to the city and contributed to the commercialization of hippie culture.\nAround the beginning of 1967, Bill Graham took over from Thompson as manager. In January the group made its first visit to the East Coast. On January 14, alongside the Grateful Dead and Quicksilver Messenger Service, Jefferson Airplane headlined the \"Human Be-In\", the famous all-day \"happening\" in Golden Gate Park, one of the key events leading up to the \"Summer of Love\".\nDuring this period the band gained its first international recognition when rising British pop star Donovan, who saw them during his stint on the U.S. West Coast in early 1966, mentioned the Airplane in his song \"The Fat Angel\", which subsequently appeared on his \"Sunshine Superman\" LP.\nThe group's second LP, \"Surrealistic Pillow\", recorded in Los Angeles with producer Rick Jarrard in 13 days at a cost of $8,000, launched the Airplane to international fame. Released in February 1967, the LP entered the \"Billboard\" 200 album chart on March 25 and remained there for over a year, peaking at No. 3. It sold over one million copies, and was awarded a gold disc. The name \"Surrealistic Pillow\" was suggested by the album's informal producer, Jerry Garcia, when he mentioned that, as a whole, the album sounded \"as surrealistic as a pillow is soft.\" Although RCA did not acknowledge Garcia's contributions to the album with a production credit, he is listed in the album's credits as \"spiritual advisor.\"\nIn addition to the group's two best-known tracks, \"White Rabbit\" and \"Somebody to Love\", the album featured \"My Best Friend\" by former drummer Skip Spence, Balin's driving blues-rock songs \"Plastic Fantastic Lover\" and \"3/5 of a Mile in 10 Seconds\", and the atmospheric Balin-Kantner ballad \"Today\". A reminder of their earlier folk incarnation was Kaukonen's solo acoustic guitar \"tour de force\" \"Embryonic Journey\" (his first composition), which referenced contemporary acoustic guitar masters such as John Fahey and helped to establish the popular genre exemplified by acoustic guitarist Leo Kottke.\nThe first single from the album, \"My Best Friend\", failed to chart, but the next two rocketed the group to prominence. Both \"Somebody to Love\" and \"White Rabbit\" became major U.S. hits, the former reaching No. 5 and the latter No. 8 on the Billboard singles chart. By late 1967 the Airplane were national and international stars and had become one of the hottest groups in America. Grace Slick biographer Barbara Rowes called the album \"a declaration of independence from the establishment [-] What Airplane originated was a romanticism for the electronic age. Unlike the highly homogenized harmonies of the Beach Boys, Airplane never strived for a synthesis of its divergent sensibilities. Through [-] each song, there remain strains of the individual styles of the musicians [creating] unusual breadth and original interplay within each structure\".\nThis phase of the Airplane's career peaked with their famous performance at the Monterey International Pop Festival in June 1967. Monterey showcased leading bands from several major music \"scenes\" including New York, San Francisco, Los Angeles, and the United Kingdom, and the resulting TV and film coverage gave national (and international) exposure to groups that had previously had only regional fame. Two songs from the Airplane's set were subsequently included in the D. A. Pennebaker film documentary of the event.\nIn August 1967, the Airplane performed in Montreal, Quebec, Canada, at two free outdoor concerts, along with fellow Bay Area band the Grateful Dead. The first concert was held in downtown Montreal at Place Ville Marie, and the second was at the Youth Pavilion of Expo 67.\nThe Airplane also benefited greatly from appearances on national network TV shows such as \"The Tonight Show Starring Johnny Carson\" on NBC and \"The Ed Sullivan Show\" on CBS. The Airplane's famous appearance on \"The Smothers Brothers Comedy Hour\" performing \"White Rabbit\" and \"Somebody to Love\" was videotaped in color and augmented by developments in video techniques. It has been frequently re-screened and is notable for its pioneering use of the Chroma key process to simulate the Airplane's psychedelic light show.\n1967\u20131970: Heavier sound and improvisation.\nAfter \"Surrealistic Pillow\", the group's music underwent a significant transformation. The band's third LP, \"After Bathing at Baxter's\", was released in December, 1967 and eventually peaked in the charts at No. 17. Its famous cover, drawn by artist and cartoonist Ron Cobb, depicts a flying machine (constructed around an idealized version of a typical Haight-Ashbury district house) soaring above the chaos of American commercial culture. Recorded over a period of more than four months, with little input from nominal producer Al Schmitt, the new album demonstrated the group's growing engagement with psychedelic rock. Although the previous LP had consisted entirely of standard-length pop songs, \"After Bathing at Baxter's\" was dominated by long multi-part suites. However, \"A Small Package of Value Will Come to You, Shortly\" was a musique concr\u00e8te-style audio collage.\n\"After Bathing at Baxter's\" also marked the ascendency of Kantner and Slick as the band's chief composers and the concurrent decline of Balin's influence and involvement. The other members, gravitating toward a harder-edged style, openly criticized Balin for his ballad-oriented compositions. Balin was also reportedly becoming increasingly disenchanted with the \"star trips\" and \"inflated egos\" generated by the band's runaway commercial success.\nIn contrast to \"White Rabbit\" and \"Somebody to Love\", \"The Ballad of You and Me and Pooneil\" only peaked at No. 42 and \"Watch Her Ride\" stalled at No. 61. However, both singles reached the Top 40 in \"Cash Box\" magazine. None of the band's subsequent singles reached the \"Billboard\" Top 40 and several failed to chart at all. AM Top 40 radio became wary of a group that had scored a hit with a song that contained thinly veiled drug references and whose singles were often deemed too controversial, so Jefferson Airplane never again enjoyed the kind of widespread AM radio support that served as a prerequisite for top-ten hits.\nIn February 1968, manager Bill Graham was fired after Slick delivered an \"either he goes or I go\" ultimatum. Bill Thompson took over as permanent manager and consolidated the group's financial security, establishing Icebag Corp. to oversee the band's publishing interests and purchasing a 20-room mansion at 2400 Fulton Street across from Golden Gate Park near the Haight-Ashbury, which became the band's office and communal residence. Bill Laudner was hired as road manager.\nIn mid-1968, the group was photographed for a \"Life\" magazine story on \"The New Rock\", appearing on the cover of the June 28, 1968 edition. They undertook their first major tour of Europe in August\u2013September 1968, playing alongside the Doors in the Netherlands, England, Germany and Sweden. In a notorious incident at a concert in Amsterdam, while Jefferson Airplane was performing \"Plastic Fantastic Lover\", Doors singer Jim Morrison, under the influence of a combination of drugs that fans had given him, appeared on stage and began dancing \"like a pinwheel\". As the group played faster and faster, Morrison spun around wildly until he finally fell senseless on the stage at Balin's feet. Morrison was unable to perform his set with the Doors and was hospitalized; keyboardist Ray Manzarek sang all the vocals. It was also during this tour that Slick and Morrison allegedly engaged in a brief sexual relationship, described in \"Somebody to Love?,\" Slick's 1998 autobiography.\nJefferson Airplane's fourth LP, \"Crown of Creation\" (released in September 1968), was a commercial success, peaking at No. 6 on the album chart and receiving a gold certification. Slick's \"Lather\", which opens the album, is said to be about her affair with drummer Spencer Dryden and his 30th birthday. \"Triad\", a David Crosby composition, had been rejected by the Byrds because they deemed its subject matter (a \"m\u00e9nage \u00e0 trois\") to be too \"hot.\" Slick's searing sexual and social-commentary anthem \"Greasy Heart\" was released as a single in March 1968. A few tracks recorded for the LP were omitted from the album but were later included as bonus tracks, including the Slick/Frank Zappa collaboration \"Would You Like a Snack?\"\nJefferson Airplane's appearance on \"The Smothers Brothers Comedy Hour\" in October 1968 caused a minor stir when Slick appeared in blackface and raised her fist in the Black Panther Party's salute after singing \"Crown of Creation\".\nIn November 1968, the band played \"House at Pooneil Corners\" and part of \"Somebody to Love\" on the roof of the Schuyler Hotel on West 45th Street in Manhattan. It was filmed for the D. A. Pennebaker film \"One P.M\". at the invitation of French filmmaker Jean-Luc Godard. As no permit had been obtained, the performance was stopped by the police just as occurred with the Beatles' famous rooftop concert about two months later, as depicted in the documentary \"Let It Be\" (1970). Several people, including Balin and actor Rip Torn, were arrested.\nIn February 1969, RCA released the live album \"Bless Its Pointed Little Head\", which was culled from 1968 performances at the Fillmore West on October 24\u201326 and the Fillmore East on November 28\u201330. It became the band's fourth Top 20 album, peaking at No. 17.\nHot Tuna began during a break in Jefferson Airplane's touring schedule in early 1969 while Slick recovered from throat node surgery that left her unable to perform. Kaukonen, Casady, Kantner and drummer Joey Covington played several shows around San Francisco, including Jefferson Airplane's original club, The Matrix, before Jefferson Airplane resumed performing. Their early repertoire was derived mainly from Jefferson Airplane material that Kaukonen (the band's frontman) sang and covers of American ragtime artist Jelly Roll Morton and country blues artists such as Reverend Gary Davis, Bo Carter and Blind Blake. From October 1969 to November 1970, Hot Tuna (also including Balin and, following Kantner's departure, a dedicated rhythm guitarist in their electric performances until November 1970) performed as the opening act to Jefferson Airplane with a combination of both electric and acoustic sets.\nIn April 1969, sessions began for Jefferson Airplane's next album, \"Volunteers\", using new 16-track facilities at the Wally Heider Studio in San Francisco. This proved to be the last album by the classic lineup of the group. The album's release was delayed following the band's conflict with the label over the content of songs such as \"We Can Be Together\" and the planned title of the album, \"Volunteers of Amerika\", a title derived from the Volunteers of America charity, and the term was in vogue in 1969 as an ironic expression of dissatisfaction with America. After the charity group objected, the title was shortened to \"Volunteers\".\nA few days after the band headlined at a free concert in New York's Central Park in August 1969, they performed in what Slick called the \"morning maniac music\" slot at the Woodstock Festival, for which the group was joined by noted British session keyboard player Nicky Hopkins. When interviewed about Woodstock by Jeff Tamarkin in 1992, Kantner recalled it with fondness but Slick and Dryden did not. Immediately after their Woodstock performance, the band taped an appearance on \"The Dick Cavett Show\" and played a few songs. Other guests on that same episode were David Crosby, Stephen Stills and Joni Mitchell.\nThe new album was finally released in the United States in November 1969. It continued Jefferson Airplane's run of Top 20 LPs, peaking at No. 13 and attaining a RIAA gold certification early in 1970. It was their most political venture, showcasing the group's vocal opposition to the Vietnam War and documenting their reaction to the changing political atmosphere in the United States. The best-known tracks include \"Volunteers\", \"We Can Be Together\", \"Good Shepherd\" and the post-apocalyptic \"Wooden Ships\", which Kantner cowrote with Crosby and Stills, and which Crosby, Stills &amp; Nash also recorded on their debut album.\nRCA raised objections to the phrase \"up against the wall, motherfucker!\" in the lyrics of Kantner's \"We Can Be Together\", but the group managed to prevent it from being censored on the album, pointing out that RCA had already allowed the offending word to be included on the cast album of the rock musical \"Hair\". In addition, the song had the line \"in order to survive, we steal, cheat, lie, forge, fuck, hide and deal\", which was also kept on the album. The group sang the song with both lines intact during their \"Dick Cavett Show\" appearance, thus becoming the first known persons to utter those words on national broadcast television. In the printed lyrics that accompanied the album, the line was transcribed as \"up against the wall fred\".\nIn December 1969, Jefferson Airplane played at the Altamont Free Concert at Altamont Speedway in California. Following the Grateful Dead's withdrawal from the program, they became the only band to perform at all three of the iconic rock festivals of the 1960s \u2014 Monterey Pop, Woodstock and Altamont. Headlined by the Rolling Stones, the concert was marred by violence. Balin was punched on stage during a scuffle with Hells Angels members who had been hired to act as security guards. The event became notorious for the fatal stabbing of teenager Meredith Hunter in front of the stage by Hells Angels after he drew a revolver during the Rolling Stones' performance.\n1970\u20131974: Decline and dissolution.\nDryden was dismissed from the band in February 1970 by a unanimous vote of the other members. Dryden had political differences with the band and was experiencing burnout after four years on the \"acid merry-go-round\". He was also deeply disillusioned by the events at Altamont, which, he later recalled, \"did not look like a bunch of happy hippies in streaming colors. It looked more like sepia-toned Hieronymus Bosch.\" He took time off before returning to music the following year as Mickey Hart's replacement in the New Riders of the Purple Sage. Dryden was replaced by Hot Tuna drummer Joey Covington, who had already contributed additional percussion to \"Volunteers\" and performed select engagements with Jefferson Airplane as a touring second drummer in 1969. Later that year, the band was further augmented by the addition of veteran jazz violinist Papa John Creach, a friend of Covington who officially joined Hot Tuna and Jefferson Airplane for their fall tour in October 1970.\nTouring continued throughout 1970, but the group's only new recordings that year were the single \"Mexico\" backed with the B-side \"Have You Seen the Saucers?\" Slick's \"Mexico\" was an attack on President Richard Nixon's Operation Intercept, which had been implemented to curtail the flow of marijuana into the United States. \"Have You Seen the Saucers\" marked the beginning of the science-fiction themes that Kantner explored in much of his subsequent work, including \"Blows Against the Empire,\" his first solo album. Released in November 1970 and credited to \"Paul Kantner/Jefferson Starship,\" this prototypical iteration of Jefferson Starship (alternatively known as the Planet Earth Rock and Roll Orchestra) included Crosby, Graham Nash, Grateful Dead members Jerry Garcia, Bill Kreutzmann and Mickey Hart, session luminary Harvey Brooks, David Freiberg, Slick, Covington and Casady. \"Blows Against the Empire\" peaked at No. 20 in the United States and was the first rock album nominated for the Hugo Award.\nJefferson Airplane ended 1970 with their traditional Thanksgiving Day engagement at the Fillmore East (marking the final performances of the short-lived Creach-era septet) and the release of their first compilation album, \"The Worst of Jefferson Airplane\", which continued their unbroken run of post-1967 chart success, reaching No. 12 on the \"Billboard\" album chart.\n1971 was a year of major upheaval for Jefferson Airplane. Slick and Kantner had begun a relationship in 1970, and on January 25, 1971, their daughter China Wing Kantner (\"Wing\" was Slick's maiden name) was born. Slick's divorce from her first husband had recently become official, but she and Kantner agreed that they did not wish to marry.\nIn April 1971, Balin officially left Jefferson Airplane after disassociating himself from the group following the fall 1970 tour. Although he had remained a key part of live performances after the band's creative direction shifted from brooding love songs, the evolution of the polarized Kantner/Slick and Kaukonen/Casady cliques\u2014compounded by an emerging drinking problem\u2014had finally left him the odd man out. Following the traumatic death of Janis Joplin, he began to pursue a healthier lifestyle; Balin's study of yoga and abstention from drugs and alcohol further distanced him from the other members of the group, whose drug intake continued unabated. This further complicated the recording of their long-overdue follow-up to \"Volunteers\"; Balin had recently completed several new songs, including \"Emergency\" and the elongated R&amp;B-infused \"You Wear Your Dresses Too Short,\" both of which later appeared on archival releases.\nOn May 13, 1971, Slick was injured in a near-fatal automobile crash when her car slammed into a wall in a tunnel near the Golden Gate Bridge in San Francisco. The accident happened while she was drag racing with Kaukonen; both were driving at over 100 miles per hour, and Kaukonen claims that he \"saved her life\" by pulling her from the car. Slick's recuperation took a few months, forcing the Airplane to curtail their touring commitments. In the meantime, Slick recorded a comic song (\"Never Argue with a German If You're Tired or European Song\") about the incident for the new album.\nIn September 1971, \"Bark\" was released. With cover art depicting a dead fish wrapped in an A&amp;P-style grocery bag, it was both the final album owed to RCA under the band's existing contract and the inaugural release on the band's Grunt Records vanity label. Manager Bill Thompson had struck a deal with RCA to allow Jefferson Airplane to run Grunt Records as they saw fit while retaining RCA's distribution. The single \"Pretty As You Feel\", excerpted from a longer jam with members of Santana and featuring lead vocals by Joey Covington, its principal composer, was the last Jefferson Airplane chart hit, peaking at No. 60 in \"Billboard\" and No. 35 in \"Cashbox\". The album rose to No. 11 in \"Billboard\", higher than \"Volunteers\", \"Blows Against the Empire\" and Hot Tuna's second album, \"First Pull Up, Then Pull Down\", released three months before \"Bark\" in June.\nDespite the band's continued success, major creative and personal divisions persisted between the Slick-Kantner and Kaukonen-Casady factions. (Kaukonen's \"Third Week In The Chelsea,\" from \"Bark\", chronicles the thoughts he was having about leaving the band.) These problems continued to be exacerbated by the band's escalating cocaine use and Slick's alcohol use disorder. Consequently, while the band played several dates in August in support of \"Bark\" (including two concerts in the New York metropolitan area and a show apiece in Detroit and Philadelphia), no tour was planned. Following a private concert/party commemorating the formation of Grunt Records at San Francisco's Friends and Relations Hall in September, the band would not reconvene until several Midwestern engagements in January 1972.\nJefferson Airplane held together long enough to record one more album, \"Long John Silver,\" begun in April 1972 and released in July. By this time the various members were thoroughly engaged with their various solo projects. Following the release of Kantner and Slick's \"Sunfighter\" in November 1971 and Creach's eponymous solo debut in December 1971, Hot Tuna released their first studio album and third opus \"Burgers\" in February 1972; meanwhile, Covington immersed himself in various Grunt Records projects, including his own solo album, \"Fat Fandango\", released in 1973, and the sessions for Black Kangaroo's debut album led by multi-instrumentalist Peter Kaukonen, Jorma's younger brother. Covington was either dismissed from the band or left of his own volition shortly after the sessions commenced.\nWith Hot Tuna drummer Sammy Piazza deputizing on one track, Covington (who had already recorded two drum parts) was soon replaced by former Turtles and CSNY drummer John Barbata, who ultimately played on most of the album. Barbata was recommended to the group by David Crosby. \"Long John Silver\" is notable for its cover, which folded out into a humidor, which the inner photo depicted as storing cigars (which may have been filled with marijuana). Despite middling reviews, the album rose to No. 20 in the United States, a significantly higher placement than \"Burgers\" (No. 68) or \"Sunfighter\" (No. 89).\nThe band began a proper national tour to promote \"Long John Silver\" in 1972, their first in nearly two years. Shortly before the tour commenced, David Freiberg (who had recently completed a prison sentence for marijuana possession after leaving Quicksilver Messenger Service) joined as a belated replacement for Balin. The East Coast leg of the tour included a major free concert in Central Park that drew over 50,000 attendees. They returned to the West Coast in September, playing concerts in San Diego, Hollywood, Phoenix and Albuquerque. The tour culminated in two shows at the Winterland Ballroom in San Francisco (September 21\u201322), both of which were recorded. At the end of the second show, the group was joined on stage by Balin, who sang lead vocals on \"Volunteers\" and the final song, \"You Wear Your Dresses Too Short\".\nThe Winterland shows were the last live performances by Jefferson Airplane[22] until their reunion in 1989. A new live album, \"Thirty Seconds Over Winterland\", was culled from the tour and released in April 1973. Later that year, Kaukonen and Casady decided to focus on Hot Tuna as a full-time endeavor, effectively leaving the band; however, no official announcement was ever released. By December 1973, RCA had terminated the band's salaries, resulting in Freiberg being forced to draw unemployment to maintain his house payments.\nFollowing the commercially unsuccessful \"Baron von Tollbooth &amp; the Chrome Nun\" (1973; credited to Kantner, Slick and Freiberg) and \"Manhole\" (1974; credited to Slick), Jefferson Airplane evolved into Jefferson Starship in January 1974. The initial lineup consisted of the remaining members of Jefferson Airplane (Kantner, Slick, Freiberg, Barbata, Creach); bassist Peter Kaukonen (soon replaced by British multi-instrumentalist Pete Sears, a veteran of Creach's debut solo album and \"Manhole\"); and lead guitarist Craig Chaquico, a member of Grunt Records band Jack Traylor and Steelwind who contributed to the Kantner/Slick solo albums beginning with \"Sunfighter\". They appropriated the name from Kantner's \"Blows Against the Empire\", with Bill Thompson convincing the group that maintaining the connection was prudent from a business standpoint. Reflecting the transition, the album \"Dragon Fly\", released in September 1974, was credited to Slick, Kantner and Jefferson Starship.\nReunions and other performances, 1989\u2013present.\nAfter the acrimonious events that resulted in Jefferson Starship's 1984 evolution into Starship, Kantner reunited with Balin (who joined Jefferson Starship in January 1975 following a guest appearance on \"Dragon Fly\" before leaving once more in 1978) and Casady in 1985 to form the KBC Band. They released their only album, \"KBC Band\", in 1986 on Arista Records. On March 4, 1988, Slick made a cameo appearance during a Hot Tuna San Francisco performance at the Fillmore (with Kantner and Creach joining in), facilitating a potential reunion of Jefferson Airplane.\nIn 1989, the classic 1966\u201370 lineup of Jefferson Airplane reunited (with the exception of Dryden) for a tour and album. The self-titled album was released by Epic to modest sales but the accompanying tour was considered a success.\nIn 1996, the 1966\u201370 lineup of Jefferson Airplane was inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame, with Balin, Casady, Dryden, Kantner and Kaukonen attending and performing. Slick was absent.\n1998 saw the production and broadcast of a very popular episode of the hit VH1 documentary television series \"Behind the Music\" about Jefferson Airplane, directed by Bob Sarles. Band members Slick, Balin, Kantner, Kaukonen, Casady and Dryden were all interviewed for the episode, along with David Crosby, longtime Airplane manager Bill Thompson and China Kantner, daughter of Paul Kantner and Grace Slick.\nIn 2004, the film \"Fly Jefferson Airplane\" (directed by Bob Sarles) was released on DVD. It covers the years 1965\u201372 and includes then-recent interviews with band members and 13 complete songs.\nKaukonen and Casady performed a set at the 2015 Lockn' Festival to celebrate the 50th anniversary of Jefferson Airplane. They were joined by G.E. Smith, Rachael Price, Larry Campbell and Teresa Williams. In 2016, Jefferson Airplane was given the Grammy Lifetime Achievement Award. In 2022, Jefferson Airplane received a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame.\nSpencer Dryden died of colon cancer on January 11, 2005. Signe Anderson and Paul Kantner both died on January 28, 2016. Marty Balin died on September 27, 2018.\nStyle and legacy.\nWilliam Ruhlmann of \"AllMusic\" conferred the title of the \"quintessential San Francisco psychedelic band\" on Jefferson Airplane, saying they \"defined the San Francisco sound in the '60s\". In the book \"Rock Chronicles\", editor David Roberts assessed that the band \"soared as \"the\" soundtrack to America's late-sixties counterculture, with its psychedelia, pot, and anti-Vietnam War, anti-establishment protest. [...] Indeed, the band's whole persona [was] infused with a potent cocktail of marijuana, LSD, cocaine, and amphetamines.\" Additionally, Ruhlmann stated the band was \"a defining force in pop before turning toward political statements in the late '60s.\" The band's sound has been described as a \"folk-garage acid mix,\" with Jorma Kaukonen's guitar work being characterized as exhibiting acid rock flavors.\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "72807", "revid": "1325", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72807", "title": "Psylocibin", "text": ""}
{"id": "72809", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72809", "title": "Gross Domestic Product", "text": ""}
{"id": "72811", "revid": "43649778", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72811", "title": "Zhang Ziyi", "text": "Chinese actress and model (born 1979)\nZhang Ziyi (; ; born 9 February 1979), sometimes credited Ziyi Zhang, is a Chinese actress, known for playing independent and strong-willed characters. Born and raised in Beijing, Zhang was admitted to the Central Academy of Drama in 1996. That year, she made her acting debut in the television film \"Touching Starlight\" (1996). After her breakout role in Zhang Yimou's \"The Road Home\" (1999), which won her Best Actress at the 2000 Hundred Flowers Awards, she gained international fame for her performance in Ang Lee's wuxia film \"Crouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon\" (2000).\nZhang made her Hollywood debut as a villain in \"Rush Hour 2\" (2001), followed by \"Memoirs of a Geisha\" (2005). She reunited with Zhang Yimou in the films \"Hero\" (2002) and \"House of Flying Daggers\" (2004). She collaborated with Wong Kar-wai on \"2046\" (2004), which won her the Best Actress at the 2005 Hong Kong Film Awards, and on \"The Grandmaster\" (2013), for which she received 12 Best Actress awards, making her the most awarded Chinese actress for a single film.\nZhang is regarded as one of the Four Dan actresses of China. From 2004 to 2010, she ranked in the Top 5 of \"Forbes\" China Celebrity 100 list every year. In 2008, she was awarded with the Outstanding Contribution to Chinese Cinema award at the 11th Shanghai International Film Festival. One of the most recognisable Asian actresses in the Western world, \"Time\" called her \"China's gift to Hollywood\" in 2005. The same year, \"Time\" named her one of the 100 Most Influential People. In 2013, she received the French Cultural Order at the Ordre des Arts et des Lettres.\nEarly life.\nZhang Ziyi was born in Beijing to Zhang Yuanxiao, an accountant and later economist, and Li Zhousheng, a kindergarten teacher. She has an older brother, Zhang Zinan, who was her manager. Zhang began her nine-year study of folk dance when she was 8; at 11, she joined the Affiliated Secondary School of Beijing Dance Academy at her parents' suggestion. While at this boarding school, she noticed how mean the other girls were to each other while competing for status amongst the teachers. Zhang disliked the attitudes of her peers and teachers so much that, on one occasion, she ran away from the school. In 1994, she won the performance award in the National Taoli Cup Dance Competition. She also appeared in a handful of TV commercials. In 1996, Zhang entered the Central Academy of Drama, majoring in acting.\nCareer.\n1996\u20132000: Early career.\nIn her freshman year, Zhang made her acting debut in the television film \"Touching Starlight\". In 1998, Zhang was offered her first major role by director Zhang Yimou in his film \"The Road Home\", which would win the Silver Bear prize at the 2000 Berlin International Film Festival. Zhang plays a country girl in love with the town's young teacher. She won the Best Actress Award at the 2000 Hundred Flowers Awards for her performance.\n2000\u201306: Wuxia epics and international breakthrough.\nZhang rose to international fame in 2000 with her role as Yu Jiaolong in Ang Lee's re-visioned wuxia martial arts film \"Crouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon\". Zhang plays a young Manchu noblewoman who has secretly learned martial arts and runs off to become a wandering swordswoman rather than commit to an arranged marriage. This role won her the Most Promising Actress award at the Chicago Film Critics Association Awards and Best Supporting Actress awards from the Independent Spirit Awards, as well as Toronto Film Critics Association Awards. The movie's success in the US and Europe helped her break into Hollywood.\nZhang then appeared in her first American film, \"Rush Hour 2\" (2001) opposite Jackie Chan and Chris Tucker. On playing her first villain role, Zhang expressed that \"the opportunity to sort of try and analyze the psyche of the character and get to know and pull out emotions I\u2019ve never had to utilize before...was very exciting.\"\nIn 2002, Zhang co-starred in \"Hero\" alongside Jet Li, Maggie Cheung and Tony Leung, directed by her early mentor Zhang Yimou. The film was a huge success in the English-speaking world and was nominated for an Oscar and a Golden Globe award in the category of Best Foreign Language Film. She then signed on to film an avant-garde drama film \"Purple Butterfly\" (2003), which competed in the 2003 Cannes Film Festival.\nZhang went back to the wuxia martial arts genre in \"House of Flying Daggers\" (2004), again by Zhang Yimou, where she starred along Takeshi Kaneshiro and Andy Lau. She plays the blind dancing girl Mei, who despite the lack of eyesight, is a skilled fighter. In preparation for the part, Zhang spent two months living with an actual blind girl. Her performance earned her a Best Actress nomination at the BAFTA Awards. She also featured on the \"House of Flying Daggers\" soundtrack with her own musical rendition of the ancient Chinese poem \"Jia R\u00e9n Qu\" (\u4f73\u4eba\u66f2, \"The Beauty Song\").\nZhang next starred in Wong Kar-wai's romantic drama film \"2046\" (2004), which featured many top Chinese actors and actresses. Critics praise Zhang for her \"expressive\" body language that was combined with her \"reserved and complex emotions\" in performance as a struggling prostitute. Zhang won Best Actress awards at the Hong Kong Film Critics' Award and Hong Kong Film Academy Award.\nIn 2005, Zhang featured in the critically acclaimed film \"Jasmine Women\", adapted from Su Tong's novel titled \"Women's Lives\". She won Best Actress at the Golden Rooster Awards for her performance. Next came \"Princess Raccoon\" (2005), directed by Japan's Seijun Suzuki, which premiered at the Cannes Film Festival. For her role, Zhang took two weeks of singing and dancing lessons in Japan.\nZhang played the lead role of Sayuri in the American film adaptation based on the international bestseller\" Memoirs of a Geisha\". Controversy arose in China about having a Chinese woman portray a prominent Japanese geisha in a film set during the height of Japanese imperialist aggression against China in World War II. Nonetheless, the film was a box office hit in the West. For the role, Zhang was nominated for the Golden Globe Award for Best Actress \u2013 Motion Picture Drama, the BAFTA Award for Best Actress in a Leading Role, and the Screen Actors Guild Award for Outstanding Performance by a Female Actor in a Leading Role.\nOn 27 June 2005, Zhang accepted an invitation to join the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences (AMPAS), placing her among the ranks of those who are able to vote on the Academy Awards. In May 2006, Zhang was chosen as a jury member of \"Feature Films\" at the 2006 Cannes Film Festival.\nZhang returned to China in 2006 for the Chinese wuxia film \"The Banquet\", directed by Feng Xiaogang. The film is a loose adaptation of William Shakespeare's \"Hamlet\".\n2007\u201312: Hollywood and China.\nIn 2007, Zhang performed the voice of Karai in the American animated film \"TMNT\" (2007). In the same year, Zhang starred alongside Liu Ye and Ge You in the first-ever opening short for the Chinese academy awards (Golden Rooster Awards) where director Dayyan Eng got top stars to spoof the action-movie genre in a humorous send-up on national TV in China.\nIn \"Forever Enthralled\" (2008), which tells the story of legendary Peking opera actor Mei Lanfang, Zhang appears in the second act as \nMei's lover Meng Xiaodong. \"The Hollywood Reporter\" praised her performance as \"confident and passion\", giving the romance a sparkle.\nHer next American film was \"Horsemen\" (2009), where she starred opposite Dennis Quaid. Back in China, she played the titular character in romantic comedy \"Sophie's Revenge\" (2009); a comic book artist seeking to punish her unfaithful boyfriend. She then starred alongside Aaron Kwok in the AIDS-themed film \"Love for Life\" (2011).\nIn 2012, Zhang starred next to Cecilia Cheung and Jang Dong-gun in the Chinese-Korean co-production \"Dangerous Liaisons\", an adaptation of the French novel \"Les Liaisons dangereuses\", narrating Shanghai of the 1930s. Zhang was reportedly paid 20 million RMB (approximately $3.5\u00a0million) for the role. The same year, she was cast in the coming-of-age film \"Forever Young\" directed and written by Li Fangfang. The film premiered in January 2018.\n2013\u201317.\nIn 2013, Zhang received the Ordre des Arts et des Lettres as a Dame for her significant contributions to the film industry.\nZhang reunited with Wong Kar-wai and Tony Leung for \"The Grandmaster\" (2013), which also marks her return to the martial arts genre after 7 years since \"The Banquet\" (2006). The film was China's submission to the Academy Awards for Best Foreign-Language Picture. Critics praise Zhang's portrayal of Gong'Er as the \"best performance she's ever delivered in the history of her career.\" which led to her winning several \"Best Actress\" trophies across Asia. The same year, she reprised her role as Sophie in \"My Lucky Star\", a sequel to \"Sophie's Revenge\". Described as Zhang's \"breakthrough comedy role\", the film topped Chinese box office on the week of its release.\nIn 2014, Zhang starred in John Woo's romantic epic \"The Crossing\", based on the true story of the Taiping steamer collision and follows six characters and their intertwining love stories in Taiwan and Shanghai during the 1930s. Zhang plays a poor illiterate woman waiting for her soldier lover in 1930's Shanghai.\nIn 2015, Zhang produced her third film \"Oh My God\", which stars Zhang Yixing and Li Xiaolu. She made a cameo appearance in the film. Zhang next starred in romance anthology film \"Run for Love\" and crime epic \"The Wasted Times\".\n2018\u2013present: Hollywood epics, directorial debut and small-screen debut.\nIn 2016, Zhang was cast in J. J. Abrams's science fiction thriller \"The Cloverfield Paradox\", which premiered in 2018.\nIn 2017, Zhang was cast in the monster film \"\", playing a prominent character.\nIn 2018, Zhang was cast in her first television series, \"Rebel Princess\".\nIn 2019, Zhang starred in the adventure drama film \"The Climbers\".\nIn 2021, Zhang made her directorial debut with a short titled \"Shi\" (Poem), one of the four stand-alone short tales of the film \"My Country, My Parents\". She won the best new director award at the 2022 Media Honors for the film.\nAmbassadorship and representation.\nEndorsements.\nZhang was the first Chinese woman to be appointed as an Emporio Armani ambassador, which she served from 2009 to 2010. She also served as regional ambassadors for Mercedes-Benz, Garnier, Precious Platinum; and global ambassadors for Maybelline, Visa, TAG Heuer, Omega SA and Cl\u00e9 de Peau Beaut\u00e9. Zhang was featured on the \"BoF 500\" list. Since 2019, she became the global ambassador for Chopard.\nPublic image and influence.\nZhang is regarded as one of the Four Dan actresses of China, alongside Zhao Wei, Zhou Xun, and Xu Jinglei. One of the most recognisable Asian actresses in the Western world, \"Time\" called her \"China's gift to Hollywood\" in 2005. The same year, \"Time\" named her one of the 100 Most Influential People. In 2021, Douglas Parkes of \"South China Morning Post\" (SCMP) described Zhang as \"surely the most important Chinese actress of her generation\".\nHaving starred in some of the most celebrated martial arts films of all time, Zhang is widely considered one of the greatest martial arts stars in the history of cinema.\nPersonal life.\nIn the July 2006 issue of \"Interview\" magazine, Zhang spoke of her movies' contents and being careful about the roles she took on, especially in Hollywood:\nZhang obtained Hong Kong residency in 2007 through the Quality Migrant Admission Scheme for her contribution to the local film industry. She is an admirer and collector of the works of the Chinese contemporary artist Shen Jingdong. Politically, she is a member of the Chinese Communist Party-controlled China Zhi Gong Party.\nFrom 2004 to 2006, Zhang was in a relationship with Eric Fok Kai Shan, an heir of the Fok family in Hong Kong. Following this, Zhang entered into a relationship with Israeli American venture capitalist Aviv \"Vivi\" Nevo in 2007, which led to an engagement; however, the couple parted ways in 2010. From late 2011 to 2013, Zhang was in a relationship with Chinese host Sa Beining.\nIn May 2015, Zhang married Chinese rock musician Wang Feng. They have two children: a daughter (born December 2015) and a son (born January 2020), both born in the United States. On 23 October 2023, Zhang and Wang announced their divorce on Weibo.\nControversy.\nInk Gate.\nIn December 2009, an Omega ad featuring Zhang near her home at the Park Hyatt residence in Beijing was splashed with black ink. In January 2010, Zhao Xinyu, a socialite and daughter-in-law of Ye Jianying, contacted the tabloid magazine \"Total Entertainment\" and claimed the ink-splashing had stemmed from Zhang's affair with real estate tycoon Yu Guoxiang. According to Zhao, she introduced Zhang, then engaged to Aviv \"Vivi\" Nevo, to Yu, who later started an affair with the actress and gave her 200 million yuan ($25 million) in jewels and artworks as gifts. When Yu's wife discovered the extramarital affair, Zhang believed that Zhao tipped her off. Zhao claimed the ink-splashing was orchestrated by her friend, unbeknownst to her, after the friend witnessed Zhang's elder brother, Zinan, threatening her over the phone. Zhao also claimed that Zhang had split up with Vivi due to disputes over the prenuptial agreement.\nZhang sued \"Total Entertainment\" for defamation the day after the magazine report and Vivi issued a statement supporting Zhang. In July, the owner of the magazine settled the case with Zhang and issued an apology. In August, the magazine was shut down.\nDonation Gate.\nIn mid-January 2010, an online post reported that Zhang failed to honor her pledge to donate one million yuan ($146,000) to relief charities in the aftermath of the May 2008 Sichuan earthquake, as she donated 840,000 yuan, or 160,000 yuan less than promised. Netizens also noted that the funds she raised in Cannes for the earthquake were unaccounted for, leading to allegations of donation fraud. Zhang denied the accusations of charity fraud, but admitted to inexperience when she organized the donation drive. Her agent, Ji Lingling, claimed responsibility for the mistake and donated another 160,000 yuan to earthquake victims, bringing Zhang's total contribution up to one million yuan.\nSeduction Gate.\nIn February 2010, Chow Yun-fat said at an event in Taipei that he was \"seduced\" during the filming of \"Crouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon\", leading to media speculation that he was referring to Zhang, one of the three actresses Chow acted opposite in the film. Her agent, Ji Lingling, dismissed the speculation as \"ridiculous\".\nThe series of three scandals above, each named in Chinese after Watergate, was collectively known as Zhang's \"Triple Gates\", marking the nadir of her reputation and career.\nDefamation cases.\nIn 2012, an American website Boxun falsely reported that Zhang was paid $100\u00a0million to sleep with top Chinese officials. Zhang sued Boxun in a US court for defamation. In December 2013, Boxun settled the case after agreeing to pay an undisclosed amount to Zhang and issue a front-page apology. Zhang also sued Next Media in Hong Kong and Taiwan over the similar reports by the group's two titles, \"Apple Daily\" and \"Next Magazine,\" both citing Boxun. She won the case in Hong Kong but lost in Taiwan.\nAwards and nominations.\nOther honors.\nIn 2005, Zhang was listed in \"Time\"'s World's 100 Most Influential People. They called her \"China's Gift to Hollywood\".\nIn 2008, she was awarded with the \"Outstanding Contribution to Chinese Cinema\" at the 11th Shanghai International Film Festival.\nIn 2010, she was named \"Actress of the Decade\" by CineAsia. She previously won \"Star of Tomorrow prize\" back in 1999.\nIn 2013, Zhang received the Order of Arts and Letter as a Dame at the Ordre des Arts et des Lettres Awards.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "72812", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72812", "title": "Walt Disney Corporation", "text": ""}
{"id": "72814", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72814", "title": "Newgate Prison", "text": "Former prison in London\nNewgate Prison was a prison at the corner of Newgate Street and Old Bailey, just inside the City of London, England, originally at the site of Newgate, a gate in the Roman London Wall. Built in the 12th century and demolished in 1904, the prison was extended and rebuilt many times, and remained in use for over 700 years, from 1188 to 1902.\nIn the late 18th century, executions by hanging were moved here from the Tyburn gallows. These took place on the public street in front of the prison, drawing crowds until 1868, when they were moved into the prison.\nFor much of its history, a succession of criminal courtrooms were attached to the prison, commonly referred to as the \"Old Bailey\". The present Old Bailey (officially, Central Criminal Court) now occupies much of the site of the prison.\nHistory.\nIn the 12th century, Henry II instituted legal reforms that gave the Crown more control over the administration of justice. As part of his Assize of Clarendon of 1166, he required the construction of prisons, where the accused would stay while royal judges debated their innocence or guilt and subsequent punishment. In 1188, Newgate was the first institution established to meet that purpose. Also around this time, the Sheriffs of London were given jurisdiction in Middlesex, as well as in the City of London.\nA few decades later in 1236, in an effort to significantly enlarge the prison, the king converted one of the Newgate turrets, which still functioned as a main gate into the city, into an extension of the prison. The addition included new dungeons and adjacent buildings, which would remain unaltered for roughly two centuries.\nBy the 15th century, however, Newgate was in need of repair. Following pressure from reformers who learned that the women's quarters were too small and did not contain their own latrines \u2013 obliging women to walk through the men's quarters to reach one \u2013 officials added a separate tower and chamber for female prisoners in 1406. Some Londoners bequeathed their estates to repair the prison. The building was collapsing and decaying, and many prisoners were dying from the close quarters, overcrowding, rampant disease, and bad sanitary conditions. Indeed, one year, 22 prisoners died from \"gaol fever\". The situation in Newgate was so dire that in 1419, city officials temporarily shut down the prison.\nThe executors of the will of Lord Mayor Dick Whittington were granted a licence to renovate the prison in 1422. The gate and gaol were pulled down and rebuilt. There was a new central hall for meals, a new chapel, and the creation of additional chambers and basement cells with no light or ventilation. There were three main wards: the Master's side for those could afford to pay for their own food and accommodations, the Common side for those who were too poor, and a Press Yard for special prisoners. The king often used Newgate as a holding place for heretics, traitors, and rebellious subjects brought to London for trial. The prison housed both male and female felons and debtors. Prisoners were separated into wards by sex. By the mid-15th century, Newgate could accommodate roughly 300 prisoners. Though the prisoners lived in separate quarters, they mixed freely with each other and visitors to the prison.\nThe prison was destroyed in the Great Fire of London in 1666, and was rebuilt in 1672 by Sir Christopher Wren. In 1752, a windmill was built on top of the prison by Stephen Hales in an effort to provide ventilation.\nIn 1769, construction was begun by the King's Master Mason, John Deval, to enlarge the prison and add a new \"Old Bailey\" sessions house. Parliament granted \u00a350,000 (~\u00a39.3 million in 2020 terms) towards the cost, and the City of London provided land measuring by . The work followed the designs of George Dance the Younger. The new prison was constructed to an \"architecture terrible\" design intended to discourage law-breaking. The building was laid out around a central courtyard, and was divided into two sections: a \"Common\" area for poor prisoners and a \"State area\" for those able to afford more comfortable accommodation.\nConstruction of the second Newgate Prison was almost finished when it was stormed by a mob during the Gordon riots in June 1780. The building was gutted by fire, and the walls were badly damaged; the cost of repairs was estimated at \u00a330,000 (~\u00a35.6 million in 2020 terms). Dance's new prison was finally completed in 1782.\nDuring the early 19th century, the prison attracted the attention of the social reformer Elizabeth Fry. She was particularly concerned at the conditions in which female prisoners (and their children) were held. After she presented evidence to the House of Commons improvements were made.\nThe prison closed in 1902, and was demolished in 1903.\nPrison life.\nAll manner of criminals stayed at Newgate. Some committed acts of petty crime and theft, breaking and entering homes or committing highway robberies, while others performed serious crimes such as rapes and murders. The number of prisoners in Newgate for specific types of crime often grew and fell, reflecting public anxieties of the time. For example, towards the tail end of Edward I's reign, there was a rise in street robberies. As such, the punishment for drawing out a dagger was 15 days in Newgate; injuring someone meant 40 days in the prison.\nUpon their arrival in Newgate, prisoners were chained and led to the appropriate dungeon for their crime. Those who had been sentenced to death stayed in a cellar beneath the keeper's house, essentially an open sewer lined with chains and shackles to encourage submission. Otherwise, common debtors were sent to the \"stone hall\" whereas common felons were taken to the \"stone hold\". The dungeons were dirty and unlit, so depraved that physicians would not enter.\nThe conditions did not improve with time. Prisoners who could afford to purchase alcohol from the prisoner-run drinking cellar by the main entrance to Newgate remained perpetually drunk. There were lice everywhere, and jailers left the prisoners chained to the wall to languish and starve. From 1315 to 1316, 62 deaths in Newgate were under investigation by the coroner, and prisoners were always desperate to leave the prison.\nThe cruel treatment from guards did nothing to help the unfortunate prisoners. According to medieval statute, the prison was to be managed by two annually elected sheriffs, who in turn would sublet the administration of the prison to private \"gaolers\", or \"keepers\", for a price. These keepers in turn were permitted to exact payment directly from the inmates, making the position one of the most profitable in London. Inevitably, often the system offered incentives for the keepers to exhibit cruelty to the prisoners, charging them for everything from entering the gaol to having their chains both put on and taken off. They often began inflicting punishment on prisoners before their sentences even began. Guards, whose incomes partially depended on extorting their wards, charged the prisoners for food, bedding, and to be released from their shackles. To earn additional money, guards blackmailed and tortured prisoners. Among the most notorious Keepers in the Middle Ages were the 14th-century gaolers Edmund Lorimer, who was infamous for charging inmates four times the legal limit for the removal of irons, and Hugh De Croydon, who was eventually convicted of blackmailing prisoners in his care.\nIndeed, the list of things that prison guards were not allowed to do serve as a better indication of the conditions in Newgate than the list of things that they were allowed to do. Gaolers were not allowed to take alms intended for prisoners. They could not monopolize the sale of food, charge excessive fees for beds, or demand fees for bringing prisoners to the Old Bailey. In 1393, new regulation was added to prevent gaolers from charging for lamps or beds.\nNot a half century later, in 1431, city administrators met to discuss other potential areas of reform. Proposed regulations included separating freemen and freewomen into the north and south chambers, respectively, and keeping the rest of the prisoners in underground holding cells. Good prisoners who had not been accused of serious crimes would be allowed to use the chapel and recreation rooms at no additional fees. Meanwhile, debtors whose burden did not meet a minimum threshold would not be required to wear shackles. Prison officials were barred from selling food, charcoal, and candles. The prison was supposed to have yearly inspections, but whether they actually occurred is unknown. Other reforms attempted to reduce the waiting time between jail deliveries to the Old Bailey, with the aim of reducing suffering, but these efforts had little effect.\nOver the centuries, Newgate was used for a number of purposes including imprisoning people awaiting execution, although it was not always secure: burglar Jack Sheppard twice escaped from the prison before he went to the gallows at Tyburn in 1724. Prison chaplain Paul Lorrain achieved some fame in the early 18th century for his sometimes dubious publication of \"Confessions\" of the condemned.\nExecutions.\nIn 1783, the site of London's gallows was moved from Tyburn to Newgate. Public executions outside the prison \u2013 by this time, London's main prison \u2013 continued to draw large crowds. It was also possible to visit the prison by obtaining a permit from the Lord Mayor of the City of London or a sheriff. The condemned were kept in narrow, sombre cells separated from Newgate Street by a thick wall and received only a dim light from the inner courtyard. The gallows were constructed outside a door in Newgate Street for public viewing. Dense crowds of thousands of spectators could pack the streets to see these events, and in 1807 dozens died at a public execution when part of the crowd of 40,000 spectators collapsed into a crowd crush. In November 1835 James Pratt and John Smith were the last two men to be executed for sodomy. \nMichael Barrett was the last man to be hanged in public outside Newgate Prison (and the last person to be publicly executed in Great Britain) on 26\u00a0May 1868. From 1868, public executions were discontinued and executions were carried out on gallows inside Newgate, initially using the same mobile gallows in the Chapel Yard, but later in a shed built near the same spot. Dead Man's Walk was a long stone-flagged passageway, partly open to the sky and roofed with iron mesh (thus also known as Birdcage Walk). The bodies of the executed criminals were then buried beneath its flagstones. Until the 20th century, future British executioners were trained at Newgate. One of the last was John Ellis, who began training in 1901. In total \u2013 publicly or otherwise \u2013 1,169 people were executed at the prison. Death masks of several of them were transferred to the Black Museum at New Scotland Yard on the prison's closure.\nNotable prisoners.\nOther famous prisoners at Newgate include:\nLegacy.\nThe Central Criminal Court \u2013 known as the Old Bailey after the street on which it stands \u2013 now stands upon the Newgate Prison site.\nThe original iron gate leading to the gallows was used for decades in an alleyway in Buffalo, New York. It is currently housed in that city at Canisius University.\nThe original door from a prison cell used to house St. Oliver Plunkett in 1681 is on display at St Peter's Church in Drogheda, Ireland (which also displays his head).\nThe phrase \"[as] black as Newgate's knocker\" is a Cockney reference to the door knocker on the front of the prison.\nIn literature.\nA record of executions conducted at the prison, together with commentary, was published as \"The Newgate Calendar\".\nThe prison appears in a number of works by Charles Dickens. Novels include \"Little Dorrit\", \"Oliver Twist\", \"A Tale of Two Cities\", \"\" and \"Great Expectations\". Newgate prison was also the subject of an entire essay in his work \"Sketches by Boz\".\nIn song.\nThe Australian \"Convict's Rum Song\" mentions Newgate with a line reading: \"[I'd] ... even dance the Newgate Hornpipe If ye'll only gimme Rum!\". The 'Newgate Hornpipe' refers to execution by hanging.\nReferences.\nNotes\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "72815", "revid": "20760116", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72815", "title": "Liouville's theorem", "text": "Liouville's theorem has various meanings, all mathematical results named after Joseph Liouville:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n Topics referred to by the same termThis page lists mathematics articles associated with the same title. "}
{"id": "72816", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72816", "title": "Trillium erectum", "text": "Species of flowering plant\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Taxobox/core/styles.css\" /&gt;\nTrillium erectum, the red trillium, also known as wake robin, purple trillium, bethroot, or stinking benjamin, is a species of flowering plant in the family Melanthiaceae. The plant takes its common name \"wake robin\" by analogy with the European robin, which has a red breast heralding spring. Likewise \"Trillium erectum\" is a spring ephemeral plant whose life-cycle is synchronized with that of the forests in which it lives. It is native to the eastern United States and eastern Canada from northern Georgia to Quebec and New Brunswick.\nDescription.\n\"Trillium erectum\" is a perennial, herbaceous, flowering plant that persists by means of an underground rhizome. Like all trilliums, it has a whorl of three bracts (leaves) and a single trimerous flower with three sepals, three petals, two whorls of three stamens each, and three carpels (fused into a single ovary with three stigmas). It grows to about in height with a spread of . The petals are dark reddish brown, maroon, purple, pale yellow, or white. The ovary is dark purple to maroon regardless of petal color. If the flower is successfully pollinated, the petals wither, leaving behind a fruit that ripens to a dark red berry-like capsule, long.\nSpecies complex.\n\"Trillium erectum\" shares many anatomical details with other North American \"Trillium\" species. These species hybridize in the wild, which has led some researchers to group them into a species complex, specifically, a syngameon of semispecies.\nThe combinations of traits that are supposed to differentiate members of the complex from one another are sometimes inconsistently combined in wild populations. This has led some researchers to declare the individual species invalid, and refer to the species complex collectively as \"T.\u00a0erectum\" (\"sensu lato\"). Others acknowledge the existence of introgression and hybrid swarm formation between some or all complex members, but maintain that the named species within the complex represent convenient groups with common features.\nMembers of the \"T.\u00a0erectum\" complex have flowers with the following commonalities: (1)\u00a0petals that are coarse and stiff in texture (in contrast with the wavy edges of other species), (2)\u00a0petals that do not change color after pollination, (3)\u00a0petals with prominent, netted veins, (4)\u00a0fleshy stigmas that are attached to the ovary separately, without a common style, and (5)\u00a0conspicuous, deeply-ridged ovaries.\nNorth American members of the \"T.\u00a0erectum\" species complex:\nThe Asian species \"T.\u00a0camschatcense\", resembles the North American \"T.\u00a0flexipes\" very closely, and itself has close relatives with similar floral features. However, trillium speciation in this group of Asian species is characterized by differences in chromosome number, with hybrids more definitively distinguishable from parent species by karyotype.\nTaxonomy.\n\"Trillium erectum\" was first described by the Swedish botanist Carl Linnaeus in 1753. The specific epithet \"erectum\" means \"upright, erect\", a reference to the erect pedicel of some forms of this species. In many populations, however, the pedicel leans or declines, sometimes declining beneath the leaves, making the name somewhat inappropriate.\nIn 1803 Andr\u00e9 Michaux introduced the name \"Trillium rhomboideum\" to describe a form of \"T.\u00a0erectum\" with black fruit in \"the high mountains of North Carolina\". The specific epithet \"rhomboideum\" refers to the broadly rhombic leaves of this (and all) forms of \"T.\u00a0erectum\". Michaux also described \"Trillium rhomboideum\" var.\u00a0\"atropurpureum\", a variety with large, dark purple petals. A decade later in 1813, Frederick Traugott Pursh referred to Michaux's variety more simply as \"Trillium erectum\" var.\u00a0\"atropurpureum\". Perhaps unaware of these taxonomic developments, other botanists subsequently described \"Trillium atropurpureum\". The epithet \"atropurpureum\" means \"dark-purple coloured\", a reference to the petal color of certain forms of \"T.\u00a0erectum\". Indeed, in some locales \"T.\u00a0erectum\" is commonly known as the purple trillium.\nInfraspecies.\nAs of October 2021[ [update]], Plants of the World Online (POWO) accepts two infraspecific names:\nPOWO lists 30\u00a0synonyms for variety \"erectum\" and 3\u00a0synonyms for variety \"album\". Michaux introduced the term \"album\" in 1803 by describing \"Trillium rhomboideum\" var.\u00a0\"album\", a variety with a smaller flower and white petals. Pursh gave a similar description for \"Trillium erectum\" var.\u00a0\"album\" in 1814. The word \"album\" means \"bright, dead-white\", a reference to the variety's white petals, a distinctive feature noted by both Michaux and Pursh. \nJohn Kunkel Small raised \"T.\u00a0rhomboideum\" var.\u00a0\"album\" Michx. to species rank in 1903. In his description, he added long anthers to the list of characters cited by Michaux while expanding the range of the taxon to include North Carolina, Tennessee, and Georgia. In 1917, R.R.\u00a0Gates recognized the existence of two distinct forms of \"T.\u00a0erectum\" with white petals, one of which was represented by the previously mentioned \"Trillium album\" (Michx.) Small. This prompted Ralph Hoffmann to propose \"Trillium erectum\" f.\u00a0\"albiflorum\", a white-flowered form of \"T.\u00a0erectum\" that occurs occasionally and spontaneously throughout the range of the species. Thus the distinct taxa recognized by Gates were fully realized by 1922.\nPOWO cites the Flora of North America (FNA) as an authority for \"Trillium erectum\" var.\u00a0\"album\" (Michx.) Pursh. The treatment of the variety in FNA expands the original concept described by Michaux to include the occasional white-flowered red trillium found throughout the range of the species. Under this scheme, all non-white petal colors (including yellow) comprise the typical variety (var.\u00a0\"erectum\"). Thus FNA lumps the two forms recognized by Gates into a single taxon. In contrast, POWO restricts the range of \"Trillium erectum\" var.\u00a0\"album\" to eastern Tennessee and western North Carolina. Noting that its distribution is poorly understood, Flora of the Southeastern United States (FSUS) describes a white-flowered variety of \"T.\u00a0erectum\" common to the foothills of the Great Smoky Mountains, in North Carolina and Tennessee, but rare elsewhere. FSUS suggests that variety \"album\" may be genetically distinct from variety \"erectum\", while other evidence suggests there is little genetic difference between the two varieties.\nDistribution.\n\"Trillium erectum\" is native to eastern North America. Its range extends from northern Georgia in the southeastern United States to Quebec and New Brunswick in eastern Canada, and as far west as Michigan and southern Ontario. The species is known to occur in the following provinces and states:\n\"Trillium erectum\" var.\u00a0\"album\" (as described in the Flora of the Southeastern United States) occurs in western North Carolina, eastern Tennessee, and other areas surrounding the Great Smoky Mountains, primarily at elevations less than .\nAs of October 2019[ [update]], \"Trillium erectum\" is globally secure. It is critically imperiled in Delaware, Illinois, and Rhode Island.\nEcology.\n\"Trillium erectum\" is a carrion-scented flower. It produces fetid or putrid odors purported to attract carrion fly and beetle pollinators. The fetid odor is described as that of a wet dog. The common name stinking benjamin refers to this characteristic of the plant. \"Benjamin\" is a corruption of the word benzoin, which itself is a corruption of the word \"benjoin\", a plant-based organic compound used in the manufacture of perfume. Despite the origins of the common name, the chemical basis of carrion-scented flowers is not well understood.\n\"Trillium erectum\" can tolerate extreme cold in winter, surviving temperatures down to .\nUses.\nThe root of the red trillium was used by various indigenous peoples of North America as an aid in childbirth, hence the common name birthwort or birthroot (which is sometimes corrupted to bethroot). Root tea was used for menstrual disorders, to induce childbirth, and to aid in labor. The Cherokee peoples used a poultice of the whole plant to treat tumors, inflammation, and ulcers.\nThe leaves contain calcium oxalate as raphides and should not be consumed by humans.\n\"Trillium erectum\" is cultivated as a flowering ornamental plant. Although not as showy as \"T.\u00a0grandiflorum\", the flowers of some forms of \"T.\u00a0erectum\" can be quite striking, especially since it tends to form large clumps. It has received the Award of Garden Merit from the Royal Horticultural Society.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "72817", "revid": "300735", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72817", "title": "Bundaberg", "text": "&lt;templatestyles src=\"Infobox_Australian_place/styles.css\"/&gt;\nBundaberg () is the major regional city in the Wide Bay-Burnett region of the state of Queensland, Australia. It is the ninth largest city in the state. The Bundaberg central business district is situated along the southern bank of the Burnett River about from its mouth at Burnett Heads, where it flows into the Coral Sea. The city is sited on a rich coastal plain, supporting one of the nation's most productive agricultural regions. The area of Bundaberg is the home of the Taribelang-Bunda, Goreng Goreng, Gurang, and Bailai peoples. The common nickname for Bundaberg is \"Bundy\", although its history as a major sugar producing region means it is often referenced as the \"Rum City\" or \"Sugar City\". The residents of the city are referred to colloquially as 'Bundabergians'. In the 2021 census, the Bundaberg urban area had a population of 73,747 people.\nThe district surveyor, John Thompson Charlton designed the city layout in 1868, which planned for uniform square blocks with wide main streets, and named it \u2018Bundaberg\u2019. An early influence on the development of Bundaberg came with the 1868 Land Act, which was a famous Queensland via media, that aimed to create a class of Australian yeoman. Large sugarcane plantations were established throughout the 1880s, with industries of sugar mills, refineries, and rum distilleries that delivered prosperity to Bundaberg. These plantations used South Sea Islanders as indentured labourers, many of whom were blackbirded, a practice considered a form of slavery. The trade was outlawed in 1904, with most South Sea Islanders deported by 1906. Major floods in 1942 and 1954 damaged the river, ending Bundaberg's role as a river port and led to a new port at the mouth of the Burnett river. In the post-war era, Bundaberg continued to grow with its wealth tied to its sugar industry. In 2013, Bundaberg experienced record flooding from Cyclone Oswald, which was the worst disaster in the city's history.\nThe economy of Bundaberg is based primarily on agriculture, forestry, fishing and tourism, with a gross regional product at about $5.62 billion as of June 2023. Bundaberg also has a major distillery and brewery industry that exports to international markets. The city is served by the Port of Bundaberg and the Bundaberg Airport.\nBundaberg has a rich history and culture, along with its humid subtropical climate it is known for its weeping fig trees, dry stone walls, and historic plantations, including the Fairymead Plantation and the Sunnyside Sugar Plantation, the latter of which is the site of a mass grave. Other sites of South Sea Islander cultural significance include Sir Anthony's Rest atop the Bundaberg Hummock and the South Sea Islander Church. Major cultural institutions include the Hinkler Hall of Aviation and the Bundaberg Regional Art Gallery. The city's culinary culture is highlighted by its annual 'Banquet on the Bridge', and an iconic rum and gin culture with Bundaberg Rum originating in the city.\nBundaberg is a popular tourism destination, the city's hinterland includes the historic towns of Childers and Gin Gin, Lake Monduran, Cania Gorge National Park and the Promisedland mountain bike trails. Bundaberg's coastal areas include Bargara and Mon Repos, Deepwater National Park, and the southernmost reaches of the Great Barrier Reef alongside the islands of Lady Musgrave and Lady Elliot.\nGeography.\nThe city is about north of the state capital, Brisbane. It is inland from the Coral Sea coast and situated on the Burnett River.\nEtymology.\nCity name.\nThe name was coined by surveyor John Charlton Thompson and his assistant Alfred Dale Edwards. \"Bunda\" was derived from the name of one of the kinship groups of the local Taribelang people, and appended with the suffix \"berg\". Two sources of the suffix have been proposed. It is a Saxon suffix which means \"hill\". It is also a German word which translates as \"mountain\", and refers to the Sloping Hummoch, the singular hill rising above the relatively flat region surrounding the Burnett River on which the city is situated.\nColloquially, the city is widely known throughout Australia as \"Bundy\". Residents are referred to by the demonym Bundabergian, which is also a corresponding adjective.\nBourbong Street.\nBourbong Street is the main street of the city. and there is some controversy in regards to its spelling and meaning. Bourbong was alternatively spelled Bourbon or Boorbong, which was a local Aboriginal title given to a large waterhole in the area. The main street was historically also gazetted in the Bundaberg Mail as \"Bourbon\" street, but by 1941 there is no reference to \"Bourbon\" street. Robert Strathdee's farming selection in the vicinity of the watering holes was recorded on early survey maps as 'Boorbung'.\nA pioneer pastoralist of the region, Nicholas Tooth, wrote that \"Bourbong\" was derived from the local Aboriginal phrase \"bier rabong\", meaning \"plenty dead\". Tooth, who took up land in the area in the early 1860s, found that Aboriginal people resolutely avoided the \"bier rabong\" vicinity. He later found the skeletal remains there of around twenty Aboriginal people who were apparently massacred in a raid by the Native Police.\nHistory.\nEarly history.\nThe Traditional owner Aboriginal groups in the region are the Taribelang, Gooreng Gooreng, https://, and Bailai peoples. They are the original inhabitants of the region. A determination of Native Title was made for all four cultural groups by the National Native Title Tribunal, pursuant to the \"Native Title Act 1993,\" on 28 November 2017. It was determined that \"native title exists in the entire determination area\" of Bundaberg, Gladstone, and the North Burnett.\nAs such, the Bundaberg Regional Council has reflected this recognition in their \"First Nations Strategy 2022-2026\", and endeavours to celebrate and embrace the region's \"local connections to First Nation Peoples and other cultures\".\nInitial British colonisation.\nThe first British man to visit the area was James Davis in the 1830s. He was an escaped convict from the Moreton Bay Penal settlement who lived with the Kabi people to the south of the region. He resided mostly around the Mary River and was referred to as \"Durrumboi\". The Burnett River was surveyed by John Charles Burnett, after whom it was named during his exploration mission of the Wide Bay and Burnett regions in 1847.\nBritish occupation of the land in the region began in 1848 when pastoral squatters Gregory Blaxland Jnr and William Forster established a sheep station. Blaxland was a son of the Blue Mountains explorer, Gregory Blaxland, and Forster was later to become a Premier of New South Wales. They selected a very large area of land which encompassed most of the western part of the modern day Bundaberg Region along the Burnett River. They named this pastoral lease Tirroan.\nBlaxland and Forster had previously set up sheep stations near the Clarence River and had a notable history of conflict with Aboriginal people. Sheep stations imposed on native bushland disrupt native food production, typically resulting in widespread hunger and illness amongst native peoples. Conflict continued at Tirroan when two of their shepherds were killed by Aboriginal people in 1849. Forster and Blaxland led a punitive expedition causing multiple Aboriginal deaths. Further conflict occurred the following year when Blaxland was clubbed to death. Forster and a number of other squatters conducted another reprisal, resulting in a large massacre of Aboriginal people in scrubland toward the coastal part of Tirroan.\nIn the early 1850s, Forster sold the property to Alfred Henry Brown who changed the name of the pastoral lease to Gin Gin. At the same time, Native Police officer, Richard Purvis Marshall, took up the Bingera leasehold in the rainforest scrubland downstream from Tirroan. Three towns in the Bundaberg region, Tirroan, South Bingera and Gin Gin, commemorate these massive initial leaseholds.\nCattle and logging.\nBefore colonisation, much of the land around the lower reaches of the Burnett River consisted of either the Woongarra Scrub, a subtropical rainforest that stood where most of the Bundaberg canefields now grow, or the Barolin Plains, a lightly timbered grassland that stretched along the coastal fringe. Neither of these areas were suitable for sheep farming but the British soon found that raising cattle was possible. In the early 1860s the first cattle stations in the area were established; Branyan on the south side of the Burnett River and Tantitha on the north side.\nTimber companies, such as that owned by William Pettigrew, started the logging of the Woongarra Scrub in 1867.\nIn 1868, Samuel Johnston erected a sawmill in Waterview, on the north bank of the Burnett River. The Waterview sawmill became a prominent supplier of timber until its closure in 1903 after being damaged by flood.\nTown of Bundaberg.\nIn 1867, timber-getters and farmers, John and Gavin Steuart, established the Woondooma property which consisted of a few houses and a wharf on the northern banks of the Burnett River where Bundaberg North now stands. An official survey of the area was undertaken in 1869 by John Charlton Thompson, assisted by James Ellwood and Alfred Dale Edwards, and the town of Bundaberg was gazetted across the river on the higher, southern banks. The first Bundaberg land sale was held in Maryborough on 11 May 1870 where hotelier John Foley bought the original lots.\nSugar.\nMost of the early settlers exploited the timber and grew maize on their selections but as a result of the incentives of the Sugar and Coffee Regulations of 1864, sugar became a major component in Bundaberg's development from the 1870s. Experimental sugar cane cultivation in the district was first grown at John Charlton Thompson's Rubyanna property in 1870 and the first sugar mill was built by Richard Elliot Palmer at his Millbank plantation in 1872. Bundaberg rapidly became an important sugar production region after the construction of the Millaquin Sugar Refinery at East Bundaberg by Robert Cran and his sons in 1882. The Fairymead sugar processing plant owned by the Young Brothers (Arthur, Horace and Ernest Young) opened in 1884 which further augmented Bundaberg's sugar producing capacity.\nThe initial 35 years of the sugar industry in Bundaberg was reliant on South Sea Islander workers, who were often blackbirded and kept in a status close to slavery. The first significant shipload of Kanaka labour, as it was called, to arrive on the Burnett River came in January 1872 aboard the \"Petrel\". Allegations of kidnapping and wounding immediately arose concerning the recruitment of the Islanders on this vessel. Influential Bundaberg plantation owners were able to purchase recruiting ships in order to obtain labour directly from areas such as the Solomon Islands and the New Hebrides. The Young Brothers owned the \"Lochiel\" and the \"May\" vessels, the Cran family and Frederic Buss were the major investors in the \"Helena\" while the \"Ariel\" was co-owned by a number of local planters. While some of the recruitment was voluntary, violence and deception toward Islanders often took place. For example, the crew of the \"Helena\" fought a battle with the locals of Ambrym while taking Islanders from there.\nThese labourers had to work for three years and were only paid at the end of this time period. Instead of cash, they usually received substandard goods and trinkets of minimal value as payment. Excessive mortality of the Islanders while serving their term of labour in the Bundaberg region was frequent. Overwork, poor housing, inadequate food, contaminated water supplies and a lack of medical care all contributed to the high death rate. Penalties for the plantation owners whose neglect resulted in these fatalities were rare and did not exceed a \u00a310 fine. Importing South Sea Islander labour was made illegal in 1904 and enforced repatriation of these workers out of Bundaberg and other locations in Queensland occurred from 1906 to 1908.\nThe 1911 Queensland sugar strike occurred after the phasing out of South Sea Islander labour, with workers claiming that many plantation owners had substituted black indentured labourers (sometimes referred to as slaves) with white ones. Workers sought better accommodation, wages and conditions, including an eight-hour day and a minimum weekly wage of 30 shillings, including food. The mobilisation of unionists from Bundaberg to Mossman was a major achievement, with the 1911 strike lasting over seven weeks in Bundaberg where the town's economy was largely based on the sugar industry. The end result of the strike was a Commonwealth Royal Commission into the sugar industry in 1911\u201312, which had been initially requested by Harry Hall, a Bundaberg AWA organiser in 1908 with a petition signed by 1500 Bundaberg sugar workers. The Royal Commission, with ALF Secretary Albert Hinchcliffe as secretary, concluded the AWA demands had been justified. The union victory was a watershed in organised labour in Queensland and Australia.\nFurther progress.\nSt Joseph's School opened in June 1876.\nWith the passage of the \"Local Authorities Act 1902\", Barolin Division became the Shire of Barolin and the Borough of Bundaberg became the Town of Bundaberg on 31 March 1903. On 22 November 1913, Bundaberg was proclaimed a City.\nIn 1912 Bundaberg pioneering aviator Bert Hinkler built and successfully flew his own glider on Mon Repos beach. He also completed a noteworthy non-stop flight from London to Turin in 1920. The following year in 1921 Hinkler flew from Sydney to Bundaberg, non-stop, in a record breaking flight of 8 and a half hours, in the process beating a telegram he had sent to his mother, to warn her of his arrival.\nThe Bundaberg War Memorial commemorating those who died in the Anglo-Boer War and World War I was unveiled by Major-General Charles Brand on 30 July 1921. The Bundaberg digger was imported from Italy and is constructed of Italian marble. The completed memorial, at a cost of \u00a31,650, was the third most costly to be erected in Queensland. It is a major regional memorial and one of the two most intact digger memorials that remain in their original settings of intersections.\nThe Bundaberg tragedy of 1928 resulted in the deaths of 12 children in a 24-hour period after they were administered a contaminated diphtheria vaccine.\nIn 1941 the Sisters of Mercy purchased the house \"Brabourne\" (originally owned by prominent citizen Frederick Buss) and established St Mary's Hostel, for women and girls working in or visiting Bundaberg. After World War II, doctors were calling for modern hospital facilities in Bundaberg, so the Sisters converted the hostel into the Mater Private Hospital, a 24-bed hospital with an operating theatre, chapel, and accommodation for the nurses and maids, officially opening on 28 July 1946. The nurses were initially all nuns, but they established a training school for other women to become nurses. The hospital expanded over the years with additional beds, operating theatres, X-ray, pathology and a dedicated children's ward. It was the first hospital in Queensland to use the Zeiss ophthalmic microscope, the first regional hospital in Queensland to have a lymphoedema clinic, and to use facial recognition technology for endoscopic sinus surgery.\nIn the 1960s the township was completely flooded by the Burnett river. In 1967 Bundaberg celebrated its centenary by producing a coin and opening The Bundaberg and District Historical Museum in the Bundaberg Botanical Gardens in Bundaberg North.\nBundaberg in the 21st century.\nIn December 2010, Bundaberg suffered its worst floods in 60 years, when floodwaters from the Burnett River inundated hundreds of homes.\nTwo years later, in January 2013, Bundaberg experienced its worst flooding in recorded history as a result of Cyclone Oswald. Floodwaters from the Burnett River peaked at 9.53 metres. Over 4,000 properties and 600 businesses had been affected by floodwaters, which moved in excess of . Two defence force Blackhawk helicopters were brought in from Townsville as part of the evacuation operation, which ultimately used an additional 14 aircraft.\nOn 6 April 2018, Prince Charles visited Bundaberg Rum Distillery He stated, \"\u201cI'm thrilled that this Distillery's proving to be the one that produces some of the most famous and special of all rums around the world.\"\"\nIn 2018, the Australian Bureau of Statistics estimated the population of Bundaberg's significant urban area was 70,921 people.\nDemographics.\nIn the 2016 census, the city of Bundaberg had a population of 50,148 people.\nIn the 2016 Census, there were 69,069 people in Bundaberg (Significant Urban Area). Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people made up 4.3% of the population. 81.2% of people were born in Australia. The next most common countries of birth were England 3.2%, New Zealand 1.8%, Philippines 0.7%, South Africa 0.5% and Scotland 0.4%. 88.9% of people spoke only English at home. Other languages spoken at home included Mandarin 0.5%, Italian 0.4%, German 0.3%, Afrikaans 0.2% and Tagalog 0.2%. The most common responses for religion were No Religion 26.3%, Catholic 18.7% and Anglican 18.6%.\nIn the 2021 census, Bundaberg's urban area has a population of 73,747 people.\nHeritage listings.\nBundaberg has a number of heritage-listed sites, including:\nClimate.\nBundaberg has a warm humid subtropical climate (K\u00f6ppen: Cfa) with hot, wet summers and very mild, dry winters. Mean maximum temperatures are high for most of the year, from in July to in January. Annual rainfall averages around , with a strong summer maximum and winter minimum. Extreme temperatures ranged from on 16 July 1918 to on 19 December 1901.\nSuburbs of Bundaberg.\nIncreasing population in Bundaberg is extending residential development into rural localities, such as Ashfield.\nMedia.\nLocal commercial FM radio stations are Breeze 102.5, Triple M 93.1, and Rebel 106.7. \nEconomy.\nSubtropical Bundaberg is dependent to a large extent on the local sugar industry. Extensive sugar cane fields have been developed throughout the district. Value-adding operations, such as the milling and refinement of sugar, and its packaging and distribution, are located around the city. A local factory that manufactured sugar-cane harvesters was closed down after it was taken over by the US multinational corporation Case New Holland. Most of the raw sugar is exported. A bulk terminal for the export of sugar is located on the Burnett River east of Bundaberg. Recent years have seen the reduction of cane farms and in turn increase of Macadamia farms, whoms main market is China.\nAnother of the city's exports is Bundaberg Rum, made from the sugar cane by-product molasses. Bundaberg is also home to beverage producer Bundaberg Brewed Drinks Vintage Soda, Craft Brewery Ballistic Brewing Company and Craft Distillery's Waterview Distillery and Kalki Moon.\nCommercial fruit and vegetable production is also significant: avocado, banana, bean, button squash, capsicum, chilli, citrus, cucumber, custard apple, egg fruit, honeydew melon, lychee, mango, passionfruit, potato, pumpkin, rockmelon, snow peas, stone fruit, sweet corn, sweet potato, tomato, watermelon, zucchini. Macadamia nuts are also grown. Due to the year-round farm work available in Bundaberg, the city has a high number of working hostels for backpackers looking to extend their working holiday visa in Australia. The hostels provide backpackers with work on farms across the Bundaberg area. However, the hostels and farms have received huge criticism in the press and on social media due to the treatment some backpackers have faced. The Courier-Mail have reported claims of poor living conditions, underpayment and allegations of sexual abuse which they say has led to backpackers warning others about working hostels in Bundaberg.\nBecause of its high rate of unemployment, Bundaberg has been referred to as the \"dole capital of Australia\".\nTourism.\nTourism is an important industry in Queensland, and Bundaberg is known as the 'Southern Gateway to the Great Barrier Reef'. The city lies near the southern end of the reef in proximity to Lady Elliot and Lady Musgrave Islands. The nearby town of Bargara is an increasingly popular holiday and retirement destination.\nNearby beaches are popular with both locals and tourists. Moore Park Beach, to the city's north, has of golden sandy beach. Beaches on the southern side of the Burnett River are (from north to south) the Oaks Beach, Mon Repos, Nielson Park, Bargara Beach, Kellys Beach, Innes Park and Elliott Heads.\nCania Gorge National Park, Deepwater National Park, Eurimbula National Park and Kinkuna National Park, located in the Bundaberg region are popular with campers and bush-lovers.\nTours of the Bundaberg Rum distillery and attractions at Bundaberg Botanic Gardens, such as the 2 ft narrow gauge Australian Sugar Cane Railway, are also popular with tourists. The Mystery Craters, 35 unexplained water-filled holes in the ground, discovered in 1971 at South Kolan, are also a tourist attraction.\nOpened in 2002 by the former member for Hinkler Paul Neville, the Tom Quinn Community Centre gardens (a multiple \"Bundy in Bloom\" winner) is a site to be seen with local flora and fauna, its own cafe, marketplace, chapel, green house, training facilities, woodwork and indigenous nature section.\nOpened in December 2008, the Hinkler Hall of Aviation is an historical aviation tourist attraction that celebrates pioneer solo aviator Bert Hinkler. In 1928, Hinkler was the first person to fly solo from England to Australia. The museum includes an exhibition hall, featuring multi-media exhibits, a flight simulator, a theatre, five aircraft and the historic Hinkler House.\nOther local attractions and events include the Whaling Wall, East Bundaberg Water Tower, Baldwin Swamp Environmental Park, Alexandra Park Zoo, Buss Park, Barrell House, Bundy in Bloom, Whale watching, reef tours of Lady Musgrave &amp; Lady Elliiot islands, the Bundaberg Show, Bundaberg &amp; Childers Regional Art Galleries, the Bundaberg Gliding school, Fishing Charters, the Bundaberg International Air Show, and the Woongarra Marine Park.\nBundaberg has ghost tours.\nMuseums and galleries.\nThe Bundaberg region contains a variety of museums and art galleries that showcase the region's history and culture.\nCulture.\nArts and entertainment.\nBundaberg has two cinemas. The Reading Cinemas, on Johanna Boulevarde, west Bundaberg, and the Moncrieff Entertainment Centre (formerly known as the Moncrieff Theatre), located on Bourbong Street, central Bundaberg. The Moncrieff Entertainment Centre also holds live musical and theatrical performances year round.\nThe Bundaberg Regional Art Gallery (BRAG) is a large multi-purpose visual arts facility located in central Bundaberg. The Bundaberg Regional Council operates a public library at 49 Woondooma Street.\nMedia.\nThe \"NewsMail\" newspaper is published in Bundaberg from Monday to Saturday. It is available in print and online. \nSeveral community newspapers are also available including the Guardian, The Bugle &amp; the Bundaberg Coastline\nBundaberg is served by three commercial television stations (Seven Queensland, WIN Television and 10) and publicly owned services (ABC TV) and (SBS).\nLocal news coverage of Bundaberg and the Wide Bay is provided on all three commercial networks with both \"Seven News\" and WIN Queensland's \"WIN News\" half-hour bulletins airing at 5:30 each weeknight. Southern Cross Austereo also airs brief local news &amp; weather updates at various intervals throughout the day on Channel 10.\nPopular culture.\nThe city has featured in several films:\nSport.\nMost major Australian sporting codes are played in Bundaberg.\nAustralian rules.\nBundaberg has two current clubs playing in the AFL Wide Bay competition.\nBasketball.\nBundaberg has two professional teams competing in the ConocoPhillips Central Queensland Cup. They are the Bundaberg Bulls (men) and Bundaberg Bears (women) and both feature local players.\nChess.\nBundaberg Chess Club was established in 1985.\nCricket.\nBundaberg has five current clubs playing in the Bundaberg Cricket Association competition.\nCroquet.\nBundaberg Croquet Club is the oldest Croquet club in Australia.\nDarts.\nBundaberg Darts and Sports Association host's tournaments monthly.\nGolf.\nBundaberg has Bargara Golf Club, Bundaberg Golf Club and Coral Cove Golf Club.\nRowing.\nBucca Weir, west of Bundaberg, is an eight lane rowing course home to Bundaberg Rowing Club. It hosts the Queensland School's Championship Regatta each year in September, as well as numerous local regattas.\nRugby league.\nThe Bundaberg Rugby Football League is a nine-club competition run under the Queensland Rugby League's Central Division. Bundaberg competes in the Central Division's 47th Battalion Shield and the Bundaberg Grizzlies formerly competed in the Queensland Cup statewide competition.\nRugby union.\nBundaberg and District Rugby Union is the governing body for Rugby union and run's a competition.\nTeams are:\nSoccer.\nThe Bundaberg Soccer Football Association was formed at the Grand Hotel on 1 May 1923. In 2023 Bundaberg Football will celebrate the centenary of formation of the Association, however there's evidence that soccer football has been played in Bundaberg and surrounding districts since at least the 1890's.\nBundaberg was home to the Bundaberg Spirit soccer club. They participated in the Queensland State League against other teams across Queensland.\nTennis.\nThe Bundaberg &amp; District Tennis Senior Association operates eleven floodlit clay courts in Drinan Park, Bundaberg West at the corner of George &amp; Powers Streets. Competition tennis is played all year round. The Bundaberg &amp; District Junior Tennis Association operates five artificial grass courts, and two granite courts.\nCommunity groups.\nThe Bundaberg branch of the Queensland Country Women's Association meets at the QCWA Hall at 15 Quay Street, Bundaberg Central. The Hinkler branch of the Queensland Country Women's Association meets at the McDonalds Central Bundaberg on the corner of Woongarra &amp; Targo Street, Bundaberg Central.\nEducation.\nThere are many public and private primary schools in Bundaberg. Bundaberg South State School opened on 11 May 1891, with an enrollment of 167 students and under the direction of William Benbow. The school celebrated its 125-year anniversary in 2016.\nBundaberg has three public high schools, Bundaberg North State High School which opened on 29 January 1974, Bundaberg State High School which opened on 30 January 1912 (the second-oldest high school in Queensland that is still open) and Kepnock State High School which opened on 28 January 1964. There are also three main private secondary schools: Shalom Catholic College, St Luke's Anglican School, and Bundaberg Christian College.\nThere is a campus of the Wide Bay Institute of Technical and further education on Walker St and a campus of the Central Queensland University, located adjacent to the airport. There is a campus of the Booth College at the Salvation Army's Tom Quinn Community Centre.\nTransport.\nBundaberg Airport has flights to Brisbane and Lady Elliot Island. The city is home to the Jabiru Aircraft Company, which designs and manufactures a range of small civil utility aircraft.\nBundaberg's bus operator is Duffy's City Buses. As of 2013, they transport over 1000 passengers in town services, and over 2000 passengers in school services every day. Routes extend to the beach suburbs of Burnett Heads, Bargara, and Innes Park. Stewart &amp; Sons also operates bus services in the area.\nBundaberg is serviced by several Queensland Rail passenger trains, including the Tilt Train and is approximately four and a half hours north of Brisbane by rail. The closed North Bundaberg station formerly served the Mount Perry railway line and is now a museum.\nSouth of Bundaberg at 24\u00b056'43\"S 152\u00b022'5\"E, there is one of the weirdest crossings of two railway lines, as there criosses a narrow gauge railway line of a sugar plantage a normal gauge railway on a drawbridge https://.\nBundaberg is situated at the end of the Isis Highway (State Route 3), approximately east of its junction with the Bruce Highway. Many long-distance bus services also pass through the city.\nBundaberg Port is located northeast of the city, at the mouth of the Burnett River. The port is a destination for ships from Australia and overseas. It is predominantly used for shipping raw sugar and other goods related to that industry such as Bundaberg Rum.\nHealth.\nBundaberg is served by three hospitals. One public hospital, Bundaberg Base Hospital on Bourbong St, and two private hospitals, Friendly Society Private Hospital &amp; Mater Hospital.\nThe Friendly Society Hospital has undergone a redevelopment and forms part of the GP Super Clinic Program.\nBundaberg is also home to the Royal Flying Doctor Service, who regularly transport patients to Bundaberg from more rural and remote areas, as well as transferring critically ill patients to Brisbane for specialist care.\nMilitary.\nBundaberg houses two military bases. Bundaberg Army Barracks and Training Ship (TS) Bundaberg. Bundaberg barracks contains mostly infantrymen and army cadets. TS Bundaberg houses mostly Cadet staff and Navy Cadets.\nSister cities.\nThe city council responsible for the Bundaberg Region maintains Sister City arrangements with two cities.\nPeople.\nRepresentatives.\nCurrent\nFormer\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "72818", "revid": "45595768", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72818", "title": "426 BC", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 426 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Tribunate of Cincinnatus, Albinus, Fusus and Cossus (or, less frequently, year 328 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 426 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy place.\nGreece.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "72819", "revid": "40574765", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72819", "title": "Mass murder", "text": "Act of murdering many people in a short span\nMass murder is the violent crime of killing a number of people, typically simultaneously or over a relatively short period of time and in close geographic proximity. A mass murder typically occurs in a single location where one or more persons kill several others. Data suggests that approximately 30% of mass murderers die in the act.\nIn the United States, Congress defined mass murders as the killing of three or more persons during an event with no \"cooling-off period\" between the homicides. The Investigative Assistance for Violent Crimes Act of 2012, passed in the aftermath of the Sandy Hook Elementary School shooting, clarified the statutory authority for federal law enforcement agencies, including those in the Departments of Justice and Homeland Security, to assist state law enforcement agencies, and mandated across federal agencies a definition of \"mass killing\" as three or more killings during an incident.\nA mass murder may be further classified as a mass shooting or a mass stabbing. Mass murderers differ from spree killers, who kill at two or more locations with almost no time break between murders and are not defined by the number of victims, and serial killers, who kill people over long periods of time.\nBy terrorist organizations.\nMany terrorist groups in recent times have used the tactic of killing many victims to fulfil their political aims. Such incidents have included:\nBy cults.\nCertain cults, especially religious cults, have committed a number of mass killings and mass murder\u2013suicides.\nBy individuals and governments.\nMass murderers may be categorized into killers of family, of coworkers, of students, and of random strangers. Their motives vary. One motivation for mass murder is revenge, but other motivations are possible, including the need for attention or fame.\nSeveral autocratic regimes have been known to have ordered mass murders including genocide and politicide. Acting on the orders of Soviet leader Joseph Stalin, Vasili Blokhin's war crime of killing of 7,000 Polish prisoners of war, shot over 28 days, was one of the most organized and protracted mass murders by a single individual on record.\nLaw enforcement response and countermeasures.\nAnalysis of the Columbine High School massacre and other incidents where law enforcement officers waited for backup has resulted in changed recommendations regarding what victims, bystanders, and law enforcement officers should do. In the Columbine shooting, the perpetrators, Eric Harris and Dylan Klebold, were able to murder 14 people, then commit suicide before the first SWAT team even entered the school. Average response time by law enforcement to a mass shooting is typically much longer than the time the shooter is engaged in killing. While immediate action may be extremely dangerous, it could save lives which would be lost if victims and bystanders involved in the situation remain passive, or law enforcement response is delayed until overwhelming force can be deployed. It is recommended that victims and bystanders involved in the incident take active steps to flee, hide, or fight the shooter and that law enforcement officers present or first arriving at the scene attempt immediately to engage the shooter. In many instances, immediate action by victims, bystanders, or law enforcement officers has saved lives. However, law enforcement programs and actions have so far been unable to reduce the total number of incidents. In 2020, a record number of 600 mass shootings occurred.\nCriticism as an analytical category.\nCommentators have pointed out that there are a wide variety of ways that homicides with more than several victims might be classified. Such incidents can be, and have been even in recent decades, classified many different ways including (per Joel Best of \"Reason\" magazine) \"as a mass shooting; as a school shooting; as mass murder; as workplace violence\u00a0...; as a crime involving an assault rifle; as a case of a mentally ill person committing acts of violence; and so on.\"\nHow such rarely occurring incidents of homicide are classified tends to change significantly with time.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In the 1960s and 1970s, ... it was understood that the key feature of [a number of such] cases was a high body count. These early discussions of mass murder lumped together [a variety of] cases that varied along what would come to be seen as important dimensions:\nIn the late decades of the 20th century and early years of the 2000s, the most popular classifications moved to include method, time and place.\nWhile such classifications may assist in gaining human meaning, as human-selected categories, they can also carry significant meaning and reflect a particular point of view of the commentator who assigned the descriptor.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "72821", "revid": "39546679", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72821", "title": "Turkey (bird)", "text": "North American genus of large birds\nTurkeys are large, heavyset galliforms in the genus Meleagris, indigenous to the Americas. They are among the largest birds in their native ranges, as well as being one of the heaviest birds in the order \"Galliformes\". There are two extant turkey species: the wild turkey (\"Meleagris gallopavo\") of Southern, Central and Eastern North America, and the ocellated turkey (\"Meleagris ocellata\") of the Yucat\u00e1n Peninsula in Mexico. Males of both species have a distinctive singular fleshy wattle, called a snood, that hangs from the base of the culmen. Like with other phasianines, the male is bigger and sports fancier plumage than the female.\nThe earliest turkeys evolved in North America over 20 million years ago. They share a recent common ancestor with grouse, pheasants, and other fowl. The North American wild turkey is the ancestor of the domestic turkey, which was domesticated approximately 2,000 years ago by indigenous peoples. It was this domestic descendant that was later transported by humans to Eurasia, during the Columbian exchange.\nTaxonomy.\nThe genus \"Meleagris\" was introduced in 1758 by the Swedish naturalist Carl Linnaeus in the tenth edition of his \"Systema Naturae\". The genus name is from the Ancient Greek \u03bc\u03b5\u03bb\u03b5\u03b1\u03b3\u03c1\u03b9\u03c2, \"meleagris\" meaning \"guineafowl\". The type species is the wild turkey (\"Meleagris gallopavo\").\nTurkeys are classed in the family Phasianidae (pheasants, partridges, francolins, junglefowl, grouse, and relatives thereof) in the taxonomic order Galliformes. They are close relatives of the grouse and are classified alongside them in the tribe Tetraonini.\nExtant species.\nThe genus contains two species.\n!scope=\"col\" style=\"width:15%; min-width:180px;\"|Common name\n!scope=\"col\" style=\"width:25%;\"|Scientific name and subspecies\n!scope=\"col\" style=\"width:15%; min-width:180px;\"|Range\n!scope\n\"col\" style\n\"width:29%;\"\n!scope\n\"col\" style\n\"width:16%; min-width:112px;\"\n!scope=\"row\"|Wild turkey and domestic turkey \nMale\nFemale named Zelda\n!scope=\"row\"|Ocellated turkey \nMale\nFemale\nName.\nThe name \"turkey\" originated as a shortening of \"turkey cock\" and \"turkey hen\" and initially denoted the guineafowl, an African bird to which the turkeys of North America are only distantly related. Guineafowl were first imported to Europe via Turkey, hence the name. Following the establishment of English colonies in the New World, the name was transferred to the superficially similar North American bird.\nIn 1550, the English navigator William Strickland, who had introduced the turkey into England, was granted a coat of arms including a \"turkey-cock in his pride proper\". William Shakespeare used the term in \"Twelfth Night\", believed to be written in 1601 or 1602. The lack of context around his usage suggests that the term was already widespread.\nAn infant turkey is called a \"chick\" or \"poult\".\nHistory.\nTurkeys were likely first domesticated in Pre-Columbian Mexico, where they held a cultural and symbolic importance. The Classical Nahuatl word for the turkey, ( in Spanish), is still used in modern Mexico, in addition to the general term . Mayan aristocrats and priests appear to have had a special connection to ocellated turkeys, with ideograms of those birds appearing in Mayan manuscripts. Spanish chroniclers, including Bernal D\u00edaz del Castillo and Father Bernardino de Sahag\u00fan, describe the multitude of food (both raw fruits and vegetables as well as prepared dishes) that were offered in the vast markets () of Tenochtitl\u00e1n, noting there were tamales made of turkeys, iguanas, chocolate, vegetables, fruits and more.\nTurkeys were first exported to Europe via Spain around 1519, where they gained immediate popularity among the aristocratic classes. Turkeys arrived in England in 1541. From there, English settlers brought turkeys to North America during the 17th century.\nDestruction and re-introduction in the United States.\nIn what is now the United States, there were an estimated 10 million turkeys in the 17th century. By the 1930s, only 30,000 remained. In the 1960s and 1970s, biologists started trapping wild turkeys from the few places they remained (including the Ozarks and New York), and re-introducing them into other states, including Minnesota and Vermont. Starting in 2014, researchers sent a survey to wildlife biologists in the National Wild Turkey Federation Technical Committee across the U.S. states to gather data regarding the population of turkeys. As of 2019, the wild turkey population declined by around 3% since 2014. Also as of 2019, the number of wild turkey hunters decreased by 18% since 2014 from the reports of the participating U.S. states. The 2019 data for population was missing information from 12 states and the 2019 hunter data was missing information from 8 states.\nIn Brookline, Massachusetts, harming a wild turkey outside of the legal hunting seasons can lead to significant penalties.\nHuman conflicts with wild turkeys.\nTurkeys have been known to be aggressive toward humans and pets in residential areas. Wild turkeys have a social structure and pecking order and habituated turkeys may respond to humans and animals as they do to other turkeys. Habituated turkeys may attempt to dominate or attack people that the birds view as subordinates.\nIn Brookline, Massachusetts, the 30,000 turkeys has become so prominent that the turkeys are considered the town's unofficial mascot. While some residents find them charming, others have experienced issues with aggressive behavior, particularly during mating season. Brookline has even installed turkey statues around town as part of a public art project. In 2017, Brookline recommended a controversial approach when confronted with wild turkeys. Besides taking a step forward to intimidate the birds, officials also suggested \"making noise (clanging pots or other objects together); popping open an umbrella; shouting and waving your arms; squirting them with a hose; allowing your leashed dog to bark at them; and forcefully fending them off with a broom\". This advice was quickly rescinded and replaced with a caution that \"being aggressive toward wild turkeys is not recommended by State wildlife officials.\"\nFossil record.\nA number of turkeys have been described from fossils. The Meleagridinae are known from the Early Miocene (c.\u200923 mya) onwards, with the extinct genera \"Rhegminornis\" (Early Miocene of Bell, U.S.) and \"Proagriocharis\" (Kimball Late Miocene/Early Pliocene of Lime Creek, U.S.). The former is probably a basal turkey, the other a more contemporary bird not very similar to known turkeys; both were much smaller birds. A turkey fossil not assignable to genus but similar to \"Meleagris\" is known from the Late Miocene of Westmoreland County, Virginia. In the modern genus \"Meleagris\", a considerable number of species have been described, as turkey fossils are robust and fairly often found, and turkeys show great variation among individuals. Many of these supposed fossilized species are now considered junior synonyms. One, the well-documented California turkey \"Meleagris californica\", became extinct recently enough to have been hunted by early human settlers. It has been suggested that its demise was due to the combined pressures of human hunting and climate change at the end of the last glacial period.\nThe Oligocene fossil \"Meleagris antiquus\" was first described by Othniel Charles Marsh in 1871. It has since been reassigned to the genus \"Paracrax\", first interpreted as a cracid, then soon after as a bathornithid Cariamiformes.\nFossil species.\nTurkeys have been considered by many authorities to be their own family\u2014the Meleagrididae\u2014but a recent genomic analysis of a retrotransposon marker groups turkeys in the family Phasianidae. In 2010, a team of scientists published a draft sequence of the domestic turkey (\"Meleagris gallopavo\") genome. In 2023 a new improved haplotype-resolved domestic turkey genome was published, which confirmed the large inversion on the Z chromosome not found in other Galliformes, and found new structural variations between the parent haplotypes that provides potential new target genes for breeding.\nAnatomy.\nIn anatomical terms, a \"snood\" is an erectile, fleshy protuberance on the forehead of turkeys. Most of the time when the turkey is in a relaxed state, the snood is pale and 2\u20133\u00a0cm long. However, when the male begins strutting (the courtship display), the snood engorges with blood, becomes redder and elongates several centimeters, hanging well below the beak (see image).\nSnoods are just one of the caruncles (small, fleshy excrescences) that can be found on turkeys.\nWhile fighting, commercial turkeys often peck and pull at the snood, causing damage and bleeding. This often leads to further injurious pecking by other turkeys and sometimes results in cannibalism. To prevent this, some farmers cut off the snood when the chick is young, a process known as \"de-snooding\".\nThe snood can be between in length depending on the turkey's sex, health, and mood.\nFunction.\nThe snood functions in both intersexual and intrasexual selection. Captive female wild turkeys prefer to mate with long-snooded males, and during dyadic interactions, male turkeys defer to males with relatively longer snoods. These results were demonstrated using both live males and controlled artificial models of males. Data on the parasite burdens of free-living wild turkeys revealed a negative correlation between snood length and infection with intestinal coccidia, deleterious protozoan parasites. This indicates that in the wild, the long-snooded males preferred by females and avoided by males seemed to be resistant to coccidial infection. Scientists also conducted a study on 500 male turkeys, gathering data on their snood lengths and blood samples for immune system functionality. They discovered a similar negative correlation. The presence of more red blood cells when the snood is not removed will help to fight off unwanted invaders in their immune system, explaining this trend.\nBehavior.\nFeeding.\nWild turkeys feed on various wildlife, depending on the season. In the warmer months of spring and summer, their diet consists mainly of grains such as wheat, corn, and of smaller animals such as grasshoppers, spiders, worms, and lizards. In the colder months of fall and winter, wild turkeys consume smaller fruits and nuts such as grapes, blueberries, acorns, and walnuts. To find this food, they have to continuously forage and feed most during the sunrise and sunset hours.\nDomesticated turkeys consume a commercially produced feed formulated to increase the size of the turkeys. To supplement their nutrition, farmers will also feed them grains that wild turkeys eat, such as corn.\nGrooming.\nTurkeys participate in a number of grooming behaviors including: dusting, sunning, and feather preening. In dusting, turkeys get low on their stomach or side and flap their wings, coating themselves with dirt. This action serves to remove debris build-up on the feathers and also clog tiny pores that parasites such as lice can inhabit. Sunning for turkeys involves bathing in the sunlight, for their top and bottom halves. This can serve to liquidate the oil that turkeys naturally produce, spreading over their feathers and dry their feathers from precipitation at the same time. In feather preening, turkeys are able to remove dirt and bacteria, while also ensuring that non-durable feathers are removed.\nFlight.\nThough domestic turkeys are considered flightless, wild turkeys can and do fly for short distances. Turkeys are best adapted for walking and foraging; they do not fly as a normal means of travel. When faced with a perceived danger, wild turkeys can fly up to a quarter mile. Turkeys may also make short flights to assist roosting in a tree.\nUse by humans.\nThe species \"Meleagris gallopavo\" is eaten by humans. They were first domesticated by the indigenous people of Mexico from at least 800 BC onwards. By 200 BC, the indigenous people of what is today the American Southwest had domesticated turkeys; though the theory that they were introduced from Mexico was once influential, modern studies suggest that the turkeys of the Southwest were domesticated independently from those in Mexico. Turkeys were used both as a food source and for their feathers and bones, which were used in both practical and cultural contexts. Compared to wild turkeys, domestic turkeys are selectively bred to grow larger in size for their meat.\nTurkey forms a central part of modern Thanksgiving celebrations in the United States of America, and is often eaten at similar holiday occasions, such as Christmas.\nThe Norfolk turkeys.\nIn her memoirs, Lady Dorothy Nevill (1826\u20131913) recalls that her great-grandfather Horatio Walpole, 1st Earl of Orford (1723\u20131809), imported a quantity of American turkeys which were kept in the woods around Wolterton Hall and in all probability were the embryo flock for the popular Norfolk turkey breeds of today.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "72822", "revid": "47542132", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72822", "title": "Japanese wordplay", "text": "Usage of Japanese language conventions to create humor\nJapanese wordplay relies on the nuances of the Japanese language and Japanese script for humorous effect, functioning somewhat like a cross between a pun and a spoonerism. Double entendres have a rich history in Japanese entertainment (such as in kakekotoba) due to the language's large number of homographs (different meanings for a given spelling) and homophones (different meanings for a given pronunciation).\nKakekotoba.\n or \"pivot words\" are an early form of Japanese wordplay used in waka poetry, wherein some words represent two homonyms. The presence of multiple meanings within these words allowed poets to impart more meaning into fewer words.\nGoroawase.\n is an especially common form of Japanese wordplay, wherein homophonous words are associated with a given series of letters, numbers or symbols, in order to associate a new meaning with that series. The new words can be used to express a superstition about certain letters or numbers. More commonly, however, \"goroawase\" is used as a mnemonic technique, especially in the memorization of numbers such as dates in history, scientific constants and phone numbers.\nDajare.\nIn Japanese, puns are referred to as . Like puns in English, \"dajare\" may be considered . \"Dajare\" commonly involve the usage of two homophonous phrases alongside each other in a sentence, though double entendres are used as well.\nExample one:\n Translation:\n An orange on an aluminum can.\n Explanation:\n \u30a2\u30eb\u30df (\"arumi\") means \"aluminum\" and \u7f36 (\"kan\") means \"can\"; \u3042\u308b (aru) means \"to exist\" and \u871c\u67d1 (\"mikan\") refers to mandarin varieties popular in Japan.\nExample two:\n A: \u5927\u98df\u3044\u306e\u305f\u3051\u3057\u541b\u3082\u3001\u5b87\u5b99\u3067\u306f\u3042\u307e\u308a\u7269\u3092\u98df\u3079\u3089\u308c\u306a\u3044\u3088\u3002 (\"\u014dgui no takeshi kun mo, uch\u016b dewa amari mono o taberarenaiyo\")\n B: \u306a\u305c? (\"naze\")\n A: \u5b87\u5b99\u306b\u306f\u7a7a\u6c17(\u98df\u3046\u6c17)\u304c\u306a\u3044\u3002 (\"uch\u016b niwa k\u016bki ga nai\")\n Translation:\n A: In space, even a glutton like Takeshi can't eat anything.\n B: Why's that?\n A: In space, there is no air.\n Explanation:\n \"K\u016bki\" (\u304f\u3046\u304d) can mean either \"air\" (\u7a7a\u6c17) or \"appetite\" (\u98df\u3046\u6c17), thus the last phrase could also be interpreted as \"in space, (he has) no appetite\".\nGinatayomi.\nSome \"dajare\" rely on for effect, similar to garden-path sentences in English. Many are commonly told by children.\nExample one:&lt;br&gt;\n\u300c\u30d1\u30f3\u4f5c\u3063\u305f\u3053\u3068\u3042\u308b\u300d(\"pan tsukutta koto aru\"; Have you ever made bread before?)\n\u3000Can also be interpreted as:\n\u300c\u30d1\u30f3\u30c4\u98df\u3063\u305f\u3053\u3068\u3042\u308b\u300d(\"pantsu kutta koto aru\"; Have you ever eaten underpants before?)\nExample two:&lt;br&gt;\n\u300c\u306d\u3047\u3001\u3061\u3083\u3093\u3068\u304a\u98a8\u5442\u5165\u3063\u3066\u308b\u300d(\"nee, chanto ofuro haitteru\"; Hey, have you been bathing regularly?)\n\u3000Can also be interpreted as:\n\u300c\u59c9\u3061\u3083\u3093\u3068\u304a\u98a8\u5442\u5165\u3063\u3066\u308b\u300d(\"nee-chan to ofuro haitteru\"; Do you bathe with your older sister?)\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "72823", "revid": "34452882", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72823", "title": "Foucault (disambiguation)", "text": "Foucault may refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "72824", "revid": "2", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72824", "title": "Boundary (topology)", "text": "All points not part of the interior of a subset of a topological space\nIn topology and mathematics in general, the boundary of a subset S of a topological space X is the set of points in the closure of S not belonging to the interior of S. An element of the boundary of S is called a boundary point of S. The term boundary operation refers to finding or taking the boundary of a set. Notations used for boundary of a set S include formula_1 and formula_2.\nTerminology.\nSome authors (for example, Willard in \"General Topology\") use the term frontier instead of boundary in an attempt to avoid confusion with a different definition used in algebraic topology and the theory of manifolds. Despite widespread acceptance of the meaning of the terms boundary and frontier, they have sometimes been used to refer to other sets. For example, \"Metric Spaces\" by E. T. Copson uses the term boundary to refer to Hausdorff's border, which is defined as the intersection of a set with its boundary. Hausdorff also introduced the term residue, which is defined as the intersection of a set with the closure of the border of its complement.\nDefinitions.\nThere are several equivalent definitions for the boundary of a subset formula_3 of a topological space formula_4 which will be denoted by formula_5 or simply formula_2 if formula_7 is understood:\nA boundary point of a set is any element of that set's boundary. The boundary formula_8 defined above is sometimes called the set's topological boundary to distinguish it from other similarly named notions such as the boundary of a manifold with boundary or the boundary of a manifold with corners, to name just a few examples.\nA connected component of the boundary of S is called a boundary component of S.\nExamples.\nConsider the real line formula_9 with the usual topology (that is, the topology whose basis sets are open intervals) and formula_10 the subset of rational numbers (whose topological interior in formula_9 is empty). Then in formula_9 we have\nThese last two examples illustrate the fact that the boundary of a dense set with empty interior is its closure. They also show that it is possible for the boundary formula_2 of a subset formula_18 to contain a non-empty open subset of formula_19; that is, for the interior of formula_2 in formula_7 to be non-empty. However, a closed subset's boundary always has an empty interior. \nThe notation formula_8 is used because the boundary of a set formula_18 crucially depends on the surrounding topological space formula_7 that's considered. Take for instance the set formula_25. Considered as a subset of formula_9, its boundary is the closed interval formula_27; considered as a subset of formula_28 (where formula_28 is given its usual topology, the subspace topology inherited from formula_9), the boundary of formula_18 is formula_32; and considered as a subset of formula_33 itself, its boundary is empty. \nGiven the usual topology on formula_34 the boundary of a closed disk formula_35 is the disk's surrounding circle: formula_36 If the disk is instead viewed as a set in formula_37 with its own usual topology, that is, formula_38 then the boundary of the disk is the disk itself: formula_39 \nProperties.\nThe boundary of a set is closed; this follows from the formula formula_40 which expresses formula_8 as the intersection of two closed subsets of formula_42 \nA set is closed if and only if it contains its boundary, and open if and only if it is disjoint from its boundary. \nThe closure of a set formula_18 equals the union of the set with its boundary: formula_44(\"Trichotomy\") Given any subset formula_45 each point of formula_7 lies in exactly one of the three sets formula_47 and formula_48 Said differently, formula_49 and these three sets are pairwise disjoint. \nA point formula_50 is a boundary point of a set if and only if every neighborhood of formula_51 contains at least one point in the set and at least one point not in the set. \nThe boundary of the interior of a set as well as the boundary of the closure of a set are both contained in the boundary of the set. \nA set and its complement have the same boundary:\nformula_52A set formula_53 is a dense open subset of formula_7 if and only if formula_55\nThe interior of the boundary of a closed set is empty. \nConsequently, the interior of the boundary of the closure of a set is empty. \nThe interior of the boundary of an open set is also empty. \nConsequently, the interior of the boundary of the interior of a set is empty. \nIn particular, if formula_3 is a closed or open subset of formula_7 then there does not exist any nonempty subset formula_58 such that formula_53 is open in formula_42 \nThis fact is important for the definition and use of nowhere dense subsets, meager subsets, and Baire spaces. \nA set is the boundary of some open set if and only if it is closed and nowhere dense. \nThe boundary of a set is empty if and only if the set is both closed and open (that is, a clopen set).\n\"Conceptual Venn diagram showing the relationships among different points of a subset formula_18 of formula_62 formula_63 = set of accumulation points of formula_18 (also called limit points), formula_65 set of boundary points of formula_66 area shaded green = set of interior points of formula_66 area shaded yellow = set of isolated points of formula_66 areas shaded black = empty sets. Every point of formula_18 is either an interior point or a boundary point. Also, every point of formula_18 is either an accumulation point or an isolated point. Likewise, every boundary point of formula_18 is either an accumulation point or an isolated point. Isolated points are always boundary points.\"\nBoundary of a boundary.\nFor any set formula_72 where formula_73 denotes the superset with equality holding if and only if the boundary of formula_18 has no interior points, which will be the case for example if formula_18 is either closed or open. Since the boundary of a set is closed, formula_76 for any set formula_77 The boundary operator thus satisfies a weakened kind of idempotence.\nIn discussing boundaries of manifolds or simplexes and their simplicial complexes, one often meets the assertion that the boundary of the boundary is always empty. Indeed, the construction of the singular homology rests critically on this fact. The explanation for the apparent incongruity is that the topological boundary (the subject of this article) is a slightly different concept from the boundary of a manifold or of a simplicial complex. For example, the boundary of an open disk viewed as a manifold is empty, as is its topological boundary viewed as a subset of itself, while its topological boundary viewed as a subset of the real plane is the circle surrounding the disk. Conversely, the boundary of a closed disk viewed as a manifold is the bounding circle, as is its topological boundary viewed as a subset of the real plane, while its topological boundary viewed as a subset of itself is empty. In particular, the topological boundary depends on the ambient space, while the boundary of a manifold is invariant.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "72827", "revid": "84591", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72827", "title": "Cauchy's integral formula", "text": "Provides integral formulas for all derivatives of a holomorphic function\nIn mathematics, Cauchy's integral formula, named after Augustin-Louis Cauchy, is a central statement in complex analysis. It expresses the fact that a holomorphic function defined on a disk is completely determined by its values on the boundary of the disk, and it provides integral formulas for all derivatives of a holomorphic function. Cauchy's formula shows that, in complex analysis, \"differentiation is equivalent to integration\": complex differentiation, like integration, behaves well under uniform limits \u2013 a result that does not hold in real analysis.\nTheorem.\nLet \"U\" be an open subset of the complex plane C, and suppose the closed disk \"D\" defined as\nformula_1\nis completely contained in \"U\". Let \"f\" : \"U\" \u2192 C be a holomorphic function, and let \"\u03b3\" be the circle, oriented counterclockwise, forming the boundary of \"D\". Then for every \"a\" in the interior of \"D\",\nformula_2\nThe proof of this statement uses the Cauchy integral theorem and like that theorem, it only requires \"f\" to be complex differentiable. Because formula_3 can be expanded as a power series in the variable &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; as\nformula_4\nit follows that holomorphic functions are analytic, i.e. they can be expanded as convergent power series.\nIn particular \"f\" is actually infinitely differentiable, with\nformula_5\nThis formula is sometimes referred to as Cauchy's differentiation formula.\nThe theorem stated above can be generalized. The circle \"\u03b3\" can be replaced by any closed rectifiable curve in \"U\" which has winding number one about \"a\". Moreover, as for the Cauchy integral theorem, it is sufficient to require that \"f\" be holomorphic in the open region enclosed by the path and continuous on its closure.\nNote that not every continuous function on the boundary can be used to produce a function inside the boundary that fits the given boundary function. For instance, if we put the function &amp;NoBreak;}&amp;NoBreak;, defined for |\"z\"| = 1, into the Cauchy integral formula, we get zero for all points inside the circle. In fact, giving just the real part on the boundary of a holomorphic function is enough to determine the function up to an imaginary constant \u2014 there is only one imaginary part on the boundary that corresponds to the given real part, up to addition of a constant. We can use a combination of a M\u00f6bius transformation and the Stieltjes inversion formula to construct the holomorphic function from the real part on the boundary. For example, the function \"f\"(\"z\") = \"i\" \u2212 \"iz\" has real part Re \"f\"(\"z\") = Im \"z\". On the unit circle this can be written &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;. Using the M\u00f6bius transformation and the Stieltjes formula we construct the function inside the circle. The &amp;NoBreak;}&amp;NoBreak; term makes no contribution, and we find the function \u2212\"iz\". This has the correct real part on the boundary, and also gives us the corresponding imaginary part, but off by a constant, namely \"i\".\nProof sketch.\nBy using the Cauchy integral theorem, one can show that the integral over \"C\" (or the closed rectifiable curve) is equal to the same integral taken over an arbitrarily small circle around \"a\". Since \"f\"(\"z\") is continuous, we can choose a circle small enough on which \"f\"(\"z\") is arbitrarily close to \"f\"(\"a\"). On the other hand, the integral\nformula_6\nover any circle \"C\" centered at \"a\". This can be calculated directly via a parametrization (integration by substitution) \"z\"(\"t\") \n \"a\" + \"\u03b5eit\" where 0 \u2264 \"t\" \u2264 2\u03c0 and \"\u03b5\" is the radius of the circle.\nLetting \"\u03b5\" \u2192 0 gives the desired estimate\nformula_7\nExample.\nLet\nformula_8\nand let \"C\" be the contour described by |\"z\"| = 2 (the circle of radius 2).\nTo find the integral of \"g\"(\"z\") around the contour \"C\", we need to know the singularities of \"g\"(\"z\"). Observe that we can rewrite \"g\" as follows:\nformula_9\nwhere \"z\"1 = \u2212 1 + \"i\" and \"z\"2 = \u2212 1 \u2212 \"i\".\nThus, \"g\" has poles at \"z\"1 and \"z\"2. The moduli of these points are less than 2 and thus lie inside the contour. This integral can be split into two smaller integrals by Cauchy\u2013Goursat theorem; that is, we can express the integral around the contour as the sum of the integral around \"z\"1 and \"z\"2 where the contour is a small circle around each pole. Call these contours \"C\"1 around \"z\"1 and \"C\"2 around \"z\"2.\nNow, each of these smaller integrals can be evaluated by the Cauchy integral formula, but they first must be rewritten to apply the theorem. For the integral around \"C\"1, define \"f\"1 as \"f\"1(\"z\") = (\"z\" \u2212 \"z\"1)\"g\"(\"z\"). This is analytic (since the contour does not contain the other singularity). We can simplify \"f\"1 to be:\nformula_10\nand now\nformula_11\nSince the Cauchy integral formula says that:\nformula_12\nwe can evaluate the integral as follows:\nformula_13\nDoing likewise for the other contour:\nformula_14\nwe evaluate\nformula_15\nThe integral around the original contour \"C\" then is the sum of these two integrals:\nformula_16\nAn elementary trick using partial fraction decomposition:\nformula_17\nConsequences.\nThe integral formula has broad applications. First, it implies that a function which is holomorphic in an open set is in fact infinitely differentiable there. Furthermore, it is an analytic function, meaning that it can be represented as a power series. The proof of this uses the dominated convergence theorem and the geometric series applied to\nformula_18\nThe formula is also used to prove the residue theorem, which is a result for meromorphic functions, and a related result, the argument principle. It is known from Morera's theorem that the uniform limit of holomorphic functions is holomorphic. This can also be deduced from Cauchy's integral formula: indeed the formula also holds in the limit and the integrand, and hence the integral, can be expanded as a power series. In addition the Cauchy formulas for the higher order derivatives show that all these derivatives also converge uniformly.\nThe analog of the Cauchy integral formula in real analysis is the Poisson integral formula for harmonic functions; many of the results for holomorphic functions carry over to this setting. No such results, however, are valid for more general classes of differentiable or real analytic functions. For instance, the existence of the first derivative of a real function need not imply the existence of higher order derivatives, nor in particular the analyticity of the function. Likewise, the uniform limit of a sequence of (real) differentiable functions may fail to be differentiable, or may be differentiable but with a derivative which is not the limit of the derivatives of the members of the sequence.\nAnother consequence is that if \"f\"(\"z\") = \u03a3 \"a\"\"n\" \"z\"\"n\" is holomorphic in and 0 &lt; \"r\" &lt; \"R\" then the coefficients \"a\"\"n\" satisfy Cauchy's estimate\nformula_19\nFrom Cauchy's estimate, one can easily deduce that every bounded entire function must be constant (which is Liouville's theorem).\nThe formula can also be used to derive Gauss's Mean-Value Theorem, which states\nformula_20\nIn other words, the average value of \"f\" over the circle centered at \"z\" with radius \"r\" is \"f\"(\"z\"). This can be calculated directly via a parametrization of the circle.\nGeneralizations.\nSmooth functions.\nA version of Cauchy's integral formula is the Cauchy\u2013Pompeiu formula, and holds for smooth functions as well, as it is based on Stokes' theorem. Let \"D\" be a disc in C and suppose that \"f\" is a complex-valued \"C\"1 function on the closure of \"D\". Then\nformula_21\nOne may use this representation formula to solve the inhomogeneous Cauchy\u2013Riemann equations in \"D\". Indeed, if \"\u03c6\" is a function in \"D\", then a particular solution \"f\" of the equation is a holomorphic function outside the support of \"\u03bc\". Moreover, if in an open set \"D\",\nformula_22\nfor some \"\u03c6\" \u2208 \"C\"\"k\"(\"D\") (where \"k\"\u00a0\u2265\u00a01), then \"f\"(\"\u03b6\", \"\u03b6\") is also in \"C\"\"k\"(\"D\") and satisfies the equation\nformula_23\nThe first conclusion is, succinctly, that the convolution \"\u03bc\" \u2217 \"k\"(\"z\") of a compactly supported measure with the Cauchy kernel\nformula_24\nis a holomorphic function off the support of \"\u03bc\". Here p.v. denotes the principal value. The second conclusion asserts that the Cauchy kernel is a fundamental solution of the Cauchy\u2013Riemann equations. Note that for smooth complex-valued functions \"f\" of compact support on C the generalized Cauchy integral formula simplifies to\nformula_25\nand is a restatement of the fact that, considered as a distribution, (\u03c0\"z\")\u22121 is a fundamental solution of the Cauchy\u2013Riemann operator .\nThe generalized Cauchy integral formula can be deduced for any bounded open region \"X\" with \"C\"1 boundary \u2202\"X\" from this result and the formula for the distributional derivative of the characteristic function \"\u03c7\"\"X\" of \"X\":\nformula_26\nwhere the distribution on the right hand side denotes contour integration along \u2202\"X\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Math_proof/styles.css\" /&gt;Proof\nFor formula_27 calculate:\nformula_28\nthen traverse formula_29 in the anti-clockwise direction. Fix a point formula_30 and let formula_31 denote arc length on formula_29 measured from formula_33 anti-clockwise. Then, if formula_34 is the length of formula_35 is a parametrization of &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;. The derivative formula_36 is a unit tangent to formula_29 and formula_38 is the unit outward normal on &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;. We are lined up for use of the divergence theorem: put formula_39 so that formula_40 and we get\nformula_41\nHence we proved &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;.\nNow we can deduce the generalized Cauchy integral formula:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Math_proof/styles.css\" /&gt;Proof\nSince formula_42 and since formula_43 this distribution is locally in formula_44 of the form \"distribution times C\u221e function\", so we may apply the Leibniz rule to calculate its derivatives:\nformula_45\nUsing that (\u03c0\"z\")\u22121 is a fundamental solution of the Cauchy\u2013Riemann operator , we get formula_46:\nformula_47\nApplying formula_48 to &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;:\nformula_49\nwhere formula_50 is used in the last line.\nRearranging, we get\nformula_51\nas desired.\nSeveral variables.\nIn several complex variables, the Cauchy integral formula can be generalized to polydiscs. Let \"D\" be the polydisc given as the Cartesian product of \"n\" open discs \"D\"1, ..., \"D\"\"n\":\nformula_52\nSuppose that \"f\" is a holomorphic function in \"D\" continuous on the closure of \"D\". Then\nformula_53\nwhere \"\u03b6\" = (\"\u03b6\"1...,\"\u03b6\"\"n\") \u2208 \"D\".\nIn real algebras.\nThe Cauchy integral formula is generalizable to real vector spaces of two or more dimensions. The insight into this property comes from geometric algebra, where objects beyond scalars and vectors (such as planar bivectors and volumetric trivectors) are considered, and a proper generalization of Stokes' theorem.\nGeometric calculus defines a derivative operator \u2207 = \u00ea\"i\" \u2202\"i\" under its geometric product \u2014 that is, for a \"k\"-vector field \"\u03c8\"(r), the derivative \u2207\"\u03c8\" generally contains terms of grade \"k\" + 1 and \"k\" \u2212 1. For example, a vector field (\"k\" = 1) generally has in its derivative a scalar part, the divergence (\"k\" = 0), and a bivector part, the curl (\"k\" = 2). This particular derivative operator has a Green's function:\nformula_54\nwhere \"Sn\" is the surface area of a unit \"n\"-ball in the space (that is, \"S\"2 = 2\u03c0, the circumference of a circle with radius 1, and \"S\"3 = 4\u03c0, the surface area of a sphere with radius 1). By definition of a Green's function,\nformula_55\nIt is this useful property that can be used, in conjunction with the generalized Stokes theorem:\nformula_56\nwhere, for an \"n\"-dimensional vector space, \"dS is an (\"n\" \u2212 1)-vector and \"dV is an \"n\"-vector. The function \"f\"(r) can, in principle, be composed of any combination of multivectors. The proof of Cauchy's integral theorem for higher dimensional spaces relies on the using the generalized Stokes theorem on the quantity \"G\"(r, r\u2032) \"f\"(r\u2032) and use of the product rule:\nformula_57\nWhen \u2207\"f\" = 0, \"f\"(r) is called a \"monogenic function\", the generalization of holomorphic functions to higher-dimensional spaces \u2014 indeed, it can be shown that the Cauchy\u2013Riemann condition is just the two-dimensional expression of the monogenic condition. When that condition is met, the second term in the right-hand integral vanishes, leaving only\nformula_58\nwhere \"in\" is that algebra's unit \"n\"-vector, the pseudoscalar. The result is\nformula_59\nThus, as in the two-dimensional (complex analysis) case, the value of an analytic (monogenic) function at a point can be found by an integral over the surface surrounding the point, and this is valid not only for scalar functions but vector and general multivector functions as well.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "72833", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72833", "title": "Fitz Kuhn", "text": ""}
{"id": "72834", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72834", "title": "Ten-sided die", "text": ""}
{"id": "72836", "revid": "49509309", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72836", "title": "Veii", "text": "Ancient Etruscan city in Isola Farnese, Italy \nVeii (also Veius; ) was an important ancient Etruscan city situated on the southern limits of Etruria and north-northwest of Rome, Italy. It now lies in Isola Farnese, in the comune of Rome. Many other sites associated with and in the city-state of Veii are in Formello, immediately to the north. Formello is named after the drainage channels that were first created by the Veians.\nVeii was the richest city of the Etruscan League. It was alternately at war and in alliance with the Roman Kingdom and later Republic for over 300\u00a0years. It eventually fell in the Battle of Veii to Roman general Camillus's army in 396\u00a0BC. Veii continued to be occupied after its capture by the Romans.\nThe site is now a protected area, part of the Parco di Veio established by the regional authority of Lazio in 1997.\nSite.\nCity of Veii.\nThe city of Veii lies mainly on a tuff plateau in area.\nThe Valchetta flows a few miles eastward to join the Tiber River on the south side of Labaro along the Via Flaminia and Veii's territory included this area.\nIts proximity to the Tiber and the trade route to the interior, which became the Via Flaminia, augmented its prosperity. The Veiians were known to trade with the Greeks and Phoenicians. Many Grecian pottery shards have been found throughout the site, dating from as far back as the 8th century BC. Although the river brought wealth and affluence to Veii, it also placed it in competition with Rome for the domination of Latium. \nThe temple of Juno was the greatest and most honoured in the city.\nThe largest visible monument is the sanctuary of Minerva from the 7th c. BC, situated along an important route just outside the city (at modern Portonaccio). Prior to their influx of wealth around the 7th century BC, the people of Veii preferred to worship their gods and goddesses in the open air. Early \"temples\" consisted of small shrines surrounded by foliage. Due to their affinity to the stars, many Veiians preferred to worship under the night sky. Once the city began to prosper, an official temple was built of wood and stone. The sanctuary was one of the oldest and most revered in Etruria, standing out for its sumptuous polychrome terracotta decorations, many of which can be seen today in the Villa Giulia. The sanctuary included the temple of Apollo of about 510 BC to which belonged the Apollo of Veii (now in the National Etruscan Museum).\nThe impressive thermal baths and the forum built under Augustus have been partially excavated in recent years.\nMany rich \"Tumuli\" and chamber tombs have been found. The most famous is the Grotta Campana uncovered in 1843, a chamber tomb with the oldest known Etruscan frescoes.\nThere are also long tunnels leading into the plateau of the city, which may corroborate Livy's account of the Roman victory in the Battle of Veii.\nThe walls of Veii, of which small sections remain, bordered the two intersecting streams using the streambeds as a ditch, with a wall across the plateau closing the triangle.\nPiazza d'Armi.\nEvery Etruscan stronghold was built on an elevation, and Veii was no exception. Its \"arx\", or citadel, was placed on a bluff delineated by cliffs within the angle of confluence of the two streams, nearly separated from the main ridge by a gully, through which ran a road in the Roman period. An archaeological site, Piazza d'Armi (\"military square\"), marks the location today.\nEtruscan League.\nVeii was the southeasternmost city of the Dodecapolis, the 12 cities of central Etruria commonly referred to as the Etruscan League. The league allowed the leaders of each city to come together and discuss a variety of topics. The city-states shared common religious practices, as well as different variations of the same language. The leaders met on a yearly basis at the Fanum Voltumnae Sanctuary in \"Velzna\", or Volsinii near modern Orvieto.\nArt.\nVeii's sculptures and statues were made of terracotta. Most ceramic vessels were decorated with intricate details. Depictions of the everyday life of Etruscans were very common. Many uncovered vases and bowls portray images of farmers harvesting crops and raising animals, as well as blacksmiths in the midst of working in a raging fire. Battle victories, as well as other accomplishments, were very popular subjects in funerary ceramics. \nAs population and wealth flourished within the city, the use of bronze became more and more common. The people of Veii first used metal for horse harnesses, weapons, fans, jewelry, and mirrors.\nBurial practices.\nThe use of burial and cremation altered depending on the stability of the settlement. In the early years, most citizens were cremated. As affluence increased, individuals were freer to bury their loved ones close by in order to visit them regularly. Burial sites dating back to the 9th century BC have been uncovered. As inhumation became more and more popular, the sarcophagi became more and more intricate. Through the use of terracotta, local sculptors began using their talents to add adornments around the coffins, creating detailed accounts of the deceased's life, as well as the deities that meant the most to them. Tombs were commonly decorated with sentimental objects, as well as items they may need in the afterlife. \nDuring times of war or economic difficulty, the use of cremation rose. Unlike their ancestors, however, the people of Veii continued the tradition of burial by keeping the urns of their loved ones in miniature tombs. Like the sarcophagi, the urns were made of terracotta and depicted varying scenes important to the diseased individual. Items were still placed in the small tombs; however, the value of the objects steadily dropped as times of financial crisis continued.\nEtruscan language.\nOver 10,000 Etruscan written pieces are known. Varying examples of Etruscan script have been uncovered all over the ancient world.\nHistory.\nEarly history.\nThe earliest evidence of occupation by demographic analysis, including that of the cemeteries, dates from the 10th century BC in the Late Bronze Age. Small settlements were scattered over a wider area than the plateau, and the population of the plateau at Veii is estimated to have been stable at about 1,000. In the 9th century BC, the Early Iron Age (Villanovan culture), the finds are localized to the plateau but appear to be associated with independent settlements, each with its own cemetery. Occupation gradually intensified in the 8th (remainder of Villanovan) and 7th (Orientalising period) centuries BC, by conurbation of the settlements as the site assumed an urban appearance with city blocks in a grid pattern arranged around a central square containing a water cistern. That evidence suggests that the city of Veii was shaped into its classical form in the 7th century BC by a population, presumably Etruscan, first settling there in the 10th century BC. During the settlement's early years, many homes were built in spherical shapes out of wood over a shallow trench and topped with a thatched roof. Up until the 7th century BC Veii had to depend on itself for the majority of its resources and goods. Many artisans found work in the textile industry, creating intricate wool designs for clothes and blankets. Further supporting their self-sufficiency, many yarn spools and loom weights have been discovered in the area. \nThe population of the early Veii practiced both inhumation and cremation within the same family. The proportion was 50% in the 9th century BC, after a predomination of cremation (90%) earlier. In the 8th century, inhumation rose to 70%, which may be attributable to an influence from Latium, where inhumation prevailed in the 9th century BC.\nDuring the 9th and 8th centuries BC, the population density and grave goods were on the increase: more and wealthier people and also more of a disparity in wealth: the rise of a wealthier class. In the 8th century BC, both the potter's wheel and writing were introduced from Greece. During the entire period, the settlements translocated around the plateau; however, a settlement (Casale del Fosso) maintained a cemetery to the north of the plateau continuously from the late 9th century BC to the early 6th century BC.\nConflict with Rome.\nThe documented history of Veii, like that of all Italian cities in their early centuries, is sparse and unreliable.\nAccording to Livy (writing 700 years later) the Fidenates and the Veientes were defeated in a war with Rome during the reign of Rome's mythical first king, Romulus, in the 8th century BC.\nPlutarch (writing even later in the 1st C. AD) says of them:The first (to oppose Romulus) were the Veientes, a people of Tuscany (the site is now in Lazio), who had large possessions, and dwelt in a spacious city; they took occasion to commence a war, by claiming Fidenae as belonging to them...\nFidenae and Veii were said to have again been defeated by Rome in the 7th century BC during the reign of Rome's third king Tullus Hostilius.\nIn the 6th century BC Rome's sixth king Servius Tullius warred against Veii (after the expiry of an earlier truce) and the Etruscans. He is said to have shown valour in the campaign, and to have routed a great army of the enemy. The war helped him to cement his position at Rome.\nIn 509\u00a0BC, after the overthrow of the Roman monarchy, the family of Tarquinius Superbus went into exile in Caere in Etruria. Tarquin sought to regain the throne, at first by the Tarquinian conspiracy and, when that failed, by force of arms. He convinced the cities of Tarquinii and Veii to support him, and led their armies against Rome in the Battle of Silva Arsia. The Roman army was victorious, and it is recorded by Livy that although the forces of Tarquinii fought well on the right wing, initially pushing back the Roman left wing, the Veientes on the left wing faltered and fled the battle, because they were accustomed to defeat at the hands of the Romans. After the loss of the battle the forces of Veii returned home. Livy writes that later in 509\u00a0BC, consul Publius Valerius Publicola returned to fight the Veientes.\nIn the 5th century BC, the Fabians, an aristocratic Roman family, moved into an Etruscan town just outside of Fidenae. Due to the sudden increase of wealth in the community, many Etruscan citizens began to worry about the impending fall of the economy. Soon, battles broke out on both sides, eventually leading to war. The sequence of events following the initial conflicts is widely considered to be a legend; it is said that the Veiian warriors murdered 300 Fabii, leaving all but one dead in order to incite fear in the rest of the community. \nThe most famous king of Veii was Lars Tolumnus whose family was part of the Veientine aristocracy and who instigated a war with Rome in 438 BC. The nearby Roman colony of Fidenae revolted against Rome and allied itself with Veii, giving Tolumnus control of the Fidenate army. The Romans sent four envoys to demand an explanation but they were murdered. Rome declared war against Veii and sent Lucius Sergius with an army who won the battle of Fidenae but the Roman losses were so high that a state of emergency was declared. A subsequent fiercely-fought battle with Veii in 437 BC reinforced by a contingent from Falerii was indecisive until the tribune Aulus Cornelius Cossus unhorsed Tolumnus and killed him with his spear.\nIn 406 BC, Rome declared war against Veii, still powerful and well-fortified, and her allies Falerii and Capena which required the Romans to commence a siege lasting many years. As Plutarch says:\nVeii had been the capital of Etruria, not inferior to Rome, either in number of arms or multitude of soldiers, so that relying on her wealth and luxury, and priding herself upon her refinement and sumptuousness, she had engaged in many honourable contests with the Romans for glory and empire ... as the city was furnished with all sorts of weapons, offensive and defensive, likewise with corn and all manner of provisions, they cheerfully endured a siege\nAfter ten years, in 396 BC, the Romans appointed Camillus as \"dictator\". After defeating both Falerii and Capena at Nepete, Camillus commanded the final strike against Veii (Battle of Veii). He dug into the soft tuff rock below the walls whilst distracting the Veiians with attacks on the walls and infiltrated the city's drainage system to emerge in the citadel, leading to their defeat. Not interested in surrender but only in Veii's complete destruction, the Romans slaughtered the entire adult male population and made slaves of all the women and children. The plunder was very rich and extensive, including the statue of Juno taken to Rome. The statue was dedicated to the Temple of Juno Regina (Aventine).\nCamillus supported the patricians in opposing the plebeian plan to populate Veii with half of the city of Rome designed to resolve poverty and space issues. Camillus deliberately protracted the project until its abandonment.\nRoman and later history.\nThe city was soon assimilated under Roman control and is termed \"Roman Veii\" as opposed to \"Etruscan Veii\" by scholarly literature. Under the empire the Romans called the city the \"Municipium Augustum Veiens\". The city never recovered its former wealth or its population after the Roman conquest. Nevertheless, after Rome's defeat in the battle of the Allia, many Roman soldiers fled there, and a project was proposed for abandoning Rome for Veii; this project was successfully opposed by Camillus.\nThe Romans built wealthy villas in the region and Livia had an estate there, according to Suetonius.\nVeii was eventually abandoned after Roman times, and everything of value or utility was removed by anyone with access to the site. Finally it was filled and smoothed for ploughland and was forgotten until its rediscovery in the 17th century by the antiquarian Raffaello Fabretti.\nAger Veientanus.\nThe territory of a city-state anywhere within the Roman domain was, in Roman legal terminology, an \"ager\". The law made a number of fine distinctions, but by \"ager\" it meant primarily \"ager publicus\", \"public territory\", the land belonging to the state, which in those times was primarily agricultural (\"ager\" is \"field\"). \nThe \"ager Veientanus\" (i.e. of Veii) covered the entire region between the right bank of the lower Tiber river and the coast; that is all of southern Etruria. The northwest border was probably as far west as the Monti Sabatini and Lake Bracciano in the north. \nIn Etruscan times the \"ager Veiantanus\" shared the countryside with the \"Silva Ciminia\", the remnant of an ancient forest, of which the Romans stood in superstitious dread.\nThe \"ager Veiantanus\" remained for the most part agrarian until it became evident after World War II that the city of Rome was going to expand into and develop that area as a suburb. Moreover, a new method of ploughing was turning over the soil a metre deep, destroying all surface evidence. John Bryan Ward-Perkins, then Director of the British School at Rome, set into motion the South Etruria Survey (1954\u20131968), which cataloged all the visible antiquities in the \"ager Veientanus\". It was published in 1968.\nNearly 30\u00a0years later, in 1997, the Italian government moved to protect a part of that area, creating the Veio Regional Natural Park of between the Via Cassia on the west, the Via Flaminia on the east, the Via Campagnanese on the north and the city of Rome on the south. Within the park are the comuni of Campagnano di Roma, Castelnuovo di Porto, Formello, Magliano Romano, Mazzano Romano, Morlupo, Riano, Sacrofano and Municipio XX of the city of Rome.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "72838", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72838", "title": "World Heritage Sites", "text": ""}
{"id": "72839", "revid": "50885481", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72839", "title": "Foucault pendulum", "text": "Device to demonstrate Earth's rotation\nThe Foucault pendulum or Foucault's pendulum is a simple device named after French physicist L\u00e9on Foucault, conceived as an experiment to demonstrate the Earth's rotation. If a long and heavy pendulum suspended from the high roof above a circular area is monitored over an extended period of time, its plane of oscillation appears to change spontaneously as the Earth makes its 24-hourly rotation. This effect is greatest at the poles and diminishes with lower latitude until it no longer exists at Earth's equator.\nThe pendulum was introduced in 1851 and was the first experiment to give simple, direct evidence of the Earth's rotation. Foucault followed up in 1852 with a gyroscope experiment to further demonstrate the Earth's rotation. Foucault pendulums have become popular in science museums and universities.\nHistory.\nFoucault was inspired by observing a thin flexible rod on the axis of a lathe, which vibrated in the same plane despite the rotation of the supporting frame of the lathe. \nThe first public exhibition of a Foucault pendulum took place in February 1851 in the Meridian of the Paris Observatory. A few weeks later, Foucault made his most famous pendulum when he suspended a brass-coated lead bob with a wire from the dome of the Panth\u00e9on, Paris. \nBecause the latitude of its location was formula_1, the plane of the pendulum's swing made a full circle in approximately formula_2, rotating clockwise approximately 11.3\u00b0 per hour. The proper period of the pendulum was approximately formula_3, so with each oscillation, the pendulum rotates by about formula_4. Foucault reported observing 2.3 mm of deflection on the edge of a pendulum every oscillation, which is achieved if the pendulum swing angle is 2.1\u00b0.\nFoucault explained his results in an 1851 paper entitled \"Physical demonstration of the Earth's rotational movement by means of the pendulum\", published in the \"Comptes rendus de l'Acad\u00e9mie des Sciences\". He wrote that, at the North Pole:\n...an oscillatory movement of the pendulum mass follows an arc of a circle whose plane is well known, and to which the inertia of matter ensures an unchanging position in space. If these oscillations continue for a certain time, the movement of the earth, which continues to rotate from west to east, will become sensitive in contrast to the immobility of the oscillation plane whose trace on the ground will seem animated by a movement consistent with the apparent movement of the celestial sphere; and if the oscillations could be perpetuated for twenty-four hours, the trace of their plane would then execute an entire revolution around the vertical projection of the point of suspension.\nThe original bob used in 1851 at the Panth\u00e9on was moved in 1855 to the Conservatoire des Arts et M\u00e9tiers in Paris. A second temporary installation was made for the 50th anniversary in 1902.\nDuring museum reconstruction in the 1990s, the original pendulum was temporarily displayed at the Panth\u00e9on (1995), but was later returned to the Mus\u00e9e des Arts et M\u00e9tiers before it reopened in 2000. On April 6, 2010, the cable suspending the bob in the Mus\u00e9e des Arts et M\u00e9tiers snapped, causing irreparable damage to the pendulum bob and to the marble flooring of the museum. The original, now damaged pendulum bob is displayed in a separate case adjacent to the current pendulum display.\nAn exact copy of the original pendulum has been operating under the dome of the Panth\u00e9on, Paris since 1995.\nMechanism.\nAt either the Geographic North Pole or Geographic South Pole, the plane of oscillation of a pendulum remains fixed relative to the distant masses of the universe while Earth rotates underneath it, taking one sidereal day to complete a rotation. So, relative to Earth, the plane of oscillation of a pendulum at the North Pole (viewed from above) undergoes a full clockwise rotation during one day; a pendulum at the South Pole rotates counterclockwise.\nWhen a Foucault pendulum is suspended at the equator, the plane of oscillation remains fixed relative to Earth. At other latitudes, the plane of oscillation precesses relative to Earth, but more slowly than at the pole; the angular speed, \u03c9 (measured in clockwise degrees per sidereal day), is proportional to the sine of the latitude, \u03c6:\nformula_5\nwhere latitudes north and south of the equator are defined as positive and negative, respectively. A \"pendulum day\" is the time needed for the plane of a freely suspended Foucault pendulum to complete an apparent rotation about the local vertical. This is one sidereal day divided by the sine of the latitude. For example, a Foucault pendulum at 30\u00b0 south latitude, viewed from above by an earthbound observer, rotates counterclockwise 360\u00b0 in two days.\nUsing enough wire length, the described circle can be wide enough that the tangential displacement along the measuring circle of between two oscillations can be visible by eye, rendering the Foucault pendulum a spectacular experiment: for example, the original Foucault pendulum in Panth\u00e9on moves circularly, with a 6-metre pendulum amplitude, by about 5\u00a0mm each period.\nA Foucault pendulum requires care to set up because imprecise construction can cause additional veering which masks the terrestrial effect. Heike Kamerlingh Onnes (Nobel laureate 1913) performed precise experiments and developed a fuller theory of the Foucault pendulum for his doctoral thesis (1879). He observed the pendulum to go over from linear to elliptic oscillation in an hour. By a perturbation analysis, he showed that geometrical imperfection of the system or elasticity of the support wire may cause a beat between two horizontal modes of oscillation. The initial launch of the pendulum is also critical; the traditional way to do this is to use a flame to burn through a thread which temporarily holds the bob in its starting position, thus avoiding unwanted sideways motion (see a ).\nNotably, veering of a pendulum was observed already in 1661 by Vincenzo Viviani, a disciple of Galileo, but there is no evidence that he connected the effect with the Earth's rotation; rather, he regarded it as a nuisance in his study that should be overcome with suspending the bob on two ropes instead of one.\nAir resistance damps the oscillation, so some Foucault pendulums in museums incorporate an electromagnetic or other drive to keep the bob swinging; others are restarted regularly, sometimes with a launching ceremony as an added attraction. Besides air resistance (the use of a heavy symmetrical bob is to reduce friction forces, mainly air resistance by a symmetrical and aerodynamic bob) the other main engineering problem in creating a 1-meter Foucault pendulum nowadays is said to be ensuring there is no preferred direction of swing.\nRelated physical systems.\nMany physical systems precess in a similar manner to a Foucault pendulum. As early as 1836, the Scottish mathematician Edward Sang contrived and explained the precession of a spinning top. In 1851, Charles Wheatstone described an apparatus that consists of a vibrating spring that is mounted on top of a disk so that it makes a fixed angle \u03c6 with the disk. The spring is struck so that it oscillates in a plane. When the disk is turned, the plane of oscillation changes just like the one of a Foucault pendulum at latitude \u03c6.\nSimilarly, consider a nonspinning, perfectly balanced bicycle wheel mounted on a disk so that its axis of rotation makes an angle \u03c6 with the disk. When the disk undergoes a full clockwise revolution, the bicycle wheel will not return to its original position, but will have undergone a net rotation of 2\u03c0 sin \"\u03c6\".\nFoucault-like precession is observed in anisotropic oscillators and in a virtual system wherein a massless particle is constrained to remain on a rotating plane that is inclined with respect to the axis of rotation.\nSpin of a relativistic particle moving in a circular orbit precesses similar to the swing plane of Foucault pendulum. The relativistic velocity space in Minkowski spacetime can be treated as a sphere \"S\"3 in 4-dimensional Euclidean space with imaginary radius and imaginary timelike coordinate. Parallel transport of polarization vectors along such sphere gives rise to Thomas precession, which is analogous to the rotation of the swing plane of Foucault pendulum due to parallel transport along a sphere \"S\"2 in 3-dimensional Euclidean space.\nIn physics, the evolution of such systems is determined by geometric phases. Mathematically they are understood through parallel transport.\nAbsolute reference frame for pendulum.\nThe motion of a pendulum, such as the Foucault pendulum, is typically analyzed relative to an Inertial frame of reference, approximated by the \"fixed stars.\"\nThese stars, owing to their immense distance from Earth, exhibit negligible motion relative to one another over short timescales, making them a practical benchmark for physical calculations. While fixed stars are sufficient for physical analyses, the concept of an absolute reference frame introduces philosophical and theoretical considerations.\nNewtonian absolute space\nCosmic microwave background (CMB)\nMach's principle and distant masses\nGeneral relativity and spacetime\nEquation formulation for the Foucault pendulum.\nTo model the Foucault pendulum, we consider a pendulum of length \"L\" and mass \"m\", oscillating with small amplitudes. In a reference frame rotating with Earth at angular velocity \u03a9, the Coriolis force must be included. The equations of motion in the horizontal plane (\"x\", \"y\") are:\nformula_6\nwhere:\nThese coupled differential equations describe the pendulum's motion, incorporating the Coriolis effect due to Earth's rotation.\nPrecession rate calculation.\nThe precession rate of the pendulum's oscillation plane depends on latitude. The angular precession rate formula_10 is given by:\nformula_11\nwhere formula_12 is Earth's angular rotation rate (approximately formula_13 radians per second).\nExamples of precession periods.\nThe time formula_14 for a full rotation of the pendulum's plane is:\nformula_15\nCalculations for specific locations:\nformula_17\nformula_19\nThese calculations show that the pendulum's precession period varies with latitude, completing a full rotation more quickly at higher latitudes.\nInstallations.\nThere are numerous Foucault pendulums at universities, science museums, and the like throughout the world. The United Nations General Assembly Building at the United Nations headquarters in New York City has one. The Oregon Convention Center pendulum is claimed to be the largest, its length approximately , however, there are larger ones listed in the article, such as the one in Gamow Tower at the University of Colorado of . There used to be much longer pendulums, such as the pendulum in Saint Isaac's Cathedral, Saint Petersburg, Russia.\nThe experiment has also been carried out at the South Pole, where it was assumed that the rotation of the Earth would have maximum effect. A pendulum was installed in a six-story staircase of a new station under construction at the Amundsen-Scott South Pole Station. It had a length of and the bob weighed . The location was ideal: no moving air could disturb the pendulum. The researchers confirmed about 24 hours as the rotation period of the plane of oscillation.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "72842", "revid": "49402000", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72842", "title": "Antofagasta Region", "text": "Region of Chile\nThe Antofagasta Region (, ) is one of Chile's sixteen first-order administrative divisions. Being the second-largest region of Chile in area, it comprises three provinces, Antofagasta, El Loa and Tocopilla. It is bordered to the north by Tarapac\u00e1, by Atacama to the south, and to the east by Bolivia and Argentina. The region's capital is the port city of Antofagasta; another one of its important cities is Calama. The region's main economic activity is copper mining in its giant inland porphyry copper systems.\nAntofagasta's climate is extremely arid, albeit somewhat milder near the coast. Nearly all of the region is devoid of vegetation, except close to the Loa River and at oases such as San Pedro de Atacama. Much of the inland is covered by salt flats, tephra and lava flows, and the coast exhibits prominent cliffs.\nThe region was sparsely populated by indigenous Changos and Atacame\u00f1os until massive Chilean immigration in conjunction with a saltpeter boom in the later 19th century. Most of the region was organised as Bolivia's only coastal territory until Chilean takeover in 1879 at the onset of the War of the Pacific.\nHistory.\nAntofagasta's history is divided, as the territory itself, into two sections: the coastal region, and the highlands plateau or altiplano around the Andes. In pre-Columbian times, the coastline was populated by nomadic fishing clans of Changos Indians, of which very little is known due to very limited contact with the Spanish conquerors.\nThe inland section was populated by the Atacaman culture around the great dry salt lake Salar de Atacama, the Loa River basin, and valleys and oases across the altiplano, with the most important settlement being the village of San Pedro de Atacama.\nThe Atacaman culture was deeply influenced by Tiwanaku culture and later fell under Inca rule. The Atacamans harvested mainly corn and beans and developed trade as far as the Amazon basin and Pacific shores. The arrival of the Spaniards in the 16th century did not destroy the culture but transformed it deeply through the process of mestizaje, in which both cultures mixed. Under Spanish rule, Atacaman territory was placed under the administration of the Audiencia Real de Charcas, though it is disputed whether the Audiencia Real de Charcas was to administer only the inland portion or the coast as well. At the time of independence general Sim\u00f3n Bol\u00edvar integrated it into the new Republic of Bolivia, under the name of \"Litoral Department\". This decision was disputed by the Chilean Government and has been a source of conflict until present times. Chile claimed that according to the Uti possidetis of the Spanish crown, the coastal region belong to them and their territory bordered directly with Peru.\nChilean explorers such as Juan L\u00f3pez and Jos\u00e9 Santos Ossa discovered rich nitrate and guano deposits which produced a massive Chilean colonization of the coastline. Friction between the new settlers from both countries grew until 1879 when the War of the Pacific erupted. Antofagasta was permanently annexed by the Chilean government at the end of the war.\nColonization by Chileans followed mainly from Norte Chico (the contemporary regions of Atacama and Coquimbo, also known as the III and IV regions), into the new territories of Antofagasta and Tarapac\u00e1, known as Norte Grande.\nIn the early 20th century, the region became a significant base of Chile's union-organizing movements. It continued to depend economically on the nitrate-extraction industry until its replacement by copper mining. Two of the largest and richest open pit mines in the world are located inland from Antofagasta: La Escondida and Chuquicamata.\nAdministration.\nEach province in the region is further subdivided into communes.\nGeography.\nThe main river is the Loa.\nAlong the Coastal Cordillera lies Atacama Fault. The area of the Coastal Cordillera around the fault is rich in iron ore constituting the northern part of the so-called Chilean Iron Belt. These ore deposits are often of the manto-type deposits and are chiefly emplaced on rocks of La Negra Formation.\nClimate.\nThe average rainfall in the Antofagasta is just per year. From the coast, east to the Chilean Coast Range, is the south-central part of the Atacama Desert, the driest desert in the world. Further to the east, it is part of the less arid Central Andean dry puna ecoregion. The surroundings of abandoned Yungay town have been named the driest place in the world.\nDemography.\nMost of the population lives on the coast in Antofagasta and Mejillones, or in Calama in the interior, the hub of the mining industry and the home of a large part of its work force.\nIn the late 19th and early 20th centuries, immigrant settlers also arrived from Europe (mainly Croatians, Italians, Spaniards, Greeks, English, French, German, and Portuguese peoples), from the Levant, and in smaller numbers from China, Japan, Korea, Peru and Bolivia. Various immigration flows joined with the culture of the altiplano region creating the modern culture of the north of Chile, which arguably presents more Andean- and multi-European-features than the Central Valley and mainstream Chilean culture.\nEconomy.\nThe Antofagasta Region is the heart of the mining industry, Chile's main source of export revenue. It represents 53% of Chile's mining output, led by copper and followed by potassium nitrate, gold, iodine, and lithium, which means it could have had GDP per capita higher than Luxembourg had it had a large degree of autonomy. The mining industry regularly accounts for more than 90% of the region's exports. In 2024 mining stood for 69% of the region's GDP. \nFishing and manufacturing also contribute to the income of the area.\nThe availability of infrastructure and services, due to the region's mining boom, together with its abundance of beautiful natural scenery, have opened vast prospects for the travel industry, both in the interior and on the coast. Interesting tourist attractions include the small town of San Pedro de Atacama, once the center of the Atacame\u00f1o culture, Atacama Salt Flat, the Valley of the Moon, the Quitor Pukar\u00e1, the Puritama hot springs and the numerous astronomical observatories including the Very Large Telescope and ALMA.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "72844", "revid": "49401372", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72844", "title": "Atacama Region", "text": "Region of Chile\nThe Atacama Region (, ) is one of Chile's 16 first order administrative divisions. It comprises three provinces: Cha\u00f1aral, Copiap\u00f3 and Huasco. It is bordered to the north by Antofagasta, to the south by Coquimbo, to the east by the provinces of Catamarca, La Rioja and San Juan of Argentina, and to the west by the Pacific Ocean. The regional capital Copiap\u00f3 is located north of the country's capital of Santiago. The region occupies the southern portion of the Atacama Desert, the rest of the desert is mainly distributed among the other regions of Norte Grande. As a generalization south of Copiap\u00f3 River the region is mostly semi-arid and north of it is a true desert. The inland area in the north also differs from the southern part by hosting active volcanoes part of the Central Volcanic Zone of Andes. \nThe region has a long tradition of mining that features a silver rush from 1832 to 1850 and a strong development of iron mining from 1952 to 1966. Besides silver and iron the region also hosts valuable reserves of gold, copper and lithium. Agriculture in the region is mainly restricted to the valleys of Copiap\u00f3 and Huasco where irrigation is aided by the dams of Lautaro and Santa Juana respectively. Crops cultivated include table grapes, olives, alfalfa and pisco grapes. \nDemography.\nThe Atacama Region is the third least populated region of the country, after Ais\u00e9n and Magallanes. Of its total population, over 50% are located in the cities of Copiap\u00f3 and Vallenar.\nThe largest cities are (2017 census data) Copiap\u00f3 (150,804 inhabitants), Vallenar (45,298), Caldera (15,547), Cha\u00f1aral (11,073), El Salvador (6,032) Tierra Amarilla (9,857), and Diego de Almagro (7,223).\nHistory.\nThe original inhabitants of this area were the Diaguitas and Changos.\nThe region experienced a boom when the Cha\u00f1arcillo silver mine was discovered by Juan Godoy in 1832.\nNatural features.\nMuch of the region is desert, and encompasses considerable mineral resources. Numerous flora and fauna species are found in the Atacama Region. One subspecies of the lesser rhea, known by the scientific name \"Rhea pennata tarapacensis\", is a notable large terrestrial bird in this region, which subspecies is considered endangered. The diminished numbers of this bird are due to prehistoric and modern hunting but more significantly due to agricultural land conversion in order to feed the expanding human population.\nThe geology of the region has four metallogenetic belts where deposits of valuable metals are found. From west to east these belts are the Atacama Fault System (copper and iron), the Inca de Oro Belt (silver, gold), the West Fissure System (copper) and lastly the Maricunga Belt (gold) close to the Argentine border. The Chilean Iron Belt largely follows the Atacama Fault System.\nEconomy.\nMining accounts for 41% of the region's GDP and 90% of its exports. Moreover, various geological surveys have identified new deposits. In Atacama Region medium and small-scale mining has a larger share of mining properties relative to large-scale mining that is dominant in the more northern regions of Tarapac\u00e1 and Antofagasta. The region's mining activity is centered on copper mining, but it host most of Chile's iron and gold mines. In Atacama Region there are numerous small-scale mines, which sell their output to ENAMI (the national mining company) for processing at its Paipote smelter. The region's main copper deposit is Candelaria, which produces around 200,000 tonnes per year and is controlled by Phelps Dodge, an international corporation. The next in size is El Salvador, owned by CODELCO, with an annual output of around 81,000 tonnes. Both mines export through the port of Cha\u00f1aral.\nOver recent decades, fresh fruit also emerged as regional export item, when the Copiap\u00f3 and Huasco valleys joined Chile\u2019s fruit-growing boom. They enjoy a comparative advantage because, thanks to the sunny climate, fruit ripens earlier than in the rest of the country and reaches northern hemisphere markets first.\nGrapes are the main crop and, on a smaller scale, olives, tomatoes, peppers, onions, broad beans, citrus fruits, nectarines, apricots, oregano, and flowers.\nThe region's organic wealth, its clear waters and sheltered bays, together with its entrepreneurial experience, favor the development of aquaculture. Species produced include the northern scallop, Japanese and Chilean oysters, abalone, turbot, algae, and different varieties of mussels. Other products with more value added include boned fish fillets, smoked and salted fish, roe, and fishburgers.\nThe unique weather conditions in the Atacama Desert, with extremely rare cloudy days, are ideal for solar power generation. Many PV and CSP plants are being built in this area.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "72845", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72845", "title": "Etruria", "text": "Region of Central Italy\nEtruria ( ) was a region of Central Italy delimited by the rivers Arno and Tiber, an area that covered what is now most of Tuscany, northern Lazio, and north-western Umbria. It was inhabited by the Etruscans, an ancient civilization that flourished in the area from around the 8th century BC until they were assimilated into the Roman Republic in the 4th century BC.\nEtruscan Etruria.\nThe ancient people of Etruria\nare identified as Etruscans. Their complex culture centered on numerous city-states that arose during the Villanovan period in the ninth century BC, and they were very powerful during the Orientalizing Archaic periods.\nThe Etruscans were a dominant culture in Italy by 650 BC, surpassing other ancient Italic peoples such as the Ligures. Their influence may be seen beyond Etruria's confines in the Po River Valley and Latium, as well as in Campania and through their contact with the Greek colonies in Southern Italy (including Sicily). Indeed, at some Etruscan tombs, such as those of the Tumulus di Montefortini at Comeana (see Carmignano) in Tuscany, physical evidence of trade with Egypt has been found by archaeologists\u2014fine Egyptian faience cups are an example. Such trade occurred either directly with Egypt or through intermediaries such as Greek or Phoenician sailors.\nRome was influenced strongly by the Etruscans even though it was separated from the early boundary of Etruria by the Silva Ciminia, the Ciminian Forest. A series of Etruscan kings ruled Rome until 509 BC when the last Etruscan king, Lucius Tarquinius Superbus, was removed from power and the Roman Republic was established. The Etruscans are credited with influencing Roman architecture and ritual practice; it was under the Etruscan kings that important structures such as the Capitolium, Cloaca Maxima, and Via Sacra were realized.\nThe Etruscan civilization had a great influence on the culture of early Republican Rome, some of what later became the most symbolic traditions of the city. It also included the introduction of new foods, the Latin alphabet, the architecture, and engineering elements.\nTerritorial subdivision of Etruria.\nEtruria usually is divided into two main territories, called Northern Etruria and Southern Etruria, to which must be added the northernmost territories are called Etruria Padana, and the southernmost territories are called Etruria Campana.\nCities of Etruria.\nLatin and Italian names are given between parentheses:\nThere was a period between 600 BC and 500 BC, during which twelve Etruscan city-states formed a loose confederation known as the Etruscan League. Etruscan was the official language for their meetings. When Etruria was conquered by the Roman Republic, Latin became the official language.\nRoman Etruria.\nIn the Augustan organization of Roman Italy, \"Etruria\" was the name of a region (Regio VII). Its borders were the Tiber, the Tyrrhenian Sea, the Apuan Alps, and the Apennines. This is roughly coincident with those of Etruria before the Roman period that began in 509 BC.\nEtruria in modern history.\nThe Grand Duchy of Tuscany (which existed 1569\u20131801 and 1814\u20131859) styled itself in Latin as \"Magnus Ducatus Etruriae\" (Grand Duchy of Etruria). The name Etruria also was applied to the Kingdom of Etruria, an ephemeral client state of Napoleon I of France that replaced the Grand Duchy between 1801 and 1807.\nA particularly noteworthy work dealing with Etruscan locations is D. H. Lawrence's \"Sketches of Etruscan Places and Other Italian Essays\"."}
{"id": "72847", "revid": "39904038", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72847", "title": "Coquimbo Region", "text": "Region of Chile\nThe Coquimbo Region (, ) is one of Chile's 16 administrative regions. It is located approximately north of the national capital, Santiago. The region is bordered by the Atacama Region to the north, the Valpara\u00edso Region to the south, Argentina to the east, and the Pacific Ocean to the west.\nThe capital and largest city is La Serena. Other significant cities include Coquimbo, a major seaport, and Ovalle, a center for agriculture.\nGeography and ecology.\nThe Coquimbo Region forms the narrowest part of Chile and is one of the most mountainous areas in the country, as the Andes range lies closer to the sea here than in other regions. The region is home to diverse marine and terrestrial species. Upwelling along the coast fosters high marine productivity, contributing to a rich ecosystem.\nIn the southern mountainous areas, the endangered Chilean Wine Palm (\"Jubaea chilensis\") can be found. Its habitat is under threat from human activities, such as population growth and deforestation for agriculture and urban expansion.\nThe Elqui Valley, known for its clear skies, is home to numerous astronomical observatories. Additionally, the Puclaro Dam, a 640-meter-long structure, contains a reservoir that holds 4.63 million cubic meters of water for agricultural irrigation along the Elqui River.\nDemography.\nMining and agriculture have shaped the distribution of settlements in the Coquimbo Region, particularly around transverse valleys and mineral deposits. Historically, these settlements corresponded to the locations of Diaguita indigenous villages. A significant portion of the population, around 70-75%, is of Mestizo (Euro-Amerindian) descent, the highest percentage in Chile. Other indigenous groups present in the region include the Aymara, Atacame\u00f1o, Mapuche, and Quechua, many of whom except Mapuche migrated from Peru and Bolivia.\nThe La Serena-Coquimbo conurbation, with an estimated population of around 300,000 people (297,253 as of the last census), accounts for about half of the region's total population. Other major urban centers include Ovalle (66,405), Illapel (21,826), Vicu\u00f1a (12,910), Salamanca (11,615), and Los Vilos (10,966), based on data from the 2002 census.\nEconomy.\nThe Coquimbo Region is a popular tourist destination, known for its long, white-sand beaches and mild climate. The region's economy is also supported by agriculture and fishing. Additionally, its mountainous terrain makes it a key location for astronomical research.\nThe region hosts the iron mines of El Romeral, near La Serena and El Dorado near Ovalle, in addition to the copper mines of Panulcillo also near Ovalle, Carmen de Andacollo next to Andacollo and Los Pelambres in the high Andes near the Argentina\u2013Chile border. The Dominga copper-iron mine project lies in the region.\nUntil 2009 when mining of manganese ceased in Chile Coquimbo Region produced all of manganese in the country. All the manganese mining districts of the region lie in the inland. Historically Corral Quemado and other areas of Coquimbo Region have produced most manganese in Chile. Manganese mining in Chile and Corral Quemado had a strong peak in 1943 when it came to produce more of what was being purchased leading to large stockpiles accumulating in ports and railway stations and ultimately to a halt in mining and thus mass unemployment.\nMedia and communications.\nThe first newspaper in the region, \"El Minero de Coquimbo\", was published in 1828. Today, the region is served by several local newspapers, including \"El D\u00eda\" in La Serena, founded in 1944, \"La Regi\u00f3n\" in Coquimbo, founded in 2004, and \"El Ovallino\", founded in 1989 in Ovalle.\nTVN Red Coquimbo, a regional affiliate of Televisi\u00f3n Nacional de Chile (TVN), began broadcasting in 1993. Several local cable and UHF television channels, such as CuartaVisi\u00f3n and Ovalle TV, offer regional programming that includes news, sports, and cultural content. However, several regional stations have ceased operations, including Telenorte and Canal 8 UCV TV, which broadcast until 2001 and 2002, respectively.\nNotable people.\nThe Coquimbo Region is the birthplace of several notable figures, including:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "72848", "revid": "39904038", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72848", "title": "Valpara\u00edso Region", "text": "Region of Chile\nThe Valpara\u00edso Region (, ) is one of Chile's 16 first order administrative divisions. With the country's second-highest population of 1,790,219 as of 2017[ [update]], and fourth-smallest area of , the region is Chile's second most densely populated after the Santiago Metropolitan Region to the southeast. The region also includes Chile's remote islands of the Pacific Ocean, including Rapa Nui and the Juan Fernandez Islands.\nIts capital is the port city of Valpara\u00edso; other important cities include Vi\u00f1a del Mar, Quillota, San Felipe, Quilpu\u00e9, Villa Alemana, and San Antonio.\nAdministration.\nAs a region, Valpara\u00edso is a first-level administrative division. Since 2021, the region is governed by the governor, who is elected by popular vote. The current governor is Rodrigo Mundaca (Broad Front).\nGeography and natural features.\nThe region is on the same latitude as the Santiago Metropolitan Region. Its capital is Valpara\u00edso, which is the site for the National Congress of Chile and an important commercial port. Also in this region is the top resort city of Vi\u00f1a del Mar. Additionally, the Pacific islands of Easter Island, Isla Salas y G\u00f3mez, the Juan Fern\u00e1ndez Islands and the Desventuradas Islands fall under the Valpara\u00edso Region's administration.\nThe Valpara\u00edso Region is part of the restricted range of the endangered Chilean wine palm (\"Jubaea chilensis\"); in prehistoric times, this endemic Chilean tree had a significantly larger range.\nDemographics.\nThe Valpara\u00edso Region is populated by 1.71 million inhabitants. The population density reached 94.1 inhabitants/km2. 91.6% of the population lives in urban areas and only 8.4% of the population lives in rural areas.\nThe most populous municipalities in the region are Valpara\u00edso, with 308,000 inhabitants and Vi\u00f1a del Mar, with 287,000 inhabitants, which together with Villa Alemana, Quilpu\u00e9 and Conc\u00f3n form the Greater Valpara\u00edso, a continuum of 1.75 million people. There are also Quillota, with about 201,000 inhabitants and San Antonio with more than 200,000 inhabitants with estimates at 250,000 to be the region's second-largest city. \nImmigration and culture.\nValpara\u00edso developed as a trans-oceanic rest stop for fishing ships, sea cruise-liners, and international naval ships. Therefore, a large proportion of residents have a variety of national origins, ethnic groups, and cultures. The 16th-century colonial population was founded by male settlers from the Spanish regions of Andalusia, Asturia and Le\u00f3n, and the large Basque contingent has given rise to a substantial Basque Chilean population. Large numbers came from other countries of Latin America from Mexico to Uruguay, esp. came during colonial rule in the 17th century. And in the late 18th\u2013early 19th centuries came a small wave of Galician settlers from the Spanish region of Galicia.\nIt is thought the majority of Valpara\u00edso's people have some non-Spanish European background, such as: British and Irish, Australians and New Zealanders, North Americans (U.S. or Canadian), Croats and Bosnians, Dutch and Belgians, French, Germans, Greeks, Italians, Portuguese and Scandinavians. Also, there are more or less assimilated groups of Chilean Jews (mostly Ashkenazi), as well as Christians from the Ottoman Empire, primarily Syro-Lebanese and a large Palestinian community in the town of La Calera.\nIn racial terms, the majority of Valpara\u00edso's inhabitants are castizos, meaning that their paternal origins are overwhelmingly from white whalers, settlers and traders of various European nationalities, including colonial Spanish settlers, while their maternal origins usually stems from unions between colonial Spanish men and local indigenous women, including those of Mapuche, Inca, Aymara and North American Indian descent (transplanted Cherokees are reported to come in the late 19th century, though it could well be a myth). Smaller numbers of East Asians, mostly Chinese, Japanese or Korean, minuscule numbers of Afro-Chileans, as well as a component of Polynesians whose ancestors were kidnapped from Easter Island and the Marquesas Islands, further added to the region's Hispanicized melting pot.\nEconomics and industry.\nThe Valpara\u00edso Region is a host of agricultural lands, wine producers, and industrial activity such as copper mining and cement. Chile's largest oil refinery is located in Conc\u00f3n (on the mouth of the Aconcagua River and about north of Valpara\u00edso) and there are two important copper ore refineries: the state-owned Ventanas (on the coast and north of Conc\u00f3n) and the private works in Chagres, about inland.\nThe region also is a hub for chemicals and gas storage near the port of Quintero. In the interior valleys, there is a booming export industry, mainly around the avocado (palta), chirimoyas and flowers. The most striking recent development has been the cultivation of hillsides using high-tech drip feed irrigation. This has allowed otherwise dry and unproductive land to bear high yields.\nReferences.\nLine notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "72850", "revid": "37371155", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72850", "title": "Miami Heat", "text": "American professional basketball team in Miami, Florida\nThe Miami Heat are an American professional basketball team based in Miami. The Heat compete in the National Basketball Association (NBA) as a member of the Southeast Division of the Eastern Conference. The team plays its home games at Kaseya Center, and has won three NBA championships.\nThe franchise began play in the 1988\u201389 season as an expansion team. After a period of mediocrity, the Heat gained relevance in the mid-1990s when Pat Riley became team president and head coach. Riley constructed the trades for Alonzo Mourning and Tim Hardaway, which propelled the team into playoff contention. Mourning and Hardaway led the Heat to four consecutive division titles prior to their departures in 2001 and 2002, respectively. The team also experienced success after drafting Dwyane Wade in 2003.\nLed by Wade, following a trade for former NBA Most Valuable Player (MVP) Shaquille O'Neal, the Heat won their first NBA title in 2006, after Riley named himself head coach for a second stint. After the departure of O'Neal two years later, the team struggled for the remainder of the 2000s. Riley remained team president, but was replaced as head coach by Erik Spoelstra. In 2010, the Heat formed a superteam through the signing of reigning league MVP LeBron James and NBA All-Star Chris Bosh, creating the \"Big Three\" along with Wade. During their four years together, Spoelstra, James, Wade, and Bosh led the Heat to the NBA Finals in every season, culminating in back-to-back championships in 2012 and 2013. All three departed by 2016, and the team entered a period of rebuilding.\nThe Heat achieved relative success again after acquiring All-Star Jimmy Butler in 2019. With the emergence of future All-Stars Bam Adebayo and Tyler Herro, the Heat were able to reach the 2020 and 2023 NBA Finals before ultimately trading Butler in early 2025.\nThe Heat hold the record for the NBA's third-longest winning streak, 27 straight games, set during the 2012\u201313 season. Seven Hall of Famers have played for Miami, and James won two consecutive NBA MVP Awards while playing for the team.\nHistory.\n1987\u20131995: Early years in Miami.\nIn 1987, the NBA granted one of four new expansion teams to Miami (the others being the Orlando Magic, Charlotte Hornets, and the Minnesota Timberwolves); the team, known as the Heat, began play in November 1988. The Miami Heat began their early years with much mediocrity, only making the playoffs twice in their first eight years and falling in the first round both times.\nMiami had previously been home to the Miami Floridians of the American Basketball Association (ABA) from 1968 to 1972.\n1995\u20132003: Title hopefuls.\nUpon the purchasing of the franchise by Carnival Cruise Lines chairman Micky Arison in 1995, Pat Riley was brought in as the team president and head coach. Riley acquired center Alonzo Mourning and point guard Tim Hardaway to serve as the centerpieces for the team, transforming Miami into a championship contender throughout the late 1990s. With them they also brought in a new team trainer, Cody Posselt, to work on shooting. The Heat underwent a dramatic turnaround in the 1996\u201397 season, improving to a 61\u201321 record \u2013 a franchise record at the time, and currently second-best in team history. That same year, Miami earned the moniker of \"Road Warriors\" for its remarkable 32\u20139 record on the road. On the backs of Hardaway and Mourning, the Heat achieved their first two series victories in the playoffs, making it to the conference finals against the Michael Jordan-led Chicago Bulls before losing in five games. Their biggest rivals of the time were the New York Knicks, Riley's former team, who would eliminate the Heat in the playoffs from 1998 through 2000. A period of mediocrity followed after, highlighted by missing the playoffs in 2002 and 2003.\n2003\u20132016: The Dwyane Wade era.\nIn the 2003 NBA draft, with the fifth overall pick, Miami selected shooting guard Dwyane Wade out of Marquette. Free-agent swing-man Lamar Odom was signed from the Los Angeles Clippers. Just prior to the start of the 2003\u201304 season, Riley stepped down as head coach to focus on rebuilding the Heat, promoting Stan Van Gundy to the position of head coach. Behind Van Gundy's leadership, Wade's stellar rookie year and Odom's break out season, the Heat made the 2004 NBA playoffs, beating the New Orleans Hornets 4\u20133 in the first round and losing to the Indiana Pacers 4\u20132 in the second round. In the off-season, Riley engineered a summer blockbuster trade for Shaquille O'Neal from the Los Angeles Lakers. Alonzo Mourning returned to the Heat in the same season, serving as a backup to O'Neal. Returning as championship contenders, Miami finished with a 59\u201323 record, consequently garnering the first overall seed in the Eastern Conference. Sweeping through the first round and the semifinals, Miami went back to the conference finals for the first time in eight years, where it met the defending champion Detroit Pistons. Despite taking a 3\u20132 lead, Miami lost Wade to injury for Game 6. The Heat would go on to lose Game 7 at home despite Wade's return.\n2005\u20132006: Championship season.\nIn the summer of 2005, Riley brought in veteran free agent Gary Payton from the Boston Celtics, and also brought in James Posey, Jason Williams and Antoine Walker via trades. After a disappointing 11\u201310 start to the 2005\u201306 season, Riley relieved Van Gundy of his duties and took back the head coaching job. The Heat made it to the conference finals in 2006 and in a re-match, defeated the Pistons, winning the series 4\u20132. Making its first NBA Finals appearance, they played the Dallas Mavericks, who won the first two games in Dallas in routs. The Heat then won the next four games, capturing its first-ever championship. Wade won the Finals MVP award.\n2006\u20132010: Post-championship struggles.\nThe Heat experienced four years of post-title struggles from 2007 through 2010, including a 4\u20130 sweep by the Chicago Bulls in the first round of the 2007 NBA playoffs. In the 2007\u201308 season, Wade was plagued by injuries and the Heat had a league-worst 15\u201367 record. O'Neal was traded to Phoenix midway through the season. Riley resigned as head coach following the season but retained his position as team president. Long-time assistant Erik Spoelstra was promoted to head coach. A healthy Wade led the Heat to 43 wins in 2009 and 47 wins in 2010, making the playoffs both seasons, though they lost in the first round, 4\u20133 in 2009 and 4\u20131 in 2010. Wade was the scoring champion in 2009 and the NBA All-Star MVP in 2010.\n2010\u20132014: The \"Big Three\" era.\nEntering the 2010\u201311 season with nearly $48\u00a0million in salary cap space, the Heat caused a major power shift during the blockbuster 2010 free agency, adding Chris Bosh and LeBron James, starting the \"Big 3\" era. However, the Heat got off to a 9\u20138 start. After a \"players only\" meeting, the team improved. The Heat finished with a 58\u201324 record and the second seed. In the much anticipated 2011 NBA playoffs, Miami defeated the Philadelphia 76ers in the first round, Boston Celtics in the conference semifinals, and Bulls in the conference finals, all in 5 games. The Heat reached the 2011 NBA Finals for the first time since 2006, in a rematch against the Dallas Mavericks. After taking a 2\u20131 series lead, the Heat lost the final three games to the Mavericks.\nAfter the second NBA lockout ended, the Heat signed veteran Shane Battier. In the shortened 2011\u201312 season, the Heat started 27\u20137. However they would struggle for the second half of the season, going 19\u201313. The Heat finished 46\u201320, earning the second seed in the East for the NBA playoffs. Entering the first round, they took a 3\u20130 lead against the New York Knicks but like their previous series with the Sixers, were not able to close them out in Game 4. A victory in Game 5 ultimately defeated New York and the Heat advanced to the second round versus the Indiana Pacers. After losing Game 2 at home and Game 3 at Indiana, many criticized Dwyane Wade's lackluster performance in Game 3, bringing attention to the fact that he got into a verbal argument with Spoelstra. However, with Wade visiting his former college coach, the team defeated the Pacers in the next three games, to close out the Pacers. They met the Boston Celtics in the Eastern Conference finals, taking the first two games before losing the next three, including one home loss where Bosh returned from injury. On June 7 they won on the road at Boston beating the Celtics 98\u201379 to tie the series 3\u20133; James had 45 points and 15 rebounds. The deciding Game 7 was at Miami. The Celtics largely dominated during the first half. The second half saw several lead changes. The Heat eventually won 101\u201388, reaching the NBA Finals for the second straight year. In the much-anticipated match-up with the Oklahoma City Thunder, the Heat split the first two games, winning Game 2 on the road, before sweeping the next three at home. James was named the Finals MVP as he won his first NBA championship.\nOn July 11, 2012, the Heat officially signed veterans Ray Allen to a three-year contract and Rashard Lewis to a two-year contract. The Heat later posted a 27-game winning streak from February 3, 2013, and March 27, 2013. Defeating Orlando in the season finale set the franchise record for 66 wins in a season. By the end of the season, the Heat won 18 of its 19 road games, the best streak on the road to end a season in NBA history. The Heat went 17\u20131 in March, becoming the first team to win 17 games in a single calendar month. The Heat ended with a franchise-best and league-best 66\u201316 record to take the first seed in the 2013 NBA playoffs. They swept the Milwaukee Bucks in the first round and defeated Chicago in five games before winning against the Indiana Pacers in Game 7. Miami became the first Eastern Conference team to reach the NBA Finals in three straight years since the Chicago Bulls in the late 1990s. Miami lost Game 1 of the Finals on their home floor in a close game that was decided by a last-minute buzzer beater by Tony Parker. The Heat went on to win Game 2 with a 33\u20135 run in the second half. The two teams continued to trade wins leading up to Game 6 where the Spurs, up 10 heading in the fourth quarter, were in position to close out the series and win the championship. James went on to score 16 points in the period, outscoring the entire Spurs team by himself at one point. With 5.2 seconds remaining, Ray Allen scored a three-pointer to tie the game at 95\u2013all and force overtime, where the Heat won the game 103\u2013100. The Heat went on to defeat the Spurs 95\u201388 in Game 7 behind a 37-point and 12 rebounds performance from James and a 23-point and 10 rebound effort from Wade. Shane Battier also scored 18 points, making six three-pointers, after having a shooting slump during the postseason up to that point. The Heat captured the NBA title for a second year in a row, becoming the first team in the Eastern Conference to repeat as league champions since the late 1990s Chicago Bulls. James was named the NBA Finals MVP, becoming the fifth player to win the award back-to-back along with Michael Jordan, Hakeem Olajuwon, Shaquille O'Neal and Kobe Bryant, and only the second player in NBA history to win the Finals MVP and league MVP back-to-back along with Jordan.\nMiami struggled throughout the 2013\u201314 season with extended absences of Dwyane Wade, who only played 54 games to injury and ended on an 11\u201314 record entering the playoffs. They entered the playoffs as the Eastern Conference second seed with a record of 54\u201328 team, and with the \"Big 3\" healthy. They went 12\u20133 in the first 3 rounds. They swept the Charlotte Bobcats. They then beat the Brooklyn Nets 4\u20131. They went on to play the first-seeded 56\u201326 Pacers in the conference finals, in a rematch of the previous year's Conference finals. The Pacers were eliminated from the playoffs for a third consecutive year by the Heat. The Heat went to a fourth consecutive Finals, and faced the Spurs again. The first two games in San Antonio were split but the Heat fell to the Spurs 4\u20131, failing to repeat as champions for the third consecutive season.\n2014\u20132016: Post-\"Big Three\" and rebuild.\nOn July 11, 2014, LeBron James announced on \"Sports Illustrated\"\u00a0's website that after opting out of the final year of his contract, he would leave the Heat and return to the Cleveland Cavaliers. Wade and Bosh stayed in Miami. Like the Cavaliers in the 2010 off-season, the Heat focused on how it would maintain itself without LeBron. Wade and Bosh were joined by returning players Mario Chalmers, Norris Cole, Udonis Haslem and Chris Andersen along with former rivals Luol Deng and Danny Granger. The Heat also drafted Shabazz Napier and James Ennis. In 2015, they also gained Goran Dragi\u0107 and his younger brother Zoran Dragi\u0107.\nAfter a season with several injuries, including to Chris Bosh and Josh McRoberts, the Heat finished with a 37\u201345 record, the NBA's 10th-worst. They failed to make the playoffs after being Eastern Conference champions four straight years. It was the second time in Wade's career they did not qualify for the postseason. The Heat were the first team since the 2004\u201305 Los Angeles Lakers to miss the playoffs after going to the NBA Finals the previous year. Miami had qualified for the playoffs for six consecutive seasons.\nAt the 2015 NBA draft lottery, the Heat were awarded the 10th pick for the 2015 NBA draft, which was used to select Duke forward Justise Winslow.\nDuring the 2015\u201316 season, the Heat compiled a 48\u201334 regular season record; however, their season ended in the Conference semifinals where they lost to the Toronto Raptors. The 2016 free agency was marked with relationship issues and disagreements between Dwyane Wade and Heat president Pat Riley, mostly focusing on how much Wade would get paid.\n2016\u20132019: Departure and return of Wade.\nOn July 6, 2016, Wade announced that he was leaving the Heat to go join his hometown Chicago Bulls.\nIn September 2016, Bosh failed his physical exam with the Heat and was not cleared by the team to participate in training camp. On September 26, 2016, Heat president Riley said he viewed Bosh's career with the team as over, noting that the team was no longer working toward his return. On July 4, 2017, the Heat waived Bosh a month after an NBA ruling declared his blood clotting issues a career-ending illness. Riley immediately announced that Bosh's number would be retired in the future out of respect to him and his accomplishments with the Heat. With nearly all remnants of the Big Three era gone in just two seasons, Miami went 41\u201341 and missed the playoffs by virtue of a tiebreaker with the Chicago Bulls.\nAlso during that offseason, the Heat would select Bam Adebayo during the 2017 NBA draft and on February 8, 2018, the Miami Heat would acquire Dwyane Wade back from the Cleveland Cavaliers. Wade willed the Heat to a game two win against the Philadelphia 76ers in the first round of the 2018 playoffs, but the team would lose the series in five games. Wade retired after one last season with the Heat in 2018\u201319; Bosh and Wade's jerseys were retired in March 2019 and February 2020, respectively.\n2019\u20132025: The Jimmy Butler era.\nIn 2019\u201320, Miami acquired All-Star Jimmy Butler, Andre Iguodala, and Jae Crowder, and drafted Kentucky shooting guard Tyler Herro. Following the suspension of the 2019\u201320 season due to the COVID-19 pandemic, the Heat were one of 22 teams invited to participate in the NBA Bubble, completing the season behind closed doors in Orlando from July to October 2020. The fifth-seeded Heat went 12\u20133 in the bubble playoffs to win the franchise's sixth conference championship in 15 seasons. They would meet LeBron James and the Los Angeles Lakers in the NBA Finals, losing in six games.\nAfter a historically short 72-day off-season, the Heat struggled to find consistency in the 2020\u201321 season, finishing as the sixth seed. They were swept in a first-round rematch with the eventual champion Milwaukee Bucks. The 2021 off-season saw the departures of Dragi\u0107 and Iguodala, along with the acquisition of veteran Kyle Lowry and P.J. Tucker.\nThe Heat bounced back during the 2021\u201322 season, finishing at the top of the Eastern Conference for the first time since 2013. Miami defeated their first round opponents, the Atlanta Hawks, in five games, and then won against the Philadelphia 76ers 4\u20132 in the conference semifinals. The Heat faced off against the Boston Celtics in the conference finals, but fell short after Butler's three-point shot to take the lead missed with 11 seconds remaining in Game 7.\nThe next season, the Heat finished the 2022\u201323 regular season as the seventh seed in the Eastern Conference, qualifying for the play-in tournament; however, they managed to clinch their division title. In the first play-in game, they lost to the Atlanta Hawks, who eventually clinched the seventh seed in the NBA playoffs. Despite this, the Heat managed to enter the playoffs as the eighth seed after defeating the Chicago Bulls in the final seeding game. They faced the Milwaukee Bucks in their third playoff meeting in four seasons, and eventually defeated them in five games, becoming the sixth team to eliminate a top-seeded team in the first round. They next defeated the New York Knicks and the Boston Celtics in the Eastern Conference Semifinals and the Eastern Conference Finals, respectively. Becoming just the second eighth seed to reach the NBA Finals, they faced the Denver Nuggets, losing in five games.\nOver the next two seasons, the Heat would fail to find the success they previously had and complications would begin to arise with Butler. In the 2023\u201324 season, the Heat would finish as the 8th seed again but lose to the Celtics in the first round in 5 games. After injuries and inconsistencies with Butler, particularly over the previous year, Pat Riley acknowledged the situation and went on to criticize him for his behavior. The statement from Riley would sour on Butler as the two parties failed to reach an agreement on an extension before the 2024\u201325 season. Further behavior from Butler would result in him being suspended multiple times throughout the season, leaving the Heat without their star for extended periods. This would culminate on February 5, 2025, when Butler was traded to the Golden State Warriors in a multi-team deal. The absence of Butler led to other Heat players getting more opportunities during the season, notably Tyler Herro, who would go on to make his first All-Star Game that season.\nUniforms.\n1988\u20131999 uniforms.\nUnveiled prior to the 1988\u201389 season, the original Miami Heat uniforms consist of simple striping, exclusive only on the right side of the jersey and shorts. The home uniforms were white with lettering in red, black and orange trim, while the away uniforms were black with red, white and orange trim; the numbers were white with red, black and orange trim, using the same font as the classic Los Angeles Lakers jerseys. The original 'flaming ball' logo is on the left leg of the shorts while the word 'Miami' is on the right leg.\nIn the 1995\u201396 season the Heat introduced a red alternate uniform with lettering and numbers in black, white and orange trim. The original set lasted until the 1998\u201399 season.\nThe original white and red uniforms were reintroduced as throwback uniforms during the Heat's 20th and 25th anniversary seasons, respectively, while the original black uniforms were used as throwbacks in the 2013\u201314 season. The classic white uniforms were used again for the 2015\u201316 season.\nAs part of Nike's uniform contract with the NBA, the so-called \"Classic\" edition was introduced and featured modernized throwback uniform designs from past years. During the 2017\u201318 season, the Heat were one of eight teams who participated in this line and wore their black 1988\u201399 uniforms, updated to the current Nike uniform cut. In the 2022\u201323 season, the Heat wore a white version of the uniforms from the same era.\n1999\u2013present uniforms.\nThe current Heat uniforms have been in use since the 1999\u20132000 season. These uniforms, though similar, have marked differences such as striping on both sides, change from orange to yellow trim, updated lettering and block numbers, and a modified 'flaming ball' logo on the right leg. The black away uniform numbers are now consistent with the lettering colors (white with red trim).\nThe alternate red uniform was introduced during the 2001\u201302 season, and features the city name and numbers in white with black trim. With subtle changes like the \"Miami\" wordmark on the black uniforms and the addition of the \"MH\" alternate logo on the shorts, these uniforms remain in use with the Heat today.\nFollowing the switch to Nike as the uniform provider in the 2017\u201318 season, the Heat's current uniforms now fall under three categories. The white uniforms are part of the \"Association\" line, the black uniforms are on the \"Icon\" line and the red uniforms are assigned to the \"Statement\" line. All three uniforms are now used regardless of home or away games.\nSpecial uniforms.\nSince the 2007\u201308 season, the Heat participated in the NBA's Noche Latina promotions, or Latin Nights. From 2008 to 2014, the Heat wore a modified version of their black uniforms, featuring the wordmark \"El Heat\"; a sleeved version was used in 2014. For the 2014\u201315 season, the Heat wore their white uniforms with the \"El Heat\" wordmark, followed by the Noche Latina version of their red alternates in the 2015\u201316 season.\nThe Heat wore a variation of their current home uniforms on the opening night of the 2012\u201313 season, with gold accents and a patch of the Larry O'Brien Championship Trophy on the right chest. They used another variation on opening night of the 2013\u201314 season, this time with gold lettering.\nDuring the 2013\u201314 season, the Heat wore a variation of their current home uniforms, but with the player's names at the back replaced by their nicknames (e.g. 'King James' for LeBron James). They wore the uniforms for select home games that season.\nFrom 2012 to 2014, the Heat wore special monochrome uniforms: an all-black ensemble in the 2011\u201312 season, an all-white version in the 2012\u201313 season, and an all-red attire in the 2013\u201314 season. In 2015, a variation of their all-black uniforms, featuring drop shadows, centered numbers and heavy striping inspired from a tuxedo, was used, followed by a similarly designed white uniform in the 2016\u201317 season.\nThe 2015\u201316 season saw the unveiling of two special uniforms. One featured a blend of modern and classic styles (Heat Legacy), while the other is a military-inspired uniform (Home Strong).\nThe Heat also participated in the Christmas Day games wearing special uniforms. In 2012, they wore monochrome red uniforms known as \"Big Color.\" The following year, they wore their \"Big Logo\" sleeved uniforms, featuring a chrome-treated version of their \"flaming ball\" logo. In 2014, the Heat wore a variation of their home uniform, featuring their primary logo and centered numbers in front, and black nameplates with the player's first name below the number at the back.\nThe Heat have also honored the ABA's Miami Floridians by donning throwback uniforms; first the road jerseys in the 2005\u201306 season, then the home jerseys in the 2011\u201312 season.\nIn the 2017\u201318 season, the Heat wore special \"City\" uniforms (named as such by Nike to commemorate local cultures and team traditions) that paid homage to the hit 1980s TV series \"Miami Vice\". The uniforms were white with pink, light blue and black trim and featured the \"Miami\" wordmark inspired from the logo of the Miami Arena. For the 2018\u201319 season, the Heat released black versions of the Miami Vice uniforms. In addition, a pink version of the uniform was unveiled as part of Nike's \"Earned\" series which were exclusive only to the 16 teams that qualified in the 2018 NBA playoffs. A light blue version of the uniforms was used in the 2019\u201320 season. The Vice theme continued with the 2020\u201321 \"City\" uniform, this time featuring a pink and blue gradient and black letters.\nIn the 2021\u201322 season, the Heat wore special \"City\" uniforms that mixed various uniform styles used by the team. The black-based uniform featured a mix of lettering taken from the Heat's previous and current uniform sets, including the throwback Floridians and Miami Vice \"City\" set. Players were allowed to choose their own number styles. A white version of this uniform served as its 2022\u201323 \"City\" uniform.\nThe 2023\u201324 \"City\" uniform centered around the mantra of \"HEAT Culture\" within the organization. The black-based uniform featured the team name in red and \"CULTURE\" in white letters. The number font was based on the 1988\u201399 uniforms. A modified version of the uniform was worn by Jaime Jaquez Jr. during the 2024 All-Star Weekend Slam Dunk Contest, with \"EL HEAT CULTURA\" emblazoned in front to acknowledge Jaquez Jr.'s Mexican American heritage. A red version of the \"HEAT Culture\" uniform served as its 2024\u201325 \"City\" uniform. However, midway through the 2024\u201325 season, the Heat retired the red \"HEAT Culture\" uniform in favor of the 2017\u201318 white \"Miami Vice\" uniform, which they wore as a temporary substitute to the primary white \"Association\" uniform for the rest of the season. The black version of the \"Miami Vice\" uniform returned for the 2025\u201326 season.\nMiami's 2021 \"Earned\" uniform (rewarded after making the 2020 NBA playoffs) marked the first time the team used yellow as a base color; previously it was only utilized as an accent color on the logo and uniforms. Letters were rendered in black with white trim, but red was not used at all in the uniform.\nRivalries.\nNew York Knicks.\nThe rivalry between the New York Knicks and the expansion Miami Heat was a result of their four consecutive playoff series from 1997 to 2000. Each series went seven games. The rivalry's central figure was Pat Riley, the head coach of both teams (the early 1990s for the Knicks and the late 1990s for the Heat). Jeff Van Gundy took over Riley's stint as head coach of the Knicks, while his elder brother Stan Van Gundy was simultaneously an assistant coach for the Heat. Patrick Ewing and Alonzo Mourning had been friends from their Georgetown college basketball period. Larry Johnson, one of the Knicks, held bad blood with Mourning as far back as their days in the Charlotte Hornets.\nChicago Bulls.\nThe rivalry with the Chicago Bulls began once the Miami Heat became contenders during the 1990s, a decade dominated by the Bulls and Michael Jordan. During that period, the Heat were eliminated three times by the Bulls, who would go on to win the NBA championship each time. After Jordan retired and the Heat's fall in the early 2000s, the rivalry cooled but slightly picked up when the Heat faced them in the first round of the 2006 NBA playoffs, which ended in a 4\u20132 Heat series victory and went on to win the NBA Finals. The Bulls would sweep the defending champion Heat in the first round the next season.\nThe rivalry has intensified with the resurgence of the Bulls, and the emergence of Derrick Rose and the Heat re-signing Dwyane Wade (who turned down a chance of joining his hometown Bulls) with newly acquired superstars in Chris Bosh and LeBron James (who spurned a chance of teaming up with Rose in Chicago). The revived rivalry has been very physical, involving rough plays and hard fouls between players. Both teams met in the 2011 Eastern Conference finals, with the Heat winning in five games.\nThe Bulls ended the Heat's record-setting 27 game win streak on March 27, 2013, with a 101\u201397 victory at the United Center in Chicago. Despite playing without Derrick Rose, Joakim Noah, Richard \"Rip\" Hamilton, and Marco Belinelli, the Bulls managed to end the second longest win streak in basketball history.\nThe rivalry would continue into the 2013 NBA playoffs when the Heat would play the Bulls in the second round. The Bulls ended another Miami Heat winning streak by beating the Heat 93\u201387 in Game 1. The Heat came back in Game 2 and set a record for the largest margin of victory in franchise playoff history with a 115\u201378 win. The Bulls also set a record for the worst playoff defeat in franchise history. The 51 personal fouls were the most in a playoff game since 1995. In Game 3, Nazr Mohammed was ejected for shoving LeBron James early in the second quarter. Norris Cole had his jersey ripped by Taj Gibson while driving to the basket for a layup. Joakim Noah was seen applauding and cheering on the image of Chris Bosh arguing with Mario Chalmers. Noah received a technical foul for shoving Chris Andersen after he fell on Nate Robinson. Chalmers received a flagrant foul for ringing his arm around Noah's neck. Taj Gibson and Noah were both ejected in the same game for yelling at the referees.\nThe two teams met in the 2023 Play-In Tournament to determine the 8th seed for the East. The Heat won to earn the Eastern Conference's 8th seed. They both met again in 2024, with the Heat once again defeating the Bulls, earning the 8th seed.\nOrlando Magic.\nThe Orlando Magic and the Miami Heat had a rivalry because both teams are located in Florida, thus the rivalry was known as the Sunshine State rivalry. Another ingredient to the rivalry was the high-caliber players on both teams such as Orlando's Shaquille O'Neal and Penny Hardaway to Miami's Alonzo Mourning and Tim Hardaway. The two had met each other in the NBA playoffs for the first time in 1997, with Miami beating Orlando 3\u20132, they have not met in the playoffs since.\nThe rivalry intensified during the 2000s and early 2010s with the rising stardom of Miami's and Orlando's Dwyane Wade and Dwight Howard, along with Miami's acquiring high-caliber stars such LeBron James from the Cleveland Cavaliers and Chris Bosh from the Toronto Raptors and in 2010, resulting in fierce competition between the two.\nWhen Dwight Howard departed from the Magic to the Los Angeles Lakers in August 2012, the rivalry softened. The Orlando Magic are undergoing a process of rebuilding, however, competition still remains tense.\nBoston Celtics.\nThe two teams first squared off in the playoffs in 2010, with the Celtics defeating the Heat four games to one en route to an eventual NBA Finals appearance by the Celtics. Having suffered first-round losses in three straight years, it was the loss to the Celtics that prompted Dwyane Wade to declare that the loss would be \"my last\" in the first round for the near future.\nLeBron James' own enmity with the Boston Celtics can be found as far back as his first stint with the Cleveland Cavaliers, where the Celtics upset the Cavaliers in 2008 and 2010. Among the two Heat stars, Wade went as far as to say that he personally hates the Celtics, with James' own disdain for Boston manifesting in how he referred to the Celtics exclusively as \"that team\" in 2011. With the acquisition of both James and Chris Bosh in 2010, the Heat challenged the Celtics for dominance in the Eastern Conference; James claimed that the formation of the Heat's Big 3 was to mirror the formation of the Celtics' Big 3 in Paul Pierce, Ray Allen and Kevin Garnett. After dropping the first three games versus the Celtics in the regular season, Miami prevailed in their fourth encounter, taking the second seed from the Celtics and gaining home-court advantage for their eventual match-up of the postseason. The teams met in the Eastern Conference semifinals of the 2011 NBA playoffs, where Paul Pierce was ejected in Game 1, Dwyane Wade inadvertently broke Rajon Rondo's arm in Game 3 and James scored the final 10 points in the deciding Game 5. James could be found roaring to the fans as the Celtics' end came, even kneeling to the ground in relief after finally defeating the Celtics. The rivalry would continue in the following season, where the Heat again took home-court advantage over the Celtics, though Boston again won the season series over the Heat. Despite the loss of Bosh to injury in the semifinals, the Heat took a 2\u20130 lead before the Celtics won the next three games; the first five games included two overtimes, Rondo's 44-point performance in Game 2, as well as Pierce and James fouling out in Game 4. James' 45-point performance in Game 6 at Boston forced a deciding seventh game, where the two teams traded blows deep into the third and fourth quarters, before Miami pulled away with a 4\u20133 victory en route to the 2012 NBA Finals.\nIn the off-season, the Celtics' Big 3 was broken up following Ray Allen's joining of the Heat. When asked about their immediate reactions to their teammate leaving for their rival, Kevin Garnett claimed that he deleted Allen's phone number, while Paul Pierce admitted that it \"hurt\", though he still considers Allen \"a brother to me\" for their 2008 championship run. Although the two teams would not meet in the playoffs, the animosity continued in their four regular season games. The season opener \u2013 a Heat victory \u2013 included Rondo clotheslining Wade's neck, Garnett snubbing a handshake from Allen pre-game, and Garnett throwing an elbow at Mario Chalmers. During Miami's 2013 streak, Paul Pierce went on record to say that he wished for Miami to lose all of its remaining games by that point. When James voiced his displeasure over the Chicago Bulls' physicality against him, Boston's general manager Danny Ainge called it \"embarrassing\" for LeBron to complain about it. Pat Riley, the Heat team president, retorted that \"Danny should shut the fuck up.\" The teams met during the streak, where it was five years to the day that the Celtics' stopped the Houston Rockets' own 20+-game winning streak. It ended in a Heat victory, one that featured James dunking on Jason Terry; he received a technical foul for staring down at Terry post-dunk. When asked about it after the game by reporters, James stated that he was \"glad it happened to him.\"\nFrom 2020 to 2023, the Heat and the Celtics faced each other in the Eastern Conference finals for three out of four of the years. The Heat won the first and third meetings, with the Celtics winning the second. The Heat and the Celtics would lose all the finals that played in from those years. In 2024, the Heat and Celtics faced off in the first round, but the Heat were playing without Jimmy Butler, and the Celtics won the championship that year.\nIndiana Pacers.\nA recent rivalry was triggered with the Indiana Pacers in the Eastern Conference semifinals of the 2012 NBA playoffs. Although the two previously met in the 2004 NBA playoffs (when Indiana won 4\u20132), as of 2014, the only player still left from either team is Udonis Haslem of the Heat. Both head coaches were fined for statements made relating to the officiating: Frank Vogel accused the Heat of flopping before the series started, while Erik Spoelstra took offense to what he perceived to be deliberate head-hunting of his players on the part of the Pacers. Indiana took a 2\u20131 lead after Miami's Chris Bosh was sidelined with an abdominal strain. Powered by LeBron James and Dwyane Wade, Miami won three straight games to take the series, 4\u20132. The series was marked by several suspensions, flagrant fouls, and confrontations between the players: Tyler Hansbrough's flagrant foul on Dwyane Wade (which drew blood), Udonis Haslem's retaliatory flagrant foul on Hansborough (which led to Haslem's Game 6 suspension), Wade colliding with Darren Collison in transition, Juwan Howard confronting Lance Stephenson over the latter's flashing of the choke sign to James, and Dexter Pittman elbowing Stephenson in the neck (which led to his own three-game suspension). Indiana's Danny Granger received technical fouls in three consecutive games for his confrontations with Heat players; he stripped James of his headband in Game 2 while attempting to block a shot, pulled the back of James' jersey in Game 3 while trying to stop a fast-break, and chest-bumped Wade in Game 4 after the latter was fouled by Roy Hibbert.\nThe following season saw improvements for both teams, from Miami's acquisition of Ray Allen and Chris Andersen, to the emergence of Paul George and Lance Stephenson. Notably, it was after the Heat lost to the Pacers that they compiled a 27-game winning streak; the last time the Heat lost two in a row in the year were the games against Indiana and Portland. During the waning minutes of Game 6 in the semifinals between the Pacers and the New York Knicks, the Pacers' fans were chanting \"Beat the Heat\" as their team beat their old New York rivals. True to form, the Heat and the Pacers met in the conference finals of the 2013 NBA playoffs on May 22, 2013. Several instances of physicality became prominent in the series: Shane Battier received an offensive foul for throwing his knee at Hibbert's midsection; Hibbert claimed that it was an intentional dirty play on the part of Battier. Andersen suffered a bloodied nose after colliding with David West. Ian Mahinmi received a retroactive flagrant foul for a grab of James' arm. Norris Cole latched a hand on West's groin area as he tried to slip through West. Wade received a retroactive flagrant foul for hitting Stephenson in the head, another incident that the Pacers, notably Paul George, felt was a dirty play. The Heat survived Game 1 on a James game-winning layup, while the Pacers came back to tie the series at 1\u20131 after forcing James into two late fourth-quarter turnovers for Game 2. In Game 3, the Heat set a team record for points in a postseason half with 70. It was the first time the Pacers had given up 70 points since 1992. Allen's single turnover was the least ever suffered by the Heat in a first half. Their five total turnovers is tied for the fewest in franchise history. The Game 3 victory marked the first time that an NBA team had won five straight road games by double digits. The Heat won the series 4\u20133, with a 99\u201376 win in Game 7. In the 2014 NBA playoffs, after beating the Brooklyn Nets in five games, and the Pacers beating the Washington Wizards in six games, the Heat and the first-seeded Pacers would meet up in the Eastern Conference finals in a much-anticipated rematch. The Heat would go on to eliminate the Pacers 4\u20132, advancing to their fourth consecutive NBA Finals in the Big Three-era. The Heat stumbled during Game 1 in Indianapolis, falling 107\u201396. They would win the next three games, but during Game 5, which Miami lost 93\u201390, James struggled, suffering heavy foul trouble and scoring only seven points, his lowest playoff record. During Game 6 in Miami, the Heat would defeat the Pacers 117\u201392.\nDallas Mavericks.\nThe Heat\u2013Mavericks rivalry began in the 2006 NBA Finals, where the two teams met and both entering their first NBA Finals appearance. A year prior, the Heat had acquired Shaquille O'Neal. The Mavericks were led by Dirk Nowitzki, and the Heat were led by Dwyane Wade. Dallas had home-court advantage in the series due to a better regular season record (60\u201322) than Miami's (52\u201330) and took the first two games in the series, entering Game 3 with a commanding 2\u20130 lead. They looked set to win Game 3 until a rally by the Heat, including many free throws from Wade, resulted in the Mavericks losing the third game. The Heat won all of its home games, as the Mavericks dropped games 3, 4 and 5. In a highly controversial Game 5, a 101\u2013100 victory for the Heat, Wade shot more free throws than the entire Mavericks team. Mavericks owner Mark Cuban, as well as Nowitzki, were both fined for acts of misconduct. During Game 6, the series returned to Dallas, where the Mavericks fell 95\u201392. Jason Terry airballed a three-point attempt that could have tied the game. Wade picked up the ball, throwing it in the air in celebration as the Heat won the NBA Championship, and its first one as well. Wade was named the Finals MVP.\nIn the 2010 off-season, Miami acquired LeBron James from the Cleveland Cavaliers and Chris Bosh from the Toronto Raptors to team up with Wade and form their own \"big three\" (to rival the Celtics' big three) that was expected to win the championship. The Heat finished 58\u201324, acquiring the southeast division title and the second seed in the Eastern Conference. During the regular season, the Mavericks swept the Heat 2\u20130. The Heat cruised through the Playoffs without much competition, eliminating every team \u2013 the Philadelphia 76ers, defending Eastern Conference champions Boston Celtics and the top-seeded Chicago Bulls all five games. Meanwhile, the Mavericks had tallied 57\u201325 for the third seed, leaving them to face the Portland Trail Blazers in the first round. The Mavericks had been defeated in the first round all but one time since the 2006 Finals, including a defeat from the seventh-seeded San Antonio Spurs just the previous season. Because of this, the Mavericks were underdogs throughout the playoffs, but they were able to dispatch Portland in six games. They faced the defending NBA champions Los Angeles Lakers and pulled off the impossible by sweeping them, ending their bid for a three-peat. In the conference finals, they defeated the Oklahoma City Thunder, resulting a rematch between the two teams. After taking a 2\u20131 lead however, the Heat stumbled in the next three games. They were eliminated on their own home floor after losing 105\u201395 during Game 6 in Miami \u2013 extending LeBron's quest for a ring. The loss had also brought further public humiliation for LeBron James, who had been scrutinized and negatively criticized for leaving the Cavaliers to join the Heat. LeBron was criticized for only averaging 17.8 points. Cavaliers fans rejoiced in the Heat's loss due to the anger that was caused by LeBron's decision to join the Heat, which they felt was unfair and a betrayal.\nAfter that, the Mavericks would never win another game against the Heat. Dallas hosted the Heat for the season opener on December 25, 2011, of the lockout-shortened 2011\u201312 season that was shortened to 66 games. The Heat spoiled the Mavericks' championship banner-raising night, giving them a 105\u201394 loss.\nAlthough the Heat and the Mavericks have not met in the postseason ever since, the rivalry continued as Mark Cuban publicly discussed his extreme personal dislike for the Heat. He described \"hate\" was not being strong enough of a word to describe his dislike for the Heat. He also had a personal dislike for Wade.\nSeason-by-season record.\n\"List of the last five seasons completed by the Heat. For the full season-by-season history, see List of Miami Heat seasons.\"\n\"Note: GP = Games played, W = Wins, L = Losses, W\u2013L% = Winning percentage\"\nRadio and television.\nThe Heat's flagship radio stations are WAXY (790 AM) in English, with Mike Inglis, former Heat coach Ron Rothstein, and former WNBA player Ruth Riley calling games, and WQBA (1140 AM) in Spanish, with Jose Pa\u00f1eda and Joe Pujala on the call.\nThe Heat games are televised primarily by FanDuel Sports Network Sun with Eric Reid and John Crotty. Reid has been part of the Heat's broadcasting team since the beginning of the franchise, first serving as a color analyst, and later becoming the lead play-by-play voice starting in the 1991\u201392 season. For the first four years of the franchise, there were radio-television simulcasts of locally broadcast games before the franchise eventually created separate broadcast teams.\nWBFS-TV (channel 33) was the original over-the-air flagship station for Heat games, with its first stint concluding at the end of the 1998\u201399 season, after 11 seasons. WAMI-TV (channel 69) took over the following season; however, WBFS (along with now-sister station WFOR channel 4) returned as the Heat's primary over-the-air home in 2000\u201301, this time lasting until the 2003\u201304 season. On the cable side, Heat games were televised on then-SportsChannel Florida (now FanDuel Sports Network Florida), before moving to then-Sunshine Network (later Sun Sports, Fox Sports Sun and Bally Sports Sun, currently FanDuel Sports Network Sun) starting in the 1992\u201393 season. Since 2004\u201305, Sun Sports have served as the exclusive regional carrier of Heat games throughout the team's designated broadcast territory, which includes the metropolitan areas of Miami\u2013Fort Lauderdale, West Palm Beach\u2013Fort Pierce\u2013Port St. Lucie, and Fort Myers\u2013Naples.\nOn a national scale, games are occasionally televised by TNT, ESPN, or ABC.\nFrom 1988 to 1993, the Heat were on WQAM. WINZ previously aired games from 1993 to 1996 and WIOD did from 1996 to 2008.\nPersonnel.\nRetained draft rights.\nThe Heat hold the draft rights to the following unsigned draft picks who have been playing outside the NBA. A drafted player, either an international draftee or a college draftee who is not signed by the team that drafted him, is allowed to sign with any non-NBA teams. In this case, the team retains the player's draft rights in the NBA until one year after the player's contract with the non-NBA team ends. This list includes draft rights that were acquired from trades with other teams.\nRetired numbers.\nThe Heat have retired seven numbers, although only six of the players played for the franchise. Michael Jordan was the first player to be honored despite not having played for the Heat. Pat Riley retired Jordan's signature No. 23 before his final game in Miami during the 2002\u201303 season as a tribute to his career.\nDuring the 2005\u201306 season the organization honored Pro Football Hall of Fame quarterback Dan Marino's No. 13 in respect of his contributions to the National Football League (NFL)'s Miami Dolphins. However, the No. 13 jersey is not retired and is still available for use by the Heat players.\nThe NBA retired Bill Russell's No. 6 for all its member teams on August 11, 2022.\nHead coaches.\nThere have been six head coaches for the Miami Heat. Ron Rothstein was the franchise's first head coach, serving from 1988 through 1991; he remains as assistant coach. Kevin Loughery was his successor from 1991 to 1995, guiding the Heat to their first two playoff berths in 1992 and 1994. Loughery was fired 46 games into the 1994\u201395 season, posting a 17\u201329 record. Alvin Gentry, an assistant coach who joined in 1991, was brought in to replace Loughery on an interim basis. Miami went 15\u201321 for the final 36 games, and Gentry moved to the Detroit Pistons the following season.\nIn the summer of 1995, owner Micky Arison hired Pat Riley as the head coach and team president. Upon suffering a 25\u201357 record in the 2002\u201303 season, Riley abruptly announced his retirement, but remained as team president. He elevated assistant coach Stan Van Gundy as his replacement. Van Gundy is Miami's all-time leader for the highest winning percentage in the regular season (.605), having led Miami to a 42\u201340 record in his first season and a 59\u201323 record in his second year. He spearheaded Miami's 2005 campaign, where they held the top seed in the east, swept their first two playoff opponents and made it to the conference finals.\nAn 11\u201310 record early into the 2005\u201306 season prompted Riley to come out of retirement and replace Van Gundy. Shortly thereafter, Riley would win his fifth and final championship as a head coach, as well as Miami's first championship in 2006. Riley would retire permanently following the 15-win 2007\u201308 season, but once again remained as team president. His hand-picked replacement, longtime assistant Erik Spoelstra, is the current Heat head coach, a position he has held since 2008. At 38, he was the youngest head coach in the league at the time, as well as the first Filipino-American head coach in league history. Spoelstra led the team to four consecutive appearances in the NBA Finals, culminating in back-to-back championships in 2012 and 2013.\nFranchise accomplishments and awards.\nFranchise leaders.\nBold denotes still active with team. \"Italic\" denotes still active but not with team.\nPoints scored (regular season) as of the end of the 2024\u201325 season\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nOther statistics (regular season) as of the end of the 2024\u201325 season\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Column/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src = \"Column/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src = \"Column/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src = \"Column/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src = \"Column/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src = \"Column/styles.css\" /&gt;\nIndividual awards.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Column/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNBA Most Valuable Player\nNBA Eastern Conference Finals MVP\nNBA Finals MVP\nNBA Scoring Champion\nNBA Defensive Player of the Year\nNBA Most Improved Player Award\nNBA Sixth Man of the Year\nBest NBA Player ESPY Award\nNBA Coach of the Year\nNBA Executive of the Year\nJ. Walter Kennedy Citizenship Award\nTwyman\u2013Stokes Teammate of the Year Award\nNBA Community Assist Award\n&lt;templatestyles src = \"Column/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAll-NBA First Team\nAll-NBA Second Team\nAll-NBA Third Team\nNBA All-Defensive First Team\nNBA All-Defensive Second Team\n&lt;templatestyles src = \"Column/styles.css\" /&gt;\nNBA All-Rookie First Team\nNBA All-Rookie Second Team\nSeason-long NBA Community Assist Award\nNBA All-Star Weekend.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Column/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNBA All-Star selections\nNBA All-Star Game head coaches\nNBA All-Star Game MVP\n&lt;templatestyles src = \"Column/styles.css\" /&gt;\nNBA All-Star Skills Challenge Champion\nNBA All-Star Three-point Shootout Champion\nNBA All-Star Slam Dunk Contest Champion\nNBA All-Star Shooting Stars Contest Champion\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "72852", "revid": "19992876", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72852", "title": "Brooklyn Nets", "text": "National Basketball Association team in New York City\nThe Brooklyn Nets are an American professional basketball team based in the New York City borough of Brooklyn. The Nets compete in the National Basketball Association (NBA) as a member of the Atlantic Division of the Eastern Conference. The team plays its home games at Barclays Center. They are one of two NBA teams located in New York City, the other being the New York Knicks.\nThe club was established in 1967 as a charter franchise of the NBA's rival league, the American Basketball Association (ABA). They played in New Jersey as the New Jersey Americans during their first season, before relocating to Long Island, New York, in 1968 and changing their name to the New York Nets. During this time, the Nets won two ABA championships (1974 and 1976), led by Hall of Famer Julius Erving. In 1976, the ABA merged with the NBA, and the Nets were absorbed into the NBA along with three other ABA teams (the Denver Nuggets, Indiana Pacers, and San Antonio Spurs), all of whom remain in the league to this day.\nIn 1977, the team returned to New Jersey and played as the New Jersey Nets from 1977 to 2012. Led by star point guard Jason Kidd, the Nets reached the NBA Finals in two consecutive NBA seasons (2001\u201302 and 2002\u201303), but failed to win a championship. In the summer of 2012, the team moved to Barclays Center in Brooklyn, becoming the first major sports franchise in the borough since the departure of the Brooklyn Dodgers baseball team in 1957. Since moving to Brooklyn, the Nets have qualified for the playoffs on eight occasions, including trips to the conference semifinals in 2014 and 2021.\nHistory.\nThe Nets were founded in 1967 and initially played in Teaneck, New Jersey, as the New Jersey Americans. In its early years, the team led a nomadic existence, moving to Long Island in 1968 and playing in various arenas there as the New York Nets.\nLed by Hall of Famer Julius Erving, the Nets won two ABA championships in New York before becoming one of four ABA teams to be admitted into the NBA as part of the ABA\u2013NBA merger in 1976. Unlike the other three ABA teams entering the NBA, who played in cities without any NBA presence, the Nets were required to pay an \"invasion fee\" of $4.8million (equivalent to $million in 2024) to the New York Knicks. The team was forced to finance that payment by selling Erving's contract to the Philadelphia 76ers; and the Nets went from winning the last ABA title in 1975\u201376 to having the worst record in the NBA in 1976\u201377. The team then moved back to New Jersey in 1977 and became the New Jersey Nets.\nDuring their time in the state, the Nets played in two consecutive NBA Finals in the 2001\u201302 and 2002\u201303 seasons, led by All-NBA point guard Jason Kidd, whose arrival helped transform the team into a perennial playoff contender. The later acquisition of Vince Carter further strengthened the core that kept the Nets competitive in the Eastern Conference through the mid-2000s. After playing 35 seasons in New Jersey, the team moved back to the state of New York, changed its geographic name to Brooklyn, and began playing in the new Barclays Center, starting with the 2012\u201313 NBA season. The team's move from New Jersey to Brooklyn was approved unanimously by the NBA Board of Governors on April 13, 2012. Since the relocation, the team has struggled to achieve consistent success, as major roster overhauls, including the trade that helped bring Kevin Garnett and Paul Pierce, and the later acquisitions of Kevin Durant and Kyrie Irving, ultimately fell short of expectations.\nRivalries.\nBoston Celtics.\nDuring the early 2000s, the Nets were led by Jason Kidd and Kenyon Martin, while the Boston Celtics were experiencing newfound success behind Paul Pierce and Antoine Walker. The rivalry began to heat up in the conference finals of the 2002 playoffs, which was preceded by trash talking from the Celtics, who claimed Martin was a \"fake\" tough guy. Things progressed as the series started, and on-court tensions seemed to spill into the stands. Celtic fans berated Kidd and his family with chants of \"Wife Beater!\" in response to Kidd's 2001 domestic abuse charge. When the series returned to New Jersey, Nets fans responded, with some brandishing signs that read \"Will someone please stab Paul Pierce?\" referring to a night club incident in 2000 in which Pierce was stabbed 11 times. When asked about the fan barbs being traded, Kenyon Martin stated, \"Our fans hate them, their fans hate us.\" Bill Walton said at the time that Nets\u2013Celtics was the \"beginning of the next great NBA rivalry\" during the conference finals. Led by Kidd, the Nets advanced to the NBA Finals, and the following year, swept Boston in the 2003 playoffs.\nOn November 28, 2012, there were indications that the rivalry might be rekindled when an altercation occurred on the court, resulting in the ejection of Rajon Rondo, Gerald Wallace, and Kris Humphries. Rondo was suspended for two games in the aftermath, while Wallace and Kevin Garnett were fined. The story was revisited on December 25, when Wallace grabbed Garnett's shorts and the two had to be broken up by referees and players alike.\nIn the 2019 NBA off-season, the Nets signed point guard Kyrie Irving. Coming off two seasons with the Celtics, Irving was described as selfish by many critics. This impression caused many Celtics fans to blame him for the Celtics' inability to get through to the playoffs.\nDuring a regular season game in the 2019\u201320 season between the Celtics and Nets, the Celtics' fans displayed their displeasure with Irving by chanting \"Kyrie sucks\" in TD Garden. When the series returned to Brooklyn two days later, the Nets' fans chanted \"Kyrie's better\" in response to the chants in Boston. The \"Kyrie's Better\" chants reference to how the Celtics signed Kemba Walker after Irving left for the Nets.\nOn May 30, 2021, after Kyrie Irving stomped on the Celtics center-court logo, a fan threw a water bottle at Irving at TD Garden following a Nets victory and a 3\u20131 lead in the series.\nNew York Knicks.\nThe Knicks\u2013Nets rivalry has historically been a geographical one, with the Knicks playing in Madison Square Garden in the New York City borough of Manhattan, while the Nets played in the suburban area of Long Island and in New Jersey, and since 2012 have been playing at Barclays Center in Brooklyn. Media outlets have noted the Knicks\u2013Nets rivalry's similarity to those of other New York City teams, such as the Major League Baseball (MLB) historical Subway Series rivalry and the current rivalry between the American League (AL)'s New York Yankees and the National League (NL)'s New York Mets, and the National Football League (NFL) rivalry between the National Football Conference (NFC)'s New York Giants and the American Football Conference (AFC)'s New York Jets, the result of the boroughs' proximity through the New York City subway. Historically, the boroughs of Manhattan and Brooklyn competed via the Dodgers\u2013Giants rivalry, when the two teams were the Brooklyn Dodgers and the New York Giants. Like the Knicks and Nets, the Giants and Dodgers played in Manhattan and Brooklyn, respectively, and were fierce intraleague rivals. The rivalry between the New York Islanders and New York Rangers of the National Hockey League (NHL) took on a similar dimension while the Islanders inhabited the Barclays Center, from 2015 to 2021. Due to the Knicks being located in Manhattan and the Nets being located in Brooklyn, some media outlets have dubbed this rivalry \"Clash of the Boroughs\".\nToronto Raptors.\nThe rivalry with the Toronto Raptors began in the 2000s, specifically in 2004, after Raptors guard/forward Vince Carter was traded to the New Jersey Nets. However, the two teams did not meet in the playoffs until 2007, when the Nets defeated the Raptors in the first round series, 4 games to 2, after a go-ahead shot by Richard Jefferson with 8 seconds left in Game 6 led to a 98\u201397 victory. In 2014, the teams met again in the first round, and the series went to seven games, with a game-winning block by Paul Pierce, giving the Nets the 104\u2013103 victory. The series was noted for controversy when Toronto Raptors general manager Masai Ujiri made derogatory remarks towards Brooklyn at a fan rally outside Maple Leaf Square in Toronto before Game 1. Ujiri later apologized at halftime. The Raptors and Nets faced each other in the 2020 NBA playoffs in the first round, with Toronto winning the series four games to none.\nSeason-by-season record.\n\"List of the last five seasons completed by the Nets. For the full season-by-season history, see List of Brooklyn Nets seasons.\"\n\"Note: GP = Games played, W = Wins, L = Losses, W\u2013L% = Winning percentage\"\nUniforms.\nNew Jersey Americans.\nUpon debuting in the ABA in 1967, the New Jersey Americans wore white and red uniforms. The white uniforms contained red, blue and white stripes, with the team name and numerals in red with blue trim. The red uniforms mirror the striping configurations of the white uniforms while the city name and numerals were in blue with white trim.\nNew York Nets.\n1968\u20131972.\nMoving to Long Island as the New York Nets, they kept the original Americans template except for the location and team name. The white uniforms featured a script \"Nets\" lettering with a tail accent below, while the red uniforms featured \"New York\" in block letters (similar to the New York Knicks). Over the years, the letters and stripes would endure a few adjustments.\n1972\u20131977.\nThe Nets changed uniforms upon moving to Nassau Coliseum. The white uniforms featured a thick blue stripe with white stars on the left, along with a red stripe and white outline. The team name is written in red block letters. The blue uniforms, which featured \"New York\" in white block letters, mirrored that of the white uniforms.\nNew Jersey Nets.\n1977\u20131981; 1983\u20131990.\nThe Nets carried the \"Stars and Stripes\" uniform to New Jersey in 1977. The white uniform remained the same but the blue uniform read \"Nets\" in front. The blue uniform later added \"New Jersey\" in white block letters inside the red stripe.\n1981\u20131983.\nUpon moving to the Meadowlands in 1981, the Nets briefly changed their uniform set. The white uniform brought back the \"Nets\" script from the original New York Nets uniforms, but the color scheme became blue with red trim. The blue uniform featured \"New Jersey\" stacked together in a similar script style, and the letters were colored in red with white trim.\n1990\u20131997.\nThe Nets underwent a visual rebrand before the 1990\u201391 season. The white uniform featured a more futuristic \"Nets\" script in red with white and blue trim, while adding red and blue stripes. Initially, the Nets wore white and light blue gradient road uniforms that had a tie-dye effect, but switched to a solid blue uniform after only one season. Both blue uniforms featured the same \"Nets\" script in red with blue and white trim along with red and white stripes.\n1997\u20132012.\nThe Nets updated their visual identity prior to the 1997\u201398 season, going with a deeper red and navy scheme with silver accents. The white uniform, which remained virtually unchanged throughout its history, featured the team name in navy with silver and red trim. The navy uniform featured the city name in silver with navy and red trim. The dark grey alternate uniform, used until 2006, initially went with the city name in navy with white and red trim, but reversed the color scheme to white with red and navy trim after only two seasons. This uniform was the only one to feature the \"NJ\" alternate logo on the neckline. The red alternate uniform, which replaced the grey alternate and became the primary dark uniform in 2009, featured the team name in white with navy and silver trim. All uniforms featured thick navy and silver argyle stripes.\nBrooklyn Nets.\n2012\u20132017.\nUpon moving to Brooklyn in 2012, the Nets went with a simple black and white uniform design, with \"Brooklyn\" in front of both the white and black uniforms. They also wore three different alternate uniforms. A grey-sleeved alternate with \"Brooklyn\" in Dodger blue, was first used in 2013 as a visual recall to the Brooklyn Dodgers. A white-sleeved alternate with the team name in black, featured the same \"Stars and Stripes\" look from the 1970s. A dark grey sleeveless alternate, meant to recall the 1980s New Jersey Nets uniforms, featured the team name in white and the city name in white written inside a black stripe.\n2017\u2013present.\nWith the switch from Adidas to Nike, the Nets kept most aspects of their visual identity intact. The white uniform became the \"Association\" uniform while the black uniform became the \"Icon\" uniform. The Nets have had three different versions of the \"Statement\" uniform. The first set, with \"BKLYN\" in white, was in dark grey and featured the same stars and stripes look from the 1970s. The uniform was updated in 2019 to a lighter grey base and black/dark grey stripes, with \"BKLYN\" written in graffiti style designed by Eric Haze. In 2022, the Nets again changed its \"Statement\" uniform, this time with a black base, black letters with silver trim, and a subtle greyscale herringbone striping with three black stars on the left.\nThe Nets also employed a fourth uniform option: the \"City\" uniform. The 2017\u201318 black \"City\" uniform featured the full team name spelled in white along with grey accents inspired from the Brooklyn Bridge. The following season, it was replaced with a black uniform featuring stylized Brooklyn camo patterns as a tribute to the Notorious B.I.G. This uniform was later brought back for the 2025\u201326 season. For 2019\u201320, the Nets wore white versions of the \"Biggie\" uniforms, but with Haze-designed \"BED-STUY\" graffiti lettering in front (a reference to Bedford\u2013Stuyvesant where the Notorious B.I.G. grew up). The 2020\u201321 \"City\" uniform, which honors Brooklyn-born artist Jean-Michel Basquiat, is predominantly black and features \"BKLYN NETS\" written in Basquiat's style along with multi-colored striping. The Basquiat-inspired \"City\" uniform returned in 2022\u201323 but in a white base.\nIn the 2021\u201322 season, the Nets' \"City\" uniform featured visual references to the Nets' uniform history. The navy base and white and silver argyle stripes recalled the 1997\u20132009 uniforms. The \"Nets\" wordmark and lettering were taken from the 1990\u20131997 uniforms. A red stripe with white stars honored the \"Stars and Stripes\" uniform of the 1970s and 1980s. A modified version of the 1980s New Jersey Nets logo, replacing the New Jersey outline with the map of Brooklyn, was added to the right leg. The 1997\u20132012 shield logo, also tweaked to feature the current \"B\" alternate logo, was added on the waist.\nThe \"City\" uniform for the 2023\u201324 season featured a collaboration with Brooklyn-based artist Kaws. The predominantly dark grey design featured splashes of light grey, blue, turquoise and pink inspired by Kaws' \"Tension\" series. The stylized \"Nets\" wordmark was also influenced by Kaws' graphic style. The design was slightly tweaked for the 2024\u201325 \"City\" uniform, this time with the color splashes relegated to the \"Brooklyn\" wordmark as part of an outer trim, with the base now featuring greyscale splashes.\nA fifth uniform option, the \"Earned\" uniform, is released occasionally and is exclusive only to the teams who qualified in the NBA playoffs the previous year. The Nets, by virtue of qualifying in the 2020 NBA playoffs, were given an \"Earned\" uniform. The design featured the herringbone parquet style of the Barclays Center court in shades of black and grey, with Helvetica lettering inspired from the signs found at the New York City Subway.\nIn 2024, Brooklyn unveiled a streamlined brand set that retired the shield logo and elevated the \"B\" basketball mark to the primary logo, which also included the \"B\" basketball mark replacing the shield on the uniform shorts. The global roundel was updated to a crisper \"Brooklyn Nets\" circle seal around the central B. New secondary marks include an arched \u201cBROOKLYN\u201d wordmark and a script \u201cNets\u201d mark, expanding typography beyond the previous block-only system.\nCulture.\nMascot.\nThe mascot of the New Jersey Nets was Sly the Silver Fox, who debuted on October 31, 1997, as part of the rebranding of the Nets for the 1997\u201398 season. Prior to that, the Nets' mascot was an anthropomorphic dragon named Duncan the Dragon.\nAfter the Nets' move to Brooklyn, the team introduced a new superhero mascot named BrooklyKnight (a pun on the demonym \"Brooklynite\") on November 3, 2012. In his first appearance, he was lowered from the ceiling of Barclays Center amid sparks and fanfare and introduced by Nets public address announcer David Diamante: \"Here to defend Brooklyn, he's the BrooklyKnight.\" The mascot was co-created by Marvel Entertainment, a sister company to NBA broadcasters ABC and ESPN. The character also starred in a 32-page comic book published by Marvel titled \"BrooklyKnight #1\", written by Jason Aaron with art from Mike Deodato. After the Nets' second season in Brooklyn, the BrooklyKnight mascot was retired, leaving the Nets mascotless.\nTeam anthem.\nOn November 3, 2012, the Nets introduced a new team anthem titled \"Brooklyn: Something To Lean On\", written and recorded by Brooklyn-born musician John Fort\u00e9. The song is notable for its refrain, which features the \"Brooklyn\" chant that has been popular with fans in the Barclays Center.\nBrooklyn Brigade.\nThe Brooklyn Brigade is a group of fans who are known for their loud chants and passionate attitude towards the Nets. The group was founded in November 2012 by Nets fan and Brooklyn native Udong \"Bobby\" Edemeka. Edemeka attended a few early season games of the team in their new Brooklyn home. Edemeka noticed that the team lacked a solid fan base in their new home, and decided to purchase tickets for a small group of roughly 20 fans who he noticed were regular followers of the team on the SB Nation online blog, NetsDaily.\nThe Brigade was not yet based in Section 114. Instead, Edemeka would purchase tickets in whichever section he could, which often included nosebleed seats. The Brigade initially did not get much recognition from the Nets. Edemeka met with the CEO Irina Pavlova (of the ONEXIM Group), who was fond of the group's antics. Although Pavlova was a supporter of the group, other members of the organization were resistant to showing support for the Brigade. During the 2014\u201315 season, however, the Brooklyn Nets organization began assigning seats to the Brigade in Section 114 of the Barclays Center. This section is adjacent to the press booth and gave the Brooklyn Brigade exposure on a regional level and then eventually on a national level.\nDuring the conference semifinals in 2014, while the Nets battled the Miami Heat, Brooklyn Nets and Barclays Center CEO Brett Yomark noticed the Brigade's effect on the arena, and he started to visit Section 114 distributing Nets' apparel. In 2016, the Nets hired Sean Marks as their general manager, who became an immediate supporter of the group. During the 2018\u201319 season, the Nets reserved section 114 for passionate fans, and called it \"The BK Block.\" Although the Brigade is an independent fan group of the Nets, The Block comprises mostly Brigade members.\nMr. Whammy.\nBruce Reznick, known commonly as \"Mr. Whammy\", is an iconic 86-year-old Nets superfan. Reznick became a Nets season ticket holder in 1998 when the Nets played in Continental Airlines Arena. He is known for his signature \"whammy\", a practice in which he stands on the sidelines in view of opposing players while they are attempting free throws and tries to distract them with pointing, jumping, and yelling. Reznick will not \"whammy\" players that have previously played for the Nets. Reznick believes the practice is effective as Barclays Center often has one of the lowest opposing team free throw percentages in the league. For example, by January 11, 2023, opposing teams had only a 70.3 free throw shot percentage in Brooklyn, which was about eight points lower than league average for the 2022\u201323 NBA season. Before Reznick was given the name \"Mr. Whammy\" by Nets broadcaster Ian Eagle he was referred to as \"Red Shirt\".\nManagement.\nOn September 18, 2019, Joseph Tsai, the executive vice chairman of the Alibaba Group, completed the acquisition of full ownership of the Brooklyn Nets. With the closing of the transaction, Tsai became NBA Governor of the Nets and its affiliates. Additionally, former Turner Broadcasting president David Levy was named CEO of the Nets and Barclays Center. On November 12, the Nets and Barclays Center announced that David Levy would step down from the CEO position he had assumed less than two months before. Oliver Weisberg, president of Tsai's holding company J Tsai Sports, assumed an interim CEO role.\nOwnership history.\nThe original owner of the Nets franchise was trucking magnate Arthur J. Brown, who founded the team in 1967. The next year, Brown sold the team for $1.1 million to entrepreneur Roy Boe. Due to financial losses suffered while the team was on Long Island, Boe moved the team back to New Jersey in 1977 and sold the team a year later to a group of seven local businessmen led by Alan N. Cohen and Joseph Taub, who became known as the \"Secaucus Seven\".\nAfter a lengthy ownership of the franchise and numerous unsuccessful attempts to improve the financial situation of the team, the \"Secaucus Seven\" finally sold the team in 1998 to a group of local real estate developers led by Raymond Chambers and Lewis Katz, who called themselves the \"Community Youth Organization\" and wanted to move the team to Newark, New Jersey. The next year the group signed an agreement with New York Yankees owner George Steinbrenner to form YankeeNets, a holding company that owned the two teams, and later also the New Jersey Devils, and increase leverage in future broadcast contracts by negotiating together. After receiving offers from several broadcast partners, including Cablevision, which held their rights at that time, YankeeNets decided to launch its own regional sports television called the YES Network.\nYankeeNets failed in its attempts to secure a deal with Newark to construct a new arena in the city. By that point in time, tensions between the management of the Yankees, Nets, and the Devils had cause a rift between them, and a decision was made to split the group. With their plan to move the Nets dead, the Community Youth Organization placed the team up for sale. After a short bidding process, the group secured a deal in 2004 with real estate developer Bruce Ratner to buy the team for $300 million, defeating a similar offer by Charles Kushner and Senator Jon Corzine of New Jersey. Ratner had purchased the team with the intent of moving it to a new arena in Brooklyn, which was to be a centerpiece of the large-scale Atlantic Yards development.\nRapper Jay-Z owned a small minority stake in the Nets from 2003 until 2013. Jay-Z was a leader in the marketing for the team and helped encourage their move from New Jersey to the Barclays Center in Brooklyn, in which he also held a stake. He relinquished his stake after registering as a sports agent with his new agency Roc Nation Sports, to avert any potential conflicts of interest. His shares were eventually sold to singer, rapper, actor and entrepreneur Will Pan, making Pan the first American of Taiwanese descent to own a U.S. professional sports franchise.\nOn September 24, 2009, Mikhail Prokhorov, Russia's third-richest man according to \"Forbes\", confirmed his intention to become majority owner of the Nets. Prokhorov sent an offer to the team owners requesting that the controlling shares of the basketball club be sold to his company, Onexim, for a symbolic price. In return, Prokhorov funded a loan of $700 million for the construction of Barclays Center, and attracted additional funds from Western banks. Prokhorov stated that he initiated the deal to help push Russian basketball to a new level of development. On May 11, 2010, following approval from the other owners of NBA teams, Prokhorov had become the principal owner of the Nets.\nIn late 2017, Prokhorov agreed to sell a 49% stake in the team to Joseph Tsai, with an option for Tsai to become the majority owner. The option was exercised in August 2019, with Tsai also buying the Nets' arena, Barclays Center, from Prokhorov for nearly $1 billion in a separate deal. The NBA Board of Governors unanimously approved the sale to Tsai on September 18, 2019.\nFacilities.\nHome arenas.\nSource:\nPractice facilities.\nThe Nets' practice facility and headquarters for the team's basketball operations are located at the Hospital for Special Surgery Training Center in the Industry City complex in the Sunset Park neighborhood of Brooklyn. The facility opened on February 17, 2016, and is built on the roof of an empty warehouse in the complex, occupying 70,000 square feet of space in total. The renovation project cost roughly $50 million. The opening of the training center completed the Nets' move to Brooklyn.\nThe team's previous practice facility was at the 65,000-square-foot PNY Center in East Rutherford, New Jersey, which opened in 1998. Prior to that, the team practiced at the APA Recreation Center in North Bergen, New Jersey, sharing their lockers and practice courts with truck drivers who used the facility, and at Ramapo College in Mahwah, New Jersey.\nIn the aftermath of Hurricane Sandy in November 2012, PNY Center suffered a power outage and extensive water damage due to flooding, and for several months, the team used the smaller training spaces and practice courts inside the Barclays Center instead.\nPersonnel.\nRetained draft rights.\nThe Nets hold the draft rights to the following unsigned draft picks who have been playing outside the NBA. A drafted player, either an international draftee or a college draftee who is not signed by the team that drafted him, is allowed to sign with any non-NBA team. In this case, the team retains the player's draft rights in the NBA until one year after the player's contract with the non-NBA team ends. This list includes draft rights that were acquired from trades with other teams.\nFranchise leaders.\nBold denotes still active with the team. \"Italics\" denotes still active, but not with the team. \"Name*\" includes combined statistics for the team from both the ABA and NBA.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Column/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src = \"Column/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src = \"Column/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src = \"Column/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src = \"Column/styles.css\" /&gt;\nIndividual awards.\nNBA.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Column/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src = \"Column/styles.css\" /&gt;\nABA.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Column/styles.css\"/&gt;\nABA All-Time Team\n&lt;templatestyles src = \"Column/styles.css\" /&gt;\nABA All-Time MVP\nNBA All-Star Weekend.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Column/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src = \"Column/styles.css\" /&gt;\nABA All-Star Game.\nABA All-Star Game\nABA All-Star Game head coaches\nABA Slam Dunk Contest\nNBA D-League/G League affiliation.\nThe Nets signed an agreement with the Springfield Armor to become its exclusive NBA Development League affiliate starting in the 2011\u201312 season. This made the Nets the second team to opt for a D-League \"hybrid affiliation\", the first being the Houston Rockets with the Rio Grande Valley Vipers. Springfield ownership maintained control over business, marketing, and day-to-day operations, with the Nets having control over coaching and player decisions. This hybrid model was well received by GMs and owners. However, after three seasons, the Detroit Pistons purchased the Armor from its former owners, and moved and renamed the team the Grand Rapids Drive.\nOn November 6, 2015, the Nets announced that they had purchased a new D-League team to be called the Long Island Nets. The team played their home games during the 2016\u201317 season at the Barclays Center and then at the Nassau Coliseum in Uniondale, New York, after renovations were complete for the 2017\u201318 season. The Long Island Nets became the twelfth D-League team to be owned by an NBA team.\nMedia.\nThe television home of the Nets is the YES Network, which the team helped create while they were under the corporate umbrella of YankeeNets, a merger of business operations between the Nets and the New York Yankees. After the dissolution of YankeeNets and Bruce Ratner's purchase of the team, YES signed a long-term deal to keep broadcasting Nets games. The sale to the Ratner group did not include the percentage of YES that was previously owned by the Nets, which remains with the pre-merger Nets owners. Prior to that, the Nets' TV home was Fox Sports Net New York and SportsChannel New York.\nSelect playoff games air over-the-air on WWOR-TV instead of on YES, this is only when Yankees games are airing at the same time. Previously these games aired on WLNY-TV or WPIX.\nThe current flagship radio station of the Nets is WFAN, which took over the radio rights to the Nets after losing their basketball contract with the Knicks (who moved to WEPN). Prior to that, Nets games aired on WNEW, WMCA, WVNJ, WNBC, WQEW, and WOR.\nIn the club's early ABA years, some Sunday road games were televised in a package carried by WPIX. The team's later ABA tenure featured more frequent road telecasts on their current broadcast partner, WWOR-TV. Known then as WOR-TV, it continued airing road games for a time once the team joined the NBA in 1976.\nTelevision.\nIan Eagle has been the sole television play-by-play announcer for the Nets since the departure of Marv Albert in 2011. Eagle became the lead television voice for the team in 1995 after serving as the team's radio voice for one year, while Albert joined the Nets following his firing by MSG Network in 2005 after four decades as the lead voice of the New York Knicks. When Albert joined the broadcast team, he became the lead broadcaster with Eagle as his substitute; beginning in the 2009\u201310 season, due to Albert's advancing age and his other commitments, Eagle once again assumed the lead play-by-play spot. Ryan Ruocco substitutes for Eagle during the latter's CBS NFL and NCAA commitments.\nAs of 2024, Sarah Kustok, Ian Eagle, Ryan Ruocco, and/or Noah Eagle provide color commentary on YES Network broadcasts, and Meghan Triplett serves as courtside reporter.\nRadio.\nWFAN is the Nets' current radio flagship, the station having assumed radio rights from WOR following the 2003\u201304 season. Chris Carrino and Tim Capstraw comprise the broadcast team, Carrino on play-by-play and Capstraw as the analyst. The games air on other Entercom-operated stations, such as WCBS (AM) and WXBK, when there are programming conflicts on WFAN.\nOther broadcasters who have worked for the Nets include Howard David, Bob Papa, Bill Raftery, Kelly Tripucka, Albert King, Mike O'Koren, Spencer Ross, Mel Proctor, Joe Tait, John Sterling, John Minko and Mark Jackson.\nNets games have also aired on WNEW and WQEW in the past.\nDuring the club's ABA years, announcers included Marty Glickman, Marv Albert's brothers Al Albert and Steve Albert, baseball Hall of Fame pitcher Bob Gibson, Bob Goldsholl, as well as Sterling and Vince DiTomasso. The latter two joined the club's move into the NBA.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "72855", "revid": "37371155", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72855", "title": "New York Knicks", "text": "National Basketball Association team in New York City\nThe New York Knickerbockers, shortened and more commonly referred to as the New York Knicks, are an American professional basketball team based in the New York City borough of Manhattan. The Knicks compete in the National Basketball Association (NBA) as a member of the Atlantic Division of the Eastern Conference. The team plays its home games at Madison Square Garden, an arena they share with the New York Rangers of the National Hockey League (NHL). They are one of two NBA teams located in New York City, the other being the Brooklyn Nets. Alongside the Boston Celtics, the Knicks are one of two original NBA teams still located in its original city.\nThe team, established by Ned Irish in 1946, was one of the founding members of the Basketball Association of America (BAA), which became the NBA after merging with the rival National Basketball League (NBL) in 1949. The Knicks were successful during their early years and were constant playoff contenders under the franchise's first head coach, Joe Lapchick. Beginning in 1950, the Knicks made three consecutive appearances in the NBA Finals, all of which were losing efforts. Lapchick resigned in 1956 and the team subsequently began to falter.\nIt was not until the late 1960s when Red Holzman became the head coach that the Knicks began to regain their former dominance. Holzman successfully guided the Knicks to two NBA championships, in 1970 and 1973. The Knicks of the 1980s had mixed success that included six playoff appearances; however, they failed to participate in the NBA Finals.\nThe playoff-level Knicks of the 1990s were led by future Hall of Fame center Patrick Ewing; this era was marked by passionate rivalries with the Chicago Bulls, Indiana Pacers, and Miami Heat. During this time, they were known for playing tough defense under head coaches Pat Riley and Jeff Van Gundy, making NBA Finals appearances in 1994 and 1999. However, they were unable to win an NBA championship during this era.\nSince 2000, the Knicks have struggled to regain their former successes, but won their first division title in 19 years in 2012\u201313, led by a core of forwards Carmelo Anthony and Amar'e Stoudemire. They were eventually eliminated in the Eastern Conference semifinals by the Indiana Pacers.\nThe Knicks failed to make the playoffs for eight years until 2020\u201321 when they were led by forward Julius Randle and sophomore RJ Barrett, who was selected third overall in the 2019 NBA draft.\nHistory.\n1946\u20131967: early years.\nIn 1946, basketball, particularly college basketball, was a growing and increasingly profitable sport in New York City. Hockey was another popular sport at the time and generated considerable profits; however, the arenas were not used often. Max Kase, a New York sportswriter, became the sports editor at the \"Boston American\" in the 1930s, when he met Boston Garden owner Walter A. Brown. Kase developed the idea of an organized professional league to showcase college players upon their graduation and felt it could become profitable if properly assembled. Brown, intrigued by the opportunity to attain additional income when the hockey teams were not playing or on the road, contacted several arena owners. On June 6, 1946, Kase and Brown and a group of seventeen others assembled at the Commodore Hotel in New York City, as the Basketball Association of America (BAA), where charter franchises were granted to major cities throughout the country.\nNed Irish, a college basketball promoter, retired sportswriter and then president of Madison Square Garden, was in attendance. Kase originally planned to own and operate the New York franchise himself and approached Irish with a proposal to lease the Garden. Irish explained that the rules of the Arena Managers Association of America stated that Madison Square Garden was required to own any professional teams that played in the arena. On the day of the meeting, Kase made his proposal to the panel of owners; however, they were much more impressed by Irish and his vast resources; Kase relented and the franchise was awarded to Irish.\nIrish wanted a distinct name for his franchise that was representative of the city of New York. He called together members of his staff for a meeting to cast their votes in a hat. After tallying the votes, the franchise was named the Knickerbockers. The \"Knickerbocker\" name comes from the pseudonym used by Washington Irving in his book \"A History of New York\", a name that became applied to the descendants of the original Dutch settlers of what later became New York, and later, by extension, to New Yorkers in general. In search of a head coach, Irish approached successful St. John's University coach Joe Lapchick in May 1946. Lapchick readily accepted after Irish promised to make him the highest-paid coach in the league; however, he requested he remain at St. John's one more season in hopes of winning one last championship. Irish obliged, hiring former Manhattan College coach Neil Cohalan as interim coach for the first year.\nWith no college draft in the league's initial year, there was no guarantee that the Knicks or the league itself would thrive. Consequently, teams focused on signing college players from their respective cities as a way to promote the professional league. The Knicks held their first training camp in the Catskill Mountains at the Nevele Country Club. Twenty-five players were invited to attend the three-week session. Players worked out twice a day and the chemistry between the New York natives was instant. With a roster assembled, the Knicks faced the Toronto Huskies at Toronto's Maple Leaf Gardens on November 1, 1946, in what would be the franchise's first game\u2014as well as the first in league history. In a low-scoring affair presented in front of 7,090 spectators, the Knicks defeated the Huskies 68\u201366 with Leo Gottlieb leading the Knicks in scoring with 14 points. With Madison Square Garden's crowded schedule, the Knicks were forced to play many of their home games at the 69th Regiment Armory during the team's early years. The Knicks went on to finish their inaugural campaign with a 33\u201327 record and achieved a playoff berth under Cohalan despite a dismal shooting percentage of 28\u00a0percent. The Knicks faced the Cleveland Rebels in the quarterfinals, winning the series 2\u20131. However, the Knicks were swept by the Philadelphia Warriors in two games in the semifinals.\nAs promised, Lapchick took over in 1947, bringing with him his up-tempo coaching style, which emphasized fast ball movement. Six new players were signed, including guard Carl Braun and Japanese-American guard Wataru Misaka, the first non-Caucasian basketball player in the BAA. Under Lapchick, the Knicks made nine straight playoff appearances beginning in 1947. Braun, who averaged 14.3 points, emerged as the team's star and paired with Dick Holub and Bud Palmer to account for half of the team's offense. Despite this, the Knicks struggled throughout the year, compiling a 26\u201322 record. Their finish was good enough to place them second in the Eastern Division and secure a playoff match-up against the Baltimore Bullets where they lost the series two games to one. In the 1948 NBA draft, the Knicks selected two future Hall of Fame players in center Dolph Schayes and Harry Gallatin. The Knicks were leery of Schayes' talent, prompting the center to leave to play for the Syracuse Nationals of the struggling National Basketball League. Despite losing Schayes, the team started the year well going 17\u20138 before they fell into a slump. They ended the year with a seven-game win streak to finish with a 32\u201328 record and a third-straight playoff appearance. The Knicks defeated the Bullets in a rematch of their previous encounter in 1947, winning the series 2\u20131. The team however struggled against the Washington Capitols and lost the series 1\u20132.\nPrior to the beginning of the 1949\u201350 season, the BAA merged with the National Basketball League to form the National Basketball Association which comprised 17 teams. Despite division realignments, the Knicks remained in the Eastern Division. The team continued its dominance under Lapchick, winning 40 games; however they lost the Eastern Division finals to the Syracuse Nationals.\nThe following season, the Knicks made history signing Sweetwater Clifton to a contract, thus becoming the first professional basketball team to sign an African American player. During this same season, the Knicks finished with a 36\u201330 record. Though they placed third in their division, they secured a playoff spot and began the first of three consecutive trips to the NBA Finals. In spite of their success, the Knicks could not overcome the Rochester Royals despite a valiant comeback after losing the first three games of the Finals. The next two years, in 1952 and 1953, New York fell to the Minneapolis Lakers in the Finals.\nIt was during this early period, the Knicks developed their first standout players in Carl Braun who retired as the Knicks leading scorer with 10,449 points before later being surpassed by the likes of Patrick Ewing, Walt Frazier and Willis Reed. Harry Gallatin and Dick McGuire were also well-known standouts on the team and were later enshrined in the Naismith Memorial Basketball Hall of Fame.\nFollowing these back-to-back losses, the Knicks made the playoffs in the subsequent two years with no success. Lapchick resigned as the team's head coach in January 1956 citing health-related issues. Vince Boryla made his debut in February 1956 as the Knicks' new coach in a win over the St. Louis Hawks. However, after two seasons of poor performances and no playoff appearances, Boryla tendered his resignation from the team in April 1958.\nLooking to regain their former dominance, Andrew Levane was named the head coach and in his first year, the results were significantly better as the team finished with a 40\u201332 record, securing their playoff spot. However, the Knicks could not manage to get past the Eastern Division semi-finals. The Levane-led squad fared poorly to begin the 1959\u201360 season and under mounting pressure Levane resigned and was immediately replaced by Carl Braun, who became the team's first player-coach. The team did not fare much better under Braun and the Knicks hired Eddie Donovan, who helped build up St. Bonaventure's basketball team, in 1961. During Donovan's tenure, New York failed to achieve a playoff berth. As a testament to their struggles, on March 2, 1962, the Knicks faced the Philadelphia Warriors in Hershey, Pennsylvania, where they infamously allowed Wilt Chamberlain to score an NBA-record 100 points in a 169\u2013147 Warriors victory.\nIn 1964, the franchise's fortunes began to take a steady turn. The Knicks drafted center Willis Reed, who made an immediate impact on the court and was named NBA Rookie of the Year for his efforts. However, the leaders of the team still remained in flux. In an attempt to reorganize, the Knicks named former standout Harry Gallatin as head coach while reassigning Donovan to general manager position. After a slow start in 1965, Dick McGuire, another former Knick, replaced his former teammate Gallatin midway through the season. Though he failed to guide the Knicks to the playoffs in 1965, he managed to do so the following season, however, the Knicks lost in the Eastern Division semi-finals.\n1967\u20131975: championship years.\nThe Knicks started their 1967\u201368 season with a 124\u2013122 win over the visiting Warriors. In that game, seven players on the Knicks' roster scored in double figures. However, the Knicks lost their next six games, falling to a 1\u20136 record. They managed to stop their losing streak on November 1, 1967, when the Knicks won the road game against the Lakers, 129\u2013113. During the game, Willis Reed scored a career-high 53 points on 21-of-29 shooting from the field. On November 3, the Knicks defeated the Seattle SuperSonics 134\u2013100 in Seattle. In that game, nine Knicks' player scored at least 10 points. Head coach Dick McGuire was replaced midway through the 1967\u201368 season after the team began the season with a 15\u201322 record. With the Knicks under .500, the team decided to hire coach Red Holzman, whose impact was immediate. Under his direction, the Knicks went 28\u201317 and finished with a 43\u201339 record thus salvaging a playoff berth, however, the Knicks were again vanquished in the Eastern Division semi-finals by the Philadelphia 76ers. However their roster was slowly coming together piece by piece. Rookies Phil Jackson and Walt Frazier were named to the NBA All-Rookie Team while Dick Barnett and Willis Reed performed in the 1968 NBA All-Star Game.\nThe following season, the team acquired Dave DeBusschere from the Detroit Pistons, and the team went 54\u201328. In the playoffs, New York made it past the first round of contention for the first time since 1953, sweeping the Baltimore Bullets in four games, before falling to the Boston Celtics in the Eastern Division finals.\nIn the 1969\u201370 season, the Knicks had a then-single-season NBA record 18 straight victories en route to a 60\u201322 record, which was the best regular season record in the franchise's history to that point. After defeating the Bullets in the Eastern Division semifinals and the Milwaukee Bucks in the Eastern Division finals, the Knicks faced the Los Angeles Lakers in the NBA Finals. With the series tied at 2\u20132, the Knicks would be tested in Game 5. Willis Reed tore a muscle in his right leg in the second quarter, and was lost for the rest of the game. Despite his absence, New York went on to win the game, rallying from a 16-point deficit.\nWithout their injured captain the Knicks lost Game 6, setting up one of the most famous moments in NBA history. Reed limped onto the court before the seventh game, determined to play through the pain of his injury. He scored New York's first two baskets before going scoreless for the remainder of the contest. Although he was not at full strength, Reed's heroics inspired the Knicks, and they won the game by a score of 113\u201399, allowing New York to capture the title that had eluded them for so long. Reed, who had been named the All-Star MVP and the league's MVP that season, was named MVP of the Finals, becoming the first player to attain all three awards in a single season.\nThe Knicks' success continued for the next few years. After losing to the Bullets in the 1971 Eastern Conference finals, the team, aided by the acquisitions of Jerry Lucas and Earl \"The Pearl\" Monroe, returned to the Finals in 1972. This time the Knicks fell to the Lakers in five games. The next year, the results were reversed, as the Knicks defeated the Lakers in five games to win their second NBA title in four years. The team had one more impressive season in 1973\u201374, as they reached the Eastern Conference finals, where they fell in five games to the Celtics. It was after this season that Willis Reed announced his retirement, and the team's fortunes began to shift once more.\n1975\u20131985: post-championship years.\nIn the 1974\u201375 season, the Knicks posted a 40\u201342 record, their first losing record in eight seasons. The team still qualified for a playoff spot, however, but they lost to the Houston Rockets in the first round. After two more seasons with losing records, Holzman was replaced by Willis Reed, who signed a three-year contract. In Reed's first year, New York finished the year with a 43\u201339 record and returned to the Eastern Conference semi-finals, where they were swept by the Philadelphia 76ers. The next season, after the team began with a 6\u20138 record, Holzman was rehired as the team's coach after Reed had angered Madison Square Garden president Sonny Werblin. The team did not fare any better under Holzman's direction, finishing with a 31\u201351 record, their worst in thirteen years.\nAfter improving to a 39\u201343 record in the 1979\u201380 season, the Knicks posted a 50\u201332 record in the 1980\u201381 season. In the playoffs, the Chicago Bulls swept New York in two games. Holzman retired the following season as one of the winningest coaches in NBA history. The team's record that year was a dismal 33\u201349. However, Holzman's legacy would continue through the players he influenced. One of the Knicks' bench players and defensive specialists during the 1970s was Phil Jackson. Jackson went on to coach the Chicago Bulls and Los Angeles Lakers to 11 NBA championships, surpassing Red Auerbach for the most in NBA history. Jackson cited Holzman as a significant influence on his career in the NBA.\nHubie Brown replaced Holzman as head coach and in his first season, the team went 44\u201338 and made it to the second round of the playoffs, where they were swept by the eventual champion Philadelphia 76ers. The next season, the team, aided by new acquisition Bernard King, improved to 47\u201335 and returned to the playoffs. The team defeated the Detroit Pistons in the first round with an overtime win in the fifth and deciding game, before losing in the second round in seven games to the Celtics. The team's struggles continued into the 1984\u201385 season, as they lost their last 12 games to finish with a 24\u201358 record. The first of these losses occurred on March 23, 1985, where King injured his knee and spent the next 24 months in rehabilitation.\n1985\u20132000: the Patrick Ewing era.\nIn the summer of 1985, the Knicks were entered into the first-ever NBA draft lottery. The Knicks ended up winning the number one pick in that year's NBA draft. They used the pick to select star center Patrick Ewing of Georgetown University. In Ewing's first season with the Knicks, he led all rookies in scoring (20 points per game) and rebounds (9 rebounds per game), and he won the NBA Rookie of the Year Award. The team would not fare as well, though, as they struggled to a 23\u201359 record in his first season.\nDuring Ewing's second season, the team started with a 4\u201312 record and head coach Hubie Brown was dismissed in favor of assistant Bob Hill. Under Hill, the Knicks had brief successes but went on to lose seventeen of their twenty-one final games of the season to finish 20\u201346 under Hill and 24\u201358 on the season. Hill was dismissed at season's end.\nThe team immediately turned around in the 1987\u201388 season with the hiring of Rick Pitino as head coach, who, only months prior to his hiring, led Providence College to the Final Four, turning around a program that had struggled prior to his arrival. Combined with the selection of point guard Mark Jackson, who won the NBA Rookie of the Year Award and garnered MVP consideration, in the draft and with Ewing's consistently stellar play, the Knicks made the playoffs with a record of 38\u201344, where they were defeated by the Celtics in the first round.\nThe resurgence continued the following season as the team traded backup center Bill Cartwright to the Bulls for power forward Charles Oakley before the season started and then posted a 52\u201330 record, which was good enough for their first division title in 18 years and their fifth division title in franchise history. In the playoffs, they defeated the 76ers in the first round before losing to the Chicago Bulls in the Eastern Conference semi-finals.\nPrior to the start of the 1989\u201390 season, Pitino departed from New York to coach for the University of Kentucky leaving many stunned by his departure. Assistant Stu Jackson was named as Pitino's replacement becoming the team's 14th head coach and the youngest head coach in the NBA, at the time, at the age of 32. Under Jackson's direction, the Knicks went 45\u201337 and defeated the Celtics in the first round of the playoffs, winning the final three games after losing the first two. They went on to lose to the eventual NBA champion Detroit Pistons in the next round. Jackson and the Knicks struggled to a 7\u20138 record to begin the 1990\u201391 season and Jackson was replaced by John MacLeod who led the Knicks to a 32\u201335 record, ending the season with a 39\u201343 record overall that was good enough to earn the team another playoff appearance. The Knicks were swept in the first round by the eventual NBA champion, Chicago Bulls.\n1991\u20131996: the Pat Riley/Don Nelson years.\nAfter the conclusion of the season, MacLeod left the team to become the head coach at the University of Notre Dame. President David Checketts reached out to Pat Riley, who was working as a commentator for the National Broadcasting Company (NBC), to see if he was interested in returning to coaching. Riley accepted the Knicks proposition on May 31, 1991. Riley, who coached the Lakers to four NBA titles during the 1980s, implemented a rough and physical style emphasizing defense. Under Riley, the team, led by Ewing and guard John Starks, who scored 24 points per game and 13.9 points per game respectively, improved to a 51\u201331 record, tying them for first place in the Atlantic Division. After defeating the Pistons in the first round of the playoffs, the team faced the Bulls, losing the series 4\u20133 in seven games. The 1992\u201393 season proved to be even more successful, as the Knicks won the Atlantic Division with a 60\u201322 record. Before the season, the Knicks traded Mark Jackson to the Los Angeles Clippers for Charles Smith, Doc Rivers, and Bo Kimble while also acquiring Rolando Blackman from the Dallas Mavericks. After defeating the Indiana Pacers and Charlotte Hornets in the first two rounds of the playoffs, the Knicks made it to the Eastern Conference finals, where once again they met the Bulls. After taking a 2\u20130 series lead, the Knicks lost the next four games.\nAfter the Bulls' Michael Jordan made what would be his first retirement from basketball prior to the 1993\u201394 season, many saw this as an opportunity for the Knicks to finally make it back to the NBA Finals. The team, who acquired Derek Harper in a midseason trade with the Dallas Mavericks, once again won the Atlantic Division with a 57\u201325 record. In the playoffs, the team played a then NBA-record 25 games (the Boston Celtics played 26 games in the 2008 playoffs); they started by defeating the New Jersey Nets in the first round before finally getting past the Bulls, defeating them in the second round in seven games. In the Eastern Conference Finals, they faced the Indiana Pacers, who at one point held a three games-to-two lead. They had this advantage thanks to the exploits of Reggie Miller, who scored 25 fourth-quarter points in Game 5 to lead the Pacers to victory. However, the Knicks won the next two games to reach their first NBA Finals since 1973.\nIn the finals, the Knicks would play seven low-scoring, defensive games against the Houston Rockets. After splitting the first two games in Houston, the Knicks would win two out of three games at Madison Square Garden, which also hosted the New York Rangers first Stanley Cup celebration in 54 years following their win over the Vancouver Canucks in Game 7 of their finals during the series. (A Knicks win would have made the Garden the first building to host a Cup winner and an NBA champ in the same season.) In Game 6, however, a last-second attempt at a game-winning shot by Starks was tipped by Rockets center Hakeem Olajuwon, giving the Rockets an 86\u201384 victory and forcing a Game 7. The Knicks lost Game 7 90\u201384, credited in large part to Starks's dismal 2-for-18 shooting performance and Riley's stubborn refusal to bench Starks, despite having bench players who were renowned for their shooting prowess, such as Rolando Blackman and Hubert Davis available. The loss denied New York the distinction of having both NBA and NHL championships in the same year. Nevertheless, the Knicks had gotten some inspiration from Mark Messier and the Rangers during the finals.\nThe next year, the Knicks were second place in the Atlantic Division with a 55\u201327 record. The team defeated the Cleveland Cavaliers before facing the Pacers again in the second round. The tone for the Knicks\u2013Pacers series was set in Game 1, as Miller once again became a clutch nuisance to the Knicks by scoring eight points in the final 8 seconds of the game to give the Pacers a 107\u2013105 victory. The series went to a Game 7, and when Patrick Ewing's last-second finger roll attempt to tie the game missed, the Pacers clinched the 97\u201395 win. Riley resigned the next day, and the Knicks hired Don Nelson as their new head coach.\nWhile Nelson had been a successful coach before joining the Knicks, his offensive-oriented Nellie Ball philosophy failed to mesh with the team, and during the 1995\u201396 season, Nelson was fired after 59 games, and, instead of going after another well-known coach, the Knicks hired longtime assistant Jeff Van Gundy, who had no prior experience as a head coach. Van Gundy, who restored the team's defense-first style of his mentor Pat Riley, went 13\u201310 the rest of the way. The Knicks ended up with a 47\u201335 record that year, and swept the Cavaliers in the first round of the playoffs before losing to the eventual champion Bulls (who had an NBA record 72 wins in the regular season) in five games.\n1996\u20132000: the Jeff Van Gundy years.\nIn the 1996\u201397 season, the Knicks, with the additions of such players as Larry Johnson and Allan Houston, registered a 57\u201325 record. In the playoffs, the Knicks swept the Charlotte Hornets in the first round before facing the Miami Heat (coached by Riley) in the second round. The Knicks took a 3\u20131 lead in the series before a brawl near the end of Game 5 resulted in suspensions of key players. Many of the suspended Knicks players, Ewing in particular, were disciplined not for participating in the altercation itself, but for violating an NBA rule stipulating that a benched player may not leave the bench during a fight (the rule was subsequently amended, making it illegal to leave the \"bench area\"). With Ewing and Houston suspended for Game 6, Johnson and Starks suspended for Game 7, and Charlie Ward suspended for both, the Knicks lost the series.\nThe 1997\u201398 season was marred by a wrist injury to Ewing on December 22, which forced him to miss the rest of the season and much of the playoffs. The team, which had a 43\u201339 record that season, still managed to defeat the Heat in the first round (a series, which saw another violent bench-clearing brawl at the end of Game 4, this time between Johnson and former Hornets teammate Alonzo Mourning) of the playoffs before having another meeting with the Pacers in the second round. Ewing returned in time for game two of the series. This time, the Pacers easily won the series in five games, as Reggie Miller once again broke the hearts of Knicks fans by hitting a tying three-pointer with 5.1 seconds remaining in Game 4, en route to a Pacers overtime victory. For the fourth straight year, the Knicks were eliminated in the second round of the playoffs.\nPrior to the lockout-shortened 1998\u201399 season, the Knicks traded Charles Oakley to the Toronto Raptors for Marcus Camby while also trading John Starks in a package to the Golden State Warriors for 1994's 1st team all-league shooting guard Latrell Sprewell (whose contract was voided by the Warriors after choking Warriors' head coach P. J. Carlesimo during the previous season). After barely getting into the playoffs with a 27\u201323 record, the Knicks started a Cinderella run. It started with the Knicks eliminating the #1 seeded Heat in the first round after Allan Houston bounced in a running one-hander off the front of the rim, high off the backboard, and in with 0.8 seconds left in the deciding 5th game. This remarkable upset marked only the second time in NBA history that an 8-seed had defeated the 1-seed in the NBA playoffs, and also the first time it happened in the Eastern Conference. After defeating the Atlanta Hawks in the second round four games to none, they faced the Pacers yet again in the Eastern Conference Finals. Despite losing Ewing to injury for the rest of the playoffs prior to Game 3, the Knicks won the series (aided in part to a four-point play by Larry Johnson in the final seconds of Game 3) to become the first eighth-seeded playoff team to make it to the NBA Finals. However, in the Finals, the San Antonio Spurs, with superstars David Robinson and Tim Duncan, proved too much for the injury-laden Knicks, who lost in five games. The remarkable fifth game of this Finals is remembered for its 2nd half scoring duel between the Spurs' Tim Duncan and the Knicks' Latrell Sprewell, and was decided by a long jumper by Avery Johnson with 47 seconds left to clinch the title for the Spurs.\nThe 1999\u20132000 season, would prove to be the last one in New York for Ewing, as the Knicks, who had a 50\u201332 record that season swept the Toronto Raptors a team led by Vince Carter, Antonio Davis and a young Tracy McGrady in three games in the first round, defeated the Miami Heat in another dramatic seven-game series in which Ewing's dunk with over a minute remaining in game 7, provided the winning margin in a 1-point road victory. They would, however, lose in the Eastern Conference Finals to the Reggie Miller-led Indiana Pacers in six games. After the season, Ewing was traded on September 20, 2000, to the Seattle SuperSonics, and the Ewing era, which produced many successful playoff appearances but no NBA championship titles, came to an end.\n2000\u20132003: downfall.\nDespite the loss of Ewing, the Knicks remained successful in the regular season, as they posted a 48\u201334 record under the direction of Houston and Sprewell. In the first round of playoff contention, however, New York fell to the Toronto Raptors in five games, failing to get past the first round of the playoffs for the first time in a decade. After a poor start to the season, the Knicks managed to get above .500 with a 10\u20139 record. In spite of their recent success, Van Gundy unexpectedly resigned as head coach on December 8, 2001, explaining he had \"lost focus\" and would no longer be able to properly coach the team. The team, which named longtime assistant Don Chaney as their new head coach, ended the season with a 30\u201352 record, and for the first time since the 1986\u201387 season they did not qualify for the playoffs.\nIn October 2002, the team elected to extend Chaney's contract for another year. Rather than rebuilding, the Knicks opted to add veterans to the roster including Antonio McDyess who had been dealing with knee problems in the preceding years. Furthermore, the Knicks were criticized by many analysts as multiple players on the roster were overpaid in light of their poor performances, causing salary cap problems that would persist until Donnie Walsh took over as team president. McDyess injured his knee during the team's third preseason game and was subjected to further operations in April 2003 after a CT scan revealed the injured knee necessitated he undergo bone-graft surgery. The Knicks managed only seven wins in their first twenty games, setting the tone for the rest of the season, which they completed with a 37\u201345 record; it was their second consecutive season without a playoff appearance.\n2003\u20132008: Isiah Thomas era.\nAfter a 10\u201318 start to the 2003\u201304 season, the Knicks underwent a massive overhaul. Isiah Thomas was named the Knicks' president on December 22, 2003, upon the firing of Scott Layden. Thomas continued to restructure the team, firing Chaney after an unproductive tenure and hiring Hall of Famer Lenny Wilkens to coach the team. Additionally, Thomas orchestrated multiple trades, including one that brought point guard Stephon Marbury to the team. The team qualified for the playoffs that year with a 39\u201343 record, but were swept by the New Jersey Nets in the first round. The series included a highly publicized spat between the Knicks' Tim Thomas and Nets' Kenyon Martin, in which Thomas all but challenged Martin to a fight and called him \"Fugazy\". The following season, the Knicks struggled to a 17\u201322 record before Wilkens resigned as head coach. Herb Williams, who had previously coached the team in a game against the Orlando Magic prior to the team hiring Wilkens, took over as interim head coach for the remainder of the season and did not fare much better as the Knicks ended their season with a 33\u201349 record and out of playoff contention.\nHoping to find a leader that could put the team back on track, New York hired Larry Brown to coach the team. Brown, who idolized the team during his childhood, was well regarded for his coaching abilities and his arrival brought a sense of hope to the franchise. Hoping to find the next Patrick Ewing, the Knicks drafted center Channing Frye and signed centers Jerome James and Eddy Curry, the former prior to the season and the latter during the season. Curry, who reportedly had a worrying heart condition, refused to take a controversial DNA test, and fell out of favor with John Paxson, Chicago's general manager. The Bulls signed-and-traded him to the Knicks along with Antonio Davis for Tim Thomas, Michael Sweetney, the Knicks' 2006 first-round pick, and the right to swap first-round picks with the Knicks in 2007, as well as 2007 and 2009 second-round picks. Isiah Thomas did not lottery-protect the picks, and the Knicks forfeited the second pick in the 2006 draft, and the ninth in the 2007 draft. With a bloated payroll, the Knicks stumbled to the second worst record in the NBA that season, at 23\u201359. The season concluded with the firing and $18.5 million buy-out of head coach Larry Brown after one season.\nWith the departure of Brown, team president Isiah Thomas took over the head coaching responsibilities. Thomas continued his practice of signing players to high-priced contracts while the franchise struggled to capitalize on their talent on the court. As a testament to their struggles, on December 16, 2006, the Knicks and the Denver Nuggets broke into a brawl during their game in Madison Square Garden. With multiple players still serving a suspension as a result of the brawl, on December 20, 2006, David Lee created one of the most memorable plays in recent Knicks history, and served as a bright spot as the team's struggles persisted, during a game against the Charlotte Bobcats. With a tie game and 0.1 seconds left on the game clock in double overtime, Jamal Crawford inbounded from the sideline, near half-court. The ball sailed towards the basket, and with that 0.1 seconds still remaining on the game clock, Lee tipped the ball off of the backboard and into the hoop. Because of the Trent Tucker Rule, a player is allowed solely to tip the ball to score when the ball is put back into play with three-tenths of a second or less remaining. Because of this rule, the rarity of Lee's play increases. The Knicks won, 111\u2013109 in double overtime. The Knicks improved by ten games in the 2006\u20132007 campaign in spite of injuries that ravaged the team at the end of the year; they ended with a 33\u201349 record, avoiding a 50-loss season by defeating the Charlotte Bobcats 94\u201393 on the last day of the season.\nDuring the 2007 off-season, the organization became embroiled in further controversy away from the basketball court. Anucha Browne Sanders, a former Knicks executive, had filed a sexual harassment lawsuit against Isiah Thomas and Madison Square Garden. Faced with a trial, the jury returned a verdict finding Thomas and Madison Square Garden liable for sexual harassment. The jury also levied $11.6 million in punitive damages against Madison Square Garden, though this was later reduced to $11.5 million in a settlement between both parties. The ordeal proved embarrassing for the franchise, revealing sordid details about Knicks management and the environment at Madison Square Garden. The Knicks struggled as they opened their 2007 campaign with a 2\u20139 record leaving many Knicks fans, frustrated with the franchise's lack of progress under Thomas, called for the coach's firing\u2014the chant \"Fire Isiah\" became a common occurrence during the Knicks' home games. On November 29, 2007, the Knicks were handed one of their worst defeats in their history by the Boston Celtics, with a final score of 104\u201359. This matched their third-largest margin of defeat. New York went on to post an eighth consecutive losing season and tied the franchise mark for their worst record ever, at 23\u201359.\n2008\u20132010: rebuilding.\nMSG chairman James Dolan hired former Indiana Pacers President Donnie Walsh on April 2, 2008, to take over Isiah Thomas's role as team president. At the introductory press conference, Walsh, while not proclaiming to be a savior, did set goals, which included getting the team under the salary cap and bringing back a competitive environment. Upon the conclusion of the 2007\u20132008 regular season, Walsh fired Thomas, and on May 13, 2008, officially named former Phoenix Suns head coach Mike D'Antoni as head coach. D'Antoni signed a four-year, $24 million deal to coach the team. The Knicks, holding the sixth pick in the 2008 NBA draft, selected Danilo Gallinari on May 20, 2008.\nOn November 21, 2008, the Knicks dealt one of their top scorers, Jamal Crawford, to the Golden State Warriors for Al Harrington. Hours later, New York traded Zach Randolph, along with Mardy Collins, to the Los Angeles Clippers for Cuttino Mobley and Tim Thomas, with the intention of freeing cap space for the 2010 off-season, when top-flight players such as LeBron James, Dwyane Wade, Chris Bosh, and Amar'e Stoudemire would be available. In February 2009, the Knicks traded Tim Thomas, Jerome James, and Anthony Roberson to the Chicago Bulls for Larry Hughes, in addition to sending Malik Rose to the Oklahoma City Thunder for Chris Wilcox.\nAdditionally, the long-standing controversy with Stephon Marbury ended when the two sides agreed to a buy-out of Marbury's contract, which allowed him to sign with the Celtics when he cleared waivers on February 27, 2009. In spite of a volatile roster, the Knicks improved by nine wins from the previous season in D'Antoni's first season, to finish 32\u201350, coinciding with the emergence of forward-center David Lee, who led the league with 65 double-doubles, and the continued development of guard Nate Robinson and swingman Wilson Chandler.\nIn the 2009 NBA draft, the Knicks selected forward Jordan Hill eighth after targets such as Stephen Curry, Jonny Flynn, and Ricky Rubio were off the board. Guard Toney Douglas was then selected with a 29th overall pick, which was acquired from the Los Angeles Lakers. Shortly afterwards, New York executed a trade with the Memphis Grizzlies in which the Knicks acquired Darko Mili\u010di\u0107 in exchange for Quentin Richardson. The Knicks got off to their worst 10-game start in franchise history, producing nine losses, with just one win. The Knicks responded by winning nine games and losing six in December. On January 24, 2010, the Knicks suffered their worst home loss in Madison Square Garden history against the Dallas Mavericks in front of a sellout crowd. The 50-point loss was also the second-worst in Knicks franchise history.\nOn February 17, the Knicks shook up the roster, trading Mili\u010di\u0107 to the Minnesota Timberwolves for Brian Cardinal and cash considerations. A day later, the Knicks and Celtics swapped guard Nate Robinson for shooting guard Eddie House. The deal also included forward Marcus Landry going to the Celtics and the Knicks acquiring bench players J. R. Giddens and Bill Walker. The Knicks also acquired All-Star forward Tracy McGrady from the Houston Rockets and point guard Sergio Rodr\u00edguez from the Sacramento Kings in a three-way trade. The deal sent Knicks shooting guard Larry Hughes to Sacramento and forward Jordan Hill and power forward Jared Jeffries to Houston. The trades, orchestrated to give the Knicks more cap space for the summer of 2010, netted the Knicks $30 million of cap space. About three weeks after these team-changing trades, the Knicks played the Dallas Mavericks at American Airlines Center and blew them out by a score of 128\u201394 for their largest win of the season. However, the Knicks were eliminated from playoff contention in late March 2010 and completed their season with a 29\u201353 record, a regression from their first season under D'Antoni.\n2010\u20132013: arrival of Carmelo Anthony.\nThe Knicks and former Phoenix Suns forward-center Amar'e Stoudemire came to an agreement on July 5, 2010. The sign and trade deal was made official on July 8 as Stoudemire agreed to an approximately $100 million contract over the span of five years. Team president Donnie Walsh stated the signing of Stoudemire as a turning point for the future of a Knicks team that had struggled in recent years. The Knicks continued to redesign their roster, trading David Lee to the Golden State Warriors for Anthony Randolph, Kelenna Azubuike and Ronny Turiaf. The Knicks also struck deals with former Bobcats point guard Raymond Felton and Russian center Timofey Mozgov. The Knicks regained their title as the most valuable franchise in the NBA following these acquisitions, though this was mainly due to the arrival of Stoudemire, whose star power allowed the team to resurge; the Knicks sold out their full-season ticket inventory for the first time since 2002.\nD'Antoni along with Stoudemire and the core of young players, including Felton, Danilo Gallinari, Mozgov, Wilson Chandler and rookie Landry Fields, piloted the Knicks to a 28\u201326 record prior to the All-Star break, marking the first time the team had been above the .500 mark at that point of the season since 2000. In spite of the team's mounting success, New York made a push to acquire Denver Nuggets forward Carmelo Anthony. After months of speculation, on February 22, 2011, Anthony was traded to New York, with teammates Chauncey Billups, Shelden Williams, Anthony Carter, and former Knicks player Renaldo Balkman. Denver acquired Felton, Danilo Gallinari, Wilson Chandler, Mozgov, Kosta Koufos, a 2014 first-round draft pick, the Warriors' second-round draft picks for 2013 and 2014 and $3 million in cash. In addition, the Knicks sent Anthony Randolph and Eddy Curry to the Minnesota Timberwolves and in return the Timberwolves' Corey Brewer was sent to the Knicks.\nThe Knicks clinched their first playoff berth since the 2004 NBA playoffs in a rout of the Cleveland Cavaliers on April 3, 2011. Carmelo Anthony ensured the franchise's first winning season since 2001 on April 10, 2011, against the Indiana Pacers, as Anthony scored the game-winning basket for the Knicks and subsequently blocked Danny Granger's shot in the final seconds of the game. The Knicks were ultimately eliminated from contention in the first round on April 24, 2011, by the Boston Celtics, losing the series 0\u20134. In spite of Donnie Walsh's successful efforts to help rebuild the franchise, he decided not to return as the team's president, electing to step down at the end of June 2011, citing the uncertainty surrounding his ability to continue to manage the daily operations of the team. Glen Grunwald was elected as interim president and general manager.\nFollowing the conclusion of the 2011 NBA lockout, the Knicks engaged in a sign-and-trade deal with the Mavericks for center Tyson Chandler on December 10, 2011, with Chandler signing a four-year contract worth approximately $58 million. In return, the Knicks sent Andy Rautins to the Mavericks, generating a trade exception for Dallas. Ronny Turiaf and $3 million in cash considerations were sent to the Wizards to complete the three-way trade. The Knicks also obtained the draft rights to Ahmad Nivins and Georgios Printezis from Dallas. In order to fit Chandler under the salary cap, Chauncey Billups was earlier waived under the amnesty clause of the new collective bargaining agreement. To replace Billups at point guard, the Knicks signed Mike Bibby to a one-year, veteran minimum contract. The Knicks also signed veteran point guard Baron Davis on December 19 to a one-year contract. At the time, Davis had suffered a herniated disk and was not expected to compete for about 6\u20138 weeks, leaving Toney Douglas as the team's starting point guard. The Knicks struggled early in the season because Douglas and Bibby struggled to facilitate the offense and subsequently, it became stagnated. Subsequently, rookie Iman Shumpert was thrust into the role as the starting point guard after Douglas was relegated to the bench due to his struggles. In addition, head coach D'Antoni also decided to use Carmelo Anthony as a point forward to help generate a more up-tempo offense; however, there were concerns Anthony was holding the ball for too long, thus contributing to the stagnation of the Knicks' offense.\n\"Linsanity\".\nWith the Knicks struggling to an 8\u201315 record, D'Antoni inserted third-string point guard Jeremy Lin into the rotation against the New Jersey Nets on February 4, 2012. Lin, who had been claimed off waivers on December 27 following an injury to Iman Shumpert, scored 25 points and had seven assists en route to a Knicks win. Lin was praised for his ability to facilitate the offense, something the Knicks had struggled to do for the first 23 games of the season. Lin, exceeding expectations, was named the starter for the Knicks following a game against the Utah Jazz.\nLin guided the Knicks to a seven-game winning streak, despite being without Anthony and Amar'e Stoudemire for five games due to a groin injury and a death in the family respectively, that brought the team back to a .500 winning percentage. The surge of positive play by the Knicks accompanied by the performance of Lin caused extensive national and worldwide media coverage that was referred to as \"Linsanity\". To bolster their depth and perimeter shooting percentage, the Knicks signed J. R. Smith on February 18, 2012. The team struggled to congeal when Anthony returned from injury and went on to lose seven of eight games before head coach Mike D'Antoni resigned on March 14, 2012. Assistant Mike Woodson was named the interim head coach.\nUnder Mike Woodson.\nUnder Woodson, the Knicks finished 18\u20136 during the regular season and clinched a playoff spot for the second straight year this time as the seventh seed, making it the first time they have clinched consecutive playoff berths since making 13 straight playoff appearances from 1988 to 2001. Not only did they also clinch consecutive winning seasons for the first time in a decade, but their 36\u201330 record was the highest winning percentage for the team since the 2000\u201301 season. The Knicks faced the Miami Heat in the first round of the playoffs and lost the first three games, breaking the NBA record for longest playoff losing streak at 13 games. The team's struggles were partially attributed to injuries as Jeremy Lin, Baron Davis and Iman Shumpert were all sidelined by knee ailments. The Knicks proceeded to win a close Game 4, which snapped their streak and ensured that they would not be swept out of the first round; however, they failed to keep up with the Heat's up-tempo offense in Game 5 and lost the series 4\u20131. Despite the team's disappointing postseason exit, the Knicks removed Woodson's interim status and he was officially named the full-time head coach on May 25, 2012.\nThe Knicks began their off-season by selecting Greek forward Kostas Papanikolaou in the 2012 NBA draft. One week later, the team came to terms with veteran point guard Jason Kidd, who was originally supposed to serve as a backup to Lin. The Knicks also re-acquired Marcus Camby from the Houston Rockets in a sign and trade sending Houston Josh Harrellson, Jerome Jordan, Toney Douglas and 2014 and 2015 two second-round picks and completed a sign-and-trade with the Portland Trail Blazers that brought back Raymond Felton and Kurt Thomas in exchange for Jared Jeffries, Dan Gadzuric, and the draft rights to Papanikolaou and Greek forward Georgios Printezis, whose draft rights had been acquired by the Knicks in December 2011. The Knicks also re-signed free agents J. R. Smith and Steve Novak and added more players to the roster, such as James White, Chris Copeland, and Argentinian point guard Pablo Prigioni. However the Knicks lost restricted free agents shooting guard, Landry Fields to the Toronto Raptors and point guard, Jeremy Lin to the Houston Rockets, who were both key players during the 2011\u201312 season. The Knicks decided not to match those teams' offers. Despite these losses, the Knicks continued to add players to the roster, signing former Chicago Bulls guard Ronnie Brewer on July 25, 2012, and signing Chris Smith, the younger brother of J. R. Smith, on August 1, 2012. It was also announced that Rasheed Wallace would come out of retirement to play for the Knicks on October 2, 2012.\nDespite playing without an injured Iman Shumpert and Amar'e Stoudemire, the Knicks compiled an 18\u20135 record to start the season, their best start since 1993. In their first four games, they scored at least 100 points and won by double digits in all of those games. The streak ended after a 10-point loss to Memphis Grizzlies. The following Sunday, in a game against the Indiana Pacers, the Knicks at home went on to win 88\u201376, assuring them a 7\u20131 record. After two tough losses to the Dallas Mavericks and Houston Rockets, the Knicks returned home in a game against the Detroit Pistons on November 25, with a 121\u2013100 blowout win, making them one of only three teams undefeated at home along with the Miami Heat and Utah Jazz. The Knicks finished November with an 11\u20134 record, their best month record since going 11\u20136 in March 2000.\nBy the All-Star break in mid-February 2013, the Knicks compiled a 32\u201318 record, good for second in the Eastern Conference. On February 21, on the trade deadline, the team traded Ronnie Brewer for a 2014 second-round draft pick. The Knicks then signed veteran power forward Kenyon Martin to a 10-day contract. In late March, the Knicks went on to compile a four-game losing streak, tying their worst skid of the season. They would go on and face the Jazz on the road, eventually winning the game and starting what would turn out to be a 13-game winning streak, including wins against the Miami Heat and the Oklahoma City Thunder. This was the third-longest winning streak in franchise history. On April 9, the Knicks beat the Washington Wizards to secure the Atlantic Division title for the first time since the 1993\u201394 NBA season. The Knicks' 13-game winning streak came to an end on April 11 as they lost to the Chicago Bulls. Despite that, they set the NBA single-season record for three-pointers. On May 3, the Knicks defeated the Boston Celtics in the first round of the NBA playoffs, 4\u20132, their first playoff victory since 2000. On May 18, the Knicks were eliminated in the second round of the playoffs, losing the series to the Indiana Pacers 4\u20132. Point guard Jason Kidd retired following the end of the season\u2014he was named head coach of the Brooklyn Nets a few days later. In the 2013 NBA draft, the Knicks selected Tim Hardaway Jr. as the 24th pick in the first round. During the 2013 off-season, The Knicks claimed Los Angeles Lakers F Metta World Peace off of waivers. They re-signed J. R. Smith to a 3-year, $18 million deal and traded Quentin Richardson, Steve Novak, Marcus Camby, and three draft picks to acquire Andrea Bargnani from the Toronto Raptors.\n2013\u20132017: Phil Jackson era.\nThe Knicks also saw changes to business operations in late 2013, replacing general manager Glen Grunwald with former MSG president Steve Mills. The Knicks also purchased an NBA D-League team located White Plains, which began operations at the start of the 2014\u201315 NBDL season. The Knicks then appointed former coach Phil Jackson as president of basketball operations, with Mills remaining as general manager, with the duo working directly under MSG chairman James Dolan. Following the 2013\u201314 season, coach Mike Woodson and his entire staff were fired, and was replaced by Derek Fisher. Fisher played under Jackson with the Los Angeles Lakers, winning five NBA championships with the franchise. The Knicks finished the season with a disappointing 37\u201345 record and finished ninth in the Eastern Conference, but was the season Carmelo Anthony established his career high, the Knicks' franchise record, and the Madison Square Garden record for single-game scoring. Anthony recorded 62 points and 13 rebounds in a victory against the Charlotte Bobcats.\n\"Forbes\" magazine released its franchise value rankings for NBA teams, and listed the Knicks as the world's most valuable basketball organization at $1.4 billion in 2014, edging out the Los Angeles Lakers by $50 million. The Knicks were valued at 40% more than the third-place Chicago Bulls valuation of $1 billion, and were valued nearly twice as highly as their crosstown rivals, the Brooklyn Nets, who came in at $780 million.\nIn the off-season, the Knicks traded controversial guard Raymond Felton, along with former NBA defensive player of the year, Tyson Chandler, to the Dallas Mavericks. In return, the Knicks received Shane Larkin, Jos\u00e9 Calder\u00f3n, Samuel Dalembert, and Wayne Ellington along with two picks for the 2014 NBA draft. The trade was the first one that Jackson ever executed as a front office executive. On June 26, as part of the draft, the Knicks selected Cleanthony Early as the 34th overall pick, and Thanasis Antetokounmpo as the 51st overall pick, using the draft picks received in the trade from the Mavericks. The Knicks also acquired Louis Labeyrie, an additional second-round draft pick, in a trade with the Indiana Pacers for cash considerations.\nThe Knicks would then go onto set a franchise record with its 13th consecutive loss, losing 101\u201391 to the Washington Wizards, giving New York its longest losing streak in the franchise's 69-season history. This record was extended to 16th consecutive losses, after the NBA Global Games loss against the Milwaukee Bucks in London. The Knicks would finish the 2014\u201315 season with a win\u2013loss record of 17\u201365, the worst record in franchise history, and allowed them to gain the 4th overall selection in the upcoming draft. The Knicks also bought out Amar'e Stoudemire's $100 million contract a season early.\nOn June 24, 2015, the Knicks selected Kristaps Porzi\u0146\u0123is with the fourth overall pick in the draft, and traded Tim Hardaway Jr. to the Atlanta Hawks in exchange for Jerian Grant, the 19th overall pick. Midway through another losing season, Fisher was relieved of his coaching duties, with Kurt Rambis being named as interim head coach as the Knicks finished the season with a record of 32\u201350. Jeff Hornacek was then hired as their next head coach, which also oversaw Jackson's most notable acts as an executive. On June 22, former NBA MVP Derrick Rose was traded, along with Justin Holiday and a second-round pick from Chicago, to New York in exchange for Robin Lopez, Jos\u00e9 Calder\u00f3n and Grant. The Knicks also signed Joakim Noah, Brandon Jennings, and Courtney Lee to contracts worth a combined $127 million, and regressed the following season, causing the franchise to part ways with Jackson after three years as the Knicks' president of basketball operations. Under Jackson's presidency, the Knicks had gone 80\u2013166, suffered three consecutive losing seasons, and missed three consecutive playoffs.\nIn his last act prior to leaving the Knicks, Jackson selected Frank Ntilikina with the eighth overall pick, Damyean Dotson with the 44th overall pick, and Ognjen Jaramaz with the 58th overall pick in the 2017 NBA draft.\n2017\u20132020: further struggles.\nFollowing Jackson's departure, the Knicks appointed Scott Perry as general manager and named Steve Mills president of basketball operations. The Knicks also saw Carmelo Anthony demanding a trade from the team, which posed difficulty for both player and franchise due to a no-trade clause inserted in Anthony's contract given by Jackson in 2013. Originally, the only teams for which he would waive his no-trade clause were for the Cleveland Cavaliers and the Houston Rockets, with the former eventually removed from trade discussions due to internal conflicts. Anthony intended to join the Rockets, with a three-way trade with the Portland Trail Blazers set up involving Ryan Anderson. Anderson's three-year, $60 million contract was not feasibly able to be absorbed by either franchise, however, causing Perry to cease talks with the Rockets, before agreeing to a deal with the Oklahoma City Thunder, after Anthony agreed to expand his no-trade clause to include the Thunder. The Knicks received Enes Kanter, Doug McDermott and a 2018 second-round pick in exchange for Anthony on September 25, 2017, while also positioning Kristaps Porzi\u0146\u0123is as the new centerpiece of the franchise.\nThe Knicks also re-signed Tim Hardaway Jr. to a four-year, $71 million contract, while also agreeing to a one-year, minimum contract with Michael Beasley. The franchise also traded for former lottery pick Emmanuel Mudiay from the Denver Nuggets at the trade deadline, who was a point guard the Knicks were rumored to have targeted prior to selecting Porzi\u0146\u0123is in 2015. The trade also included the Dallas Mavericks, with Dallas acquiring McDermott from the Knicks, and the Nuggets obtaining Devin Harris from Dallas. However, the season again ended poorly, with 29\u201353 record to leave the Knicks as the 11th seed in the Eastern Conference. This caused the Knicks to part ways with head coach Jeff Hornacek. Hornacek's two full seasons retained criticism for the team's continued struggle on defense, as well as the inability to implement an efficient, modern offense. He was replaced with former Memphis Grizzlies head coach David Fizdale. Fizdale signed a four-year deal, and was tasked to deliver on player development and improving the team's basketball philosophy.\nOn May 15, 2018, the Knicks were awarded the ninth overall pick in the 2018 NBA draft, and selected Kevin Knox II from the Kentucky. The team also acquired Mitchell Robinson with the 36th overall pick, and signed former lottery pick Mario Hezonja. They further invested in untapped potential by signing another former lottery pick, with Noah Vonleh agreeing to a one-year deal. However, following a dismal start to the season, and after a meeting with Porzi\u0146\u0123is gave team officials the impression that he wanted to be traded, Porzi\u0146\u0123is was traded on January 30, 2019, alongside Trey Burke, Courtney Lee and Tim Hardaway Jr., to the Dallas Mavericks in exchange for DeAndre Jordan, Wesley Matthews, Dennis Smith Jr., an unprotected 2021 first-round draft pick, and an additional top-ten protected 2023 first-round draft pick. The Knicks finished the 2018\u201319 season with a league worst 17\u201365 regular season record, but the season was notable for the emergence of undrafted rookie Allonzo Trier, as well as for the progression of Dotson and Robinson. The Knicks won the third overall pick in the 2019 NBA draft, and selected RJ Barrett from Duke. The team also traded for forward Iggy Brazdeikis, who was drafted in the second round from Michigan.\nIn preparation for the 2019\u201320 season, and as a result of having a record $74 million in cap space following the Porzi\u0146\u0123is trade, the team divided it among five new signings. The Knicks agreed terms with veteran role players Wayne Ellington and Taj Gibson, with forward Bobby Portis also signing. The team then signed former lottery picks Elfrid Payton and Julius Randle. On February 4, 2020, the Knicks fired Steve Mills after seven seasons as president with Scott Perry taking over on an interim basis.\n2020\u2013present: Jalen Brunson and Karl-Anthony Towns.\nOn March 2, 2020, Leon Rose was named president of the team. On July 30, the Knicks announced that they hired Tom Thibodeau as their head coach. Julius Randle had a breakout season and, on February 23, 2021, Randle was named as a reserve for the 2021 NBA All-Star Game. On May 3, with a 118\u2013104 win over the Memphis Grizzlies, the Knicks clinched their first winning season since the 2012\u201313 season. On May 12, the Knicks clinched their first playoff appearance since 2013, ending their eight-year playoff drought. At the end of the regular season, Randle was named NBA Most Improved Player, while Thibodeau was named the NBA Coach of the Year, becoming the first Knicks head coach since Pat Riley in 1992\u201393 to receive the award. The Knicks faced the Atlanta Hawks in the first round of the 2021 NBA playoffs as the fourth seed, losing in five games. Fan attendance in home games during the 2020\u201321 season was prohibited until February 23, 2021, per an executive order from Governor of New York Andrew Cuomo. The Knicks reopened Madison Square Garden to spectators on February 23.\nIn the 2021 off-season, the Knicks retained much of their old talent, while bringing in former all-star guard Kemba Walker and forward Evan Fournier. Additionally, after Randle's breakthrough season, the Knicks extended his contract for four years in August 2021.\nOn January 13, 2022, the Knicks traded former eighth overall pick of the 2018 NBA draft, Kevin Knox II and a protected future first round pick in exchange for former 10th overall pick of the 2019 NBA draft, Cam Reddish, Solomon Hill and a 2025 second-round draft pick and cash considerations. During the 2021\u201322 season, the Knicks struggled regressed finishing 11th in the Eastern Conference with a 37\u201345 record. Randle took a step back having a down season across the boards and his shooting percentages took a hit that resulted in fans booing Randle and increased trade rumours, and the lack of leadership of Randle was questioned, along with attitude and desire to be a Knick. Head coach Thibodeau was questioned if he was the right coach for the Knicks heading onwards. The signings of guard Kemba Walker and forward Evan Fournier were considered extreme failures that set the Knicks back as well. The third overall pick of the 2019 NBA draft, RJ Barrett in his third season averaged 20.0 points, 5.8 rebounds and 3.0 assists.\nThe 2022 off-season brought a lot of change to the Knicks' roster. During the 2022 NBA draft, the Knicks traded Alec Burks, Nerlens Noel and Kemba Walker to the Detroit Pistons to clear cap space for the free agency period, as well as trading their 11th overall pick for protected future first round picks. On June 12, 2022, the Knicks signed point guard Jalen Brunson to a four-year contract, with hopes he could bring some much-needed stability to the position. The Knicks completed the 2022\u201323 season with a 47\u201335 record, finishing in fifth place in the Eastern Conference. Randle represented the Knicks in the 2023 NBA All-Star Game. In the first round of the 2023 playoffs, the Knicks defeated the Cleveland Cavaliers in five games, their first playoff series win since 2013. They were then defeated 4\u20132 by the Miami Heat in the second round.\nIn 2024, the Knicks saw Brunson and Randle represent them at the NBA All-Star Game. The team finished with 50 wins and secured the second seed, with a first round matchup against the Philadelphia 76ers. The Knicks defeated the 76ers in six games, before falling short in seven games against the Indiana Pacers. During the 2024 off-season, the Knicks traded away Julius Randle, Donte DiVincenzo and Keita Bates-Diop to the Minnesota Timberwolves in exchange for Karl-Anthony Towns.\nSeason-by-season record.\n\"List of the last five seasons completed by the Knicks. For the full season-by-season history, see List of New York Knicks seasons.\"\n\"Note: GP = Games played, W = Wins, L = Losses, W\u2013L% = Winning percentage\"\nLogos and uniforms.\n1946\u20131964: Father Knickerbocker.\nThe first logo of the New York Knicks is of a character named \"Father Knickerbocker\" dribbling a basketball, in the iconic blue and orange colors. It was designed by New York World-Telegram cartoonist Willard Mullin. From the beginning, the Knicks home uniforms are in white with blue and orange trim, while the away uniforms are in blue with orange and white trim. The first iterations contain monotone lettering in blue (home) and orange (away) lettering, with the addition of a checkerboard pattern during the mid-1950s.\n1964\u20131992: classic roundball.\nThe Knicks would introduce an iconic logo that would endure for the next three decades. Designed by Bud Freeman, the word \"Knicks\" superimposed over a brown basketball is known as the \"classic roundball logo\", with minor changes throughout its lifespan such as maroon wordmark and orange basketball. An alternate logo featuring the full team name inside an orange basketball was used during the late 1960s and into the 1970s. As the 1960s began, the Knicks updated their uniforms again. This time the lettering is in serifed fonts, and the blue lettering and numbers on the home uniforms are now trimmed in orange. The away uniforms maintained the orange lettering but added white trim; it later changed to white letters while adding white trim on the piping. Side stripes were also added to the uniform. The \"NY\" monogram is on the left leg of the shorts.\n1968\u20131979; 1983\u20131997: championship era uniforms.\nThe Knicks unveiled a uniform that would stay for three decades. This uniform, with an arched \"NEW YORK\" in serif lettering and in orange, would be the uniform worn during their 1970 and 1973 championship seasons; however, they were not introduced simultaneously. The home uniforms would debut in 1968, while the away uniforms debuted the following year. One noticeable feature was that the player's name was in a straight block arched lettering (which is also called the \"vertical arch\" style), which was meticulously designed by Gerry Cosby and his sporting goods company. The unusual arrangement on the player's name was later adopted by several Major League Baseball teams in the 1970s, and are currently used by the National Hockey League's Colorado Avalanche, Detroit Red Wings and New York Rangers. On the shorts, there was no logo placed during much of the 1970s, but during the 1978\u201379 season, the side stripes were eliminated and the interlocking \"NY\" logo inside an apple was placed instead. When this uniform style was reinstated for the 1983\u201384 season, it now featured the player's number and the interlocking \"NY\" logo (similar to the \"NY\" on the iconic New York Yankees pinstripe uniform) on the shorts, in addition to the return of the side stripes. After the 1986\u201387 season, the shorts number was removed, then in the 1991\u201392 season, the \"roundball logo\" replaced the \"NY\" and player names became serifed and arranged in a radial arch. The final iteration saw the Knicks adopt the \"black-accented triangle\" logo for the 1992\u201393 season, replacing the previous \"roundball logo\", which was slightly tweaked to add \"NEW YORK\" above the logo for the 1995\u201396 season.\n1979\u20131983: crimson red era uniforms.\nThe Knicks radically changed their uniforms prior to the 1979\u201380 season. Royal blue and orange were replaced by navy and crimson red. During this period, the home uniforms featured the team name below the number, both in crimson red with navy trim and in a stylized, free-flowing font. Navy away uniforms continue to feature the city name but below the white and crimson red number. The interlocking \"NY\" logo debuted on the shorts, with the addition of player numbers and side stripes during the 1981\u201382 season.\nThe change to crimson red and navy was initiated by then-team president E. Michael Burke, whose alma mater University of Pennsylvania wore those colors.\nThe \"Knicks\" script from the \"crimson red era\" uniforms was later reused in the uniforms of the Knicks' NBA Development League affiliate Westchester Knicks, with the same team name below the number format, though it was soon changed to a variation of the triangle logo.\n1992\u20132012: black-accented triangle.\nBefore the 1992\u201393 season, the Knicks updated their \"roundball logo\" to its present form, with the word \"Knicks\" in a futuristic font, again superimposed over a basketball, with a silver triangle accentuating the look. The \"new look\" logo was designed by Michael Doret and overseen by Tom O'Grady. For the 1995\u201396 season, the city name in a futuristic script was added atop the logo, while an alternate subway-token logo featuring the acronym \"NYK\" was introduced. Black was also introduced as an accent color. The logo was added while the \"championship era\" uniforms were still in use, but during the 1995\u201396 season, the Knicks unveiled a blue alternate uniform, this time featuring black side panels and the aforementioned \"subway token\" logo on the shorts' beltline. A home white version of this uniform was introduced for the 1997\u201398 season, effectively retiring the championship era uniforms. In the 2001\u201302 season, the side stripes were narrowed, while the \"subway token\" logo was moved to the back of the uniform, and the Knicks primary logo moved from the side to the front of the shorts.\n2012\u2013present: modified triangle.\nThe Knicks updated their \"new look logo\", this time eliminating the color black from the scheme. They still used the previous uniform during the 2011\u201312 season, but for the 2012\u201313 season, the Knicks unveiled new uniforms inspired from their \"championship era\" uniforms. A more subtle and bolder \"New York\" script was introduced, while the uniform piping stopped until the lettering. The phrase \"Once A Knick, Always A Knick\" is added on the uniform collar. Gray became the accent color. In addition, an updated version of their 1970s secondary logo, this time featuring only the team name, was introduced.\nOn October 25, 2013, the Knicks unveiled an alternate orange uniform, which is essentially a mirror image of the blue away uniforms, but with orange as the primary color and blue and white as trim colors. The uniforms debuted on October 31 in a road game against the Chicago Bulls, and were used in the first five weekend home games, but after going 0\u20136 in the orange uniforms, they were discontinued permanently.\nBeginning with the 2017\u201318 season, Nike became the NBA's new uniform provider. Under Nike, \"home\" and \"away\" uniform designations were eliminated, and in their place were the white \"Association\" set, primary color \"Icon\" set, alternate color \"Statement\" set, and annual \"City\" set that were used either at home or away. The Knicks kept their white \"Association\" and blue \"icon\" uniforms almost intact with only a few alterations such as truncated shoulder and shorts striping and the modern roundball logo on the waistband.\nFrom 2017 to 2019, the Knicks' \"statement\" uniform featured a white base with lettering in orange with white and blue trim. The striping was inspired from the team's 1970s-era uniforms. In the 2019\u201320 season, the Knicks changed their Statement uniform to a blue base and white lettering with blue and orange trim. The white letters were a nod to the team's 1960s blue uniforms. As with the previous \"statement\" uniform, the striping was based on the team's 1970s uniforms. Before the 2022\u201323 season, the \"statement\" uniform was again changed, this time with a navy base and orange gradient striping. The 1995\u20132011 \"New Look\" logo was placed on either side of the shorts. Letters are orange with blue trim.\nIn the 2025\u201326 season, the Knicks changed their \"statement\" uniform, going with a black base with orange and blue gradient stripes. The aforementioned gradient stripes were a nod to Madison Square Garden's iconic lighting. \nSpecial uniforms.\nThe Knicks have also worn special edition uniforms every March as part of the NBA's Noche Latina events and during St. Patrick's Day. The uniforms during Noche Latina were originally white with blue and orange trim, first using the 2001\u201312 uniform from 2008 to 2012, and then the current uniforms from 2012 to 2015, the only exception being \"Nueva York\" in front. In the 2015\u201316 season, the Knicks used a variation of their away blue uniform for Noche Latina. The Saint Patrick's Day uniforms used the road uniform template except for green substituting for the blue base. These uniforms have also been used on Christmas Day from the 2009\u201310 season, and was worn in particular by Nate Robinson for a \"Kryptonate vs. Superman\" theme against Dwight Howard in the 2009 Slam Dunk Contest. The St. Patrick's uniforms were shelved after the 2011\u201312 season.\nOn Christmas Day 2012, the Knicks wore monochrome uniforms known as \"big color\". The uniforms are mostly orange, with blue trimming. The following year, the Knicks wore sleeved orange uniforms known as \"big logo\", featuring a chrome-treated Knicks logo in front. For the 2014 edition, the Knicks wore a variation of their home uniforms, featuring the team logo in front and the player's first name in a blue nameplate below the number. The 2016 Christmas Day game against the Celtics saw the Knicks wear an all-blue uniform without additional striping, complete with fancy scripted orange lettering and numbers.\nAs part of its deal with Nike, a special \"city\" uniform would be used to pay tribute to either local culture or team traditions. The Knicks' 2017\u201318 \"city\" uniform, which is navy with orange and grey trim and features an emblem containing the team name, uniform number, a ladder with a silhouette of a firefighter, a fire hydrant, and the abbreviation \"N.Y.C.\" for New York City, pays homage to the city's firefighters and their families. It was designed in collaboration with the Knicks, the NBA, Nike and the Uniformed Firefighters Association.\nThe Knicks' second \"city\" uniform is also in navy and features white lettering, a straight aligned \"New York\" wordmark in front and alternating stripes of blue, navy and orange designed to mimic the New York City skyline. The blue and orange arm striping was inspired from the team's 1950s uniforms. The Knicks initially debuted the uniform in the 2018\u201319 season, and was retained the following season.\nThe Knicks' 2020\u201321 \"city\" uniform is designed in collaboration with Kith. The uniform is predominantly black with blue and orange side gradients. The roundel in front features both the full team name and the \"city never sleeps\" nickname in a white, blue and orange gradient, and white numbers with blue drop shadows are added inside. The \"NYC\" acronym in black and white trim is placed within the Nike mark.\nThe Knicks' 2021\u201322 \"city\" uniform featured another collaboration with Kith. The predominantly black uniform featured the classic \"New York\" wordmark in white with orange trim, and orange numbers with white trim. Those elements, along with the 1992 \"New Look\" logo on the waist, paid tribute to the 1995\u20132001 blue uniforms. Along the side, black and gray checkerboard stripes were an homage to the 1950s set. A silhouette of the classic Madison Square Garden logo was added to the side stripes on the shorts. This design was revisited for the 2025\u201326 season, but was \"remixed\" to closely resemble the 1997\u20132001 white uniform minus the black accents.\nAnother Kith-collaborated \"city\" uniform was released in the 2022\u201323 season. This design was inspired by the blue uniforms they wore from 1995 to 2001, but with black as the base color.\nThe 2023\u201324 \"City\" uniform, again under a collaboration with Kith, was yet another nod to the late 1990s\u2013early 2000s uniform design. In a first for the franchise, dark blue pinstripes were added to the blue-based uniform, and two \"New York\" wordmarks in both white and orange were layered twice on the top, in a nod to the iconic saying \"the city so nice, they named it twice.\" Black and orange side stripes were also featured. This uniform, albeit in white, was reused as part of the 2024\u201325 \"City\" uniform.\nThrowback uniforms.\nThe Knicks were one of several NBA teams to wear throwback uniforms during the league's 50th anniversary in the 1996\u201397 season. The throwback set they wore that season represented the franchise's first season in 1946\u201347. However, both the blue and white throwbacks featured blue letters with orange trim (the originals had only orange letters on the blue uniform and blue letters on the white uniform minus any additional trim).\nIn the 2004\u201305 season, the Knicks wore throwback white uniforms from the \"maroon era\" of the early 1980s. The only difference from the originals was that the letters on the player's name were arranged in a radial arch (the originals were designed in a vertical arch) and were smaller in size.\nThe following season, the Knicks wore throwback blue checkerboard uniforms from the mid-1950s, which featured the \"Father Knickerbocker\" logo on the left leg (the originals did not feature said logo).\nFor the 2007\u201308 season, the Knicks wore their classic white uniforms as a tribute to the early 1970s championship teams. As with the \"maroon era\" throwbacks, the player's name no longer appeared in a vertical arch and were smaller in size. In addition, the original \"roundball\" logo was added (the original uniforms had no logo on the shorts).\nThe 2010\u201311 season saw the Knicks wear the blue uniforms to commemorate the 40th anniversary of the 1969\u201370 championship team. However, the design they wore that season faithfully replicated those of the 1991\u201392 Knicks team, complete with radially-arched serifed block letters on the player's name and the \"roundball\" logo on the shorts. In the original version, the shorts had no logo while the player name is arranged in a vertical arch and in a sans-serif block font.\nIn the 2015\u201316 season, the Knicks wore throwback white versions of the mid-1950s checkerboard uniforms in commemoration of the franchise's 70th season.\nIn the 2021\u201322 season, the Knicks, along with the Celtics and Warriors, were one of three teams to wear a \"classic edition\" uniform to commemorate each franchise and the NBA's 75th anniversary. The Knicks design harkened back to the original white uniforms from 1946, complete with enlarged blue numbers, blue waistbands, and blue and orange side stripes.\nPersonnel.\nRetained draft rights.\nThe Knicks hold the draft rights to the following unsigned draft picks who have been playing outside the NBA. A drafted player, either an international draftee or a college draftee who is not signed by the team that drafted him, is allowed to sign with any non-NBA teams. In this case, the team retains the player's draft rights in the NBA until one year after the player's contract with the non-NBA team ends. This list includes draft rights that were acquired from trades with other teams.\nRetired numbers.\nNotes:\nBasketball Hall of Famers.\nNotes:\nAll-Star Game selections.\nThe following Knicks players were selected to the NBA All-Star Game.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nStaff.\nManagement.\nSteve Mills served as general manager and president during the 2013\u201314 season. At the end of the 2013\u201314 season Phil Jackson replaced Mills as team's president. He was reinstated as president in 2017, with Scott Perry replacing him as general manager.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nFranchise leaders.\nBold denotes still active with team.\n\"Italic\" denotes still active, but not with team.\nPoints scored (regular season) as of the end of the 2024\u201325 season\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nOther statistics (regular season) as of the end of the 2024\u201325 season\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Column/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src = \"Column/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src = \"Column/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src = \"Column/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src = \"Column/styles.css\" /&gt;\nIndividual awards.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Column/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNBA MVP\nNBA Finals MVP\nNBA Rookie of the Year\nNBA Sixth Man of the Year\nNBA Defensive Player of the Year\nNBA Most Improved Player\nNBA Clutch Player of the Year\nNBA Coach of the Year\nNBA Sportsmanship Award\nJ. Walter Kennedy Citizenship Award\nNBA scoring champion\nNBA All-Star Game head coaches\n&lt;templatestyles src = \"Column/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAll-NBA First Team\nAll-NBA Second Team\nAll-NBA Third Team\nNBA All-Defensive First Team\nNBA All-Defensive Second Team\n&lt;templatestyles src = \"Column/styles.css\" /&gt;\nNBA All-Rookie First Team\nNBA All-Rookie Second Team\nRivalries.\nBoston Celtics.\nThe New York Knicks and the Boston Celtics are two of the three remaining teams from the original 1946 NBA (the other is the Golden State Warriors). The rivalry stems from the old rivalry between the cities of New York City and Boston, which is also mirrored in both the Yankees\u2013Red Sox and Jets\u2013Patriots rivalries. The fact that Boston and New York City are only 190 miles apart contributes to it.\nThe teams have met nine times in the postseason. The last time was in the 2012\u201313 season, when Carmelo Anthony won the 2013 scoring title and helped them win the Atlantic Division for the first time since 1994. The Knicks faced the Celtics, who were without Rajon Rondo because of a mid-season injury, in the 1st round of the 2013 playoffs. In both games 1 and 2, Celtics had a lead going into halftime but were held to 25 and 23 points respectively in the second half, which was an all-time low for the franchise in the playoffs. Knicks gained a 3\u20130 lead in the series, but Boston avoided elimination in games 4 and 5. In game six, Knicks once led by 26 points in the fourth quarter, then the Celtics went onto a 20\u20130 run in less than 5 minutes to make it a close game, but Knicks still won and moved on to round 2.\nBrooklyn Nets.\nThe Brooklyn Nets, formerly the New Jersey Nets, are the Knicks' closest rival geographically. Both teams play in New York City, with the Knicks in Manhattan and the Nets in Brooklyn. Media outlets have noted the Knicks-Nets rivalry's similarity to those of other New York City teams, such as Major League Baseball's Subway Series rivalry between the American League's New York Yankees (the Bronx) and the National League's New York Mets (Queens), due to both boroughs' proximity through the New York City Subway. Historically, the boroughs of Manhattan and Brooklyn competed via the Dodgers\u2013Giants rivalry, when the two teams were known as the Brooklyn Dodgers and the New York Giants. Like the Knicks and Nets, the Giants and Dodgers played in Manhattan and Brooklyn, respectively, and were fierce divisional rivals. The rivalry between the New York Islanders and New York Rangers of the National Hockey League also had this distinction when the Islanders played in Brooklyn from 2015 to 2020. Due to the Knicks and Nets being located in the boroughs of Manhattan and Brooklyn, some media outlets have dubbed this rivalry \"Clash of the Boroughs\". The Knicks and Nets have met in the playoffs three times, with the Knicks winning two of the three meetings. The Knicks defeated the Nets in the playoffs in 1983 and 1994, while the Nets won their most recent meeting in 2004.\nChicago Bulls.\nThe Knicks have a strong rivalry with the Chicago Bulls. The rivalry's most intense period was during the late 1980s and early 90s, when both teams were huge playoff contenders. This intensity was due to a variety of factors: the great frequency in which the teams competed against each other in high-stakes contests and playoff series; well-known players such as Michael Jordan, Scottie Pippen, Patrick Ewing, and John Starks; the reputations of the team's respective cities; and personnel changes and conflicts between the teams.\nThe rivalry was dormant through much of the 2000s, with both teams rebuilding after the retirements of Patrick Ewing and Michael Jordan. However, with the arrival of future NBA MVP Derrick Rose in 2008, the Chicago Bulls began experiencing success once again. In the summer of 2010, the Bulls signed Carlos Boozer and the Knicks signed Amar'e Stoudemire, making both teams playoff contenders once again. Carmelo Anthony and Tyson Chandler joined the Knicks soon after, and the rivalry between the two teams appears to have been reborn.\nIndiana Pacers.\nThe rivalry between the New York Knicks and the Indiana Pacers started in 1993 and quickly became one of the most bitter in NBA history. They met in the playoffs 6 times from 1993 to 2000, fueling a rivalry epitomized by the enmity between Reggie Miller and prominent Knick fan Spike Lee. Miller likened it to the Hatfield\u2013McCoy feud, and The New York Times said in 1998 that it was \"as combustible as any in the league\".\nThe rivalry gave Miller the nickname \"The Knick-Killer\". His clutch performances were frequently followed by jabs at Lee like the choke sign, adding fuel to the rivalry. The rivalry renewed during the 2013 NBA playoffs in the Eastern Conference Semifinals, with Indiana taking the series 4 games to 2, and again in the second round of the 2024 NBA playoffs, where the Pacers upset the Knicks in seven games.\nMiami Heat.\nThe Miami Heat were one of the New York Knicks' strongest inter-divisional foes. The two teams met in the playoffs each year from 1997 to 2000, with all four of those series being played to the maximum number of games. Pat Riley, the head coach of the Miami Heat at the time, served as the head coach of the Knicks from 1991 to 1995 and led the Knicks to the 1994 NBA Finals. During this four-year span, the Heat and the Knicks each won two playoff series against each other.\nThe two teams met again in the first round of the 2012 NBA playoffs, for the first time since the 1990s rivalry days. The Heat won the series, 4\u20131, and later went on to win the 2012 NBA Finals.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "72856", "revid": "37371155", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72856", "title": "Orlando Magic", "text": "National Basketball Association team in Orlando, Florida\nThe Orlando Magic are an American professional basketball team based in Orlando, Florida. The Magic compete in the National Basketball Association (NBA) as a member of the Southeast Division of the Eastern Conference. The franchise was established in 1989 as an expansion franchise. Notable NBA stars as Shaquille O'Neal, Penny Hardaway, Grant Hill, Tracy McGrady, Vince Carter and Dwight Howard, have played for the club throughout its history. As of 2024[ [update]], the franchise has played in the NBA playoffs 17 times in 35 seasons, and twice went to the NBA Finals, in 1995 and 2009, losing to the Houston Rockets and the Los Angeles Lakers, respectively.\nHistory.\n1985\u20131986: Team creation.\nIn September 1985, Orlando businessman Jim L. Hewitt approached Philadelphia 76ers general manager Pat Williams as they met in Texas on his idea of bringing an NBA team to Orlando. Intrigued by the potential of an Orlando-based NBA team, Williams became the front man of the investment group one year later, after he left the 76ers. On June 19, 1986, the two held a news conference to announce their intention of seeking an NBA franchise.\nAt the same time, Hewitt and Williams decided to hold a contest in the \"Orlando Sentinel\" newspaper to get names for their new franchise. Out of a total of 4,296 submitted entries, the names were subsequently narrowed to four, \"Heat\", \"Tropics\", \"Juice\", and \"Magic\". The last one, which had been submitted by 11 people, was picked after Williams brought his seven-year-old daughter Karyn to visit in Orlando. On July 27, 1986, it was announced that the committee chose the Magic to be the new name of the Orlando franchise in the NBA. The name \"Magic\" alludes to the area's biggest tourist attraction and economic engine Walt Disney World, along with its Magic Kingdom, highlighting its corporate theme of magic. Hewitt added that \"You look at all the aspects of Central Florida, and you find it really is an exciting place, a magical place.\"\nMany, including Williams himself at first, thought that Miami or Tampa were better locations in Florida for a franchise. At the time, Orlando was a small city without a major airport or a suitable arena. Hewitt brought investors such as real estate developer William duPont, Orlando Renegades owner Don Dizney, and Southern Fruit Citrus owners Jim and Steve Caruso, and talked the Orlando city officials into approving an arena project. Meanwhile, Williams gave presentations to NBA commissioner David Stern and the owners of the other teams of the league that the town was viable.\nIn April, the franchise committee recommended expanding by three teams, with two of the slots going to Charlotte and Minneapolis-St. Paul. The recommendation put the Orlando bid in doubt, since it advised that the state of Florida should only be allocated one team as part of the three-team expansion. This feedback put the planned Orlando franchise up against the Miami-based team, originally known as the \"Florida Heat\" and eventually named the Miami Heat. When both Miami and Orlando ownership groups made successful pitches, the expansion committee decided to expand by four teams, allowing both to have a franchise.\nThe Magic became the first-ever major-league professional sports franchise in the Orlando area, following an expansion fee of reportedly $32.5 million. They were one of the four new expansion franchises awarded by the NBA in 1987 along with the Charlotte Hornets, Miami Heat and Minnesota Timberwolves. The Magic hired Matt Guokas as the team's first coach, who helped the Magic select 12 players in the NBA expansion draft on June 15, 1989.\n1989\u20131992: Early years.\nThe Magic, in their debut year, selected Nick Anderson from Illinois in the first round of the 1989 NBA draft. As the 11th pick, he was the team's first franchise player and leading scorer for a decade.\nThe Magic's very first game played was an exhibition game on October 13, 1989, against the then-reigning champion Detroit Pistons, which the Magic won. Anderson was quoted as saying the atmosphere and the people watching the game was \"like Game 7 of the NBA Finals\".\nOn November 4, 1989, the Magic played their first season game at the Orlando Arena (O-Rena) against the visiting New Jersey Nets, who won 111\u2013106 in a hard-fought game. The Magic's first victory came two days later, as the Magic defeated the New York Knicks 118\u2013110. The inaugural team compiled a record of 18\u201364 with players including the franchise star player Nick Anderson, Reggie Theus, Scott Skiles, Terry Catledge, Sam Vincent, Otis Smith, and Jerry Reynolds.\nIn the 1990 NBA draft, the Orlando Magic selected Dennis Scott with the fourth overall pick. On December 30, 1990, Scott Skiles racked up 30 assists in the 155\u2013116 victory over the Denver Nuggets, breaking Kevin Porter's NBA single-game assists record (29). Skiles was named the NBA's Most Improved Player at the end of the season, as the Magic heralded the NBA's most improved record that season. Forward Dennis Scott set a team mark with 125 three-point field goals for the season, the best long-distance production by a rookie in NBA history. He was named to the NBA All-Rookie First Team.\nOn September 19, 1991, the DeVos family, founders of Amway, purchased the franchise for $85 million. Family patriarch Richard DeVos became the owner of the franchise. The 1991\u201392 season was disappointing for the Magic as various players missed games with injuries. Dennis Scott played only 18 games, Nick Anderson missed 22 games, Stanley Roberts, Jerry Reynolds, Brian Williams, Sam Vincent and Otis Smith all missed at least 27 games each. With a shortage of healthy players, the team struggled through a 17-game losing streak and finished with a 21\u201361 record. The Magic still managed to have all 41 home games sold out.\n1992\u20131996: The Shaquille O'Neal and Penny Hardaway era.\nThe Magic history was changed on May 17, 1992, when the franchise won the first pick in the 1992 NBA draft Lottery. The Magic selected big-man Shaquille O'Neal from Louisiana State University, the biggest prize in the draft since the Knicks won Patrick Ewing. O'Neal, a center, made an immediate impact on the Magic, leading the team to a 41\u201341 record. The Magic again became the NBA's most improved franchise, as they improved by 20 games. O'Neal was the first rookie to be voted an All-Star starter since Michael Jordan in 1985. He also became the 1992\u201393 NBA Rookie of the Year. Despite O'Neal's presence, the Magic missed the 1993 NBA playoffs because they were tied with the Indiana Pacers for the eighth and final playoff spot in the Eastern Conference with the Pacers holding the tiebreaker.\nDespite barely missing the playoffs and receiving the least chance of gaining the top draft pick with only one ball in the lottery, the Magic again won the first pick in the 1993 NBA draft Lottery. Prior to the draft, Guokas stepped down as head coach, and Brian Hill was promoted to become the Magic's second head coach. In the draft, the Magic selected Chris Webber, but traded him to the Golden State Warriors for the number three pick, guard Penny Hardaway and three future first-round draft picks. With the combination of O'Neal and Hardaway, the Magic became a dominant team in the NBA, compiling the first 50 win season in franchise history with a 50\u201332 record. The Magic were in the playoffs for the first time, ranked the fourth seed in the Eastern Conference; however, the Pacers swept the Magic 3\u20130 in the first round, thus ending the Magic's season.\nIn the 1994\u201395 season, the Magic's sixth season, All-Star forward Horace Grant was acquired as a free agent from the Chicago Bulls. The Orlando Magic compiled a 57\u201325 record, best in the East and winning the Atlantic Division title, becoming the second-fastest team (behind the Milwaukee Bucks in 1971, who were in their third season) to advance to the NBA Finals in league history. In the playoffs, the Magic defeated the Boston Celtics, Bulls, and the Pacers, advancing to the NBA Finals where O'Neal, Hardaway and the young Magic bowed to a more playoff-experienced Hakeem Olajuwon and the Houston Rockets, winning their second consecutive championship in a 4\u20130 sweep of Orlando.\nIn the 1995\u201396 season, the Magic again were near the top of the Eastern Conference and the Atlantic Division with a 60\u201322 record, led by O'Neal and Hardaway; however, the Magic were seeded number two, behind the NBA's second-best all-time 72\u201310 record of the Chicago Bulls. In the meantime, general manager Pat Williams was promoted to senior executive vice president and replaced by the vice president of Basketball Operations John Gabriel on April 29, 1996. In the playoffs, after the Magic defeated the Detroit Pistons and the Atlanta Hawks, Orlando met the Bulls in the Eastern Conference Finals. The combination of Jordan, Scottie Pippen and rebounder Dennis Rodman was too much for the Magic, and Orlando was swept 4\u20130.\n1996\u20131999: The post-Shaq/Penny Hardaway era.\nIn the off-season, O'Neal left as a free agent to the Los Angeles Lakers, dealing a huge blow to the Magic franchise. In the middle of the season, urged by player discontent, management fired coach Brian Hill and named Richie Adubato as interim coach for the rest of the season. Under Adubato, the Magic went 21\u201312 to compile a 45\u201337 record, led by Penny Hardaway. In the playoffs, the Magic quickly fell 0\u20132 to the heavily favored Miami Heat in the first round, but Hardaway battled back with consecutive 40-point games to assure a game five (the first player to do so), which the Magic ultimately lost.\nThe Magic then hired Chuck Daly to be head coach for the 1997\u201398 season. In addition, Hall of Famer Julius Erving joined the Magic's front office, giving Orlando hope for a successful season. The season was hampered by an injury to Hardaway who sat out the majority of the season. Anderson, combined with newly acquired free agent Bo Outlaw, led the team to a 41\u201341 record, just out of reach of the NBA playoffs. In addition, Rony Seikaly was traded during the season to the New Jersey Nets for three role players and a future draft pick.\nIn 1998\u201399, with the drafting of Michael Doleac and Matt Harpring with the 12th and 15th picks in the 1998 draft, and a healthy Penny Hardaway and Nick Anderson, the Magic tied for the Eastern Conference's best record with the Miami Heat in the lockout-shortened season, 33\u201317. At the heart of the team was veteran and future Orlando Magic Hall of Famer Darrell Armstrong, leading from the vanguard (a constant that Orlando fans would enjoy for a decade) and picking up the NBA's Sixth-Man and Most Improved Player awards along the way. Orlando also acquired NBA great Dominique Wilkins, along with brother Gerald, who were past their primes but were both still serviceable NBA players. In the playoffs the Penny Hardaway-led Magic were seeded number 3 because of tiebreakers and faced the Philadelphia 76ers. The 76ers, led by Allen Iverson, upset the Magic 3\u20131 in the first round. The team also changed their uniforms for the first time ever, changing from pinstripes to stars.\n1999\u20132000: \"Heart and Hustle\" season.\nIn 1999, the Magic, under general manager John Gabriel, who was later named Executive of the Year, hired rookie-coach Doc Rivers. Gabriel dismantled the previous team trading their only remaining superstar Penny Hardaway to the Phoenix Suns for Danny Manning (who never donned a Magic uniform), Pat Garrity, and two future draft picks. The Magic were then a team composed of virtually all no name players and little experience, which included team captain Armstrong, Bo Outlaw and a young Ben Wallace, along with Coach Rivers, who led the Magic to a 41\u201341 record, barely missing out on the playoffs. At the end of the season Rivers was named Coach of the Year. That year was characterized by the slogan \"Heart and Hustle\", as the team was known for its hard-working style.\n2000\u20132004: The Tracy McGrady era.\nThe following off-season, Gabriel, with millions of cleared salary cap space, attempted to lure three of the NBA's most prized free agents: Tim Duncan, Grant Hill, and Tracy McGrady. While Duncan opted to remain with the San Antonio Spurs, the Magic acquired Hill, a perennial All-Star, and McGrady. With McGrady and Hill together, the Magic were expected to be a force in the East. However, Hill was limited to 4 games because of an ankle injury. McGrady blossomed into a star during the season, becoming one of the NBA's top scorers. With the addition of Mike Miller from the draft, the Magic compiled a 43\u201339 record, which included a nine-game winning streak, and once again made the playoffs. McGrady made the All-Star Team and All-NBA Second Team. Miller won the Rookie of the Year. In the playoffs, they faced the Milwaukee Bucks in the first round. The Bucks won the series 3\u20131.\nIn 2001\u201302, McGrady led the Magic to a winning record of 44\u201338. Hill was still severely limited by his ankle injury, and did not play for the vast majority of the season. McGrady, combined with Armstrong, Miller, and 3-point sharpshooter Pat Garrity, formed the core of the team. McGrady made the All-NBA for the first time and made his second consecutive All-Star Team. However, the Magic were defeated 3\u20131 in the first round of the playoffs by the Charlotte Hornets led by Baron Davis.\nIn 2002\u201303, with the acquisitions of Gordan Giricek and Drew Gooden from the Memphis Grizzlies in exchange for Mike Miller, McGrady once again led the Magic to a 42\u201340 record. McGrady led the league in scoring with 32.1 points per game, made his second All-NBA First Team, and Third All-Star Team. Despite still not having Hill due to injury, the Magic entered the playoffs for the third straight year. However, after taking a 3\u20131 lead in the best-of-seven first-round series, the Magic fell to the Detroit Pistons 4\u20133. McGrady was quoted as saying, \"It feels good to get in the second round\" after still needing one more win to advance.\nThe Magic's 15th season in 2003\u201304 proved to be one of its toughest ever. Even with the acquisition of veteran free agents Tyronn Lue and Juwan Howard, the Magic struggled early. After winning its first game, the Magic lost 19 consecutive games, setting a franchise record. They never recovered, and finished an NBA worst 21\u201361. Despite this, McGrady led the league in scoring with 28.0 points per game, made the All-NBA Second Team and his fourth consecutive All-Star Team. In the middle of the 19-game losing streak, coach Doc Rivers was fired, and assistant Johnny Davis was promoted to head coach. General manager Gabriel was replaced by John Weisbrod.\n2004\u20132012: The Dwight Howard era.\nIn the off-season, Weisbrod completely dismantled the team. Though he kept Davis as coach, he shook up the player roster, only keeping a few players from last season. The most significant trade was Tracy McGrady. McGrady, discontent with the Magic, wished to move on; Weisbrod accused McGrady of \"slacking off\" and not attending practices (McGrady later admitted that he did not give 100 percent during the 2003\u201304 season and wanted the team to bring him some help, but never wanted to leave Orlando). The Magic traded McGrady along with Reece Gaines, Tyronn Lue, and Juwan Howard to the Houston Rockets for Steve Francis, Kelvin Cato, and Cuttino Mobley. In addition, the Magic acquired center Tony Battie and two second-round draft picks from the Cleveland Cavaliers in exchange for Drew Gooden, Steven Hunter, and the draft rights to Anderson Varej\u00e3o. The Magic then signed free agent Hedo T\u00fcrko\u011flu. With the number one draft pick, the Magic selected high-school phenomenon and future All-Star and franchise cornerstone Dwight Howard, and a draft-day trade with the Denver Nuggets got them point guard Jameer Nelson.\nAfter a promising 13\u20136 start, the Magic began to fall apart. First, Weisbrod traded Mobley for Doug Christie from the Sacramento Kings. Christie, because of his emotional ties to the Kings, at first refused to play for the Magic. Later on, Christie claimed he had bone spurs and was placed on the injured list after playing only a few games for the Magic. Near the end of the season, with a playoff-push faltering, Weisbrod fired Davis after leading Davis to believe he was going to be the team's head coach for the entire 2004\u201305 NBA season. He then promoted Chris Jent to interim head coach. Throughout the season, bolstered by Hill's return, the Magic played spectacularly, defeating top NBA teams. However, led by the erratic play of Francis, the Magic also lost to league teams with losing records. Howard showed great promise, becoming one of the few players to average a double-double. Howard was a consistent rebounder and scorer, becoming the first rookie to start and play all 82 games in a season. In addition, Nelson, after a slow start, developed into a talented player, taking over the starting point guard position. Hill also returned and averaged 19.7 points a game. Hill was chosen an All-Star starter by NBA fans for the 2005 All-Star Game, and Dwight Howard and Jameer Nelson were named to the All-Rookie first and second teams, respectively. Howard was a unanimous selection.\nThe Magic finished the season 36\u201346. Their playoff push was hampered by injuries in the last quarter of the season: a season-ending broken wrist for sixth man Hedo T\u00fcrko\u011flu, a shin injury to Grant Hill, a rib cage injury to Nelson, and a three-game suspension to Francis for kicking a photographer. The Magic ended a few games out of the playoffs. On May 23, 2005, the Magic's plans were disrupted by the abrupt resignation of general manager and Chief Operating Officer John Weisbrod. In addition, the Magic announced the following day that Brian Hill, the coach who led the Magic to the NBA Finals under O'Neal and Hardaway, would return as head coach.\nThe Magic drafted Fran V\u00e1zquez with the 11th pick in the 2005 NBA draft. On July 28, 2005, Vazquez stunned the team after announcing that he would remain in Spain to play for Akasvayu Girona, getting ridiculed by media after he was quoted that the decision to stay was made by his girlfriend. Owner Rich DeVos announced on October 21 that he was transferring ownership to his children, with the official owner role moving to son-in-law and team president Bob Vander Weide. The transfer was supposed to be complete by the end of the year.\nThe 2005\u201306 season opened with high hopes for the Magic despite not being able to add first-round draft pick Vasquez. Grant Hill was supposedly finally healed from his multiple ankle surgeries. Dwight Howard and Jameer Nelson showed excellent progress during summer-league play. Second-round draft pick Travis Diener showed excellent shooting and decision-making during the summer. And the free-agent signing of Keyon Dooling showed that the club was going to continue making progress. Then trouble began. Hill, despite his ankle apparently being healed, suffered a painful sports hernia injury that would hamper his play throughout the entire season. After playing in three preseason games, he underwent surgery to correct the hernia and would not appear during the regular season until mid-December, to which he lasted a month before attempting to make another comeback in February and early March, however, he only played sporadically. Then a foot injury to Nelson forced him to sit out for over a month.\nOn February 15, 2006, the Magic announced that they had acquired Darko Mili\u010di\u0107 and Carlos Arroyo from the Detroit Pistons in exchange for Kelvin Cato and a 2007 top-five protected first-round draft pick. One week later, on February 22, the Magic announced that they had traded Steve Francis to the New York Knicks in exchange for Penny Hardaway (whom they waived two days later) and Trevor Ariza. With a set starting rotation of Battie, Howard, T\u00fcrko\u011flu, DeShawn Stevenson, and Nelson, the Magic mounted a surprising run at the eighth playoff spot in the Eastern Conference, including an 8-game winning streak and 12 consecutive home wins. The streak included wins against NBA powerhouses Detroit, San Antonio, Dallas and Miami, as well as a game against the Philadelphia 76ers in which Howard recorded 28 points and a career-high 26 rebounds. Despite their efforts they did not make the playoffs.\n2006\u20132010: Return to the NBA Finals.\nWith the 11th overall pick in the 2006 NBA draft, the Magic took former Duke star JJ Redick. Even with the fan support to get him playing time he averaged just over 11 minutes a game. After beginning the season strong with a 13\u20134 record, the Orlando Magic began to suffer in the standings as the result of multiple losses, due in large part to the injuries of Tony Battie, Keyon Dooling, and Grant Hill. The Magic were also hampered with the sporadic play of many of their young stars, who on multiple occasions showed their propensity for streaky shooting and the team's lack of a solid scoring two-guard. Despite the team's poor play, Dwight Howard continued to develop and blossom in his third year in the league, culminating in his first selection to the Eastern Conference All-Star team. The final few weeks of the season saw the Magic build momentum and confidence with an impressive late push towards the Playoffs. On April 15, 2007, with an 88\u201386 victory over the Boston Celtics, the Magic secured its first berth in the NBA playoffs since 2003 by locking up the eighth seed in the Eastern Conference. This marked the first time that the team had made the playoffs while posting a losing record. Nevertheless, their Playoff run ended on April 28, 2007, after they were swept in the first round by first seeded Detroit Pistons whose experience, veteran leadership and ability to consistently make the clutch basket proved far too much for the undermanned and overwhelmed Magic to overcome. It was announced on May 23, 2007, that Brian Hill had been fired as head coach of the Magic.\nOn June 1, 2007, the Magic signed Billy Donovan to be their head coach for five years. The next day, Donovan wished to be released from the contract and the Magic agreed several days later. On June 6, 2007, the Magic signed a 4-year contract with Stan Van Gundy. In the free agent market, the Magic signed Rashard Lewis of the Seattle SuperSonics to a six-year league-maximum contract believed to be worth over $110 million. At the NBA China Games, the Magic swept the three games in China, twice against the Cleveland Cavaliers and once against the Chinese national team in games held in Shanghai and in Macau.\nOn November 15, 2007, Bob Vander Weide, the son-in-law of Richard DeVos, officially took over as owner of the team, although ownership is still split evenly amongst Richard DeVos' other children as well.\nThe Magic started the 2007\u201308 NBA season with an impressive 16\u20134 record in their first 20 games, which included wins over the Boston Celtics and Cleveland Cavaliers. Through the next few months, the Magic were not so successful, splitting their next 36 games with 18 wins and 18 losses. At the start of March, the Magic seemed to pick up speed again, finishing the month with 10 wins, the first time since November that they won 10 or more in a month. The Magic clinched the Southeast Division title when the Washington Wizards were routed at Utah 129\u201387 on March 31, 2008. It was the Magic's third division title, but only their first since 1995\u201396 season, as well as their first since the Southeast Division was formed. They also earned their 50th win of the season against the Chicago Bulls on April 13, which had not happened since the 1995\u201396 season. The Magic finished the regular season 52\u201330, their best season since 1995\u201396. With the third seed in the Eastern Conference, they were matched up in their first-round playoff series against the Toronto Raptors. The Magic had home-court advantage for the first time since the 1998\u201399 season.\nOn April 28, 2008, at Amway Arena, the Magic eliminated the Raptors with a 4\u20131 series victory in the first round. It was the first playoff series victory for the Magic in 12 years after 6 straight first-round exits. The run of success did not last long as they fell 4\u20131 to the experienced Detroit Pistons in the second round. With the Magic already down in the series, controversy erupted after the Pistons' Game 2 victory. At the conclusion of the third quarter, Chauncey Billups of the Pistons made a three-point shot giving the Pistons a three-point lead. However, the clock had stopped just as the play began. NBA rules prohibit officials from using instant replay or any timing device to determine how much time has elapsed when a clock malfunctions, nor is a replay allowed to be viewed from the time of the malfunction to when the play ends, when the game clock has not expired. Because of the rule, the officials then estimated that the play took 4.6 seconds, and because there were 5.1 seconds remaining when play began, the field goal was allowed to be counted. The NBA later admitted that the play actually took 5.7 seconds and the basket in question should not have counted. The Pistons went on to win Game 2. The Magic were able to win Game 3, with the Pistons' Chauncey Billups out for most of the game with an injury but were unable to take advantage of his absence and defeat the Pistons in Games 4 and 5, which ended the Magic's playoff run in 2008. Another highlight of the season was Hedo Turkoglu winning Most Improved Player.\nThe first half of the 2008\u201309 season went very well for the Magic. After 41 games, the Magic were 33\u20138, leading the Southeast Division, as well as having one of the top four records in the league. At the start of February, Jameer Nelson, their all-star starting point guard, went down with a shoulder injury. He was expected to miss the remainder of the season. After trading for Rafer Alston, the Magic finished the regular season with a 59\u201323 record, it was the most games the team had won in a season since the 1995\u201396 season in which they had 60 wins. In the playoffs, the Magic beat the Philadelphia 76ers in the first round of the playoffs and then the defending champions, the Boston Celtics, in the Eastern Conference semifinals, behind assistant coach Patrick Ewing's guarantee that they would win Game 7 of that series. In their first conference finals since 1996, the Magic beat the Cleveland Cavaliers, which were led by the season's MVP, LeBron James. After dropping the first two games in the Finals against the Los Angeles Lakers, the Magic finally won their first-ever game in the Finals in Game 3. Despite Nelson's return to the team for the Finals, the Lakers won the series and the championship by beating the Magic in five games.\nIn the 2009 off-season, Orlando traded Rafer Alston, Tony Battie, and Courtney Lee to the New Jersey Nets in exchange for eight-time All-Star Vince Carter and Ryan Anderson. Hedo T\u00fcrko\u011flu, as part of a sign-and-trade, was sent to the Toronto Raptors. They then made several free agent signings. On July 10, former Dallas Mavericks power forward Brandon Bass was given a 4-year deal. On July 21, the Magic signed former Phoenix Suns forward Matt Barnes. On August 19, they signed former Miami Heat point guard Jason Williams, who decided to come back after a year in retirement.\nOn September 28, 2009, Orlando extended the contract of head coach Stan Van Gundy by exercising his option for the 2010\u201311 season. They did the same for general manager Otis Smith, which would keep him in that position through the 2011\u201312 season.\nThe Magic were without Rashard Lewis for the first 10 games of the 2009\u201310 season. Lewis tested positive for an elevated testosterone level that was caused by an over-the-counter supplement containing a substance banned by the league. To make matters worse, Vince Carter suffered a left ankle injury in just the second game of the season. Carter's injury turned out to be not too serious, but caused him to miss the next five games. Another setback came in mid-November, when Jameer Nelson injured his left knee, which required arthroscopic surgery to repair. Nelson would be out for five weeks. Despite all of this, the Magic had a 23\u20138 record at the end of December.\nOrlando lost seven of their first ten games in January but recovered well enough to post a winning record for the month by winning six of their next seven. Following the All-Star break, the Magic went on a roll, winning 23 of their 28 remaining games, clinching their fourth consecutive playoff berth and winning their third consecutive division championship in the process. The Magic finished the regular season with a 59\u201323 record, matching their record from the 2008\u201309 season, and finishing with not only the second-best record in the Eastern Conference, but the second-best record in the entire league. The team became one of the only teams in NBA history to beat all of the other 29 teams at least once during the regular season. The Magic swept the Charlotte Bobcats and the Atlanta Hawks in the first two rounds of the playoffs, respectively. They then faced the Boston Celtics in the conference finals. After losing the first three games of the series, Orlando managed to win the next two games, but lost on the road in Game 6, ending their season.\n2010\u20132012: \"Dwightmare\" saga.\nIn anticipation of the team's move to Amway Center, the Magic updated its logo. They retained the streaking ball logo, but changed the wordmark taken from their current uniforms. The Magic hosted the NBA All-Star Game in 2012. The Magic also unveiled black alternate uniforms.\nIn the summer of 2010, the Orlando Magic signed Chris Duhon, formerly of the New York Knicks, and Quentin Richardson, formerly of the Miami Heat.\nOn December 18, 2010, having lost five of their last six games, the Magic made a blockbuster trade deal with the Phoenix Suns and the Washington Wizards. They traded Vince Carter, Marcin Gortat and Micka\u00ebl Pi\u00e9trus to Phoenix for Hedo T\u00fcrko\u011flu (who led them into the 2009 NBA Finals when they lost 4\u20131 against the Los Angeles Lakers), Jason Richardson and Earl Clark. Rashard Lewis was traded to Washington for 3-time All-Star Gilbert Arenas.\nThe Magic finished the season with 52 victories, good for second in the Southeast Division. But they were ousted in six games by the Atlanta Hawks in the first round of the 2011 NBA playoffs, the first time head coach Stan Van Gundy was eliminated early in the playoffs.\nIn a lockout-shortened 2011\u201312 season, the Magic started the off-season on a rocky note, with their All-Star center, Dwight Howard, requesting a trade to either the New Jersey Nets, Los Angeles Lakers, or Dallas Mavericks. Overlooking the trade request the Magic did a sign and trade with the Boston Celtics for Glen Davis and Von Wafer in exchange for Brandon Bass. The Magic also amnestied Gilbert Arenas and signed Larry Hughes, Justin Harper, and DeAndre Liggins. The Magic started the season on Christmas Day in Oklahoma City against the Thunder. They lost the season opener 97\u201389. During the month of February, the Magic waived Hughes and signed Ish Smith. On February 26, Orlando hosted the 2012 All-Star Game. The Magic struggled to win games consistently, with concerns about the uncertainty of Dwight Howard's future with the franchise. However, after Dwight rescinded his trade demand and signed a one-year deal in March, the Magic seemed to find their footing again. But then in early April, shortly after it became public that Howard requested coach Van Gundy to be replaced, the center was diagnosed with a herniated disk and forced to have back surgery, thus ending his season. The Magic clinched the sixth seed in the east with a 37\u201329 record. The Magic were faced with the third-seeded Pacers in the first round. Despite winning the first game of the series the Magic were defeated 4\u20131.\nOn May 21, 2012, it was reported that general manager Otis Smith and head coach Stan Van Gundy would part ways with the organization. Stan Van Gundy finished with a 259\u2013135 regular season record with the team which included making the playoffs in those five years and a conference championship.\nCEO Alex Martins announced former Oklahoma City assistant general manager Rob Hennigan as the new general manager for the Orlando Magic on June 20, 2012. Once hired, he became the youngest general manager in the league.\nIn the 2012 NBA draft, the Magic selected Andrew Nicholson and Kyle O'Quinn.\nOn June 25, 2012, Dwight Howard had face-to-face meetings with general manager Rob Hennigan in Los Angeles and demanded a trade to the Brooklyn Nets.\nOn July 9, 2012, the Magic completed a sign-and-trade deal with the New Orleans Hornets, that sent forward Ryan Anderson to the Hornets. In return the Magic received center Gustavo Ayon.\nOn July 28, 2012, Jacque Vaughn was named the new head coach. He had been the assistant coach for the San Antonio Spurs for the last two seasons.\nOn August 9, 2012, ESPN reported that a four-team trade would send Dwight Howard to the Los Angeles Lakers. Marc Stein of ESPN.com was told the Lakers were to acquire Howard, Chris Duhon and Earl Clark, the Denver Nuggets were to acquire Andre Iguodala, the Philadelphia 76ers were to acquire Andrew Bynum and Jason Richardson, and the Magic were to acquire Arron Afflalo, Al Harrington, Nikola Vu\u010devi\u0107, Maurice Harkless, Josh McRoberts, Christian Eyenga, and five total protected future (three first-round, two second-round) picks from each of the other three teams. The deal was officially confirmed and completed on August 10.\nHoward left the Magic as their all-time leading scorer, shot blocker, and rebounder.\n2012\u20132021: Struggles with Nikola Vucevic.\n2012\u20132017: Rob Hennigan era.\nFollowing the trade of Dwight Howard, the Magic entered into a state of rebuilding with Maurice Harkless and Nikola Vu\u010devi\u0107. On August 29, the Magic signed free agent guard E'Twaun Moore. On December 2, 2012, Howard's first game against his former team, the Magic defeated the Lakers 113\u2013103.\nOn February 21, 2013, the Magic traded JJ Redick, Ish Smith and Gustavo Ay\u00f3n to the Milwaukee Bucks. In return, the Magic received Beno Udrih, Tobias Harris and rookie Doron Lamb. The Magic also traded Josh McRoberts to the Charlotte Bobcats for Hakim Warrick who was waived 2 days later. The Magic finish the 2012\u201313 season 20\u201362 as the worst record in the NBA, missing the playoffs for the first time since 2006.\nOn June 27, 2013, the Orlando Magic had the second pick in the first round of the 2013 NBA draft. The Magic used their lottery pick to draft Big Ten Defensive Player of the Year, shooting guard Victor Oladipo from Indiana University. The Magic also had the 51st pick in the second round of the NBA draft. They used this pick to draft forward Romero Osby from the University of Oklahoma. Osby averaged 16 points, seven rebounds, and 1.3 assists during his senior NCAA season at Oklahoma but was cut by the Magic before the season opener.\nThe Magic finished the 2013\u201314 season with a 23\u201359 record, third worst in the NBA. The draft lottery gave them the fourth pick in the 2014 NBA draft. In the draft, they selected Aaron Gordon with the fourth pick and Dario \u0160ari\u0107 with the 12th pick. Saric was then swapped for the 10th pick, Elfrid Payton in exchange for a 2017 first round pick and a future second round pick. Roy Devyn Marble was selected with the 56th pick in the second round. On February 5, 2015, Jacque Vaughn was relieved of his head coaching duties after coaching &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;2+1\u20442 seasons for the Magic. His overall record was 58\u2013158. He was replaced by interim head coach James Borrego.\nOn May 29, 2015, the Magic hired their former point guard Scott Skiles as the franchise's 12th head coach.\nOn June 25, 2015, in the 2015 NBA draft, Orlando selected Mario Hezonja with the fifth overall pick and Tyler Harvey\nwith the 51st overall pick. On February 16, 2016, the Magic traded Tobias Harris to the Detroit Pistons in exchange for Ersan \u0130lyasova and Brandon Jennings.\nOn May 12, 2016, Skiles stepped down as head coach of the Orlando Magic. On May 19, the Orlando Magic agreed to a deal with former Indiana Pacers coach Frank Vogel to become the next head coach of the team.\nWith Vogel as their new coach, the Magic made many changes to their roster during the off-season. On June 23, 2016, in the 2016 NBA draft the Magic selected Domantas Sabonis 11th overall, but then traded Sabonis and shooting guard Victor Oladipo for defensive power forward Serge Ibaka of the Oklahoma City Thunder. During free agency the Magic re-signed Evan Fournier to a five-year, $85 million contract and also signed Bismack Biyombo, Jeff Green, and D. J. Augustin. On July 15, C. J. Wilcox was acquired, along with cash considerations, from the Clippers in exchange for Devyn Marble and a future second round draft pick.\nOn February 14, 2017, Ibaka was traded to the Toronto Raptors in exchange for Terrence Ross and a future first-round draft pick. The Magic finished the 2016\u201317 season with the third worst record in their conference, finishing 29\u201353.\n2017\u20132022: Jeff Weltman era.\nIn the summer of 2017, the Magic made various changes, the first being the firing of general manager Rob Hennigan on April 13. On May 23, the Magic named Jeff Weltman, the former general manager of the Toronto Raptors, as president of basketball operations and named John Hammond, the former general manager for the Milwaukee Bucks, as the new general manager. With the sixth overall pick in the 2017 NBA draft, Orlando drafted Florida State forward, Jonathan Isaac. During free agency the Magic signed Jonathon Simmons, Arron Afflalo, Shelvin Mack, Marreese Speights, Khem Birch and Adreian Payne.\nOn October 6, 2017, the Magic announced that former superstar Tracy McGrady, had rejoined the team as assistant to the CEO.\nOn February 8, 2018, the Magic traded starting point guard Elfrid Payton to the Phoenix Suns in exchange for a 2018 second-round pick.\nOn April 12, 2018, head coach Frank Vogel was fired by the Magic after the conclusion of the 2017\u201318 regular season. On May 30, the Magic named Steve Clifford as their new head coach.\nOn June 21, 2018, the Magic drafted center Mohamed Bamba with the sixth overall pick. and Melvin Frazier in the second round. Other player acquisitions included trading for Timofey Mozgov and Jerian Grant in a three-team trade for Bismack Biyombo, Jarell Martin in a trade from the Memphis Grizzlies, and free agent Isaiah Briscoe.\nOn September 6, 2018, team owner Richard DeVos died aged 92 from complications from an infection.\nDuring the 2018\u201319 season, the Magic won their sixth division title and finished in seventh place in the Eastern Conference to clinch a playoff berth for the first time since the 2011\u201312 season. Mohamed Bamba was diagnosed with stress fracture on February 5, 2019, and eventually missed the remainder of the season. At the NBA trade deadline, the Magic traded Jonathon Simmons and two draft picks to the Philadelphia 76ers for Markelle Fultz. Nikola Vu\u010devi\u0107 was selected as a reserve for the 2019 Eastern Conference All Star Team, being the first Orlando Magic All Star player since Dwight Howard in 2012. In March 2019, the Magic signed former NBA Rookie of the Year Michael Carter-Williams to two ten-day contracts before signing him to a one-year deal. The Magic were matched up against the Toronto Raptors in the first round of the 2019 NBA playoffs. While the Magic won their first playoff game in seven years, the Raptors won the series in five games.\nIn the 2019 NBA draft the Magic selected Chuma Okeke with the 16th overall pick, and traded its second-round pick to the Los Angeles Lakers in exchange for $2.2 million and a future draft pick. With the prospect of limited playing time due to injury, the Magic and Okeke agree to sign a one-year deal with the Magic's G League affiliate in Lakeland and sign Okeke's rookie contract in the summer of 2020. During the 2019 free agency, the Magic re-signed with Vu\u010devi\u0107, Terrence Ross, Michael Carter-Williams, and Birch, signed free agent Al-Farouq Aminu, and waived Mozgov. The Magic compiled a 30\u201335 record before the league suspended its season on March 11, 2020, due to the COVID-19 pandemic. Following the suspension of the season, the Magic were one of the 22 teams invited to the NBA Bubble to participate in the final eight seeding games of the regular season. Season ending injuries to Jonathan Isaac and Mo Bamba, along with significant injuries to Terrence Ross and Evan Fournier hampered their performance and they went 3\u20135 in the seeding games, but the team earned the eighth playoff spot in the Eastern Conference to face the Milwaukee Bucks. While the Magic won the opening game, Milwaukee won the next four ending the Magic's season in round one for the second year in a row.\nIn the 2020 NBA draft the Magic selected Cole Anthony with the 15th overall pick. The shortened free agency period followed where the Magic signed their 2019 draft pick Chuma Okeke, re-signed James Ennis, Michael Carter-Williams, and Gary Clark, while adding Dwayne Bacon. The injury Jonathan Isaac suffered during the previous season was significant enough that he was ruled out for the entire 2020\u201321 season. In the eighth game of the 2020\u201321 season, starting point guard, Markelle Fultz went down with an ACL tear in a game against the Cleveland Cavaliers. After the season-ending injury, rookie point guard, Cole Anthony would fill the starting point guard role. On January 20, 2021, Fultz underwent surgery. At the 2021 NBA trade deadline the Magic traded away Nikola Vu\u010devi\u0107, Aaron Gordon, and Evan Fournier, each to different teams, in what has been viewed as the beginning of another rebuilding period. At the end of the season, the team and Clifford mutually agreed to part ways.\nOn July 11, 2021, Jamahl Mosley was named head coach after spending the previous season as an assistant coach with the Dallas Mavericks.\nOn July 29, 2021, the Magic selected Jalen Suggs with the fifth pick and Franz Wagner with the eighth pick (Acquired via the Chicago Bulls in the Nikola Vu\u010devi\u0107 trade) in the 2021 NBA draft. The Magic also selected Orlando native Jason Preston in the second round and promptly traded him on draft night to the Los Angeles Clippers.\n2022\u2013present: The Paolo Banchero Era.\n2022\u20132023: First year of Banchero.\nOn June 23, 2022, the Magic selected Paolo Banchero from Duke University with the first pick and Caleb Houstan from the University of Michigan with the 32nd pick in the 2022 NBA draft. Banchero helped the Magic improve their record from 22 wins to 34, averaging 20 points per game and ultimately being chosen as Rookie of the Year.\nIn May 2023, the Magic donated $50,000 to a super PAC supporting Florida governor Ron DeSantis's 2024 presidential campaign, in what the \"New York Times\" called \"the first known instance in which an NBA team directly donated to a group allied with a presidential candidate.\"\nOn June 22, 2023, the Magic selected Anthony Black from the University of Arkansas with the sixth overall pick and Jett Howard from the University of Michigan with the 11th pick.\nOn July 5, 2023, the Magic promoted Anthony Parker to general manager (GM) and Pete D'Alessandro to executive vice president (EVP), while Jeff Weltman was promoted to President of Basketball Operations.\nOn July 17, 2023, the Magic traded picks with the Phoenix Suns. The Suns received a 2023 second-round pick via the Denver Nuggets, a 2026 second-round pick via the Los Angeles Clippers, and a 2028 second-round pick via the Orlando Magic (protected No. 31-45). In this deal, the Orlando Magic receive unprotected swap rights to the 2026 first-round pick of the Phoenix Suns or Washington Wizards (the Phoenix Suns owe the top of these two picks or theirs already, therefore allowing the Orlando Magic to receive the best of the left-over pick selection spots or keep their own).\n2023\u2013present: Playoff rise.\nThe 2023\u201324 season saw the young Orlando Magic rise as a playoff team. Banchero made his first All-Star team as a reserve for the Eastern Conference, becoming the first Magic All-Star since Nikola Vu\u010devi\u0107 in 2021. Jalen Suggs made all defensive-second team. The Magic finished 47\u201335 as the fifth seed in the Eastern Conference and forced the Cleveland Cavaliers led by Donovan Mitchell to seven games in the first round of the playoffs but lost the series.\nThe next off-season, the Magic did not re-sign former number one overall pick Markelle Fultz. They drafted Tristan da Silva and traded for the 47th pick which they used to select Antonio Reeves. They also signed Kentavious Caldwell-Pope in free agency, and signed Franz Wagner to a contract extension.\nOn October 31, 2024, Banchero, suffered a torn right oblique Later, Franz Wagner tore his right oblique and was ruled out indefinitely. The Magic lost both their star forwards to torn obliques. After missing more than two months, Banchero made his return to the Orlando lineup in a 109\u2013106 loss against the Bucks, recording 34 points and seven rebounds.\nHome arenas.\nAmway Arena.\nAmway Arena opened in 1989 and served as home to the Orlando Magic since their inception until the 2009\u201310 season. It was originally known as the Orlando Arena, or the \"O-Rena\", during its first 10 years. In 1999, TD Waterhouse purchased the naming rights and named the venue the TD Waterhouse Centre. In December 2006, the naming rights were purchased by Amway for four years. It is also home of the Arena Football League's Orlando Predators, the Orlando Sharks of the Major Indoor Soccer League, and various sporting and entertainment events. Amway Arena was one of \"The Orlando Venues\" owned and operated by the City of Orlando. The other facilities include the Bob Carr Performing Arts Centre, Tinker Field, Camping World Stadium, Harry P. Leu Gardens, and Mennello Museum.\nKia Center.\nThe team's current home arena, Kia Center (formerly Amway Center), officially opened on October 1, 2010. The Orlando Magic hosted their first preseason game at Amway Center on October 10 against the New Orleans Hornets. The 2010\u201311 regular season home opener was on October 28 against the Washington Wizards, and the Magic won both games. In 2012, the Amway Center hosted the All-Star Weekend.\nAt the time it opened, the new Amway Center was home to the largest Jumbotron in the NBA. The arena also features approximately of digital ribbon boards, and outside the building a by video display is visible to motorists traveling on Interstate 4.\nOn December 20, 2023, Amway Center was formally renamed Kia Center in partnership with Kia America.\nKia Center is also the home of the minor league hockey team, Orlando Solar Bears and the Orlando Predators of the National Arena League (NAL).\nTeam identity.\nLogos and uniforms.\nOriginal pinstripes (1989\u20131998).\nOrlando advertising agency The Advertising Works, led by its president Doug Minear was responsible for the original Magic uniforms. The logo, featuring a basketball crowded by stars and the wordmark \"Magic\" with a star replacing the A, was created following meetings with Walt Disney World artists and over 5000 suggestions sent from around the country. Stars would remain a primary feature of the logo once it was redesigned in 2000 to feature a comet-like basketball. Pat Williams first suggested the colors black and gold of his alma mater Wake Forest, but this was eschewed for various factors, including the local college UCF using the same scheme. Black would still be the primary color in the scheme used by Minear, a trait shared by 16 other NBA teams. Other colors were an electric blue specially made by sporting goods manufacturer MacGregor, and silver. The home uniforms were white with black pinstripes, featuring black numbers with blue trim, and the road jerseys reversed the scheme while featuring \"Orlando\" instead of the Magic wordmark. Given the standard mesh nylon worn across the NBA did not allow for pinstripes, the jerseys were made out of durene, a material with cotton on the underside and polyester bonded on the outside. The road uniform was changed to blue with white pinstripes in 1994\u201395, although the black uniforms remained in use as alternates.\nSublimated stars (1998\u20132003).\nFor the Magic's 10th anniversary in 1998\u201399, a new look designed by fashion designer Jhane Barnes was unveiled. The pinstripes were relegated to the sides and the uniforms now featured stars as the background. Both jerseys, made out of the dazzle that was used in the Women's National Basketball Association uniforms, had the Magic wordmark, with the home jersey in white and the away in blue. For its first two seasons, the original \"streaking ball with stars\" logo was placed on the waistline, but after the Magic changed its logo in the 2000\u201301 season, the new \"shooting ball with stars\" logo was placed on the left leg.\nBack to basics (2003\u20132008).\nThe Magic's 15th anniversary in 2003\u201304 inspired another uniform revamp, opting for a cleaner look without stripes or stars. The home jerseys were white and featured \"Magic\" in blue block letters with silver and black trim. The away jersey reverted to the city name in white block letters with silver and black trim and was blue. The logo was placed on either side with thin white and black stripes, and a silver star was placed beneath the collar. During this time, the team's original pinstriped jerseys were worn several times per year as alternates: black in 2003\u201304 and 2006\u201307, blue in 2004\u201305, and white in 2005\u201306.\nPinstripes return (2008\u20132017).\nFor the 2008\u201309 season, the Magic have once again introduced new uniforms. The Magic returned to the pinstriped uniforms to commemorate the team's 20th anniversary. The current design combines the elements of the previous three uniform designs the Magic used in its 20-year history. The home jerseys are white with silver pinstripes, while the away jerseys are blue with white pinstripes. The font used for the number and player/team name has also been updated to a more modern look. Magic alternate logos are on the shorts and the back of the jersey. This is the fourth model in franchise history.\nAs the Magic moved to the Amway Center in 2010, they unveiled a new logo that for the first time fully spelled \"Magic\", without the star instead of the A. They also unveiled a black alternate uniform, with silver pinstripes, mirroring the regular blue road uniform. They were usually worn as throwback uniforms as part of the NBA Hardwood Classics program. A variation of the uniform is also used for Noche Latina every March, with 'Orlando' substituted for 'El Magic', with 'El' in black and silver trim and 'Magic' in blue and silver trim. This was unveiled in the 2011\u201312 season.\nSilver sleeves and \"Stars\" jersey.\nIn 2014, Magic unveiled a silver uniform for the first time in their history. It was sleeved, and featuring white pinstripes along with blue, black and white trim for the letters and numbers. Unlike the three other uniforms, a different striping pattern will be used on the sides. In 2016, The Magic unveiled a third alternate uniform, featuring carbon as the primary color and without pinstripes. Named \u201cStars\u201d, it featured the team's secondary logo and a blue, white and blue tricolor stripe in front, along with white lettering.\nNike takes over (2017\u20132025).\nThe Magic made only a few slight tweaks to their uniforms when Nike became the league's uniform provider in 2017. From 2017 to 2019, the Magic wore white \"Association\" uniforms, blue \"Icon\" uniforms and black \"Statement\" uniforms. With the exception of the black uniforms eliminating the blue side stripes and changing pinstripe colors from silver to blue, the set remained almost identical to the previous Adidas set. Beginning with the 2019\u201320 season, the black uniform became the \"Icon\" uniform while a new blue uniform served as the \"Statement\" uniform. The uniform was inspired from the different sets the Magic wore through the years, such as the silver star and black stripes with white pinstripes from the 1989\u201398 set, and the cleaner look of the 2003\u201308 set. This uniform was then tweaked prior to the 2022\u201323 season, adding black pinstripes (a nod to the 1989\u201398 uniforms) and black stripes with subtle star patterns (a nod to the 1998\u20132003 uniforms). Starting in 2020\u201321, the \"Statement\" uniforms would feature Jordan Brand's jumpman logo. Their jersey's sponsor is Disney.\nHomage to the classics (2025\u2013present).\nAhead of the 2025\u201326 season, the Magic unveiled a new logo and uniform set, introducing a modernized version of the \"streaking ball with stars\" logo that they originally used from 1989 to 2000. The uniforms were also a modern take on the original pinstripe look from 1989 to 1998, bringing back the silver star as a substitute to the \"A\" on the wordmark. Blue was brought back as the \"Icon\" uniform base color, while the black \"Statement\" uniform pays homage to the road warmup gear the Magic wore from 1991 to 1997.\nCity edition: \"Stars\".\nAn annual \"City\" edition is also utilized by Nike to honor either local culture or team tradition. The Magic's 2017\u201318 \"City\" uniform featured a printed pattern of stars in the sky along with the team's alternate logo in front. For the 2018\u201319 season, the Magic only made slight changes to their \"City\" uniform, with the printed pattern of stars relegated to the sides and a predominantly black base.\nCity edition: \"Orange\".\nThe 2019\u201320 City uniforms featured an \"anthracite\" (grey) base with orange lettering. The orange color pays homage to Florida's orange-growing industry. The Magic kept the orange theme for their 2020\u201321 \"City\" uniform, this time with a white base and orange letters and numerals with anthracite trim. The uniform also paid homage to the original uniforms worn from 1989 to 1998, featuring \"Orl\" beside an anthracite star in its original typeface along with orange pinstripes. When the jersey's colors are inverted it shows the exact color scheme used in Orlando's original uniforms. In the 2021\u201322 season, the Magic again reprised the orange theme for its \"City\" uniform, this time featuring a few elements from previous uniforms. This uniform would return in the 2025\u201326 season, but recolored to the current Magic blue and silver scheme.\nCity edition: \"Kingdom\".\nFor their 2022\u201323 \"City\" uniform, the Magic went with a black base, dark gray pinstripes, and gothic-inspired white letters with blue trim to represent the team and the city as a kingdom on the rise. Orlando's \"City\" uniform for the 2023\u201324 season featured a Gothic-themed design, attributing to Orlando's pride and resiliency and the Magic's determination to protect its kingdom. The midnight-based jersey incorporated silver stripes meant to evoke a steel cage, along with Gothic script lettering. The Magic's \"Kingdom\" series was again used for the 2024\u201325 \"City\" uniform, with the design similar to last season's \"City\" uniform but in a platinum base with midnight blue letters.\nEarned uniforms.\nHaving qualified for the 2020 NBA playoffs the previous year, the Magic were also given an \"Earned\" uniform. The design, which has a white base, featured the alternate logo in front (an homage to the 2016\u201317 \"Stars\" alternate and 2017\u201319 \"City\" uniform) and blue numbers with black and silver trim. Side panels featured the stars pattern as an homage to the 1998\u20132003 blue uniforms.\nClassic uniforms.\nThe Magic are one of seven teams to wear \"Classic\" uniforms for the 2018\u201319 season. As part of their 30th anniversary, the team unveiled the blue pinstriped uniform similar to those worn from 1994 to 1998. To commemorate not only its 35th anniversary season, but also the 25th anniversary of the 1999\u20132000 \"Heart and Hustle\" team in 2023\u201324, the Magic donned the blue \"sublimated stars\" uniform worn from 1999 to 2003.\nMascot.\nStuff the Magic Dragon has been the Magic's mascot since 1989. A dragon designed by Wade Harrison and Bonnie Erickson of Acme Mascots, Inc, his name is a pun on Puff the Magic Dragon, and how a slam dunk is also known as \"stuffing\".\nPersonnel.\nRetained draft rights.\nThe Magic hold the draft rights to the following unsigned draft picks who have been playing outside the NBA. A drafted player, either an international draftee or a college draftee who is not signed by the team that drafted him, is allowed to sign with any non-NBA teams. In this case, the team retains the player's draft rights in the NBA until one year after the player's contract with the non-NBA team ends. This list includes draft rights that were acquired from trades with other teams.\nRetired numbers.\nNotes:\nBasketball Hall of Famers.\nNotes:\nFIBA Hall of Famers.\nNotes:\nOrlando Magic Hall of Fame.\nIn 2014, the Orlando Magic launched the team's Hall of Fame, which honors players, coaches and executives who have had a major impact for the team and in the community.\nSeason-by-season record.\n\"List of the last five seasons completed by the Magic. For the full season-by-season history, see List of Orlando Magic seasons.\"\n\"Note: GP = Games played, W = Wins, L = Losses, W\u2013L% = Winning percentage\"\nRivalries.\nMiami Heat.\nThe Orlando Magic and the Miami Heat had a rivalry because both teams are located in Florida, thus the rivalry was known as the Sunshine State rivalry. Another ingredient to the rivalry was the high-caliber players on both teams such as Orlando's Shaquille O'Neal and Penny Hardaway to Miami's Alonzo Mourning and Tim Hardaway. The two had met each other in the NBA playoffs for the first time in 1997, with Miami beating Orlando 3\u20132, they have not met in the playoffs since.\nThe rivalry intensified during the 2000s and early 2010s with the rising stardom of Miami's and Orlando's Dwyane Wade and Dwight Howard, respectively, along with Miami's acquiring high caliber stars such LeBron James from the Cleveland Cavaliers and Chris Bosh from the Toronto Raptors and in 2010, resulting in fierce competition between the two.\nWhen Dwight Howard departed from the Magic to the Los Angeles Lakers in August 2012, the rivalry softened. The Orlando Magic have been going through a process of rebuilding ever since then.\nAtlanta Hawks.\nThe Atlanta Hawks and the Orlando Magic had an intense rivalry, mostly stemming from playoff competitions and the rising stardom of Dwight Howard and Josh Smith, both from the 2004 NBA draft and who were both raised in Georgia.\nThe two teams faced each other three times in the 1996, 2010, and 2011 NBA playoffs. The Magic defeated the Hawks in the second round of the 1996 playoffs 4\u20131, and swept the second-round series 4\u20130 in the 2010 playoffs, while the Hawks eliminated the Magic 4\u20132 in the first round of the corresponding 2011 playoffs.\nMedia.\nTelevision.\nThe current television announcing team for the Orlando Magic is play-by-play announcer David Steele and color analyst Jeff Turner. Kendra Douglas reports in with the as well. \nTurner played for the Magic from its inaugural 1989 season to 1996. Paul Kennedy and Dante Marchetelli serve as courtside reporters, while Marchetelli, former coach Brian Hill, and former Magic player Nick Anderson host the pre-game, halftime and post-game shows. Television broadcasts were split in 2007\u201308 between Fox Sports Florida and Sun Sports (later Fox Sports Sun, currently FanDuel Sports Sun). In the 18 years before then, broadcasts were split between Sun Sports (formerly known as the Sunshine Network) and local television stations, originally WKCF and, later, WRBW.\nThere was a controversy with moving broadcasts to Fox Sports Florida since Orlando's largest cable TV provider, Bright House Networks, did not carry the network. Pressure increased for the cable provider to pick up FS Florida in time for the 2007\u201308 NBA season but this did not happen. The Magic persisted with airing games on FS Florida into the 2008\u201309 season despite Bright House's refusal to pick up the channel in all of its affiliates. Bright House and FS Florida came to an agreement on January 1, 2009, and began airing the channel as part of its standard cable package. However, Bright House airs the channel using a digital signal that only allows customers who own the Digital cable box to receive the channel. The customers do not have to pay any additional costs to get the channel with their Digital cable box.\nAs of the 2024\u201325 season, all Magic games are now on FanDuel Sports Florida.\nRadio.\nAfter the end of the 2019\u201320 season, the Orlando Magic decided not to renew its contract with play-by-play announcer Dennis Neumann and color analyst Richie Adubato, another former Magic head coach. Games are produced by Magic Radio Network flagship AM 580 WDBO in Orlando, and also broadcast on AM 1380 WELE in Daytona Beach, 99.5 FM WGMW \"The Star\" in Gainesville and Ocala, AM 1290 WPCF in Panama City, AM 1590 WPSL in Port St. Lucie and AM 1450 WSTU in Stuart. The affiliate in Tallahassee is AM 1270 \"My 94.3\" WTLY. The immediate Tampa Bay area has no affiliate although AM 1340 in Clearwater WTAN is listed on the team's website. The Magic will continue to have a radio presence using the audio from its television broadcasts.\nThe flagship broadcast was simulcast on WDBO-FM during the 2011\u201312 NBA season while that station moved from AM to FM. When WDBO re-formatted from talk radio to sports radio, it retained the flagship status. However, WOEX (the former WDBO-FM) still simulcasts Magic games in Central Florida.\nPodcasts.\nThe official Orlando Magic website features a collection of podcasts available on iTunes, including \"Magic Overtime with Dante and Galante\".\nLeaders.\nFranchise leaders.\nBold denotes still active with team.\n\"Italic\" denotes still active but not with team.\nPoints scored (regular season) (as of the 2024\u201325 NBA season)\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nOther statistics (regular season) (as of the 2024\u201325 NBA season)\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Column/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src = \"Column/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src = \"Column/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Column/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src = \"Column/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src = \"Column/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFranchises accomplishments and awards.\nIndividual awards.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNBA Defensive Player of the Year\nNBA Rookie of the Year\nNBA Sixth Man of the Year\nNBA Sportsmanship Award\nNBA Most Improved Player of the Year\nNBA Coach of the Year\nNBA Executive of the Year\nNBA scoring champion\nAll-NBA First Team\nAll-NBA Second Team\nAll-NBA Third Team\nNBA All-Defensive First Team\nNBA All-Defensive Second Team\nNBA All-Rookie First Team\nNBA All-Rookie Second Team\nNBA All-Star Weekend.\nNBA All-Star Team\nNBA All-Star head coaches\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
