{"id": "62728", "revid": "949717", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62728", "title": "Juan de la Cierva", "text": "Spanish engineer and count (1895\u20131936)\nJuan de la Cierva y Codorn\u00edu, 1st Count of la Cierva (; 21 September 1895 \u2013 9 December 1936), was a Spanish civil engineer, pilot and a self-taught aeronautical engineer. His most famous accomplishment was the invention in 1920 of a rotorcraft called \"Autogiro\", a single-rotor type of aircraft that came to be called autogyro in the English language. In 1923, after four years of experimentation, De la Cierva developed the articulated rotor, which resulted in the world's first successful flight of a stable rotary-wing aircraft, with his C.4 prototype.\nEarly life.\nJuan de la Cierva was born to a wealthy, aristocratic Spanish family, and for a time his father was the war minister. At the age of eight he was spending his pocket money with his friends on experiments with gliders in one of his father's work sheds. In their teens they constructed an aeroplane from the wreckage they had bought from a French aviator who had crashed the plane. The final aeroplane used wood from a Spanish bar counter for the propeller. He eventually earned a civil engineering degree and after building and testing the first successful autogyro, moved to the United Kingdom in 1925, where, with the support of Scottish industrialist James G. Weir, he established the Cierva Autogiro Company.\nAt the outbreak of the Spanish Civil War, De la Cierva supported the Nationalist coalition forces, helping the rebels to obtain the De Havilland DH-89 'Dragon Rapide' which flew General Franco from the Canary Islands to Spanish Morocco. His brother was summarily executed by the Republican army in Paracuellos del Jarama.\nThe gyroplane (autogyro).\nDe la Cierva started building aircraft in 1912. In 1914, he designed and built a tri-motor aeroplane which was accepted by the Spanish government. In 1919 he started to consider the use of a rotor to generate lift at low airspeed, and eliminate the risk of stall.\nIn order to achieve this, he used the ability of a lifting rotor to autorotate, whereby at a suitable pitch setting, a rotor will continue to rotate without mechanical drive, sustained by the torque equilibrium of the lift and drag forces acting on the blades. With De la Cierva's autogyro, the rotor was drawn through the air by means of a conventional propeller, with the result that the rotor generated sufficient lift to sustain level flight, climb and descent.\nBefore this could be satisfactorily achieved, De la Cierva experienced several failures primarily associated with the unbalanced rolling movement generated when attempting take-off, due to dissymmetry of lift between the advancing and retreating blades. This major difficulty was resolved by the introduction of the flapping hinge. In 1923, De la Cierva's first successful autogyro was flown at Getafe aerodrome in Spain by Lt. Gomez Spencer.\nThis pioneering work was carried out in De la Cierva's native Spain. In 1925, he brought his C.6 to Britain and demonstrated it to the Air Ministry at Farnborough, Hampshire. This machine had a four blade rotor with flapping hinges but relied upon conventional airplane controls for pitch, roll and yaw. It was based upon an Avro 504K fuselage, initial rotation of the rotor was achieved by the rapid uncoiling of a rope passed around stops on the undersides of the blades.\nThe Farnborough demonstration was a great success, and resulted in an invitation to continue the work in the UK. As a direct result, and with the assistance of the Scottish industrialist James George Weir, the Cierva Autogiro Company, Ltd., was formed the following year. From the outset De la Cierva concentrated upon the design and the manufacture of rotor systems, relying on other established aircraft manufacturers to produce the airframes, predominantly the A.V. Roe Company.\nThe Avro built C.8 was a refinement of the C.6, with the more powerful 180hp Lynx radial engine, and several C.8s were built. The C.8R incorporated drag hinges, due to blade flapping motion causing high blade root stresses in the rotor plane of rotation; this modification resulted in other problems such as ground resonance for which drag hinge dampers were fitted.\nThe resolution of these fundamental rotor problems opened the way to progress, confidence built up rapidly, and after several cross-country flights a C.8L4 was entered for the 1928 Kings Cup Air Race. Although forced to withdraw, the C.8L4 subsequently completed a tour of the British Isles. Later that year it flew from London to Paris thus becoming the first rotating wing aircraft to cross the English Channel. The tour was subsequently extended to include Berlin, Brussels and Amsterdam.\nA predominant problem with the autogyro was driving the rotor prior to takeoff. Several methods were attempted in addition to the coiled rope system, which could take the rotor speed to 50% of that required, at which point movement along the ground to reach flying speed was necessary, while tilting the rotor to establish autorotation.\nAnother approach was to tilt the tail stabiliser to deflect engine slipstream up through the rotor. The most acceptable solution was finally achieved with the C.19 Mk.4, which was produced in some quantities; a direct drive from the engine to the rotor was fitted, through which the rotor could be accelerated up to speed. The system was then declutched prior to executing the take-off run.\nAs De la Cierva's autogyros achieved success and acceptance, others began to follow and with them came further innovation. Most important was the development of direct rotor control through cyclic pitch variation, achieved initially by tilting the rotor hub and subsequently by Raoul Hafner by the application of a spider mechanism that acted directly on each rotor blade. The first production direct control autogyro was the C.30, produced in quantity by Avro, Liore et Olivier, and Focke-Wulf. This machine allowed for change of motion in any direction \u2013 upwards, downwards or sideways \u2013 by the tilting of the horizontal rotors and also effected a minimising of some of controls used in more conventional aircraft of the period. Development of cyclic pitch variation was also influenced by the Dutch helicopter pioneer Albert Gillis von Baumhauer, who adopted swashplate principle in his designs and probably influenced Cierva in their meeting in 1928.\nThe introduction of jump take-off was another major improvement in capability. The rotor was accelerated in no-lift pitch until the rotor speed required for flight was achieved, and then declutched. The loss of torque caused the blades to swing forward on angled drag hinges with a resultant increase in collective pitch, causing the aircraft to leap into the air. With all the engine power now applied to the forward thrusting propeller, it was now possible to continue in forward flight with the rotor in autorotation.\nThe C.40 was the first production jump takeoff autogyro.\nAutogyros were built in many countries under De la Cierva licences, including France, Germany, Japan, Russia and the United States.\nDe la Cierva's motivation was to produce an aircraft that would not stall but near the end of his life he accepted the advantages offered by the helicopter and began the initial work towards that end. In 1936, the Cierva Autogiro Company, Ltd. responded to a British Air Ministry specification for a Royal Navy helicopter with the gyrodyne.\nDeath.\nOn the morning of 9 December 1936, he boarded a Dutch DC-2 of KLM at Croydon Airfield, bound for Amsterdam. After delay caused by heavy fog, the airliner took off at about 10:30 am but drifted slightly off course after takeoff and exploded after flying into a house on gently rising terrain to the south of the airport, killing 15 people, among them de la Cierva.\nLegacy.\nJuan de la Cierva's work on rotor-wing dynamics made possible the modern helicopter, whose development as a practical means of flight had been prevented by a lack of understanding of these matters. The understanding that he established is applicable to all rotor-winged aircraft; though lacking true vertical flight capability, work on the autogyro forms the basis for helicopter analysis.\nDe la Cierva's death in an aeroplane crash in December 1936 prevented him from fulfilling his recent decision to build a useful and reliable aircraft capable of true vertical flight for the Royal Navy, but it was his work on the autogyro that was used to achieve this goal. Technology developed for the autogyro was used in the development of the experimental Fw 61 helicopter, which was flown in 1936 by Cierva Autogiro Company licensee Focke-Achgelis. His pioneering work also led to the development of a third type of rotorcraft, the gyrodyne, a concept of his former technical assistant and successor as chief technical officer of the Cierva Autogyro Company, Dr. James Allan Jamieson Bennett.\nIn 1966, Juan de la Cierva was inducted into the International Aerospace Hall of Fame for his innovation in rotor blade technology, using them to generate lift and to control the aircraft's attitude with precision. The Juan de la Cierva scholarship from the Spanish Ministry of Science is named after him.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "62729", "revid": "9755426", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62729", "title": "Sense of balance", "text": "Physiological sense regarding posture\nThe sense of balance or equilibrioception is the perception of balance and spatial orientation. It helps prevent humans and nonhuman animals from falling over when standing or moving. Equilibrioception is the result of a number of sensory systems working together; the eyes (visual system), the inner ears (vestibular system), and the body's sense of where it is in space (proprioception) ideally need to be intact.\nThe vestibular system, the region of the inner ear where three semicircular canals converge, works with the visual system to keep objects in focus when the head is moving. This is called the vestibulo-ocular reflex (VOR). The balance system works with the visual and skeletal systems (the muscles and joints and their sensors) to maintain orientation or balance. Visual signals sent to the brain about the body's position in relation to its surroundings are processed by the brain and compared to information from the vestibular and skeletal systems.\nVestibular system.\nIn the vestibular system, equilibrioception is determined by the level of a fluid called endolymph in the labyrinth, a complex set of tubing in the inner ear.\nDysfunction.\nWhen the sense of balance is interrupted it causes dizziness, disorientation and nausea. Balance can be upset by M\u00e9ni\u00e8re's disease, superior canal dehiscence syndrome, an inner ear infection, by a bad common cold affecting the head or a number of other medical conditions including but not limited to vertigo. It can also be temporarily disturbed by quick or prolonged acceleration, for example, riding on a merry-go-round. Blows can also affect equilibrioreception, especially those to the side of the head or directly to the ear.\nMost astronauts find that their sense of balance is impaired when in orbit because they are in a constant state of weightlessness. This causes a form of motion sickness called space adaptation syndrome.\nSystem overview.\n This overview also explains acceleration as its processes are interconnected with balance.\nMechanical.\nThere are five sensory organs innervated by the vestibular nerve; three semicircular canals (Horizontal SCC, Superior SCC, Posterior SCC) and two otolith organs (saccule and utricle). Each semicircular canal (SSC) is a thin tube that doubles in thickness briefly at a point called osseous ampullae. At their center-base, each contains an ampullary cupula. The cupula is a gelatin bulb connected to the stereocilia of hair cells, affected by the relative movement of the endolymph it is bathed in.\nSince the cupula is part of the bony labyrinth, it rotates along with actual head movement, and by itself without the endolymph, it cannot be stimulated and therefore, could not detect movement. Endolymph follows the rotation of the canal; however, due to inertia its movement initially lags behind that of the bony labyrinth. The delayed movement of the endolymph bends and activates the cupula. When the cupula bends, the connected stereocilia bend along with it, activating chemical reactions in the hair cells surrounding crista ampullaris and eventually create action potentials carried by the vestibular nerve signaling to the body that it has moved in space.\nAfter any extended rotation, the endolymph catches up to the canal and the cupula returns to its upright position and resets. When extended rotation ceases, however, endolymph continues, (due to inertia) which bends and activates the cupula once again to signal a change in movement.\nPilots doing long banked turns begin to feel upright (no longer turning) as endolymph matches canal rotation; once the pilot exits the turn the cupula is once again stimulated, causing the feeling of turning the other way, rather than flying straight and level.\nThe horizontal SCC handles head rotations about a vertical axis (e.g. looking side to side), the superior SCC handles head movement about a lateral axis (e.g. head to shoulder), and the posterior SCC handles head rotation about a rostral-caudal axis (e.g. nodding). SCC sends adaptive signals, unlike the two otolith organs, the saccule and utricle, whose signals do not adapt over time.\nA shift in the otolithic membrane that stimulates the cilia is considered the state of the body until the cilia are once again stimulated. For example, lying down stimulates cilia and standing up stimulates cilia, however, for the time spent lying the signal that you are lying remains active, even though the membrane resets.\nOtolithic organs have a thick, heavy gelatin membrane that, due to inertia (like endolymph), lags behind and continues ahead past the macula it overlays, bending and activating the contained cilia.\nUtricle responds to linear accelerations and head-tilts in the horizontal plane (head to shoulder), whereas saccule responds to linear accelerations and head-tilts in the vertical plane (up and down). Otolithic organs update the brain on the head-location when not moving; SCC update during movement.\nKinocilium are the longest stereocilia and are positioned (one per 40-70 regular cilia) at the end of the bundle. If stereocilia go towards kinocilium, depolarization occurs, causing more neurotransmitters, and more vestibular nerve firings, as compared to when stereocilia tilt away from kinocilium (hyperpolarization, less neurotransmitter, less firing).\nNeural.\nFirst order vestibular nuclei (VN) project to lateral vestibular nucleus (IVN), medial vestibular nucleus (MVN), and superior vestibular nucleus (SVN).\nThe inferior cerebellar peduncle is the largest center through which balance information passes. It is the area of integration between proprioceptive, and vestibular inputs, to aid in unconscious maintenance of balance and posture.\nThe inferior olivary nucleus aids in complex motor tasks by encoding coordinating timing sensory information; this is decoded and acted upon in the cerebellum.\nThe cerebellar vermis has three main parts. The vestibulocerebellum regulates eye movements by the integration of visual info provided by the superior colliculus and balance information. The spinocerebellum integrates visual, auditory, proprioceptive, and balance information to act out body and limb movements. It receives input from the trigeminal nerve, dorsal column (of the spinal cord), midbrain, thalamus, reticular formation and vestibular nuclei (medulla) outputs. Lastly, the cerebrocerebellum plans, times, and initiates movement after evaluating sensory input from, primarily, motor cortex areas, via pons and cerebellar dentate nucleus. It outputs to the thalamus, motor cortex areas, and red nucleus.\nThe flocculonodular lobe is a cerebellar lobe that helps maintain body equilibrium by modifying muscle tone (the continuous and passive muscle contractions).\nMVN and IVN are in the medulla, LVN and SVN are smaller and in pons. SVN, MVN, and IVN ascend within the medial longitudinal fasciculus. LVN descend the spinal cord within the lateral vestibulospinal tract and ends at the sacrum. MVN also descend the spinal cord, within the medial vestibulospinal tract, ending at lumbar 1.\nThe thalamic reticular nucleus distributes information to various other thalamic nuclei, regulating the flow of information. It is speculatively able to stop signals, ending transmission of unimportant info. The thalamus relays info between pons (cerebellum link), motor cortices, and insula.\nThe insula is also heavily connected to motor cortices; the insula is likely where balance is likely brought into perception.\nThe oculomotor nuclear complex refers to fibers going to tegmentum (eye movement), red nucleus (gait (natural limb movement)), substantia nigra (reward), and cerebral peduncle (motor relay). Nucleus of Cajal are one of the named oculomotor nuclei, they are involved in eye movements and reflex gaze coordination.\nThe abducens nerve solely innervates the lateral rectus muscle of the eye, moving the eye with the trochlear nerve. The trochlear solely innervates the superior oblique muscle of the eye. Together, trochlear and abducens contract and relax to simultaneously direct the pupil towards an angle and depress the globe on the opposite side of the eye (e.g. looking down directs the pupil down and depresses (towards the brain) the top of the globe). The pupil is not only directed, but often rotated, by these muscles. (See visual system)\nThe thalamus and superior colliculus are connected via the lateral geniculate nucleus. The superior colliculus (SC) is the topographical map for balance and quick orienting movements with primarily visual inputs. SC integrates multiple senses.\nOther animals.\nSome animals have better equilibrioception than humans; for example, a cat uses its inner ear and tail to walk on a thin fence.\nEquilibrioception in many marine animals is done with an entirely different organ, the statocyst, which detects the position of tiny calcareous stones to determine which way is \"up\".\nIn plants.\nPlants could be said to exhibit a form of equilibrioception, in that when rotated from their normal attitude the stems grow in the direction that is upward (away from gravity) while their roots grow downward (in the direction of gravity). This phenomenon is known as gravitropism and it has been shown that, for example, poplar stems can detect reorientation and inclination.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "62732", "revid": "40192293", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62732", "title": "Equivalent", "text": ""}
{"id": "62734", "revid": "15956619", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62734", "title": "Redhat", "text": ""}
{"id": "62735", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62735", "title": "GAO", "text": ""}
{"id": "62737", "revid": "98915", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62737", "title": "Finger (protocol)", "text": "Simple network protocols for the exchange of human-oriented status and user information\nIn computer networking, the Name/Finger protocol and the Finger user information protocol are simple network protocols for the exchange of human-oriented status and user information.\nName/Finger protocol.\nThe Name/Finger protocol is based on Request for Comments document RFC 742 (December 1977) as an interface to the codice_1 and codice_2 programs that provide status reports on a particular computer system or a particular person at network sites. The finger program was written in 1971 by Les Earnest who created the program to solve the need of users who wanted information on other users of the network. Information on who is logged in was useful to check the availability of a person to meet. This was probably the earliest form of presence information for remote network users.\nPrior to the finger program, the only way to get this information on WAITS was with a WHO program that showed IDs and terminal line numbers (the server's internal number of the communication line over which the user's terminal is connected) for logged-in users. In reference to the name FINGER, Les Earnest, wrote that he saw users of the WAITS time-sharing system run their fingers down the output of the WHO command.\nFinger user information protocol.\nThe finger daemon runs on TCP port 79. The client will (in the case of remote hosts) open a connection to port 79. An RUIP (Remote User Information Program) is started on the remote end of the connection to process the request. The local host sends the RUIP one line query based upon the Finger query specification, and waits for the RUIP to respond. The RUIP receives and processes the query, returns an answer, then initiates the close of the connection. The local host receives the answer and the close signal, then proceeds to close its end of the connection.\nThe Finger user information protocol is based on RFC 1288 (\"The Finger User Information Protocol\", December 1991). Typically the server side of the protocol is implemented by a program codice_3 or codice_4 (for \"finger daemon\"), while the client side is implemented by the codice_1 and codice_2 programs which are supposed to return a friendly, human-oriented status report on either the system at the moment or a particular person in depth. There is no required format, and the protocol consists mostly of specifying a single command line.\nThe program would supply information such as whether a user is currently logged-on, e-mail address, full name etc. As well as standard user information, finger displays the contents of the codice_7 and codice_8 files in the user's home directory. Often this file (maintained by the user) contains either useful information about the user's current activities, similar to micro-blogging, or alternatively all manner of humor.\nSecurity concerns.\nSupplying such detailed information as e-mail addresses and full names was considered acceptable and convenient in the early days of networking, but later was considered questionable for privacy and security reasons.\nFinger information has been used by hackers as a way to initiate a social engineering attack on a company's computer security system. By using a finger client to get a list of a company's employee names, email addresses, phone numbers, and so on, a hacker can call or email someone at a company requesting information while posing as another employee.\nThe finger daemon has also had several exploitable security holes crackers have used to break into systems. For example, in 1988 the Morris worm exploited an overflow vulnerability in codice_3 (among others) to spread.\nFor these reasons, by the late 1990s the vast majority of sites on the Internet no longer offered the service.\nApplication support.\nIt is implemented on Unix (like macOS), Unix-like systems (like Linux and FreeBSD), and current versions of Windows (finger.exe command). Other software has finger support:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "62738", "revid": "11487766", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62738", "title": "1350s BC", "text": "The 1350s BC is a decade that lasted from 1359 BC to 1350 BC.\nDecade \nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "62739", "revid": "3784107", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62739", "title": "1360s BC", "text": "Decade\nThe 1360s BC is a decade that lasted from 1369 BC to 1360 BC.\nDecade\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "62740", "revid": "46737838", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62740", "title": "Dartford Crossing", "text": "Tunnel and bridge between Kent and Essex, UK\nThe Dartford\u2013Thurrock River Crossing, commonly known as the Dartford Crossing and until 1991 the Dartford Tunnel, is a major road crossing of the River Thames in England, carrying the A282 road between Dartford in Kent in the south and Thurrock in Essex in the north.\nIt consists of two bored tunnels and the cable-stayed Queen Elizabeth II Bridge. The only fixed road crossing of the Thames east of Greater London, it is the busiest estuarial crossing in the United Kingdom, with an average daily use of over 130,000 vehicles. It opened in stages: the west tunnel in 1963, the east tunnel in 1980 and the bridge in 1991. The crossing, although not officially designated a motorway, is considered part of the M25 motorway's route, using the tunnels northbound and bridge southbound. Described as one of the most important road crossings in Britain, it suffers from heavy traffic and congestion.\nThe crossing's development started in the late 1930s, but was interrupted due to the Second World War and resumed in the 1950s. The original tunnel catered for a single lane of traffic in each direction, but rising traffic levels required the second tunnel to be built. The M25 connected to the tunnels at both ends when completed in 1986, and the increased traffic put pressure on the tunnels' capacity. A private finance initiative scheme was started in 1988 to build the bridge. The combined crossing now handles four lanes of traffic in each direction.\nThe crossing has always been tolled, and though the cost of construction has since been paid back, the toll was retained, and rebranded as a congestion pricing scheme from 1 April 2003. Since 2008 it has been free from 10 pm to 6 am. An automatic number plate recognition charging scheme named the \"Dart Charge\" began in November 2014. As a result, the booths on the Kent side were removed and the charge is now only payable online, by post, or in participating retail outlets. A residents' scheme is available, offering discounts for people living near the crossing.\nThe crossings are operated by Connect Plus (M25) Ltd on behalf of National Highways as part of a 30-year Design-Build-Finance-Operate agreement that began in 2009.\nLocation.\nThe crossing spans the River Thames between Dartford, Kent, to the south and Thurrock, Essex, to the north. It is about east of the centre of London, outside the Greater London boundary. The two tunnels are long, while the cable-stayed bridge is high with a main span of . A speed limit is in place in both directions. North of the river, the rail line High Speed 1 (between St Pancras and Ebbsfleet International Stations) passes under the approach roads at a near right angle.\nThe design capacity is 135,000 vehicles per day, but in practice the crossing carries around 160,000. It has been described by the Highways Agency as \"a vital transport link for the national and South East economies\", by the former Secretary of State for Transport, Patrick McLoughlin, as \"a crucial part of the country's strategic road network\", and by the local Thurrock Council as \"one of Europe's most heavily used crossings and complex traffic management systems\". It is signed as a major destination on London's orbital route, the M25, though the crossing and its approach road are an all-purpose road (the A282); this allows some (though not all) non-motorway traffic\u2014such as mopeds, learner drivers and agricultural vehicles\u2014to use it. The speed limit for the crossing is set at 50 mph. Though not the name of the crossing infrastructure, the actual road across the Thames is named Canterbury Way. Southbound traffic crosses the four-lane bridge, while northbound traffic uses both of the two-lane road tunnels. The bridge can be closed due to high winds or maintenance. On these occasions, traffic uses the tunnels in both directions. The crossing and its approaches, like most UK urban motorways, are equipped with lane control and variable-message signs to manage traffic.\nAlternative routes.\nThe next nearest vehicle crossings to the west of Dartford are the Woolwich Ferry and the Blackwall and Silvertown Tunnels, both well within East London. When the bridge is closed in high winds and for maintenance, no convenient diversion exists through London for the higher-limit southbound vehicles. Those over are diverted around the far side of the M25.\nA number of new crossings have been proposed as relief for the Dartford Crossing. The proposed Thames Gateway Bridge to the west was provisionally supported in 2004, but was cancelled in November 2008 when Boris Johnson became Mayor of London. Johnson subsequently proposed the Gallions Reach Ferry, a ferry crossing in the same location, as an alternative. The Lower Thames Crossing is a proposed tunnel to the east between Shorne, Kent and South Ockendon, Essex. Thurrock Council suggest that this crossing will be essential for managing congestion. A public consultation on the scheme ended in March 2016, with the route announced in April 2017.\nAs of December\u00a02023[ [update]], contracts have been awarded and the target date for completion is 2032.\nCharges.\nA free-flow electronic charging system called Dart Charge began in November 2014 based on automatic number plate recognition. The charge can be paid online or phone, in advance or by midnight the day after crossing, but can no longer be paid in cash at the site since the old toll booths have been removed. However, cash payments are accepted at some Payzone retail outlets. Reminder signs and variable message signs on approaches to the crossing say \"Dart charge \u2013 find us online. Pay by midnight tomorrow.\" Vehicles have to pay the charge if they use the crossing between 6\u00a0am and 10\u00a0pm seven days per week, and this is indicated on signs. Daily charges for the crossing since October 2018 are:\nVarious categories of vehicles are exempt from the charge, including emergency services vehicles, military vehicles and those exempt from Vehicle Excise Duty on the grounds of disability.\nThe charges vary according to the type of vehicle. Motorcycles are free but there are standard charges for cars, two-axle goods vehicles and larger vehicles with more than two axles. Drivers who fail to pay the charge are issued with a penalty charge notice. There are no signs warning of penalty charges.\nSince 2008, a local residents' scheme gives 50 crossings to car drivers resident in the Dartford and Thurrock council areas for an annual registration fee of \u00a310, with additional crossings at 20p each. On 1 March 2014, this scheme was extended to include privately owned two-axle goods vehicles. A further option was introduced giving unlimited crossings for \u00a320 annually. Around 44,000 drivers take advantage of this scheme each year. Although the website for paying the charge is operated by the UK Government, the contract for the free-flow charging system is held by French public roads operator Soci\u00e9t\u00e9 des Autoroutes du Nord et de l'Est de la France (SANEF) on behalf of the Government.\nIn 2025, campaign group Transport Action Network claimed the toll could be tripled to \u00a38.10 for cars and \u00a314 for lorries if private finance is used to build the Lower Thames Crossing.\nHistory.\nWestern tunnel.\nThe idea of a tunnel crossing was first proposed by the Ministry of Transport in 1924. Initial reports at the start of the year suggested a crossing between Tilbury and Gravesend, replacing a ferry service, but this had been rejected by July in favour of a route further upstream, near Dartford. By 1929, the total cost of building the tunnel had been estimated at \u00a33 million (equivalent to \u00a3 million in 2023). The tunnel was planned to be part of a general orbital route around London and was provisionally known as part of the \"South Orbital Road\". The &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Visible anchor/styles.css\" /&gt;Dartford Tunnel Act 1930 (20 &amp; 21 Geo. 5. c. clxxxii) authorised the construction of the tunnel, and set tolls to be charged for its use. It was amended by the &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Visible anchor/styles.css\" /&gt;Dartford Tunnel Act 1937 (1 Edw. 8. &amp; 1 Geo. 6. c. cxxvii) to adjust the design and increase the permitted tolls.\nThe first engineering work to take place was a compressed air driven pilot tunnel, which was drilled between 1936 and 1938. Work on the tunnel was delayed due to World War II, and resumed in 1959, using a Greathead Shield, similar to the work on the Blackwall Tunnel some 60 years earlier. The delay in work due to the war allowed the tunnel's design to be improved, which included a better ventilation system. After negotiations with the Ministry of Transport, Kent and Essex county councils obtained government approval to increase the previously set tolls in 1960, before opening. The two-lane bore, 28 feet | 8.6m diameter tunnel opened to traffic on 18 November 1963; the total project cost was \u00a313 million (equivalent to \u00a3 million in 2023) and it initially served approximately 12,000 vehicles per day.\nThe toll was originally two shillings and sixpence, equivalent to 12.5p post-decimalisation, and approximately equivalent in purchasing power to \u00a3 in 2023. The &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Visible anchor/styles.css\" /&gt;Dartford Tunnel Act 1967 (c. xxxvii) gave a joint committee of Kent and Essex county councils (the Dartford Tunnel Joint Committee) the authority to increase the tolls, and in December 1977, the toll was raised from 25p to 35p for cars, 40p to 55p for two-axle goods vehicles, and 60p to 85p for HGVs. By 1984, the toll for cars had risen to 60p.\nEastern tunnel.\nThe first tunnel was expected to carry two million vehicles a year but by 1970 was carrying over eight million. That year, Michael Heseltine, then a junior transport minister, announced that a second tunnel would be built in conjunction with the North Orbital Road, later to become the M25.\nConstruction was approved in April 1971, with an initial expected opening date in 1976. Work was delayed due to a lack of funds, which was resolved by EEC funding granted in 1974. The second tunnel opened in May 1980, allowing each tunnel to handle one direction of traffic, by which time the joint capacity of the two tunnels had increased to 65,000 vehicles per day. Connection of the crossing to the M25 was completed on the southerly Kent side in 1977 (Junction 2) and to the northerly Essex side in September 1982 (Junction 31). Following the completion of the M25 in 1986, the daily demand had grown to 79,000 vehicles.\nQueen Elizabeth II Bridge.\nDuring the early 1980s, it was anticipated that traffic through the tunnel would rise on the completion of the M25 in 1986. At the time, the expectation was that other routes in London would be improved instead, diverting 15% of traffic away from the tunnel. In 1985, the Transport Minister, Lynda Chalker, announced that the number of toll booths would be increased to 12 each way, but concern grew that two tunnels would not be able to cope with the full demands of a completed M25.\nBetween September 1985 and December 1986, proposals for improvements to the Dartford Crossing underwent several changes, and in 1986, a Trafalgar House consortium won a bid to build a new bridge at Dartford crossing, valued at \u00a386 million (\u00a3 million in 2023). At the time there were several other privately financed projects planned or under construction in the UK, including the Second Severn Crossing. From 1981 until the establishment of the private finance initiative (PFI) regime in the late 1980s, private investment projects were governed by the Ryrie Rules which dictated that \"any privately-financed solution must be shown to be more cost-effective than a publicly-financed alternative, and that privately-financed expenditure by nationalised industries could not be additional to public expenditure provision\" [annual budget], \"which would be reduced by the amount of private finance borrowed.\"\nOn 31 July 1988, a private finance initiative concession was enabled under the Dartford-Thurrock Crossing Act 1988 (c. 20), which transferred control of the crossing from Kent and Essex county councils to Dartford River Crossing Limited, a private company managed by Rodney Jones. The company would also bear the debt of the bridge, then under construction, \"financed 100% by debt, with no equity contribution\". The private company was at risk of not recuperating their costs, but ultimately the Dartford scheme demonstrated that the Ryrie Rules were no longer a barrier to the private financing of public infrastructure projects. The concession was scheduled for 20 years from the transfer date, with a stipulation that it could end when debts had been paid off, which was agreed to have been achieved on 31 March 2002. According to the \"International Handbook on Public-Private Partnership\", the chief financing for the project came from a \"20-year subordinated loan stock, 16-year loan stock and \u00a385 million (\u00a3 million in 2023) as a term loan from banks\". The construction contract was let to a joint venture of Kv\u00e6rner, Cleveland Bridge &amp; Engineering Company and the Cementation Company.\nConstruction of the bridge started immediately after the creation of the PFI in 1988. It was designed by German civil engineer Hellmut Homberg, with the UK's Halcrow Group acting as category 3 check engineer, employer's agent and engineering adviser. The two main caissons supporting the bridge piers were constructed in the Netherlands. Each caisson was designed to withstand a bridge strike of a ship weighing up to 65,000 tonnes and travelling up to The bridge deck is about high, and it took a team of around 56 to assemble its structure. During construction of the approach road, a World War II bomb was found in its path, which required closure of the entire crossing.\nThe bridge was opened by Queen Elizabeth II on 30 October 1991. The total cost of construction was \u00a3120\u00a0million (\u00a3 in 2023), including \u00a330 million (\u00a3 million in 2023) for the approach roads. The proposed name had been simply the Dartford Bridge, but Thurrock residents objected and suggested the Tilbury Bridge, leading to a compromise. At the time of opening, it had the longest cable-stayed span of any bridge in Europe. It is the only bridge across the Thames downstream of Central London to be opened since Tower Bridge in 1894.\nCharging scheme.\nIn 2000, the European Union issued a directive that value-added tax should be charged on all road tolls, including the Dartford Crossing. The Government opposed the directive and said it would bear the additional cost. It was anticipated that the tolls would be removed on 1 April 2003 under the original PFI scheme contract. However, the Highways Agency decided that the tolls would become a \"charge\", under legislation introduced by the Transport Act 2000 to introduce charging schemes on any trunk road bridge or tunnel at least in length.\nUnder the 2000 Transport Act, the A282 Trunk Road (Dartford-Thurrock Crossing charging scheme) Order 2002 allowed the continuation of the crossing fee, which officially became a charge and not a toll on 1 April 2003. Management of the crossing was contracted to Le Crossing Company Limited on behalf of the Highways Agency. In September 2009 the Highways Agency made a new contract with Connect Plus (M25) Limited. As well as maintaining the crossing, the contract required the company to widen around 40 miles of the M25 and to refurbish a tunnel on the A1(M) at Hatfield. In October 2009, the Government announced its intention to sell the crossing as part of a public sector deficit reduction strategy. The announcement was unpopular with local residents, who encouraged drivers to sound their horns in protest when using the crossing. After the change of government following the 2010 general election, the new prime minister David Cameron announced that the crossing might still be sold, despite local opposition, particularly from Gareth Johnson, Member of Parliament (MP) for Dartford. Subsequently, the chancellor George Osborne announced that charges would be increased instead to cover the budget deficit. Pre-pay accounts for the crossing were introduced around this time; drivers held an electronic device called a DART-Tag in the vehicle that automatically deducted the charge at payment booths. This was abolished when the Dart Charge was introduced in 2014.\nUnder the 2008 Charging Order introduced on 15 November 2008, charges between 10\u00a0pm and 6\u00a0am were discontinued, but standard daytime rates increased, starting at \u00a31.50 for cars. On 7 October 2012 the charges increased to \u00a32 for cars, \u00a32.50 for 2 axle goods vehicles and \u00a35 for multi-axle goods vehicles. By 2012, local businesses were complaining that the crossing's charge booths were impeding local growth. The government announced that a new electronic charging system would be introduced in 2014. Drivers would be able to pay by phone, text, online or in shops. The charge was proposed to increase to \u00a32.50 for cars, \u00a33 for two-axle goods vehicles and \u00a36 for multi-axle vehicles. Drivers not exempt and not paying the charge within 28 days are charged \u00a3105.\nPreparation work on the free-flow scheme started in April 2014. Concerns were raised about reliability, with a Highways Agency report predicting that it could lose up to \u00a36m of unpaid charges per year. In September, the Highways Agency announced that the new scheme would start to operate at the end of November, though related works to remove barriers would continue until April 2015. Subsequently, the date for removal of the booths was confirmed as 30 November.\nThe Dart Charge scheme was considered a success by the project management, who claimed it has reduced peak-time round trips over the crossing by 15 minutes. The Automobile Association said the scheme had faults, while a 2015 BBC report showed 1.8 million fines had been issued for failure to pay in the year since the charge was set up.\nIn 2023, a system upgrade prevented many users from paying the Dart Charge, and National Highways temporarily extended its payment deadline to accommodate the problem.\nTraffic.\nAs of 2015,[ [update]] a total of 1,537,084,159 journeys had been made. The highest recorded daily usage was 181,990 on 23 July 2004; since then traffic levels have decreased. The total income for the financial year ended 31 March 2012 was \u00a372,147,091, while the corresponding figure for the following financial year was \u00a380,331,662. A 2016 report by Highways England suggested the crossing is used around 50 million times a year.\nBus.\nThere is currently one bus service that uses the crossing, the X80 operated by Ensignbus which runs between Lakeside Shopping Centre and Bluewater.\nCycling.\nBicycles are not permitted on the crossing, but cyclists can be carried across the crossing by the transport authority. Section 27 of the Dartford-Thurrock Crossing Act 1988 requires that this service be provided free of charge. Cyclists report to the crossing control offices on either side, using a free telephone service. The transfer takes around 15 to 30 minutes.\nIn October 1963, the Dartford Tunnel Joint Committee ordered five double-decker buses based on the Ford Thames Trader chassis for special duties, taking cyclists through the Dartford Tunnel. These had a lower deck purpose-built for carrying bicycles, with upper deck seats for cyclists. Access was via a stairwell to the upper deck starting several feet above the level of the road, accessible from special platforms built at either end of the tunnel; there was also a ladder built into the side of the bodywork for access elsewhere. The design was criticised for failing to protect any passenger from falling off the vehicle, and running costs were estimated at \u00a32,550 per month, with only \u00a345 revenue. The joint committee contracted London Transport to operate the buses on their behalf. The service was reduced to one bus in April 1964 and then cancelled in 1965, to be replaced by the current transfer service using a vehicle with a rear cycle rack. One of these buses has been preserved.\nHazardous loads.\nThe transport of hazardous goods through the crossing is governed by the European ADR Agreement. The Dartford Crossing is class C, which restricts transporting goods such as nitrates and flammable liquids. The introduction of the ADR scheme initially caused confusion, and for a short time, transporting aerosols through the tunnel was banned. Certain hazardous goods vehicles, together with some oversize and abnormal loads (if permitted), may require escorting by National Highways traffic officers. The crossing authority must hold exercises in conjunction with the emergency services. In 2006 Exercise Orpheus was held, involving the closure of both road tunnels for five hours.\nSafety patrol.\nThe tunnel is patrolled by National Highways traffic officers. Officers may stop and direct traffic on the crossing and its approach roads, and must be in uniform to exercise their powers. The crossing's speed limit is enforced by speed cameras; between October 2012 and June 2014, 24,229 drivers were caught speeding, with some travelling as fast as . A spokesman for Highways England said the cameras were \"helping us improve safety and make journeys more reliable\". The bridge also has a reduced speed limit of when crosswind is above or headwind above , and is closed entirely if Britain's national weather service, the Met Office, predicts crosswind above or headwind above .\nCongestion.\nThe crossing is the busiest in the United Kingdom, with an average daily use of around 160,000 vehicles. The crossing has high levels of congestion, especially at peak times - with high levels of air pollution impacting neighbouring Thurrock and Dartford.\nBecause the design capacity has been exceeded, the crossing is subject to major traffic congestion and disruption, particularly when parts are closed because of accidents or bad weather. Though the government was adamant that the Queen Elizabeth II Bridge should be designed to avoid closure due to high winds, the bridge has nevertheless had to close on occasions. On 12 February 2014, during the winter storms, it was closed owing to winds, and again on the evening of 13\u201314 February 2014.\nAt busy times there was significant delay at the payment booths when these existed. Because there are numerous junctions on either side of the crossing, a high proportion of local traffic mixes with long-distance traffic, for example travelling from the North and Midlands onward to Continental Europe. In 2004, a BBC survey reported that the crossing was \"the most stressful section of the M25\" while in 2009, the crossing was listed in a Royal Automobile Club report as the fourth most congested road in Britain. Though Highways England have reported greatly improved journey times since automatic charging was introduced, former local MP Gareth Johnson claims otherwise and has insisted that the Lower Thames Crossing, along with improved signing around Dartford, are better options to reduce congestion. In 2015, he said the crossing was Britain's worst stretch of motorway.\nFuture.\nSince the 2000s, planning work has been underway regarding another crossing of the Thames to ease congestion at the Dartford Crossing. Options considered included an additional crossing at Dartford for long distance M25 traffic, as well as new crossings located in the Swanscombe or Tilbury area.\nIn 2017, a route connecting the M25 at North Ockendon to the A2 at Thong was selected. The new road will be in length, and have a twin-bore tunnel crossing under the River Thames east of Gravesend and Tilbury. The crossing is estimated to cost between \u00a36.4 billion and \u00a38.2 billion, taking about six years to build once permission is granted.\nReferences.\nFootnotes\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "62741", "revid": "11487766", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62741", "title": "1370s BC", "text": "The 1370s BC refers to the period between \"1379 BC\" and \"1370 BC\", the 1370s was the third decade of the 14th century BC.\nDecade\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "62742", "revid": "11487766", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62742", "title": "1390s BC", "text": "The 1390s BC is a decade that lasted from 1399 BC to 1390 BC.\nDecade\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "62743", "revid": "3019949", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62743", "title": "1400s BC (decade)", "text": "The 1400s BC is a decade that lasted from 1409 BC to 1400 BC.\nDecade\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "62745", "revid": "49566734", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62745", "title": "Lethal injection", "text": "Form of execution involving injection of chemicals into the bloodstream\nLethal injection is the practice of injecting one or more drugs into a person (typically a barbiturate, paralytic, and potassium) for the express purpose of causing death. The main application for this procedure is capital punishment, but the term may also be applied in a broader sense to include euthanasia and other forms of suicide. The drugs cause the person to become unconscious, stop their breathing, and cause a heart arrhythmia, in that order.\nFirst developed in the United States, the method has become a legal means of execution in Mainland China, Thailand (since 2003), Guatemala, Taiwan, the Maldives, Nigeria, and Vietnam, though Guatemala abolished the death penalty for civilian cases in 2017 and has not conducted an execution since 2000, and the Maldives has never carried out an execution since its independence. Although Taiwan permits lethal injection as an execution method, no executions have been carried out in this manner; the same is true for Nigeria. Lethal injection was also used in the Philippines until the country re-abolished the death penalty in 2006.\nAlthough primarily introduced as a more \"humane\" method of execution, lethal injection has been subject to criticism, being described by some as cruel and unusual. Opponents in particular critique the operation of lethal injections by untrained corrections officers and the lack of guarantee that the victim will be unconscious in every individual case. There have been instances in which condemned individuals have been injected with paralytics, and then a cardiac arrest-inducing agent, while still conscious; this has been compared to torture. Proponents often say that there is no reasonable or less cruel alternative.\nHistory.\nLethal injection gained popularity in the late 20th century as a form of execution intended to supplant electrocution, gas inhalation, hanging and firing squad, which were considered to be less humane. It has become the most common form of legal execution in the United States.\nLethal injection was proposed on January 17, 1888, by Julius Mount Bleyer, a New York doctor who praised it as being cheaper than hanging. Bleyer's idea would not be revived until the mid-1970s, when Texas and Oklahoma adopted the modern version of the method; a series of botched executions led to an eventual rise of public disapproval of electrocutions in the 1980s. Lethal injections were first used by Nazi Germany to execute prisoners during World War II. Nazi Germany developed the Action T4 euthanasia program led by Karl Brandt as one method to terminate \"Lebensunwertes Leben\" (\"life unworthy of life\"). During the war, lethal injections were also administered to children detained at the Sisak concentration camp, by the camp's commander, the physician Antun Naj\u017eer. The Royal Commission on Capital Punishment 1949\u20131953 considered lethal injection, but eventually ruled it out after pressure from the British Medical Association (BMA).\nImplementation.\nOn May 10, 1977, Oklahoma became the first U.S. state to approve lethal injection when Governor David Boren signed a bill into law. Episcopal Reverend Bill Wiseman had introduced it into the Oklahoma legislature, where it passed and was quickly sent to the Governor's desk (Title 22, Section 1014(A)). The next day, Texas became the second U.S. state to approve a lethal injection law. Since then, until 2004, 37 of the 38 states using capital punishment introduced lethal injection statutes (the last state, Nebraska, maintained electrocution as its sole method until adopting injection in 2009, after its Supreme Court deemed the electric chair unconstitutional).\nOn May 11, 1977, the day after the new method had become state law, Oklahoma's state medical examiner Jay Chapman proposed a new, less painful method of execution known as Chapman's protocol: \"An intravenous saline drip shall be started in the prisoner's arm, into which shall be introduced a lethal injection consisting of an ultrashort-acting barbiturate in combination with a chemical paralytic.\" The Chapman protocol was approved by anesthesiologist Stanley Deutsch, formerly Head of the Department of Anaesthesiology of the Oklahoma University Medical School. \nOn August 29, 1977, \nTexas adopted the new method of execution, switching from electrocution.\nOn December 7, 1982, Texas became the first U.S. state or territory in the world to use lethal injection to carry out capital punishment, for the execution of Charles Brooks, Jr.\nThe People's Republic of China began using it in 1997, Guatemala in 1996, the Philippines in 1999, Thailand in 2003, and Taiwan in 2005. Vietnam first used this method in 2013. The Philippines abolished the death penalty in 2006, with their last execution being in 2000. All seven executions made from 1999 to 2000 were carried out using lethal injection. Guatemalan law still allows for the death penalty and lethal injection is the sole method allowed, but none have been carried out since 2000 when the country televised the live double executions of Am\u00edlcar Cetino P\u00e9rez and Tom\u00e1s Cerrate Hern\u00e1ndez.\nThe export of drugs to be used for lethal injection was banned by the European Union (EU) in 2011, together with other items under the EU Torture Regulation. Since then, pentobarbital followed thiopental in the European Union's ban.\nComplications of executions and cessation of supply of lethal injection drugs.\nBy early 2014, a number of botched executions involving lethal injection, and a rising shortage of suitable drugs, had some U.S. states reconsidering lethal injection as a form of execution. Tennessee, which had previously offered inmates a choice between lethal injection and the electric chair, passed a law in May 2014 which gave the state the option to use the electric chair if lethal injection drugs were either unavailable or declared unconstitutional. At the same time, Wyoming and Utah were considering the use of execution by firing squad in addition to other existing execution methods.\nIn 2016, Pfizer joined over 20 American and European pharmaceutical manufacturers that had previously blocked the sale of their drugs for use in lethal injections, effectively closing the open market for FDA-approved manufacturers for any potential lethal execution drug. In the execution of Carey Dean Moore on August 14, 2018, the State of Nebraska used a novel drug cocktail comprising diazepam, fentanyl, cisatracurium, and potassium chloride, over the strong objections of the German pharmaceutical company Fresenius Kabi.\nPotassium acetate had been incorrectly used in place of potassium chloride in Oklahoma in January 2015 for the execution of Charles Frederick Warner. In August 2017, the State of Florida first used the drug in the execution of Mark James Asay using a combination of etomidate, rocuronium bromide, and potassium acetate as part of a new protocol.\nProcedures.\nProcedure in the United States.\nIn the United States, the typical lethal injection begins with the condemned person being strapped onto a gurney; two intravenous cannulas (\"IVs\") are then inserted, one in each arm. Only one is necessary to carry out the execution; the other is reserved as a backup in the event the primary line fails. A line leading from the IV line in an adjacent room is attached to the prisoner's IV and secured so that the line does not snap during the injections.\nThe arm of the condemned person is swabbed with alcohol before the cannula is inserted. The needles and equipment used are sterilized. Questions have been raised about why these precautions against infection are performed despite the purpose of the injection being death. The several explanations include: cannulae are sterilized and have their quality heavily controlled during manufacture, so using sterile ones is a routine medical procedure. Secondly, the prisoner could receive a stay of execution after the cannulae have been inserted, as happened in the case of James Autry in October 1983. Third, use of unsterilized equipment would be a hazard to the prison personnel in case of an accidental needle stick injury.\nFollowing connection of the lines, saline drips are started in both arms. This, too, is standard medical procedure: it must be ascertained that the IV lines are not blocked, ensuring the chemicals have not precipitated in the IV lines and blocked the needle, preventing the drugs from reaching the subject. A heart monitor is attached to the inmate.\nIn most states, the intravenous injection is a series of drugs given in a set sequence, designed to first induce unconsciousness followed by death through paralysis of respiratory muscles and/or by cardiac arrest through depolarization of cardiac muscle cells. The execution of the condemned in most states involves three separate injections (in sequential order):\nThe drugs are not mixed externally to avoid precipitation. A sequential injection is also key to achieve the desired effects in the appropriate order: administration of the pentobarbital renders the person unconscious; the infusion of the pancuronium bromide induces complete paralysis, including that of the lungs and diaphragm rendering the person unable to breathe.\nIf the person being executed were not already completely unconscious, the injection of a highly concentrated solution of potassium chloride could cause severe pain at the site of the IV line, as well as along the punctured vein; it interrupts the electrical activity of the heart muscle and causes it to stop beating, bringing about the death of the person being executed.\nThe intravenous tubing leads to a room next to the execution chamber, usually separated from the condemned by a curtain or wall. Typically, a prison employee trained in venipuncture inserts the needle, while a second prison employee orders, prepares, and loads the drugs into the lethal injection syringes. Two other staff members take each of the three syringes and secure them into the IVs. After the curtain is opened to allow the witnesses to see inside the chamber, the condemned person is then permitted to make a final statement. Following this, the warden signals that the execution may commence, and the executioner(s) (either prison staff or private citizens depending on the jurisdiction) then manually inject the three drugs in sequence. During the execution, the condemned's cardiac rhythm is monitored.\nDeath is pronounced after cardiac activity stops. Death usually occurs within seven minutes, although, due to complications in finding a suitable vein, the whole procedure can take up to two hours, as was the case with the execution of Christopher Newton on May 24, 2007. According to state law, if a physician's participation in the execution is prohibited for reasons of medical ethics, then the death ruling can be made by the state medical examiner's office. After confirmation that death has occurred, a coroner signs the condemned's death certificate.\nMissouri and, before the abolition of capital punishment, Delaware, uses or used a lethal injection machine designed by Massachusetts-based Fred A. Leuchter consisting of two components: the delivery module and the control module. The delivery module is in the execution chamber. It must be pre-loaded with the proper chemicals and operates the timing of the dosage. The control module is in the control room. This is the portion which officially starts the procedure. This is done by first arming the machine, and then with station members simultaneously pressing each of their buttons on the panel to activate the delivery. The computer then deletes who actually started the syringes, so the participants are not aware if their syringe contained saline or one of the drugs necessary for execution (to assuage guilt in a manner similar to the blank cartridge in execution by firing squad).\nThe delivery module has eight syringes. The end syringes (i.e., syringes 7 and 8) containing saline, syringes 2, 4 and 6 containing the lethal drugs for the main line and syringes 1, 3 and 5 containing the injections for the backup line. The system was used in New Jersey before the abolition of the death penalty in 2007. Illinois previously used the computer, and Missouri and Delaware use the manual injection switch on the delivery panel.\nEleven states have switched, or have stated their intention to switch, to a one-drug lethal injection protocol. A one-drug method is using the single drug sodium thiopental to execute someone. The first state to switch to this method was Ohio, on December 8, 2009.\nIn 2011, after pressure by activist organizations, the manufacturers of pentobarbital and sodium thiopental halted the supply of the drugs to U.S. prisons performing lethal injections and required all resellers to do the same.\nProcedure in China.\nIn the past, the People's Republic of China executed prisoners primarily by means of shooting. In recent years, lethal injection has become more common. The specific lethal injection procedures, including the drug or drugs used, are a state secret and not publicly known.\nLethal injection in China was legalized in 1996. The number of shooting executions slowly decreased, and in February 2009, the Supreme People's Court ordered the discontinuation of firing squads by the following year under the conclusion that injections were more humane to the prisoner. It has been suggested that the switch is also in response to executions being horrifying to the public. Lethal injections are less expensive than firing squads, with a single dose costing 300 yuan compared to 700 yuan for a shooting execution.\nProcedure in Vietnam.\nPrior to 2013, shooting was the primary method of execution in Vietnam. The use of lethal injection method was approved by the government in 2010, adopted in 2011, and then started being used in 2013. Urges to adopt other methods than lethal injection to replace the shooting execution began earlier, in 2006, after concerns of the mental state of the firing squad members after executions.\nThe drugs used consist of pancuronium bromide (paralytic), potassium chloride (cardiotoxin), and sodium thiopental (anesthetic). The production of these substances, however, is low in Vietnam. This led to drug shortages and to considering using other domestic poisons or the readoption of shootings.\nThe first prisoner in Vietnam to be executed by lethal injection, on August 6, 2013, was 27-year-old Nguyen Anh Tuan, arrested for murder and robbery. Between 2013 and 2016, 429 prisoners were executed by this method in the country.\nDrugs.\nConventional lethal injection protocol.\nTypically, three drugs are used in lethal injection. Pancuronium bromide (Pavulon) is used to cause muscle paralysis and decreased neural transmission to the lungs, potassium chloride to stop the heart, and midazolam for sedation.\nPancuronium bromide (Pavulon).\nPancuronium bromide (Trade name: Pavulon): The related drug curare, like pancuronium, is a non-depolarizing muscle relaxant (a paralytic agent) that blocks the action of acetylcholine at the motor end-plate of the neuromuscular junction. Binding of acetylcholine to receptors on the end-plate causes depolarization and contraction of the muscle fiber; non-depolarizing neuromuscular blocking agents like pancuronium stop this binding from taking place\nThe typical dose for pancuronium bromide in capital punishment by lethal injection is 0.2\u00a0mg/kg and the duration of paralysis is around 4 to 8 hours. Paralysis of respiratory muscles will lead to death in a considerably shorter time.\nPancuronium bromide is a derivative of the alkaloid malouetine from the plant \"Malouetia bequaertiana\".\nInstead of pancuronium, other drugs in use are succinylcholine chloride and tubocurarine chloride.\nPotassium chloride.\nPotassium is an electrolyte, 98% of which is intracellular. The 2% remaining outside the cell has great implications for cells that generate action potentials. Doctors prescribe potassium for patients when potassium levels in the blood are insufficient, called hypokalemia. The potassium can be given orally, which is the safest route; or it can be given intravenously, in which case strict rules and hospital protocols govern the rate at which it is given.\nThe usual intravenous dose of 10\u201320 mEq per hour is given slowly since it takes time for the electrolyte to equilibrate into the cells. When used in state-sanctioned lethal injection, bolus potassium injection affects the electrical conduction of heart muscle and ultimately leads to cardiac arrest. The potassium bolus delivered for lethal injection causes a rapid onset of elevated extracellular potassium, also known as hyperkalemia, causing depolarization of the resting membrane potential of the heart muscle cells, particularly impacting the heart's pacemaker cells. However, potassium's effect on membrane potential is concentration dependent and ultimately occurs in two phases. Given the reference range for serum potassium is 3.5-5.5 mEq/L, concentrations up to 8 mEq/L shorten action potential duration and the refractory period due to an allosteric effect of potassium ions on potassium channels, leading to increased conduction velocity and subsequently quicker potassium efflux which contributes to quicker repolarization and the mentioned shortening of the refractory period. At approximately 8 mEq/L and beyond, the shortened refractory period and increased resting membrane potential diminishes the quantity of voltage-gated sodium channels ready to contribute to rapid phase 0 depolarization due to the inactivation gate requiring further repolarization to open back up. At potassium concentrations beyond 14mEq/L, enough sodium channels remain inactivated to no longer generate an action potential, ultimately leading to no heart beat. Heart potassium levels after lethal injection can reach 160.0 mEq/L. \nDepolarizing the muscle cell inhibits its ability to fire by reducing the available number of sodium channels (they are placed in an inactivated state). ECG changes vary depending on serum potassium concentrations and on the individual. Peaked T-waves signifying faster repolarization and potentially instances of early-repolarization and phase 2 re-entry (Brugada, Short QT, and Early-Repolarization Syndromes) are evident in the first phase of hyperkalemia. This progresses into a broadening and lengthening of the P wave and PR interval, then eventually disappearance of the P wave, widening of the QRS complex, and finally, asystole. This process can occur in the span of 30 to 60 seconds, but there have been cases of 'botched' procedures, leading to one inmate gasping for air for approximately 10 to 13 minutes.\nSodium thiopental.\nSodium thiopental (US trade name: Sodium Pentothal) is an ultra-short acting barbiturate, often used for anesthesia induction and for medically induced coma. The typical anesthesia induction dose is 0.35 grams. Loss of consciousness is induced within 30\u201345 seconds at the typical dose, while a 5\u00a0gram dose (14 times the normal dose) is likely to induce unconsciousness in 10 seconds.\nA full medical dose of thiopental reaches the brain in about 30 seconds. This induces an unconscious state. Five to twenty minutes after injection, approximately 15% of the drug is in the brain, with the rest in other parts of the body.\nThe half-life of this drug is about 11.5 hours, and the concentration in the brain remains at around 5\u201310% of the total dose during that time. When a 'mega-dose' is administered, as in state-sanctioned lethal injection, the concentration in the brain during the tail phase of the distribution remains higher than the peak concentration found in the induction dose for anesthesia, because repeated doses\u2014or a single very high dose as in lethal injection\u2014accumulate in high concentrations in body fat, from which the thiopental is gradually released. This is the reason why an ultra-short acting barbiturate, such as thiopental, can be used for long-term induction of medical coma.\nHistorically, thiopental has been one of the most commonly used and studied drugs for the induction of coma. Protocols vary for how it is given, but the typical doses are anywhere from 500\u00a0mg up to 1.5\u00a0grams. It is likely that this data was used to develop the initial protocols for state-sanctioned lethal injection, according to which one gram of thiopental was used to induce the coma. Most states use 5\u00a0grams to be absolutely certain the dosage is effective.\nPentobarbital was introduced at the end of 2010 due to a shortage of sodium thiopental, and has since become the primary sedative in lethal injections in the United States.\nBarbiturates are the same class of drug used in medically assisted suicide. In euthanasia protocols, the typical dose of thiopental is 1.5\u00a0grams; the Dutch Euthanasia protocol indicates 1-1.5 grams or 2 grams in case of high barbiturate tolerance. The dose used for capital punishment is therefore about 3 times more than the dose used in euthanasia.\nNew lethal injection protocols.\nThe Ohio protocol, developed after the incomplete execution of Romell Broom, aims to ensure the rapid and painless onset of anesthesia by only using sodium thiopental and eliminating the use of Pavulon and potassium as the second and third drugs, respectively. It also provides for a secondary fail-safe measure using intramuscular injection of midazolam, followed by sufentanil or hydromorphone in the event intravenous administration of the sodium thiopental proves problematic. The first state to switch to use midazolam as the first drug in a new three-drug protocol was Florida on October 15, 2013. Then on November 14, 2013, Ohio made the same move.\nIn the brief for the U.S. courts written by accessories, the State of Ohio implies that they were unable to find any physicians willing to participate in development of protocols for executions by lethal injection, as this would be a violation of medical ethics, such as the Geneva Promise, and such physicians would be thrown out of the medical community and shunned for engaging in such deeds, even if they could not lawfully be stripped of their license.\nOn December 8, 2009, Kenneth Biros became the first person executed using Ohio's new single-drug execution protocol. He was pronounced dead at 11:47\u00a0am EST, 10 minutes after receiving the injection. On September 10, 2010, Washington became the second state to use the single-drug Ohio protocol with the execution of Cal Coburn Brown, who was proclaimed dead within two minutes after receiving the single-drug injection of sodium thiopental. Eight states (Arizona, Georgia, Idaho, Missouri, Ohio, South Dakota, Texas, and Tennessee) have used the single-drug execution protocol. The state of Washington used this single drug method only once, as it later abandoned the death penalty. Four additional states (Arkansas, Kentucky, Louisiana, and North Carolina) announced that they would switch to a single-drug protocol but, as of June 2025, had not executed anyone since switching protocols.\nAfter sodium thiopental began being used in executions, Hospira, the only American company that made the drug, stopped manufacturing it due to its use in executions. The subsequent nationwide shortage of sodium thiopental led states to seek other drugs to use in executions. Pentobarbital, often used for animal euthanasia, was used as part of a three-drug cocktail for the first time on December 16, 2010, when John David Duty was executed in Oklahoma. It was then used as the drug in a single-drug execution for the first time on March 10, 2011, when Johnnie Baston was executed in Ohio.\nEuthanasia protocol.\nLethal injection has also been used in cases of euthanasia to facilitate voluntary death in patients with terminal or chronically painful conditions. Euthanasia can be accomplished either through oral, intravenous, or intramuscular administration of drugs. In individuals who are incapable of swallowing lethal doses of medication, an intravenous route is preferred, because it is the most reliable and rapid way to accomplish euthanasia. The following is a Dutch protocol for parenteral (intravenous) administration to obtain euthanasia, with the old protocol listed first and the new protocol listed second:\nFirst a coma is induced by intravenous administration of 1 g sodium thiopental (Nesdonal), if necessary, 1.5\u20132.0 g of the product in case of strong tolerance to barbiturates. Then, 45 mg alcuronium chloride (Alloferin) or 18 mg pancuronium bromide (Pavulon) is injected. To ensure optimal availability, these agents are preferably given intravenously. However, they can also be injected intramuscularly. In severe hepatitis or cirrhosis of the liver, alcuronium is the agent of first choice.\nA coma is first induced by intravenous administration of 20 mg/kg sodium thiopental in a small volume (10 ml physiological saline). Then, a triple intravenous dose of a nondepolarizing neuromuscular muscle relaxant is given, such as 20 mg pancuronium bromide or 20 mg vecuronium bromide (Norcuron). The muscle relaxant should preferably be given intravenously, to ensure optimal availability. Only for pancuronium dibromide, the agent may also be given intramuscularly in a dose of 40 mg.\nA euthanasia machine may allow an individual to perform the process alone.\nConstitutionality in the United States.\nIn 2006, the Supreme Court ruled in \"Hill v. McDonough\" that death-row inmates in the United States could challenge the constitutionality of states' lethal injection procedures through a federal civil rights lawsuit. Since then, numerous death-row inmates have brought such challenges in the lower courts, claiming that lethal injection as practiced violates the ban on \"cruel and unusual punishment\" found in the Eighth Amendment to the United States Constitution. Lower courts evaluating these challenges have reached opposing conclusions. For example, courts have found that lethal injection as practiced in California, Florida, and Tennessee is unconstitutional. Other courts have found that lethal injection as practiced in Missouri, Arizona, and Oklahoma is constitutionally acceptable.\nAs of 2014, California has nearly 750 prisoners condemned to death by lethal injection despite the moratorium imposed when in 2006 a federal court found California's lethal injection procedures to be unconstitutional. A newer lethal injection facility has been constructed at San Quentin State Prison which cost over $800,000, but it has yet to be used because a state court found that the California Department of Corrections and Rehabilitation violated the California Administrative Procedure Act by attempting to prevent public oversight when new injection procedures were being created.\nOn September 25, 2007, the United States Supreme Court agreed to hear a lethal-injection challenge arising from Kentucky, \"Baze v. Rees\". In Baze, the Supreme Court addressed whether Kentucky's particular lethal-injection procedure (using the standard three-drug protocol) comports with the Eighth Amendment; it also determined the proper legal standard by which lethal-injection challenges in general should be judged, all in an effort to bring some uniformity to how these claims are handled by the lower courts. Although uncertainty over whether executions in the United States would be put on hold during the period in which the United States Supreme Court considers the constitutionality of lethal injection initially arose after the court agreed to hear Baze, no executions took place during the period between when the court agreed to hear the case and when its ruling was announced, with the exception of one lethal injection in Texas hours after the court made its announcement.\nOn April 16, 2008, the Supreme Court rejected \"Baze v. Rees\", thereby upholding Kentucky's method of lethal injection in a majority 7\u20132 decision. Justices Ruth Bader Ginsburg and David Souter dissented. Several states immediately indicated plans to proceed with executions.\nThe U.S. Supreme Court also upheld a modified lethal-injection protocol in the 2015 case \"Glossip v. Gross\". By the time of that case, Oklahoma had altered its execution protocol to use midazolam instead of thiopental or pentobarbital; the latter two drugs had become unavailable for executions due to the European embargo on selling them to prisons. Inmates on Oklahoma's death row alleged that the use of midazolam was unconstitutional, because the drug was not proven to render a person unconscious as thiobarbital would. The Supreme Court found that the prisoners failed to demonstrate that midazolam would create a high risk of severe pain, and that the prisoners had not provided an alternative, practical method of execution that would have a lower risk. Consequently, it ruled that the new method was permissible under the Eighth Amendment.\nOn March 15, 2018, Russell Bucklew, a Missouri death-row inmate who had been scheduled to be executed on May 21, 2014, appealed the constitutionality of lethal injection on an as-applied basis. The basis for Bucklew's appeal was due to Bucklew's allegation that his rare medical condition would interfere with the effects of the drugs, potentially causing him to choke on his own blood. On April 1, 2019, The Supreme Court ruled against Bucklew on the grounds that his proposed alternative to lethal injection, nitrogen hypoxia, was neither \"readily implemented\" nor established to \"significantly reduce a substantial risk of severe pain\". Bucklew was executed on October 1, 2019.\nEthics of lethal injection.\nThe American Medical Association (AMA) believes that a physician's opinion on capital punishment is a personal decision. Since the AMA is founded on preserving life, they argue that a doctor \"should not be a participant\" in executions in any professional capacity with the exception of \"certifying death, provided that the condemned has been declared dead by another person\" and \"relieving the acute suffering of a condemned person while awaiting execution\". The AMA, however, does not have the ability to enforce its prohibition of doctors from participation in lethal injection. As medical licensing is handled on the state level, it does not have the authority to revoke medical licenses.\nTypically, most states do not require that physicians administer the drugs for lethal injection, but most states do require doctors, nurses or paramedics to prepare the substances before their application and to attest the inmate's death after it.\nSome states specifically detail that participation in a lethal injection is not to be considered practicing medicine. For example, Delaware law reads \"the administration of the required lethal substance or substances required by this section shall not be construed to be the practice of medicine and any pharmacist or pharmaceutical supplier is authorized to dispense drugs to the Commissioner or the Commissioner's designee, without prescription, for carrying out the provisions of this section, notwithstanding any other provision of law\" (excerpt from Title 11, Chapter 42, \u00a7 4209). State law allows for the dispensing of the drugs/chemicals for lethal injection to the state's department of corrections without a prescription. However, states are still subject to DEA regulation with respect to lethal injection drugs.\nControversy.\nOpposition.\nOpponents of lethal injection have voiced concerns that abuse, misuse and even criminal conduct is possible when there is not a proper chain of command and authority for the acquisition of death-inducing drugs.\nAwareness.\nOpponents of lethal injection believe that it is not painless as practiced in the United States. They argue that thiopental is an ultrashort-acting barbiturate that may wear off (anesthesia awareness) and lead to consciousness and an uncomfortable death wherein the inmates are unable to express discomfort because they have been paralyzed by the paralytic agent.\nOpponents point to sodium thiopental's typical use as an induction agent and not in the maintenance phase of surgery because of its short-acting nature. Following the administration of thiopental, pancuronium bromide, a paralytic agent, is given. Opponents argue that pancuronium bromide not only dilutes the thiopental, but, as it paralyzes the inmate, also prevents the inmate from expressing pain. Additional concerns have been raised over whether inmates are administered an appropriate amount of thiopental owing to the rapid redistribution of the drug out of the brain to other parts of the body.\nAdditionally, opponents argue that the method of administration is also flawed. They contend that because the personnel administering the lethal injection lack expertise in anesthesia, the risk of failure to induce unconsciousness is greatly increased. In reference to this issue, Jay Chapman, the creator of the American method, said, \"It never occurred to me when we set this up that we'd have complete idiots administering the drugs\". Opponents also argue that the dose of sodium thiopental must be set for each individual patient, and not restricted to a fixed protocol. Finally, they contend that remote administration may result in an increased risk that insufficient amounts of the lethal-injection drugs enter the inmate's bloodstream.\nIn summary, opponents argue that the effect of dilution or of improper administration of thiopental is that the inmate dies an agonizing death through suffocation due to the paralytic effects of pancuronium bromide and the intense burning sensation caused by potassium chloride.\nOpponents of lethal injection, as practiced, argue that the procedure is designed to create the appearance of serenity and a painless death, rather than actually providing it. Specifically, opponents object to the use of pancuronium bromide, arguing that it serves no useful purpose in lethal injection since the inmate is physically restrained. Therefore, the default function of pancuronium bromide would be to suppress the autonomic nervous system, specifically to stop breathing.\nResearch.\nIn 2005, University of Miami researchers, in cooperation with the attorney representing death-row inmates from Virginia, published a research letter in the medical journal \"The Lancet\". The article presented protocol information from Texas, Virginia, and North and South Carolina which showed that executioners had no anesthesia training, drugs were administered remotely with no monitoring for anesthesia, data were not recorded, and no peer review was done. Their analysis of toxicology reports from Arizona, Georgia, North and South Carolina showed that \"post mortem\" concentrations of thiopental in the blood were lower than that required for surgery in 43 of 49 executed inmates (88%), and that 21 (43%) inmates had concentrations consistent with awareness. This led the authors to conclude that a substantial probability existed that some of the inmates were aware and suffered extreme pain and distress during execution. The authors attributed the risk of consciousness among inmates to the lack of training and monitoring in the process, but carefully made no recommendations on how to alter the protocol or how to improve the process. Indeed, the authors conclude, \"because participation of doctors in protocol design or execution is ethically prohibited, adequate anesthesia cannot be certain. Therefore, to prevent unnecessary cruelty and suffering, cessation and public review of lethal injections is warranted\".\nPaid expert consultants on both sides of the lethal-injection debate have found opportunity to criticize the 2005 \"Lancet\" article. Subsequent to the initial publication in the \"Lancet\", three letters to the editor and a response from the authors extended the analysis. The issue of contention is whether thiopental, like many lipid-soluble drugs, may be redistributed from blood into tissues after death, effectively lowering thiopental concentrations over time, or whether thiopental may distribute from tissues into the blood, effectively increasing \"post mortem\" blood concentrations over time. Given the near absence of scientific, peer-reviewed data on the topic of thiopental \"post mortem\" pharmacokinetics, the controversy continues in the lethal-injection community and, in consequence, many legal challenges to lethal injection have not used the \"Lancet\" article.\nIn 2007, the same group that authored the \"Lancet\" study extended its study of the lethal-injection process through a critical examination of the pharmacology of the barbiturate thiopental. This study \u2013 published in the online journal \"PLOS Medicine\" \u2013 confirmed and extended the conclusions made in the original article and goes further to disprove the assertion that the lethal-injection process is painless.\nTo date, these two studies by the University of Miami team serve as the only critical peer-reviewed examination of the pharmacology of the lethal-injection process.\nCruel and unusual.\nOn occasion, difficulties inserting the intravenous needles have also occurred, with personnel sometimes taking over half an hour to find a suitable vein. Typically, the difficulty is found in convicts with type 2 diabetes or a history of intravenous drug use. Opponents argue that excessive time taken to insert intravenous lines is tantamount to cruel and unusual punishment. In addition, opponents point to instances where the intravenous line has failed, or when adverse reactions to drugs or unnecessary delays have happened during the process of execution.\nOn December 13, 2006, Angel Nieves Diaz was not executed successfully in Florida using a standard lethal-injection dose. Diaz was 55 years old and had been sentenced to death for murder. Diaz did not succumb to the lethal dose even after 35 minutes, necessitating a second dose of drugs to complete the execution. At first, a prison spokesman denied Diaz had suffered pain and claimed the second dose was needed because Diaz had some sort of liver disease. After performing an autopsy, the medical examiner, Dr. William Hamilton, stated that Diaz's liver appeared normal, but that the needle had pierced through Diaz's vein into his flesh. The deadly chemicals had subsequently been injected into soft tissue rather than into the vein. Two days after the execution, then-Governor Jeb Bush suspended all executions in the state and appointed a commission \"to consider the humanity and constitutionality of lethal injections.\" The ban was lifted by Governor Charlie Crist when he signed the death warrant for Mark Dean Schwab on July 18, 2007. On November 1, 2007, the Florida Supreme Court unanimously upheld the state's lethal-injection procedures.\nA study published in 2007 in \"PLOS Medicine\" suggested that \"the conventional view of lethal injection leading to an invariably peaceful and painless death is questionable\".\nThe execution of Romell Broom was abandoned in Ohio on September 15, 2009, after prison officials failed to find a vein after two hours of trying on his arms, legs, hands, and ankle. This stirred up more intense debate in the United States about lethal injection. Broom's execution was later rescheduled for March 2022, but he died in 2020 before the sentence could be carried out.\nDennis McGuire was executed in Lucasville, Ohio, on January 17, 2014. According to reporters, McGuire's execution took more than 20 minutes, and he was gasping for air for 10\u201313 minutes after the drugs had been administered. It was the first use of a new drug combination which was introduced in Ohio after the European Union banned sodium thiopental exports. This reignited criticism of the conventional three-drug method.\nClayton Lockett died of a heart attack during a failed execution attempt on April 29, 2014, at Oklahoma State Penitentiary in McAlester, Oklahoma. Lockett was administered an untested mixture of drugs that had not previously been used for executions in the U.S. He survived for 43 minutes before being pronounced dead. Lockett convulsed and spoke during the process and attempted to rise from the execution table 14 minutes into the procedure, despite having been declared unconscious.\nLethal injection, by design, is outwardly ambiguous with respect to what can be seen by witnesses. The 8th amendment of the US constitution proscribes cruel punishment but only the punished can accurately gauge the experience of cruelty. In state-sanctioned executions, the inmate is unable to be a witness to their own execution, so it is up to the assembled witnesses to have the final say. Eyewitnesses to execution report very different observations, and these differences range from an opinion that the execution was painless to comments that the execution was highly problematic. Post mortem examinations of inmates executed by lethal injection have revealed a common finding of heavily congested lungs consistent with pulmonary edema. The occurrence of pulmonary edema found at autopsy raises the question about the actual cruelty of lethal injection. If pulmonary edema occurs as a consequence of lethal injection, the experience of death may be more akin to drowning than simply the painless death described by lethal injection proponents. Pulmonary edema can only occur if the inmate has heart function and cannot occur after death.\nEuropean Union export ban.\nDue to its use for executions in the US, the UK introduced a ban on the export of sodium thiopental in December 2010, after it was established that no European supplies to the US were being used for any other purpose. The restrictions were based on \"the European Union Torture Regulation (including licensing of drugs used in execution by lethal injection)\". From December 21, 2011, the European Union extended trade restrictions to prevent the export of certain medicinal products for capital punishment, stating, \"The Union disapproves of capital punishment in all circumstances and works towards its universal abolition\".\nSupport.\nCommonality.\nThe combination of a barbiturate induction agent and a nondepolarizing paralytic agent is used in thousands of anesthetics every day. Supporters of the death penalty argue that unless anesthesiologists have been wrong for the past 40 years, the use of pentothal and pancuronium is safe and effective. In fact, potassium is given in heart bypass surgery to induce cardioplegia. Therefore, the combination of these three drugs remains in use. Supporters of the death penalty speculate that the designers of the lethal-injection protocols intentionally used the same drugs as are used in everyday surgery to avoid controversy. The only modification is that a massive coma-inducing dose of barbiturates is given. In addition, similar protocols have been used in countries that support euthanasia or physician-assisted suicide.\nAnesthesia awareness.\nThiopental is a rapid and effective drug for inducing unconsciousness, since it causes loss of consciousness upon a single circulation through the brain due to its high lipophilicity. Only a few other drugs, such as methohexital, etomidate, or propofol, have the capability to induce anesthesia so rapidly. (Narcotics such as fentanyl are inadequate as induction agents for anesthesia.) Supporters argue that since the thiopental is given at a much higher dose than for medically induced coma protocols, it is effectively impossible for the condemned to wake up.\nAnesthesia awareness occurs when general anesthesia is inadequately maintained, for a number of reasons. Typically, anesthesia is 'induced' with an intravenous drug, but 'maintained' with an inhaled anesthetic given by the anesthesiologist or nurse-anesthetist (note that there are several other methods for safely and effectively maintaining anesthesia). Barbiturates are used only for induction of anesthesia and although these drugs rapidly and reliably induce anesthesia, wear off quickly. A neuromuscular-blocking drug may then be given to cause paralysis which facilitates intubation, although this is not always required. The anesthesiologist or nurse-anesthetist is responsible for ensuring that the maintenance technique (typically inhalational) is started soon after induction to prevent the patient from waking up.\nGeneral anesthesia is not maintained with barbiturate drugs because they are so short-acting. An induction dose of thiopental wears off after a few minutes because the thiopental redistributes from the brain to the rest of the body very quickly. Also thiopental has a long half-life and needs time for the drug to be eliminated from the body. If a very large initial dose is given, little or no redistribution takes place because the body is saturated with the drug; thus recovery of consciousness requires the drug to be eliminated from the body. Because this process is not only slow (taking many hours or days), but also unpredictable in duration, barbiturates are unsatisfactory for the maintenance of anesthesia.\nThiopental has a half-life around 11.5 hours (but the action of a single dose is terminated within a few minutes by redistribution of the drug from the brain to peripheral tissues) and the long-acting barbiturate phenobarbital has a half-life around 4\u20135 days. In contrast, the inhaled anesthetics have extremely short half-lives and allow the patient to wake up rapidly and predictably after surgery.\nThe average time to death once a lethal-injection protocol has been started is about 7\u201311 minutes. Because it takes only about 30 seconds for the thiopental to induce anesthesia, 30\u201345 seconds for the pancuronium to cause paralysis, and about 30 seconds for the potassium to stop the heart, death can theoretically be attained in as little as 90 seconds. Given that it takes time to administer the drug, time for the line to flush itself, time for the change of the drug being administered, and time to ensure that death has occurred, the whole procedure takes about 7\u201311 minutes. Procedural aspects in pronouncing death also contribute to delay, so the condemned is usually pronounced dead within 10\u201320 minutes of starting the drugs. Supporters of the death penalty say that a huge dose of thiopental, which is between 14 and 20 times the anesthetic-induction dose and which has the potential to induce a medical coma lasting 60 hours, could never wear off in only 10\u201320 minutes.\nDilution effect.\nDeath-penalty supporters state that the claim that pancuronium dilutes the sodium thiopental dose is erroneous. Supporters argue that pancuronium and thiopental are commonly used together in everyday surgery and that if there were a dilution effect, it would be a known drug interaction.\nDrug interactions are a complex topic. Simplistically, drug interactions can be classified as either synergistic or inhibitory interactions. In addition, drug interactions can occur directly at the site of action through common pathways, or indirectly through metabolism of the drug in the liver or through elimination in the kidney. Pancuronium and thiopental have different sites of action, one in the brain and one at the neuromuscular junction. Since the half-life of thiopental is 11.5 hours, the metabolism of the drugs is not an issue when dealing with the short time frame in lethal injections. The only other plausible interpretation would be a direct one, or one in which the two compounds interact with each other. Supporters of the death penalty argue that this theory does not hold true. They state that even if the 100\u00a0mg of pancuronium directly prevented 500\u00a0mg of thiopental from working, sufficient thiopental to induce coma would be present for 50 hours. In addition, if this interaction did occur, then the pancuronium would be incapable of causing paralysis.\nSupporters of the death penalty state that the claim that the pancuronium prevents the thiopental from working, yet is still capable of causing paralysis, is not based on any scientific evidence and is a drug interaction that has never before been documented for any other drugs.\nSingle drug.\nTerminally ill patients in Oregon who have requested physician-assisted suicide have received lethal doses of barbiturates. The protocol has been highly effective in producing a so-called painless death, but the time required to cause death can be prolonged. Some patients have taken days to die, and a few patients have actually survived the process and have regained consciousness up to three days after taking the lethal dose. In a California legal proceeding addressing the issue of the lethal-injection cocktail being \"cruel and unusual\", state authorities said that the time to death following a single injection of a barbiturate could be as much as 45 minutes.\nBarbiturate overdoses typically cause death by depression of the respiratory center, but the effect is variable. Some patients may have complete cessation of respiratory drive, whereas others may only have depression of respiratory function. In addition, cardiac activity can last for a long time after cessation of respiration. Since death is pronounced after asystole and given that the expectation is for a rapid death in lethal injection, multiple drugs are required, specifically potassium chloride to stop the heart. In fact, in the case of Clarence Ray Allen, a second dose of potassium chloride was required to attain.\nStockpiling and sourcing of drugs.\nA 2017 study found that four U.S. states that allow capital punishment are stockpiling lethal-injection drugs that are in short supply and may be needed for life-saving medical procedures elsewhere.\nThis stockpiling of lethal-injection drugs also extends to the federal level, with the source of such drugs being put into question. At least one alleged supplier, Absolute Standards, is neither registered with the FDA, nor registered as a controlled substances manufacturer with the DEA, and has seen investigations over its alleged involvement.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "62748", "revid": "1285129806", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62748", "title": "Jefferson", "text": "Jefferson may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "62749", "revid": "79100368", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62749", "title": "Redmond Linux", "text": ""}
{"id": "62750", "revid": "575135", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62750", "title": "Lenox (company)", "text": "American bone china manufacturer\nLenox Corporation is an American manufacturing company that sells tableware, giftware, and collectible products under the Lenox, Reed &amp; Barton, Gorham, and Oneida brands. For most of the 20th century, it was the most prestigious American maker of tableware, and the company produced other decorative pieces as well. Several Lenox china services have been commissioned for the White House. By 2020, it was the last significant manufacturer of bone china in the United States, until the COVID-19 pandemic forced the closure of the company's only remaining American factory.\nHistory.\nLenox was founded in 1889 by Walter Scott Lenox as Lenox's Ceramic Art Company in Trenton, New Jersey.\nAs Lenox's products became popular in the early 20th century, the company expanded its production to a factory-style operation, making tableware in standard patterns while still relying on skilled handworking, especially for painting.\nTwo of the first patterns Lenox produced were introduced in 1917, the \"Ming\" and \"Mandarin\", which were eventually manufactured for over fifty years. Lenox products also became well known in the United States thanks to Frank Graham Holmes, chief designer from 1905 to 1954, who won several artistic awards such as the 1927 Craftsmanship Medal of the American Institute of Architects and the 1943 silver medal of the American Designers Institute. Lenox pieces were the only American porcelain chosen for display in 1928 by the National Museum of Ceramics in S\u00e8vres, France.\nIn 1983, Lenox was acquired by Brown-Forman Corporation. Brown-Forman acquired Dansk Designs and its Gorham Manufacturing Company division in 1991, which were incorporated into Lenox. In 2005, Brown-Forman sold Lenox, Incorporated, to collectible manufacturer Department 56 for $190 million.\nThe Lenox company archives, not purchased by Department 56, were donated to several repositories. China-related archival documents were donated to the Rutgers University Libraries. The historical china collections were given to the Newark Museum and the New Jersey State Museum.\nLenox Sales, Inc., filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy in 2008. On March 16, 2009, Clarion Capital Partners purchased the assets of Lenox and renamed the company Lenox Corporation. Lenox continued some manufacture of bone china dinnerware at its plant in Kinston, North Carolina, built in 1989. The plant is situated on . Its manufacturing capabilities included enamel dot, etch, color, and microwave metals, and eventually became Lenox's only American factory until its closure in 2020.\nIn a bankruptcy auction conducted in April 2015, the operating assets of Reed &amp; Barton, a competing maker of flatware, were acquired by Lenox.\nLenox's brands include Kate Spade New York, Marchesa by Lenox, and Brian Gluckstein by Lenox. \nLenox ceased production at the Kinston factory on March 18, 2020, due to concerns over the COVID-19 pandemic; on April 17 the company announced that the closure would become permanent, with production expected to resume overseas.\nIn July 2020 Lenox announced that they would permanently close all of their outlet and warehouse stores, also citing the COVID-19 pandemic.\nIn October 2020, Lenox was acquired by private equity firm Centre Lane Partners.\nIn June 2021, Lenox acquired its erstwhile competitor Oneida.\nPresidential collection.\nLenox was the first North American bone china to be used in the White House, and the company has since made tableware for six U.S. presidents. They are officially titled:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "62751", "revid": "431183", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62751", "title": "Johnstown", "text": "Johnstown may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "62752", "revid": "22651524", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62752", "title": "Lansing", "text": ""}
{"id": "62754", "revid": "16185737", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62754", "title": "H. A. Rey", "text": "Children's illustrator and writer (1898\u20131977)\nH. A. Rey (born Hans Augusto Reyersbach; September 16, 1898 \u2013 August 26, 1977) was a German-born American illustrator and author, known best for the series of children's picture books that he and his wife Margret Rey created about \"Curious George\".\nEarly life.\nHans Augusto Reyersbach was born in Hamburg, German Empire on September 16, 1898. He and his wife, Margret, were both German Jews. They first met in Hamburg at Margret's sister's 16th birthday party. They met again in Brazil, where Rey was working as a salesman of bathtubs and Margret had gone to escape the rise of Nazism in Germany. They got married in 1935 and moved to Paris, France in August of that year. They lived in Montmartre and fled Paris in June 1940 on bicycles, carrying the \"Curious George\" manuscript with them. They received visas in Bayonne under instructions from the Portuguese consul in Bordeaux, Aristides de Sousa Mendes, which enabled them to leave Europe via Portugal.\nCurious George.\nWhile in Paris, Rey's animal drawings came to the attention of a French publisher, who commissioned him to write a children's book. The characters in \"Cecily G. and the Nine Monkeys\" included an impish monkey named Curious George, and the couple then decided to write a book focused entirely on him. The outbreak of World War II interrupted their work. Being Jews, the Reys decided to flee Paris before the Nazis invaded the city. Hans assembled two bicycles, and they left the city just a few hours before it fell. Among the meager possessions they brought with them was the illustrated manuscript of \"Curious George\".\nThe Reys' odyssey took them to Bayonne, France, where they were issued life-saving visas signed by Portuguese Vice-Consul Manuel Vieira Braga (following instructions from Aristides de Sousa Mendes) on June 20, 1940. They crossed the Spanish border, where they bought train tickets to Lisbon. From there, they returned to Brazil, where they had met five years earlier, but this time they continued on to New York. The Reys escaped Europe carrying the manuscript to the first Curious George book, which was published in New York by Houghton Mifflin in 1941. They originally planned to use watercolor illustrations, but since they were responsible for the color separation, Rey changed these to the cartoon-like images that continue to be featured in each of the books. A collector's edition with the original watercolors has since been released.\n\"Curious George\" was an instant success, and the Reys were commissioned to write more adventures of the mischievous monkey and his friend, the Man with the Yellow Hat. They wrote seven stories in all, with Hans mainly doing the illustrations and Margret working mostly on the stories, though they both admitted to sharing the work and cooperating fully in every stage of development. At first, however, covers omitted Margret's name. In later editions, this was changed, and Margret now receives full credit for her role in developing the stories. \n\"Curious George Takes a Job\" was named to the Lewis Carroll Shelf Award list in 1960.\nIn 1963, the Reys relocated to Cambridge, Massachusetts, in a house near Harvard Square, and lived there until Rey died on August 26, 1977.\nIn the 1990s, friends of the Reys founded a children's bookstore named Curious George &amp; Friends (formerly Curious George Goes to Wordsworth), which operated in Harvard Square until 2011. A new Curious George themed store opened in 2012, The World's Only Curious George Store, which moved to Central Square in 2019.\nStar charts.\nRey's interest in astronomy began during World War I and led to his desire to redraw constellation diagrams, which Rey found difficult to remember, so that they were more intuitive. This led to the 1952 publication of \"\" (). His constellation diagrams were adopted widely and now appear in many astronomy guides, such as Donald H. Menzel's \"A Field Guide to the Stars and Planets\". As of 2008 \"The Stars: A New Way to See Them\" and a simplified presentation for children called \"Find the Constellations\" are still in print. A new edition of \"Find the Constellations\" was released in 2008, updated with modern fonts, the new status of Pluto, and some more current measurements of planetary sizes and orbital radii.\nCollected papers.\nThe University of Oregon holds H. A. Rey papers dated 1940 to 1961, dominated by correspondence, primarily between Rey and his American and British publishers.\nThe de Grummond Children's Literature Collection in Hattiesburg, Mississippi, holds more than 300 boxes of Rey papers dated 1973 to 2002.\nDr. Lena Y. de Grummond, a professor in the field of library science at the University of Southern Mississippi, contacted the Reys in 1966 about USM's new children's literature collection. H. A. and Margret donated a pair of sketches at the time. When Margret Rey died in 1996, her will designated that the entire literary estate of the Reys be donated to the de Grummond Collection.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "62755", "revid": "16185737", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62755", "title": "Margret Rey", "text": "Children's illustrator and writer (1906\u20131996)\nMargret Elizabeth Rey (born Margarete Elisabeth Waldstein; May 16, 1906 \u2013 December 21, 1996) was a German-born American writer and illustrator, best known for the \"Curious George\" series of children's picture books that she and her husband H. A. Rey created from 1939 to 1966.\nLife.\nMargarete Elisabeth Waldstein was born on May 16, 1906, in Hamburg, German Empire, the daughter of Gertrude (Rosenfeld) and Felix Waldstein. Her father was a member of the Reichstag. She studied art at Bauhaus in Dessau, Kunstakademie D\u00fcsseldorf, and the University of Munich between 1926 and 1928 and afterward worked in advertising. In 1935 she left Germany for Rio de Janeiro, in Brazil to escape Nazism (Nazi Germany) \u2013 and to meet Hans Reyersbach, a salesman and another German Jew from Hamburg, who had been a family friend. They married in 1935 and moved to Paris, France, in 1936.\nWhile in Paris, Hans's animal drawings came to the attention of a French publisher, who commissioned him to write a children's book. The result, \"Cecily G. and the Nine Monkeys\", is little remembered today, but one of its characters, an adorably impish monkey named Curious George, was such a success that the couple considered writing a book just about him. Their work was interrupted with the outbreak of World War II. The Nazis later invaded France. As Jews, the Reys decided to flee from Paris before the Nazis seized the city. Hans built two bicycles, and they fled Paris just a few hours before it fell. Among the meager possessions they brought with them was the illustrated manuscript of \"Curious George\".\nThe Reys' odyssey took them to Bayonne, France, where they were issued life-saving visas signed by Portuguese Vice-Consul Manuel Vieira Braga (following instructions from Aristides de Sousa Mendes) on June 20, 1940. They crossed into Spain, where they bought train tickets to Lisbon, Portugal. From there they returned to Brazil, where they had met five years earlier, but this time they continued to New York City in the United States. The books were published by Houghton Mifflin in 1941, though certain changes had to be introduced because of the technology of the time. Hans and Margret originally planned to use watercolors to illustrate the books, but since they were responsible for the color separation, he changed these to the cartoon-like images that continue to feature in each of the books. A collector's edition with the original watercolors was released in 1998.\n\"Curious George\" was an instant success, and the Reys were commissioned to write more adventures of the mischievous monkey and his friend, the Man with the Yellow Hat. They wrote seven stories in all, with Hans mainly doing the illustrations and Margret working mostly on the stories, though they both admitted to sharing the work and cooperating fully in every stage of development. At first, however, Margret's name was left off the cover, ostensibly because there was a glut of women already writing children's fiction. In later editions, this was corrected, and Margret now receives full credit for her role in developing the stories.\nMargret and her husband moved to Cambridge, Massachusetts, in 1963, in a house close to Harvard Square. Following her husband's death in 1977, Margret continued writing, and in 1979 she became a professor of Creative Writing at Brandeis University in Waltham, Massachusetts. From 1980 she collaborated with Alan Shalleck on a series of short films featuring Curious George and on more than two dozen additional books.\nIn 1989 Margret Rey established the Curious George Foundation to help creative children and prevent cruelty to animals. In 1996, she made major donations to the Boston Public Library and Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center. She was also a long-time supporter of the Longy School of Music.\nRey died of a heart attack on December 21, 1996, in Cambridge, Massachusetts at the age of 90.\nCollected papers.\nThe de Grummond Children's Literature Collection in Hattiesburg, Mississippi, holds more than 300 boxes of Rey papers dated 1973 to 2002.\nDr. Lena Y. de Grummond, a professor in the field of library science at The University of Southern Mississippi, contacted the Reys in 1966 about USM's new children's literature collection. H. A. and Margret donated a pair of sketches at the time. When Margret Rey died in 1996, her will designated that the entire literary estate of the Reys would be donated to the de Grummond Collection.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "62756", "revid": "94147", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62756", "title": "Salam Faiad", "text": ""}
{"id": "62757", "revid": "10808929", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62757", "title": "Abdel Razak al-Yehiyeh", "text": "Palestine politician (1929\u20132020)\nAbdel-Razak al-Yehiyeh or Abdul-Razzaq Al-Yahya (15 March 1929 \u2013 9 March 2020) born in Tantura, near Haifa, then in the British Mandate of Palestine, also known as Abu Anas, was a Palestinian politician who served as Interior Minister of the Palestinian National Authority.\nAl-Yehiyeh trained as a military strategist and served as chief operations officer and then deputy chief-of-staff of the PLA brigade in Syria before 1967. In August 1968, he led an attempt to make PLA Syria brigades more independent of Syrian control, and was made PLA chief-of-staff by the Palestine Liberation Organisation (PLO) Executive Committee. But with Syria opposed, he resigned to become military advisor to the PLO Executive Committee from 1969 and chief-of-staff of the Palestinian Armed Struggle Command (PASC) in February 1969.\nHe was reappointed to the PLA as commander-in-chief by the PLO Executive Committee in June 1969. Then when Yasser Arafat took on that role in September 1970, al-Yehiyeh became chief-of-staff of all Palestinian forces.\nDue to Syrian pressure, he was replaced in 1971, becoming director of the PLO's political department from 1971 to 1976, He was a member of the PLO Executive Committee from 1984 to 1991. Al-Yehiyeh headed security committees in talks with Israel from 1993 to 1995, including final status talks, and also headed negotiations on Hebron security arrangements and safe passage.\nHe was appointed as Interior Minister of the Palestinian Authority in June 2002, charged with overhauling Palestinian security forces. He was a member of the three-man delegation to Washington in August 2000. He was involved in security talks with Israel, and headed a centralized security apparatus for the Palestinian Authority.\nAl-Yehiyeh left the PA cabinet in late 2002, feeling that Arafat had prevented him from making any significant reforms. He published his book \"Between militarism and politics\" in 2006, and he was working on publishing a new book about peace negotiations between the Palestinian National Authority PNA and Israel.\nHe was appointed Interior Minister on 15 June 2007.\nPersonal life.\nFrom his first marriage, he had 4 daughters: Jomana, Lina, Roula and Rejwan. After the death of his first wife, he remarried and had a daughter Rana, and a son, Anas.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "62759", "revid": "264323", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62759", "title": "\u00c3owyn", "text": ""}
{"id": "62760", "revid": "49887303", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62760", "title": "\u00c9owyn", "text": "Fictional noblewoman in The Lord of the Rings\n\u00c9owyn ( or ) is a fictional character in J. R. R. Tolkien's \"The Lord of the Rings\". She is a noblewoman of Rohan who describes herself as a shieldmaiden.\nWith the hobbit Merry Brandybuck, she rides into battle and kills the Witch-King of Angmar, Lord of the Nazg\u00fbl, in the Battle of the Pelennor Fields. This fulfils the Macbeth-like prophecy that he would not be killed by a man.\n\u00c9owyn's brief courtship by Faramir has been seen by scholars as influenced by Tolkien's experience of war brides from the First World War. She has been seen, too, as one of the few strong female characters in the story, especially as interpreted in Peter Jackson's film trilogy, where her role, played by Miranda Otto, is far more romantic than Tolkien made her.\nNarrative.\nIn \"The Two Towers\", \u00c9owyn, a daughter of the House of Eorl and the niece of King Th\u00e9oden of Rohan, is introduced in Meduseld, the King's hall at Edoras. She is the daughter of \u00c9omund and Th\u00e9odwyn (Th\u00e9oden's sister), and the sister of \u00c9omer. When she is only seven years old, her father is killed fighting orcs, and her mother dies of grief. \u00c9owyn and \u00c9omer are raised in her uncle's household as his own children.\nShe longs to win renown in battle\u2014especially since she is royal\u2014but being female, her duties are reckoned to be at Edoras. When Th\u00e9oden's mind is poisoned by his corrupt adviser Gr\u00edma Wormtongue, \u00c9owyn is obliged to care for her uncle, and his deterioration pains her deeply. To make matters worse, she is constantly harassed by Gr\u00edma, who lusts after her. When Gandalf arrives, he frees Th\u00e9oden from Wormtongue's influence.\n\u00c9owyn falls in love with Aragorn, but though he respects her, he does not return her feelings, as he is betrothed to the elf Arwen. \nAs Aragorn points out, her duty is with her people; she has to shoulder the responsibility of ruling Rohan in Th\u00e9oden's stead when the war-host of Rohan go to war.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\u00c9owyn disguises herself as a man and, under the alias of \"Dernhelm\" (from Old English \"dern\" meaning \"secret, concealed\"), travels with the Riders of Rohan to the battle outside Minas Tirith in Gondor on her horse Windfola, carrying with her the hobbit Merry Brandybuck, who had also been ordered to remain behind.\nIn the Battle of the Pelennor Fields, she confronts the Witch-King of Angmar, Lord of the Nazg\u00fbl, after Th\u00e9oden is mortally injured. The Witch-King threatens that he will \"bear thee away to the houses of lamentation, beyond all darkness, where thy flesh shall be devoured, and thy shrivelled mind be left naked to the Lidless Eye\". He boasts \"No living man may hinder me\", whereupon \u00c9owyn removes her helmet and declares:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;But no living man am I! You look upon a woman. \u00c9owyn I am, \u00c9omund's daughter. You stand between me and my lord and kin. Begone, if you be not deathless! For living or dark undead, I will smite you, if you touch him.\nThe Nazg\u00fbl leader's flying steed attacks \u00c9owyn, but she kills it, cutting off its head with her sword. The Nazg\u00fbl then shatters her shield and breaks her shield-arm with his mace, but is distracted by Merry, who stabs him behind the knee with a barrow-blade. \u00c9owyn seizes the opportunity to strike the Nazg\u00fbl with a killing thrust \"between crown and mantle\". Then, as her sword shatters, his withering form collapses and he vanishes with a final cry of anguish. \u00c9owyn passes out from the pain in her arm, and is believed dead until Prince Imrahil realizes she still lives. \u00c9owyn is brought to the Houses of Healing, hovering near death from the effects of having struck the Nazg\u00fbl. There \u00c9owyn meets Faramir, with whom she soon falls in love. Her outlook on life also changes: \"Then the heart of \u00c9owyn changed, or else at last she understood it. ... I will be a shieldmaiden no longer, nor vie with the great Riders, nor take joy only in the songs of slaying. I will be a healer, and love all things that grow and are not barren.\"\nAfter the demise of Sauron, \u00c9owyn and Faramir marry and settle in Ithilien, of which Faramir is made the ruling Prince by Aragorn. Faramir and \u00c9owyn have a son, Elboron.\nConcept and creation.\nOriginally, Tolkien intended for \u00c9owyn to marry Aragorn. Later, however, he decided against it because Aragorn was \"too old and lordly and grim\". He considered making \u00c9owyn the twin sister of \u00c9omund, and having her die \"to avenge or save Th\u00e9oden\". He also considered having Aragorn truly love \u00c9owyn and regret never marrying after her death. Tolkien once described \u00c9owyn as \"a stern Amazon woman\". Later he wrote: \"Though not a 'dry nurse' in temper, she was also not really a soldier or 'Amazon', but like many brave women was capable of great military gallantry at a crisis.\" (Here he alludes to \u00c9owyn's statement to Aragorn: \"But am I not of the House of Eorl, a shieldmaiden and not a dry-nurse?\")\nIn Old English, the language Tolkien used to represent his invented language of Rohirric, the word \"eoh\" means \"war-horse\" while \"wyn\" means \"delight\", so \"\u00c9owyn\" can be taken to mean \"Delight in horses\". Her name in Rohirric is not given, but it would have started with the element \"L\u00f4-\" or \"Loh-\", meaning \"horse\".\nAnalysis.\nJulaire Andelin, in the \"J.R.R. Tolkien Encyclopedia\", writes that prophecy in Middle-earth depended on characters' understanding of the Music of the Ainur, the divine plan for Arda, and was often ambiguous. Thus, Glorfindel's prophecy \"not by the hand of man will [the Lord of the Nazg\u00fbl] fall\" did not lead the Lord of the Nazg\u00fbl to suppose that he would die at the hands of a woman and a hobbit.\nThe Tolkien scholar Tom Shippey states that the prophecy, and the Witch-king's surprise at finding Dernhelm to be a woman, parallel the witches' statement to Macbeth that he may \"laugh to scorn / The power of man, for none of woman born / Shall harm Macbeth\" (Act 4, scene 1), and Macbeth's shock at learning that Macduff \"was from his mother's womb / Untimely ripp'd\" (as Macduff was born by Caesarean section: Act 5, scene 8). Thus, Shippey notes, despite Tolkien's stated dislike of Shakespeare's treatment of myth, he read \"Macbeth\" closely.\nTolkien's First World War experience of war brides may be reflected in \u00c9owyn's brief courtship. The scholar of literature Melissa A. Smith notes that Tolkien wrote in response to criticism that \"In my experience feelings and decisions ripen very quickly (as measured by mere 'clock-time', which is actually not justly applicable) in periods of great stress, and especially under the expectation of imminent death\". She notes that Tolkien indeed married Edith Bratt just before he was posted to the Western Front in France.\nThum states that \u00c9owyn wears in turn two masks, the first unconventional, the second conventional. She appears initially as a medieval romance heroine, a \"woman clad in white\", standing silent and obedient behind King Th\u00e9oden's throne. But soon it becomes clear that she is no meek subordinate, as \"she looked on the king with cool pity in her eyes\": she thinks for herself. Further, she appears conventionally beautiful as a romance lady: \"Very fair was her face, and her long hair was like a river of gold.\" But, Thum writes, this too is swiftly gainsaid: \"Slender and tall she was ... but strong she seemed and stern as steel, a daughter of kings.\" \u00c9owyn's second mask is the appearance of a male Rider of Rohan, \"Dernhelm\", as, against orders, she rides to battle. In Old English \"dern\" means \"secret, concealed\", while \"helm\" is \"helmet\", a covering for the head. Thum comments that this unconventional mask conveys \u00c9owyn's rebellious nature far more powerfully than would any overt account of her thinking.\nJessica Yates wrote that \u00c9owyn meets all the requirements for a classic woman warrior: a strong identity; skill in fighting; weapons and armour; a horse; special powers, seen when she turns the Ringwraith's prophecy of doom back onto him; and being modest and chaste. Carol Leibiger added that \u00c9owyn is the only strong human female in \"The Lord of the Rings\" (Galadriel and Arwen being Elves), noting that her rejection of the woman's place in the home leads her to fulfil the prophecy about the leader of the Ringwraiths, the Witch-King of Angmar, that \"not by the hand of man will [he] fall\".\nMelissa Hatcher wrote in \"Mythlore\" that \"The Lord of the Rings\" has as a central theme the way that \"the littlest person, a hobbit, overcom[es] the tides of war\": that the real power is that of healing, protecting, and preserving. She noted that \u00c9owyn tries the path of the warrior and then becomes a healer, and that some academics have interpreted her choice as weak submission. Hatcher stated that instead, \u00c9owyn is following Tolkien's \"highest ideal: a fierce commitment to peace\", embodying the \"full-blooded subjectivity\" that Tolkien believed necessary for peace. She described \u00c9owyn as \"a complete individual who fulfills Tolkien's theme of peace, preservation, and cultural memory.\"\nHatcher cited the philosopher Gregory Bassham's list of the six essential ingredients of happiness in Middle-earth, namely \"delight in simple things, making light of one's troubles, getting personal, cultivating good character, cherishing and creating beauty, and rediscovering wonder\", and stated that these are all seen in \u00c9owyn and the Hobbit Sam, the gardener who inherits Frodo's Bag End and restores the Shire, \"but in very few others\".\nPortrayal in adaptations.\nEarly films.\nNellie Bellflower voiced \u00c9owyn in the 1980 Rankin/Bass animated version of \"The Return of the King\". Elin Jenkins voiced the character in BBC Radio's 1981 serialisation. \u00c9owyn appears briefly in Ralph Bakshi's 1978 adaptation of \"The Lord of the Rings\".\nPeter Jackson.\nIn Peter Jackson's films ' (2002) and ' (2003), \u00c9owyn is played by Miranda Otto. Uma Thurman was slated for the role at one point. \nAlthough Jackson cuts much of Tolkien's poetry and song, he adds a scene with \u00c9owyn singing a dirge at Th\u00e9odred's funeral.\nShippey states that the Hollywood studio sent a \"script doctor\" to New Zealand to bring Jackson's direction into line with their view, which was that since Aragorn needed a single love interest, Arwen could be deleted and \"Aragorn should then marry \u00c9owyn instead of politely dissuading her. ... The script doctor's advice was ignored.\" \nBrian Robb and Paul Simpson concur with Shippey that Jackson does, however, make Aragorn far more romantic than do either Tolkien or Bakshi, devoting substantial viewing time to Aragorn's \"modern love triangle\" and providing \"clear on-screen chemistry\" with \u00c9owyn.\nThe scholar of English Helen Young writes that while neither Tolkien nor Jackson give \u00c9owyn any thanks for killing the Witch-King, Jackson's film version does at least invert the gender roles depicted by the Norwegian artist Peter Nicolai Arbo in his 19th century painting \"Hervor's Death\", though when she falls as if dead, the film scene looks in her opinion much like that in the painting. The film reduces \u00c9owyn's role as cup-bearer, which in Tolkien's text describes a genuine Germanic ceremony in which a woman embodied the weaving of peace. Young suggests this was because the screenwriters feared the audience would misinterpret the scene. The extended edition of the \"Return to Edoras\" scene however includes the ceremony for Th\u00e9oden.\nThe film scholar Sarah Kozloff writes that, if the film series can be seen as a melodrama, Jackson's \u00c9owyn symbolizes the modern \"tomboy/feminist\" psychic figure, the role being played \"in a realistic performance style\".\nFeminist scholar Penny Griffin writes that in \"The Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King\", \u00c9owyn is \"probably the movies' closest approximation to an SFC [Strong Female Character]\". Her credentials for this, Griffin notes, include rebelling against the injunction to stay behind when the Riders of Rohan go off to fight, disguising herself as a man, riding to battle, and fighting the leader of the Ringwraiths. The feminist effect is spoiled, Griffin notes, when her story ends (according to Tolkien's text, not the film) with her disavowing battle and marrying Faramir to live \"happily every after\".\nThe scholar of literature Maureen Thum comments that Jackson \"stresses what Tolkien implies\" by portraying \u00c9owyn's feelings for Aragorn and her skill in battle. Thum writes that Tolkien's narrative, having \u00c9owyn ride to war under the name \"Dernhelm\", meaning \"secret helmet\", far more powerfully conveys her rebellious nature than would any explicit description of her thinking.\nThe Tolkien scholar Jane Chance notes that Jackson's \"Two Towers\" includes a moment of swordplay between \u00c9owyn and Aragorn, the latter using a knife; Chance describes this as \"a scene of sexual symbolism nowhere found in Tolkien's text\".\nIn Kenji Kamiyama's 2024 anime fantasy film \"\", a prequel to Jackson's films, Otto reprised her role as \u00c9owyn, while also serving as the film's narrator.\nReferences.\nPrimary.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSecondary.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "62761", "revid": "2666701", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62761", "title": "\u00c9omer", "text": "Fictional character in J. R. R. Tolkien's Middle-earth\n\u00c9omer is a fictional character in J. R. R. Tolkien's Middle-earth. He appears in \"The Lord of the Rings\" as a leader of the Riders of Rohan who serve as cavalry to the army of Rohan, fighting against Mordor.\nThe name \u00c9omer, meaning \"Horse-famous\" in Old English, is from \"Beowulf\", a work that Tolkien had studied extensively. Despite the evident Old English connection, Tolkien denied that \u00c9omer and the Riders of Rohan directly represented the Anglo-Saxons. Scholars have noted that while in a book the imagery remains ambiguous, and can combine suggestions of Gothic as well as Anglo-Saxon origins, film such as Peter Jackson's \"Lord of the Rings\" trilogy inevitably has to choose. When \u00c9omer appears in a helmet recalling the Sutton Hoo helmet, he is plainly Anglo-Saxon.\nFictional account.\nMain text.\n\u00c9omer is the son of Th\u00e9odwyn and \u00c9omund. After their parents' death \u00c9omer and his sister \u00c9owyn were adopted by their uncle Th\u00e9oden, king of the Rohirrim. He is the leader of the forces of Rohan who attack and kill the Uruk-hai who had kidnapped the hobbits Merry Brandybuck and Pippin Took. Against orders, impressed by Aragorn, he helps Aragorn, Gimli and Legolas by lending them horses and guiding them to where the attack had taken place.\nOn his return to Edoras, \u00c9omer reports this meeting to Th\u00e9oden, and is imprisoned on the orders of Gr\u00edma Wormtongue, Th\u00e9oden's sinister advisor. Aragorn, Gimli and Legolas arrive in Edoras with the wizard Gandalf, who releases the king from Gr\u00edma's spell. \u00c9omer is set free and restored to honour. He fights at the battle of Helm's Deep, where the forces of Rohan drive Saruman's army of Orcs and Dunlendings from the walls of the Hornburg, buying enough time for Gandalf to arrive with Erkenbrand and his men of the Westfold of Rohan.\n\u00c9omer plays a major role in the Battle of the Pelennor Fields, the pivotal battle of \"The Return of the King\" against the forces of the Dark Lord Sauron from Mordor. After leading a successful cavalry charge, he is dismayed to find Th\u00e9oden mortally wounded. Th\u00e9oden appoints him King of Rohan with his dying breath. Seeing \u00c9owyn seemingly dead on the battlefield, \u00c9omer throws himself and the remaining Rohirrim at the enemy. Aragorn arrives unexpectedly from Pelargir, and joins forces with \u00c9omer, fulfilling his prediction that they would meet in the midst of their enemies. They rout the Orcs and win the battle.\n\u00c9omer accompanies Aragorn to the Gates of Mordor for the final stand against Sauron, the Battle of the Morannon. This distracts Sauron long enough for the One Ring to be destroyed in Mount Doom, causing his immediate downfall. Th\u00e9oden is taken back to Edoras to be buried, and \u00c9omer becomes King of the Mark.\nAppendices.\nThe Appendices to \"The Lord of the Rings\" add a few details. In 3021 of the Third Age, \u00c9omer marries Loth\u00edriel, only daughter of Imrahil, prince of Dol Amroth. She bears him a son, Elfwine the Fair, who becomes King of Rohan after his father. Tolkien fan fiction imagines many alternative lives for Loth\u00edriel.\nAnalysis.\nThe name \u00c9omer, meaning \"Horse-famous\" in Old English, occurs in \"Beowulf\", at line 1959, as that of a king descended from Offa of Mercia. Tolkien had studied \"Beowulf\" extensively and drew material from it in writing \"The Lord of the Rings\".\nThe critic Paul Kocher notes that in his first meeting with Aragorn on the plains of Rohan, \u00c9omer is moved by affection more than just by the policy of the Mark, and indeed he risks both his command and his life by assisting Aragorn, contrary to orders.\nThe Tolkien scholar Tom Shippey contrasts \u00c9omer's behaviour with that of Faramir, son of the Ruling Steward of Gondor. In his view, Faramir is courteous, urbane, and civilised where \u00c9omer is \"compulsively truculent\", in both cases reflecting the character of their nations: Gondor \"a kind of Rome\", subtle and calculating, Rohan a simple but vigorous Anglo-Saxon society. In his view, Rohan resembles Anglo-Saxon society in every way, except for one: the Anglo-Saxons did not like to fight on horseback.\nShippey writes further that prominent at the critical moment of the Battle of the Pelennor Fields, the decisive charge of the Riders of Rohan, is panache, which he explains means both \"the white horsetail on [Eomer's] helm floating in his speed\" and \"the virtue of sudden onset, the dash that sweeps away resistance.\" Shippey notes that this allows Tolkien to display Rohan both as English, based on their Old English names and words like \"eored\" (troop of cavalry), and as \"alien, to offer a glimpse of the way land shapes people\".\nAdaptations.\nIn the 1978 animated adaptation of \"The Lord of the Rings\" by Ralph Bakshi, \u00c9omer has no lines and is not fully animated.\nIn Peter Jackson's \"The Lord of the Rings\" film trilogy, \u00c9omer was played by the New Zealand actor Karl Urban.\nThe Tolkien scholar Michael Drout states that Jackson's film version of \u00c9omer's helmet is plainly based on the Sutton Hoo helmet, \"the single most iconic image of Anglo-Saxon culture\". Tolkien, he notes, had denied that the Riders of Rohan were actually the Anglo-Saxons, though he had made them speak the Mercian dialect of that language. In a book, Drout states, there can be ambiguity about visual images which are always partly in the reader's imagination; but a film inevitably reduces that useful ambiguity. \u00c9omer's crest of horsetail, and the riders' flaxen hair give the impression of \"continental Gothic\" rather than Anglo-Saxons, but the film collapses that ambiguity. Drout further contrasts Jackson's presentation of \u00c9omer in close-up in his elaborate helmet (scene 11 of \"The Two Towers\"), with the later scene of an Easterling soldier whose helmet covers his face. Drout writes that this carries the suggestion of \"veiling and Orientalism\", whereas \u00c9omer's face can be seen between his cheek-guards, making him seem more open and less threatening.\nReferences.\nPrimary.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSecondary.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "62762", "revid": "35126782", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62762", "title": "Charles the Great", "text": ""}
{"id": "62763", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62763", "title": "Karl der Grosse", "text": ""}
{"id": "62766", "revid": "39151475", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62766", "title": "Tom Bombadil", "text": "Middle-earth character\nTom Bombadil is a character in J. R. R. Tolkien's legendarium. He first appeared in print in a 1934 poem called \"The Adventures of Tom Bombadil\", which included \"The Lord of the Rings\" characters Goldberry (his wife), Old Man Willow (an evil tree in his forest) and the barrow-wight, from whom he rescues the hobbits. They were not then explicitly part of the older legends that became \"The Silmarillion\", and are not mentioned in \"The Hobbit\".\nBombadil is best known from his appearance as a supporting character in Tolkien's novel \"The Lord of the Rings\", published in 1954 and 1955. In the first volume, \"The Fellowship of the Ring\", Frodo Baggins and company meet Bombadil in the Old Forest. The idea for this meeting and the appearances of Old Man Willow and the barrow-wight can be found in some of Tolkien's earliest notes for a sequel to \"The Hobbit\". Bombadil is mentioned, but not seen, near the end of \"The Return of the King\", where Gandalf plans to pay him a long visit.\nTom Bombadil has been omitted in radio adaptations of \"The Lord of the Rings\", the 1978 animated film, and Peter Jackson's film trilogy, as nonessential to the story.\nCommentators have debated Bombadil's role and origins. A likely source is the demigod V\u00e4in\u00e4m\u00f6inen in the Finnish epic poem \"Kalevala\", with many points of resemblance. Scholars have stated that he is the spirit of a place, a \"genius loci\".\nAppearances.\n\"The Adventures of Tom Bombadil\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;poem&gt;Old Tom Bombadil was a merry fellow;\nbright blue his jacket was and his boots were yellow,\ngreen were his girdle and his breeches all of leather;\nhe wore in his tall hat a swan-wing feather.\nHe lived up under Hill, where the Withywindle\nran from a grassy well down into the dingle.&lt;/poem&gt;\n \u2014 \"The Adventures of Tom Bombadil\"\nThe original version of Tolkien's poem \"The Adventures of Tom Bombadil\" was published in 1934 in \"The Oxford Magazine\". The poem depicts Bombadil as a \"merry fellow\" living in a small valley close to the Withywindle river, where he wanders and explores nature at his leisure. Several of the valley's mysterious residents, including the \"River-woman's daughter\" Goldberry, the malevolent tree-spirit Old Man Willow, the Badger-folk and a barrow-wight, attempt to capture Bombadil for their own ends. However, they quail at the power of his voice, which defeats their enchantments and commands them to return to their natural existence. At the end of the poem, Bombadil captures and marries Goldberry. Throughout the poem, he is unconcerned by the attempts to capture him and brushes them off with the power in his words.\nBombadil makes it clear that he found Goldberry in the Withywindle river, calling her \"River-woman's daughter\". The Tolkien scholar John D. Rateliff suggests that, at least in terms of Tolkien's early mythology, she should be seen as one of the fays, spirits, and elementals (including the Maia): \"Thus Melian is a 'fay', (as, in all probability, are Goldberry and Bombadil; the one a nymph, the other a \"genius loci\")\".\nThe later poem \"Bombadil Goes Boating\" anchors Bombadil in Middle-earth, featuring a journey down the Withywindle to the Brandywine river, where Hobbits (\"Little Folk I know there\") live at Hays-end. Bombadil is challenged by various river residents on his journey, including birds, otters, and Hobbits, but charms them all with his voice, ending his journey at the farm of Farmer Maggot, where he drinks ale and dances with the family. At the end of the poem, the charmed birds and otters work together to bring Bombadil's boat home. The poem includes a reference to the Norse lay of \u00d3tr, when Bombadil threatens to give the hide of a disrespectful otter to the barrow-wights, who he says will cover it with gold apart from a single whisker. The poem mentions Middle-earth locations including Hays-end, Bree, and the Tower Hills and speaks of \"Tall Watchers by the Ford, Shadows on the Marches\".\n\"The Lord of the Rings\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;poem&gt;There was another burst of song, and then suddenly, hopping and dancing along the path, there appeared above the reeds an old battered hat with a tall crown and a long blue feather stuck in the band. With another hop and a bound there came into view a man, or so it seemed. At any rate he was too large and heavy for a hobbit, if not quite tall enough for one of the Big People, though he made noise enough for one, stumping along with great yellow boots on his thick legs, and charging through grass and rushes like a cow going down to drink. He had a blue coat and a long brown beard; his eyes were blue and bright, and his face was red as a ripe apple, but creased into a hundred wrinkles of laughter. In his hand he carried on a large leaf as on a tray a small pile of white water-lilies.&lt;/poem&gt;\n \u2014 \"The Fellowship of the Ring\", book 1, ch. 6, \"The Old Forest\"\nIn \"The Fellowship of the Ring\", Tom Bombadil helps Frodo Baggins and his Hobbit companions on their journey to destroy the Ring. Tom and his wife, Goldberry, the \"Daughter of the River\", still live in their house by the source of the Withywindle, and some of the characters and situations from the original poem reappear.\nTom first appears when Merry and Pippin are trapped in the Old Forest by Old Man Willow, and Frodo and Sam cry for help. Tom commands Old Man Willow to release them, singing him to sleep.\nThe Hobbits spend two nights in Tom Bombadil's house, which serves as one of Frodo's five Homely Houses. Here it is seen that the One Ring has no power over Bombadil; he can see Frodo when the Ring makes him invisible to others and can wear it himself with no effect. He even tosses the Ring in the air and makes it disappear but then produces it from his other hand and returns it to Frodo. The idea of giving him the Ring for safekeeping is rejected in Book Two's second chapter, \"The Council of Elrond\". Gandalf says that it is unwise to consider Tom as having power over the Ring and that rather, \"the Ring has no power over him...\". He suggests that Tom would not find the Ring to be very important and so might simply misplace it.\nBefore sending the Hobbits on their way, Tom teaches them a rhyme to summon him if they fall into danger again within his borders. This proves fortunate, as the four are trapped by a barrow-wight. After rescuing them, Tom gives each Hobbit a long dagger taken from the treasure in the barrow. He refuses to pass the borders of his own land, but he directs them to the Prancing Pony Inn at Bree.\nTowards the end of \"The Return of the King\", when Gandalf leaves the Hobbits, he mentions that he wants to have a long talk with Bombadil, calling him a \"moss-gatherer\". Gandalf says, in response to Frodo's query of how well Bombadil is getting along, that Bombadil is \"as well as ever\", \"quite untroubled\" and \"not much interested in anything that we have done and seen\", save their visits to the Ents. At the very end of \"The Lord of the Rings\", as Frodo sails into the West and leaves Middle-earth forever, he has what seems to him the very experience that appeared to him in the house of Bombadil in his dream of the second night.\nConcept and creation.\nTolkien stated that he invented Tom Bombadil in memory of his children's Dutch doll. His Bombadil poems far pre-date the writing of \"The Lord of the Rings\", into which Tolkien introduced Tom Bombadil from the earliest drafts. In response to a letter, Tolkien described Tom in \"The Lord of the Rings\" as \"just an invention\" and \"not an important person \u2013 to the narrative\", even if \"he represents something that I feel important, though I would not be prepared to analyse the feeling precisely. I would not, however, have left him in, if he did not have some kind of function.\" Specifically, Tolkien connected Tom in the letter to a renunciation of control, \"a delight in things for themselves without reference to yourself,\" \"Botany and Zoology (as sciences) and Poetry\". In another letter, Tolkien writes that he does not think Tom is improved by philosophizing; he included the character \"because I had already 'invented' him independently\" (in \"The Oxford Magazine\") \"and wanted an 'adventure' on the way\". \nTolkien commented further that \"even in a mythical Age there must be some enigmas, as there always are. Tom Bombadil is one (intentionally)\". In a letter to Stanley Unwin, Tolkien called Tom Bombadil the spirit of the vanishing landscapes of Oxfordshire and Berkshire. However, this 1937 letter was in reference to works which pre-dated the writing of \"The Lord of the Rings\".\nTolkien said little of Tom Bombadil's origins, and the character does not fit neatly into the categories of beings Tolkien created. Bombadil calls himself the \"Eldest\" and the \"Master\". He claims to remember \"the first raindrop and the first acorn\", and that he \"knew the dark under the stars when it was fearless\u2014before the Dark Lord came from Outside\". When Frodo asks Goldberry just who Tom Bombadil is, she responds simply by saying \"He is\". Some critics have taken this dialogue as a reference to God's statement \"I Am that I Am\" in the Book of Exodus, an idea which Tolkien denied as an influence.\nAnalysis.\nV\u00e4in\u00e4m\u00f6inen.\nThe scholar of folklore David Elton Gay writes that Tolkien was inspired by the poetry of the \"Kalevala\", Elias L\u00f6nnrot's 1849 collection of Finland's oral tradition. Gay suggests with a detailed comparison that Tom Bombadil was directly modelled on the \"Kalevala\"'s central character, the demigod V\u00e4in\u00e4m\u00f6inen.\nSauron's opposite.\nThe Tolkien scholar Verlyn Flieger writes that if there was an opposite to Sauron in \"The Lord of the Rings\", it would not be Aragorn, his battlefield opponent, nor Gandalf, his spiritual enemy, but Tom Bombadil, the earthly Master who is entirely free of the desire to dominate, and hence cannot be dominated. The Christian scholar W. Christopher Stewart sees Bombadil as embodying the pursuit of knowledge purely for its own sake, driven only by his sense of wonder. In his view, this goes some way to explaining Bombadil's indifference to the One Ring, whose only purpose is power and domination.\nMultiple levels of meaning.\nJane Beal, in the \"Journal of Tolkien Research\", writes that Bombadil can be considered using \"the four levels of meaning found in medieval scriptural exegesis and literary interpretation\". These are different ways of understanding a text, rather than necessarily contradicting each other.\nJungian interpretation.\nThe psychologist Timothy R. O'Neill interpreted Bombadil from a Jungian perspective in \"The Individuated Hobbit: Jung, Tolkien, and the Archetypes of Middle-Earth\" (1979). O'Neill finds Bombadil to be the manifestation of the Self archetype and a vision of man's beginning and destiny:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe Tolkien scholar Patrick Grant notes that \"Jung also talks of a common figure, the 'vegetation numen,' king of the forest, who is associated with wood and water in a manner that recalls Tom Bombadil.\"\nEarly interpretations.\nRobert Foster, author of an early guide to Middle-earth, suggested in 1978 that Bombadil is one of the Maiar, angelic beings sent from Valinor.\nThe Tolkien scholar and philosopher Gene Hargrove argued in \"Mythlore\" in 1986 that Tolkien understood who Bombadil is, but purposefully made him enigmatic. Hargrove suggested that Tolkien left clues that Bombadil is one of the Valar, a god of Middle-Earth, specifically Aul\u00eb, the archangelic demigod who created the dwarves.\nAdaptations.\nAlong with the adventures in Crickhollow, the Old Forest, and the Barrow-downs, Bombadil is omitted from Peter Jackson's interpretation of \"The Lord of the Rings\". Jackson explained that this was because he and his co-writers felt that the character does little to advance the story, and including him would make the film unnecessarily long. Christopher Lee concurred, stating the scenes were left out to make time for showing Saruman's capture of Gandalf.\nBombadil has appeared in other radio and film adaptations. He was played by Norman Shelley in the 1955\u20131956 BBC radio adaptation of \"The Lord of the Rings\", a performance that Tolkien thought \"dreadful\"; in his view even worse was that Goldberry was announced as his daughter and Willowman \"an ally of Mordor (!!)\" (his emphasis). He was portrayed by Esko Hukkanen in the 1993 Finnish miniseries \"Hobitit\". He appeared, too, in the 1979 Mind's Eye recordings, where he was played by Bernard Mayes, who also voiced Gandalf.\nHe was included, along with Goldberry and the Barrow-wight, in the 1991 Russian adaptation of \"The Fellowship of the Ring\", \"Khraniteli\". \nTom Bombadil is portrayed by Rory Kinnear in the second season of \"\".\nAlthough Bombadil was not portrayed in Ralph Bakshi's or Jackson's films, a Tom Bombadil card exists in \"The Lord of the Rings Trading Card Game\" by Decipher, Inc. (part of the trilogy's merchandise). The model portraying Bombadil on this card is Harry Wellerchew. Bombadil is a non-player character in the MMORPG game \"\", serving as a main character in Book 1 of the epic quests.\nBombadil appears as a playable character in the LEGO \"The Lord of the Rings\" and \"The Hobbit\" video games. He has no impact in the main story for either game, as the games are direct adaptations of the Peter Jackson films rather than the original novels, but he later appears as an unlockable character in the Middle Earth hub world and can be used in free-play mode. He appears, too, on a \"God\" type card in the \"\" expansion \"The Lord of the Rings: Tales of Middle-earth\".\nThe 1969 \"Harvard Lampoon\" novel \"Bored of the Rings\" parodies Tom Bombadil as \"Tim Benzedrine\", a stereotypical hippie married to \"Hash-berry\". One of his songs is rewritten as:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;poem&gt;Toke-a-lid! Smoke-a-lid! Pop the mescalino!\nStash the hash! Gonna crash! Make mine methedrino!\nHop a hill! Pop a pill! For Old Tim Benzedrino!&lt;/poem&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nPrimary.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSecondary.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "62767", "revid": "2278355", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62767", "title": "Radagast", "text": "Wizard in J.R.R. Tolkien's fictional Middle-earth\nRadagast the Brown is a fictional character in J. R. R. Tolkien's legendarium. A wizard and associate of Gandalf, he appears briefly in \"The Hobbit\", \"The Lord of the Rings\", \"The Silmarillion\", and \"Unfinished Tales\". \nHis role in Tolkien's writings is so slight that it has been described as a plot device, though scholars have noted his contribution to the evident paganism in Middle-earth. He played a more significant role in Peter Jackson's \"The Hobbit\" film series, where he was portrayed by Sylvester McCoy. Some aspects of his characterisation were invented for the films, but the core elements of his character\u2014namely communing with animals, skill with herbs, and shamanistic ability to change his shape and colours\u2014are all described in Tolkien's works. He is also a character in role-playing video games based on Tolkien's writings.\nAppearances.\n\"Unfinished Tales\" explains that Radagast, like the other Wizards, came from Valinor around the year 1000 of the Third Age of Middle-earth and was one of the angelic Maiar. His original name is said to have been \"Aiwendil\", meaning \"bird-friend\" in Tolkien's invented language of Quenya. Yavanna, one of the god-like Valar, forces Radagast's fellow wizard Saruman to accept him as a companion, which, Tolkien says, may have been one of the reasons Saruman was contemptuous of him, to the point of scornfully calling him \"simple\" and \"a fool\". However, he is an ally and confidant of Gandalf, who describes him in \"The Hobbit\" as his \"cousin\". He is a friend of the skin-changer Beorn, something that Gandalf relies upon to get his party of Dwarves and a Hobbit accepted by a sceptical Beorn.\nRadagast lives at Rhosgobel on the western eaves of Mirkwood, its name deriving from Sindarin \"rhosc gobel\" meaning \"brown village\". Radagast has a strong affinity for\u2014and relationship with\u2014wild animals. It is said he speaks the many tongues of birds, and is a \"master of shapes and changes of hue\". Radagast is described by Gandalf as \"never a traveller, unless driven by great need\", \"a worthy Wizard\", and \"honest\".\nIn \"The Fellowship of the Ring\", during the Council of Elrond, Gandalf tells of a previous encounter with Radagast. Radagast was unwittingly used by Saruman to lure Gandalf to his tower of Orthanc, where Gandalf was captured. Fortuitously, Radagast also helped rescue him by sending Gwaihir the eagle to Orthanc with news of the movements of Sauron's forces. When Gwaihir saw that Gandalf was imprisoned on the top of the tower he carried him off to safety. The only other reference to Radagast in \"The Lord of the Rings\" is after the Council of Elrond when scouts are sent out. It is reported that Radagast is not at his home at Rhosgobel.\n\"The Silmarillion\" briefly summarizes the same events in \"Of the Rings of Power and the Third Age\", stating that Radagast is \"the friend of all birds and beasts\", and noting that he innocently helps Saruman to assemble \"a great host of spies\" including many birds.\nEtymology and origins.\nThe in-fiction etymology, according to the essay \"The Istari\" in \"Unfinished Tales\", is that the name \"Radagast\" means \"tender of beasts\" in Ad\u00fbnaic, one of Tolkien's fictional languages. However, Christopher Tolkien says that his father intended to change this derivation and bring Radagast in line with the other wizard-names, Gandalf and Saruman, by associating it with the old language of the Men of the Vales of Anduin. No alternative meaning is provided with this new association; indeed, Tolkien stated that the name was \"not now clearly interpretable\". His title \"the Brown\" is simply a reference to his earth-brown robes; each of the wizards has a cloak of a different colour.\nThe name Radagast is found in Edward Gibbon's 1776\u20131789 \"Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire\", in the form \"Radagaisus\", the name of a Gothic king. Slavic mythology contains a god named Radegast; this has been interpreted as \"welcome guest\", making him the god of hospitality. Tolkien's wizard may represent an echo of this Slavic tradition, a rare source among all the diverse influences on Tolkien's writings.\nTolkien wrote that Josef Madlener's \"Der Berggeist\", which shows a man in a hat seated in a forest, communing with a wild deer, inspired his Gandalf and set him thinking about the wizards Gandalf, Saruman, and Radagast.\nAnalysis.\nRadagast appears so briefly that he has been described as a plot device for Saruman's treachery, rather than a genuine character. From the clues given, that he is a \"master of shapes and a changer of hues\", his friendship and communication with animals, and his skill in herbs, he resembles a shaman. He has been described as \"one of the most interesting enigmas in Tolkien's writings\"; given the treason of Saruman, he and Gandalf are the only two wizards available to counter Sauron, but Radagast fails to answer Elrond's call.\nIn a letter, Tolkien wrote that Radagast gave up his mission as a Wizard by becoming too obsessed with animals and plants, but stated that he did not believe that Radagast's failure was as great as Saruman's. Christopher Tolkien commented that Radagast might not have failed completely, as he was specifically chosen by the Vala Yavanna for a mission to protect the plants and animals.\nThe Tolkien scholar Patrick Curry writes that the Slavic Radagast is the pagan patron of the Czech Beskyd mountains, depicted with a bird atop his horned helmet. In his view, this suggests that Tolkien's Radagast is one of many examples of paganism in Middle-earth.\nAdaptations.\nIn film.\nIn Peter Jackson's \"\", Radagast is played by Sylvester McCoy, and is expanded far beyond his brief role in the book. McCoy stated that he saw Radagast as \"very otherworldly with, as Tolkien depicts him, an empathy and kinship with nature, a Middle-earth version of St Francis of Assisi\". McCoy added that while Radagast was rather absent-minded, he comes out as \"a bumbling hero\". As for his house, McCoy said that the idea was that the tree decided to grow right through it, and Radagast agreed that he and the tree could live together. In the film, Radagast is the first wizard to visit Dol Guldur after he realizes that an evil power has infected the wood in which he lives. He discovers that a Necromancer (who turns out to be Sauron) has taken residence in the ruined fortress. In Dol Guldur he encounters the spirit of the Witch-king of Angmar, as well as the shadow of the Necromancer himself, and escapes with the Morgul blade taken from the Witch-king. Radagast's means of transportation is a sled pulled by enormous rabbits, a concept entirely original to the movie. Radagast meets Gandalf, Bilbo Baggins, and the Dwarves en route to Erebor, and tells them of his discovery in Dol Guldur. When Thorin's Company are attacked by Orcs riding Wargs, Radagast mounts his sled and provides a distraction. Later, Saruman makes contemptuous remarks about Radagast during a meeting with Gandalf, Elrond, and Galadriel. The writer Brian Sibley comments that the fact that Tolkien said little about Radagast gave Jackson's screenwriters freedom to make of the character what they liked. \"The Economist\" wrote that Radagast the Brown had been created from Tolkien's \"sparse and bare\" hints as to his character. The sled chase was filmed in the Strath Taieri glacial valley of New Zealand's South Island, strewn with real boulders.\nIn \", Radagast appears with Gandalf in a few scenes. The two wizards investigate an empty tomb, determining that the Nazg\u00fbl are once again awake and have been summoned. Gandalf bids Radagast to go and tell Galadriel of all they find, and that the White Council must make a pre-emptive move on Dol Guldur. Inside the ruins, Gandalf confronts the Necromancer and finds that he is indeed Sauron, just as Radagast had thought.\nIn \", Radagast arrives in Dol Guldur as the White Council battle Sauron and the Nazg\u00fbl, and carries the wounded Gandalf on his sled. In the final battle, Radagast leads a charge of the Great Eagles at the end of the battle to assist the Dwarves, Men, and Elves against the Orcs.\nIn games.\nRadagast features in computer and video games such as those from Games Workshop. He plays an expanded role in the massively multiplayer online role-playing game \"The Lord of the Rings Online\", which makes him a leader in a part of Middle-earth, allowing players to interact with him.\nReferences.\nPrimary.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSecondary.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "62768", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62768", "title": "D\u00e9agol", "text": ""}
{"id": "62771", "revid": "11952314", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62771", "title": "1400 BC", "text": ""}
{"id": "62772", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62772", "title": "Anacamptis pyramidalis", "text": "Species of plant\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Taxobox/core/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAnacamptis pyramidalis, the pyramidal orchid, is a perennial herbaceous plant belonging to the genus \"Anacamptis\" of the family Orchidaceae. The scientific name \"Anacamptis\" derives from Greek \u03b1\u03bd\u03b1\u03ba\u03ac\u03bc\u03c4\u03b5\u03b9\u03bd 'anakamptein' meaning 'bend forward', while the Latin name \"pyramidalis\" refers to the pyramidal form of the inflorescence.\nDescription.\nThis hardy plant reaches on average of height, with a maximum of . The stem is erect and unbranched. The basal leaves are linear-lanceolate with parallel venation, up to long, the cauline ones are shorter and barely visible on the stem. The arrangement of hermaphroditic flowers in a compact pyramidal shape is very distinctive and gives the orchid its common name. The colour of the flower varies from pink to purple, or rarely white, and the scent is described as \"foxy\". The flowers have six tepals, being three small sepals and three petals. Two small petals are on the sides, while the third and lower (labellum) is large and trilobate. At the back of the flower there is a tubular spur of about long, while the labellum bears two lateral small flaps. The flowering period extends from April through July.\nHabitat and distribution.\n\"Anacamptis pyramidalis\" requires a sunny spot on diverse soils: loamy or clay. It can even grow on very alkaline soil. It can be found on meadows, in grassland, sand dunes, maquis as well as dry and well exposed slopes, at an altitude of above sea level.\nIn the UK, \"Anacamptis pyramidalis\" is a very successful coloniser of disturbed soil, and can grow in a wide variety of locations, including road verges, reservoirs, quarries and airfields.\nThis orchid is native to southwestern Eurasia, from western Europe through the Mediterranean region eastwards to Iran. In Germany, it is rare and was declared Orchid of the Year in 1990 to heighten awareness of this plant. \nThis orchid is especially common on the Isle of Wight in the South of England, and was designated the county plant in 2008. On the Isle of Wight, it favours growth in chalky or sandstone-rich soil, and thus can easily be found on the Downland and cliffs to the west and south of the island.\nEcology.\nThe flowers are pollinated by butterflies and moths. To ensure the fertilization, their morphology is well adapted to the proboscis of Lepidoptera, especially \"Euphydryas\", \"Melanargia\", \"Melitaea\", \"Pieris\" and \"Zygaena\" species. The mechanism by which its pairs of pollinia attach themselves to an insect's proboscis was discovered by Charles Darwin and described in his book on the \"Fertilisation of Orchids\".\n\"Anacamptis pyramidalis\" has been suggested to form mycorrhizal relationships with \"Rhizoctonia\", \"Fusarium\" and \"Papulaspora\" species.\nVarieties.\nThere are some notable varieties, which are sometimes treated as subspecies \u2013 and as they seem to be limited to certain regions, this may be correct:\nThe variety \"alba\" can be found anywhere in the Pyramidal Orchid's range; its flowers are white.\nMedicinal uses.\nThe dried and ground tuber (from various species of \"Orchis\" and \"Anacamptis\") can be made into a fine white powder, called salep. This is a very nutritious sweet starchlike substance. It is used in drinks, cereals and in making bread. In Turkey it is used in ice-creams. It was also used medicinally in diets for children and convalescents.\nCulture.\nThe pyramidal orchid was voted the County flower of the Isle of Wight in 2002 following a poll by the wild flora conservation charity Plantlife.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "62773", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62773", "title": "Gymnadenia conopsea", "text": "Species of orchid\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Taxobox/core/styles.css\" /&gt;\nGymnadenia conopsea, commonly known as the fragrant orchid or chalk fragrant orchid, is a herbaceous plant of the family Orchidaceae native to northern Europe.\nEtymology.\nThe name of the genus \"Gymnadenia\" is formed from Greek words (', \"nude\") and (', \"gland\") and refers to the characteristics of the organs for secreting nectar. The specific Latin name \"conopsea\" derives from the Greek ' ('), literally meaning \"mosquito-like\", probably because of the similarity of the long spur of the flower with the mouthparts of a mosquito.\nThe scientific binomial name of this plant was initially \"Orchis conopsea\", proposed by the Swedish naturalist and botanist Carl von Linn\u00e9 (1707\u20131778) in his ' of 1753. The name has been subsequently amended to the one currently accepted (\"Gymnadenia conopsea\"), by the British botanist Robert Brown (1773\u20131858) in 1813. In German, this plant is called ' or '; in French, is called ' or '; in Italy, it is called ' (\"pink hand\"); in Croatian, it is known under \"\".\nDescription.\n\"Gymnadenia conopsea\" reaches on average of height, with a maximum of . These plants are tuberous geophytes, as they bring their buds in underground tuber, organs that annually produce new stems, leaves and flowers. These orchids are \"terrestrial\" because unlike \"epiphytic\" species, they do not grow on other plants of major sizes.\nThe stem is leafy and robust, with a striated surface. The leaves are long, narrow and lanceolate and vary from 3 to 7. The leaf color is gray-green. Size of leaf: width 1 to 2\u00a0cm, length 10 \u2013 25\u00a0cm.\nThese orchids have two ovoidal bulbs, deeply webbed and with many small and short lobes. Size of tubers: 1 to 3.5\u00a0cm.\nThe inflorescence is long and it is composed of flowers gathered in dense cylindrical spikes (up to 50 flowers per spike). These inflorescences are scented and genes underlying eugenol (a volatile scent compound) production have been identified in Gymnadenia conopsea, G. odoratissima and G. densiflora. The flowers are petiolated, placed in the axils of long bracts and reach on average . They have a distinctive three lobed lip and long spurs. Their light scent is similar to cloves. Their colors vary from white and pink to pink-purple, more rarely white. These flowers bloom in the Summer, from June to July. They are hermaphrodite and pollinated by insects (entomophily), including moths.\nEcology.\nThe species is almost exclusively pollinated by moths (Lepidoptera). The most common pollinators are the small elephant hawk-moth (\"Deilephila porcellus\"), hummingbird hawk-moth (\"Macroglossum stellatarum\"), silver Y (\"Autographa gamma\"), burnished brass (\"Diachrysia chrysitis\") and large yellow underwing (\"Noctua pronuba\"). Fruit set is high with an average of 73%.\nThe seed's germination is conditioned by the presence of mycorrhizal fungi. \"Gymnadenia conopsea\" is held to be a mycorrhizal generalist, able to form associations with a variety of different fungal species including species in the Tulasnellaceae, Ceratobasidiaceae and Pezizales.\nDistribution.\nThis plant is quite common throughout northern Europe with the exception of the Dinaric Alps. In Asia it is common in areas to the north of the Himalayas.\n\"Gymnadenia conopsea\" ssp. \"borealis\" has been recorded from Co. Donegal, Ireland in 2004.\nHabitat.\nThis species' habitat includes mountain meadows and pastures, grassland and fens. They grow on siliceous and calcareous substrate, mildly damp and with low nutritional value, at an altitude of above sea level.\nSynonyms.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "62775", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62775", "title": "Pre-abelian category", "text": "Category\nIn mathematics, specifically in category theory, a pre-abelian category is an additive category that has all kernels and cokernels.\nSpelled out in more detail, this means that a category C is pre-abelian if:\nNote that the zero morphism in item 3 can be identified as the identity element of the hom-set Hom(\"A\",\"B\"), which is an abelian group by item 1; or as the unique morphism \"A\"\u00a0\u2192 0\u00a0\u2192\u00a0\"B\", where 0 is a zero object, guaranteed to exist by item 2.\nExamples.\nThe original example of an additive category is the category Ab of abelian groups.\nAb is preadditive because it is a closed monoidal category, the biproduct in Ab is the finite direct sum, the kernel is inclusion of the ordinary kernel from group theory and the cokernel is the quotient map onto the ordinary cokernel from group theory.\nOther common examples:\nThese will give you an idea of what to think of; for more examples, see abelian category (every abelian category is pre-abelian).\nElementary properties.\nEvery pre-abelian category is of course an additive category, and many basic properties of these categories are described under that subject. This article concerns itself with the properties that hold specifically because of the existence of kernels and cokernels.\nAlthough kernels and cokernels are special kinds of equalisers and coequalisers, a pre-abelian category actually has \"all\" equalisers and coequalisers.\nWe simply construct the equaliser of two morphisms \"f\" and \"g\" as the kernel of their difference \"g\"\u2009\u2212\u2009\"f\"\u200a\n ; similarly, their coequaliser is the cokernel of their difference.\nSince pre-abelian categories have all finite products and coproducts (the biproducts) and all binary equalisers and coequalisers (as just described), then by a general theorem of category theory, they have all finite limits and colimits.\nThat is, pre-abelian categories are finitely complete.\nThe existence of both kernels and cokernels gives a notion of image and coimage.\nWe can define these as\nim\u00a0\"f\"\u00a0:= ker\u2009coker\u00a0\"f\";\ncoim\u00a0\"f\"\u00a0:= coker\u2009ker\u00a0\"f\".\nThat is, the image is the kernel of the cokernel, and the coimage is the cokernel of the kernel.\nNote that this notion of image may not correspond to the usual notion of image, or range, of a function, even assuming that the morphisms in the category \"are\" functions.\nFor example, in the category of topological abelian groups, the image of a morphism actually corresponds to the inclusion of the \"closure\" of the range of the function.\nFor this reason, people will often distinguish the meanings of the two terms in this context, using \"image\" for the abstract categorical concept and \"range\" for the elementary set-theoretic concept.\nIn many common situations, such as the category of sets, where images and coimages exist, their objects are isomorphic.\nPut more precisely, we have a factorisation of \"f\":\u00a0\"A\"\u00a0\u2192\u00a0\"B\" as\n\"A\"\u00a0\u2192 \"C\"\u00a0\u2192 \"I\"\u00a0\u2192 \"B\",\nwhere the morphism on the left is the coimage, the morphism on the right is the image, and the morphism in the middle (called the \"parallel\" of \"f\") is an isomorphism.\nIn a pre-abelian category, \"this is not necessarily true\".\nThe factorisation shown above does always exist, but the parallel might not be an isomorphism.\nIn fact, the parallel of \"f\" is an isomorphism for every morphism \"f\" if and only if the pre-abelian category is an abelian category.\nAn example of a non-abelian, pre-abelian category is, once again, the category of topological abelian groups.\nAs remarked, the image is the inclusion of the \"closure\" of the range; however, the coimage is a quotient map onto the range itself.\nThus, the parallel is the inclusion of the range into its closure, which is not an isomorphism unless the range was already closed.\nExact functors.\nRecall that all finite limits and colimits exist in a pre-abelian category.\nIn general category theory, a functor is called \"left exact\" if it preserves all finite limits and \"right exact\" if it preserves all finite colimits. (A functor is simply \"exact\" if it's both left exact and right exact.)\nIn a pre-abelian category, exact functors can be described in particularly simple terms.\nFirst, recall that an additive functor is a functor \"F\":\u00a0C\u00a0\u2192\u00a0D between preadditive categories that acts as a group homomorphism on each hom-set.\nThen it turns out that a functor between pre-abelian categories is left exact if and only if it is additive and preserves all kernels, and it's right exact if and only if it's additive and preserves all cokernels.\nNote that an exact functor, because it preserves both kernels and cokernels, preserves all images and coimages.\nExact functors are most useful in the study of abelian categories, where they can be applied to exact sequences.\nMaximal exact structure.\nOn every pre-abelian category formula_1 there exists an exact structure formula_2 that is maximal in the sense that it contains every other exact structure. The exact structure formula_2 consists of precisely those kernel-cokernel pairs formula_4 where formula_5 is a semi-stable kernel and formula_6 is a semi-stable cokernel. Here, formula_7 is a semi-stable kernel if it is a kernel and for each morphism formula_8 in the pushout diagram\nformula_9\nthe morphism formula_10 is again a kernel. formula_11 is a semi-stable cokernel if it is a cokernel and for every morphism formula_12 in the pullback diagram\nformula_13\nthe morphism formula_14 is again a cokernel.\nA pre-abelian category formula_1 is quasi-abelian if and only if all kernel-cokernel pairs form an exact structure. An example for which this is not the case is the category of (Hausdorff) bornological spaces.\nThe result is also valid for additive categories that are not pre-abelian but Karoubian.\nSpecial cases.\nThe pre-abelian categories most commonly studied are in fact abelian categories; for example, Ab is an abelian category. Pre-abelian categories that are not abelian appear for instance in functional analysis."}
{"id": "62776", "revid": "2300502", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62776", "title": "Range (function)", "text": ""}
{"id": "62777", "revid": "1427850", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62777", "title": "Henry Benedict Stuart", "text": "Catholic cardinal (1725\u20131807)\nHenry Benedict Thomas Edward Maria Clement Francis Xavier Stuart, Cardinal Duke of York (6 March 1725\u00a0\u2013 13 July 1807), also known as the Cardinal of York, was a cardinal, and was the third and final Jacobite heir to publicly claim the thrones of Great Britain and Ireland, as the younger grandson of King James II of England. One of the longest-serving cardinals in history, Henry spent his whole life in the Papal States and became the dean of the College of Cardinals and cardinal-bishop of Ostia and Velletri. Unlike his father James Francis Edward Stuart (\"The Old Pretender\") and elder brother Charles Edward Stuart (\"The Young Pretender\" or \"Bonnie Prince Charlie\"), Henry made no effort to seize the thrones. After Charles's death in 1788, Henry became known by Jacobites as Henry IX and I, but the Papacy did not recognise Henry as the lawful ruler of Great Britain and Ireland and instead referred to him as the \"Cardinal Duke of York\". He was most widely known as the \"Duke of York\", a title in the Jacobite peerage granted to him by his father.\nEarly life.\nHenry was born in exile at the Palazzo Muti in Rome on 6 March 1725 and baptised on the same day by Pope Benedict XIII, 37 years after his grandfather James II and VII lost the thrones, and ten years after his father's failed attempt to regain it. His father was James Francis Edward Stuart, known to his opponents as \"the Old Pretender\". His mother was the Princess Maria Klementyna Sobieska, granddaughter of the Polish King and Lithuanian Grand-Duke, John III Sobieski. Henry was apparently an intelligent child who could spell and write better than his older brother Charles. More introverted than Charles and more cautious in his approach to problems, Henry was described as pious and mild-mannered.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Stack/styles.css\"/&gt;\nHenry went to France in 1745 to help his brother, Prince Charles Edward Stuart (\"Bonnie Prince Charlie\", or \"the Young Pretender\") prepare the Jacobite rising of 1745. Attached to the French Royal Army, he was in nominal command of a cross-channel invasion force of some 10,000 men that never made it out of Dunkirk, and subsequently served under Maurice de Saxe at the siege of Antwerp. After the defeat at the Battle of Culloden (1746), Henry Stuart returned to Italy, aged 21.\nEcclesiastical career.\nOn 30 June 1747 Pope Benedict XIV conferred the tonsure on him and created him Cardinal-Deacon of Santa Maria in Campitelli in a special consistory held on 3 July 1747. On 27 August 1747 he was promoted through the four minor orders by Benedict. He received the subdiaconate on 18 August 1748 and diaconate on 25 August 1748. His elder brother Charles, who was in France at the time, was not in favor of the ecclesiastical honors as he believed they would only serve to further religious prejudice against the Stuarts.\nAs the cardinalate was a rank rather than one of the priestly orders, Charles hoped that Henry might yet make a politically advantageous marriage, and was dismayed to discover that his brother had been ordained a priest on 1 September 1748. Later that month, Henry was made Cardinal-Priest, retaining his diaconal church. In 1751, he was made Arch-Priest of St. Peter's Basilica.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;His revenues from the many ecclesiastical preferments he enjoyed were enormous. His income from abbeys and other pluralities in Flanders, Spain, Naples and France amounted to 40,000 Pounds in British money at the time. He also held sinecure benefices yielding revenues in Spanish America. He owned territory in Mexico, which contributed largely to his income. Louis XV of France bestowed on the Cardinal the abbeys of Auchin and St. Amand as compensation for having had to evict his brother pursuant to the terms of the Treaty of Aix-la-Chapelle.\nIn December 1752 his titular seat was changed to Santi Apostoli; and in 1758 the Pope named him Camerlengo of the Sacred College of Cardinals. The responsibilities of this office included administering all property, fees, funds and revenue belonging to the College of Cardinals, celebrating the requiem Mass for a deceased cardinal, and charge of the registry of the \"Acta Consistoralia\". He participated in the 1758 papal conclave, which elected Pope Clement XIII. In October of that year, Henry was made titular Archbishop of Corinth. The following year, he resigned the title of Santa Maria in Campitelli to assume that of Santa Maria in Trastevere; however, he retained the Church of Santi Apostoli \"in commendam\".\nHe was made Cardinal-Bishop of Frascati on 13 July 1761. He was appointed Dean of the Sacred College of Cardinals on 26 September 1803, then also succeeding to the See of Ostia and Velletri. He lived and worked in Frascati for many years, descending each afternoon in his carriage to Rome, where his position as vice-chancellor entitled him to the Palazzo della Cancelleria.\nHenry was the last claimant to the British throne to touch the sick to cure them from the King's Evil.\nHenry is described as a beatific, abstemious, wealthy, celibate aesthete who lived to a great age, 'inoffensive and respectable' to the end.\nFrench Revolution and later life.\nAt the time of the French Revolution, he lost his French Royal benefices and sacrificed many other resources to assist Pope Pius VI. This, in addition to the seizure of his Frascati property by the French, caused him to descend into poverty, which resulted in the sale of the Stuart Sapphire. The British Minister in Venice arranged for Henry to receive an annuity of \u00a34,000 from George III of Great Britain. Although the British government represented this as an act of charity, Henry and the Jacobites considered it to be a first instalment on the money which was legally owed to him. (For many years the British government had promised to return the English dowry of his grandmother, Mary of Modena, but never did so.)\nThe Vatican had recognised James Francis Edward Stuart as James III and VIII as the King of Great Britain and Ireland. After his death in 1766, the Vatican did not recognise his son (Henry's brother) Charles, who had converted to Anglicanism in 1750. The Vatican had not, however, overtly recognised the Hanoverian monarchs. However, in November 1792 the Vatican first referred to George III as the King of Great Britain and Ireland instead of the Elector of Hanover. This resulted in a protest by Henry, who suggested the insult would result in him not visiting Rome again.\nDespite their general anti-clericalism and hostility to the Bourbon monarchy, the French Directory suggested to the United Irishmen in 1798 to elevate Henry as King of the Irish (Henry IX). This was in the course of General Jean Joseph Amable Humbert landing a force in County Mayo for the Irish Rebellion of 1798, and trying to rally the Catholic population: a significant number of Irish priests supported the Rising, even though Humbert's army had been veterans of the anti-clerical campaign in Italy. The French hoped Henry could lead a French client state in Ireland; however, Wolfe Tone, the Protestant republican leader, vetoed the scheme.\nHenry returned to Frascati in 1803. In September of that year he became the Dean of the College of Cardinals and hence Cardinal Bishop of Ostia and Velletri, though he still lived in the episcopal palace at Frascati. He died there on 13 July 1807, aged 82, after 60 years as a cardinal.\nPersonal life.\nSome modern historians have speculated whether Henry was homosexual. Contemporary accounts include the writings of Hester Lynch Thrale (1741\u20131821), and the diplomat and writer Giuseppe Gorani (1740\u20131819). Gorani admitted to having gathered evidence insufficient to confirm his suspicions either way, but drew attention to the number of handsome clerics that were to be found in Henry's palace. The historian Andrew Lang alluded to James's comment that his younger son would never marry although many marriages had been planned for him.\nThe writer Gaetano Moroni provides the lengthiest account of Henry's close attachment with his majordomo Giovanni Lercari (1722\u20131802), whom Henry was said to have \"loved beyond measure\". This led to serious tensions between the cardinal and his father James, who in 1752 tried to have Lercari dismissed from Rome. Henry reacted by attempting to secure his financial independence, and refused to return to Rome from Bologna without Lercari by his side. A public scandal was narrowly avoided by the intervention of Pope Benedict XIV. It was agreed that Lercari would leave the household, and he was later made Archbishop of Genoa.\nThings became easier after the death of James in 1766. From 1769 onwards Henry remained close to Angelo Cesarini, a nobleman from Perugia, who under Henry's protection won various honours, was made canon of the cathedral in Frascati, and in 1801 became Bishop of Milevi. Henry died with Cesarini at his side, as for the past 32 years. Cesarini was later buried in the church of Santa Maria in Vallicella.\nThese relationships may have had a romantic element.\nLegacy.\nUnder his will, which he signed as \"Henry R\" (i.e. Rex or king), he was succeeded in all his claimed British rights by his nearest blood-relative and friend, King Charles Emmanuel IV of Sardinia. Like his successors, Charles Emmanuel neither asserted nor renounced his Jacobite claims.\nIn his will he left the Crown Jewels of the United Kingdom to the Prince of Wales, the future George IV.\nHenry, his brother, his father and his mother are buried in the crypt of St. Peter's Basilica in the Vatican. There is a monument to the Royal Stuarts on one of the columns in the basilica proper, designed by Antonio Canova. The monument was originally commissioned by Angelo Cesarini, executor of Henry Benedict's estate. Among the subscribers was George IV.\nThe monument was restored at the expense of Queen Elizabeth The Queen Mother in the 1940s.\nArms.\nDuring the pretence of his father and brother, Henry claimed a coat of arms consisting of those of the kingdom, differenced by a \"crescent argent\" or white crescent.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "62778", "revid": "15244483", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62778", "title": "Austrasia", "text": "Kingdom within Frankish empire (511\u2013751)\nAustrasia was a historical region and the northeastern realm within the core of the Frankish State during the Early Middle Ages, centering on the regions between Meuse, Moselle, Middle Rhine and the Main rivers. It included the original Frankish-ruled territories within what had been the northernmost part of Roman Gaul and parts of Roman Germania. It also stretched beyond the old Roman borders on the Rhine into Frankish areas which had never been formally under Roman rule. It came into being as a part of the Frankish Kingdom, founded by the Merovingian king Clovis I (r. 481\u2013511), who expanded Frankish rule further to the southwest, into Gaul, whose northern regions came to be known as Neustria. \nThese two realms, or sub-kingdoms (Austrasia and Neustria), along with Aquitaine and Burgundy, were subsequently ruled by various rulers from the Merovingian dynasty, followed in the 8th and 9th centuries by their successors from the Carolingian dynasty, whose own powerbase was in Austrasia itself. The two Frankish dynasties did not always have a single ruling monarch over the whole Frankish realm, and already by 561, Austrasia was ruled as a separate kingdom within the Frankish realm by the Merovingian king Sigebert I (561\u2013575). Kings often allowed different family members to rule sub-kingdoms, and these were sometimes in conflict with each other, despite the underlying continuity of the overall Frankish state. \nIn 843, by the Treaty of Verdun, Austrasia was divided in three parts, with eastern section being assigned to the East Francia, central regions to the Middle Francia, and the most western part to the West Francia. Further divisions affected mostly the central part of Austrasia, ruled since the Treaty of Pr\u00fcm (855) by king Lothair II, whose name gave rise to Lotharingia, that corresponded to central Austrasia. It was divided by the Treaty of Meerssen (870), but reunited by the Treaty of Ribemont (880), under the east Frankish rule. During the 9th century, Austrasia was still considered as one of the main regions (stem lands) within the Carolingian Empire, surrounded by Alamannia (to the south), Bavaria (to the south-east), Thuringia (to the north-east), and Saxony (to the north), as attested by the Royal Frankish Annals, and the Annals of Saint Bertin, that mentions not only Austrasia, but also \"Autrasians\".\nIn time, central Austrasia was more frequently designated as Lotharingia, that became the prevailing term for those regions, while eastern parts of Austrasia came to be known as Franconia.\nEtymology.\nThe name \"Austrasia\" is not well attested in the Merovingian period. The first surviving record of the term is by Gregory of Tours, writing in about 580. It was later used by Aimoin of Fleury around 1000. It is presumably the latinization of an Old Frankish name, reconstructed as \"*Oster-rike\" (\"Eastern Kingdom\").\nAs with the name \"Austria\", it contains the word for \"east\", and means \"eastern land\". The term designated the original territory of the Franks in contrast to Neustria, which apparently meant the \"(new) western land\".\nGeography.\nAustrasia was centered on the Middle Rhine, including the basins of the Moselle, Main and Meuse rivers. It bordered on Frisia and Saxony to the north, Thuringia to the east, Swabia and Burgundy to the south and to Neustria to the southwest. The exact boundary between Merovingian Neustria and Austrasia is unclear with respect to areas such as the medieval counties of Flanders, Brabant and Hainaut, and areas immediately to the south of these.\nMetz served as the Austrasian capital, although some Austrasian kings ruled from Reims, Trier and Cologne. Other important cities included Verdun, Worms and Speyer. Fulda monastery, an important royal monastery, was founded in eastern Austrasia in the final decade of the Merovingian period.\nIn the High Middle Ages, its territory became divided among the duchies of Lotharingia and Franconia in Germany, with some western portions including Reims and Rethel passing to France.\nIts exact boundaries were somewhat fluid over the history of the Frankish sub-kingdoms, but Austrasia can be taken to correspond roughly to the territory of present-day Luxembourg, parts of eastern Belgium, north-eastern France (Lorraine and Champagne-Ardenne), west-central Germany (the Rhineland, Hesse and Franconia) and the southern Netherlands (Limburg, North Brabant, with a salient north of the Rhine including Utrecht and parts of Gelderland).\nHistory.\nAfter the death of the Frankish king Clovis I in 511, his four sons partitioned his kingdom amongst themselves, with Theuderic I receiving the lands that were to become Austrasia. Descended from Theuderic, a line of kings ruled Austrasia until 555, when it was united with the other Frankish kingdoms of Chlothar I, who inherited all the Frankish realms by 558. He redivided the Frankish territory amongst his four sons, but the four kingdoms coalesced into three on the death of Charibert I in 567: Austrasia under Sigebert I, Neustria under Chilperic I, and Burgundy under Guntram. These three kingdoms defined the political division of Francia until the rise of the Carolingians and even thereafter.\nFrom 567 to the death of Sigebert II in 613, Neustria and Austrasia fought each other almost constantly, with Burgundy playing the peacemaker between them. These struggles reached their climax in the wars between Brunhilda and Fredegund, queens, respectively, of Austrasia and Neustria. Finally, in 613, a rebellion by the nobility against Brunhilda saw her betrayed and handed over to her nephew and foe in Neustria, Chlothar II. Chlothar then took control of the other two kingdoms and set up a united Frankish kingdom with its capital in Paris. During this period the first \"majores domus\" or mayors of the palace appeared. These officials acted as mediators between the king and the people in each realm. The first Austrasian mayors came from the Pippinid family, which experienced a slow but steady ascent until it eventually displaced the Merovingians on the throne.\nIn 623, the Austrasians asked Chlothar II for a king of their own and he appointed his son Dagobert I to rule over them with Pepin of Landen as regent. Dagobert's government in Austrasia was widely admired. In 629, he inherited Neustria and Burgundy. Austrasia was again neglected until, in 633, the people demanded the king's son as their own king again. Dagobert complied and sent his elder son Sigebert III to Austrasia. Historians often categorise Sigebert as the first \"roi fain\u00e9ant\", or do-nothing king, of the Merovingian dynasty. His court was dominated by the mayors. In 657, the mayor Grimoald the Elder succeeded in putting his son Childebert the Adopted on the throne, where he remained until 662. Thereafter, Austrasia was predominantly the kingdom of the Arnulfing mayors of the palace and their base of power. With the Battle of Tertry in 687, Pepin of Heristal defeated the Neustrian king Theuderic III and established his mayoralty over all the Frankish kingdoms. This was even regarded by contemporaries as the beginning of his \"reign\". It also signalled the dominance of Austrasia over Neustria, which would last until the end of the Merovingian era.\nIn 718, Charles Martel had Austrasian support in his war against Neustria for control of all the Francian realms. He was not king himself, but appointed Chlothar IV to rule in Austrasia. In 719, Francia was united by Martel's family, the Carolingian dynasty, under Austrasian hegemony. While the Frankish kings continued to divide up the Frankish realm in different ways over subsequent generations, the term Austrasia was only used occasionally after the Carolingian dynasty.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "62779", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62779", "title": "Limit (categories)", "text": ""}
{"id": "62780", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62780", "title": "Colimit", "text": ""}
{"id": "62781", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62781", "title": "Complete category", "text": "Category in which all small limits existIn mathematics, a complete category is a category in which all small limits exist. That is, a category \"C\" is complete if every diagram \"F\" : \"J\" \u2192 \"C\" (where \"J\" is small) has a limit in \"C\". Dually, a cocomplete category is one in which all small colimits exist. A bicomplete category is a category which is both complete and cocomplete.\nThe existence of \"all\" limits (even when \"J\" is a proper class) is too strong to be practically relevant. Any category with this property is necessarily a thin category: for any two objects there can be at most one morphism from one object to the other.\nA weaker form of completeness is that of finite completeness. A category is finitely complete if all finite limits exists (i.e. limits of diagrams indexed by a finite category \"J\"). Dually, a category is finitely cocomplete if all finite colimits exist.\nTheorems.\nIt follows from the existence theorem for limits that a category is complete if and only if it has equalizers (of all pairs of morphisms) and all (small) products. Since equalizers may be constructed from pullbacks and binary products (consider the pullback of (\"f\", \"g\") along the diagonal \u0394), a category is complete if and only if it has pullbacks and products.\nDually, a category is cocomplete if and only if it has coequalizers and all (small) coproducts, or, equivalently, pushouts and coproducts.\nFinite completeness can be characterized in several ways. For a category \"C\", the following are all equivalent:\nThe dual statements are also equivalent.\nA small category \"C\" is complete if and only if it is cocomplete. A small complete category is necessarily thin.\nA posetal category vacuously has all equalizers and coequalizers, whence it is (finitely) complete if and only if it has all (finite) products, and dually for cocompleteness. Without the finiteness restriction a posetal category with all products is automatically cocomplete, and dually, by a theorem about complete lattices."}
{"id": "62782", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62782", "title": "Preadditive categories", "text": ""}
{"id": "62783", "revid": "7181920", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62783", "title": "Pre-Abelian categories", "text": ""}
{"id": "62784", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62784", "title": "Soybean", "text": "Legume grown for its edible bean\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Taxobox/core/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe soybean, soy bean, or soya bean (Glycine max) is a species of legume native to East Asia, widely grown for its edible bean. Soy is a staple crop, the world's most grown legume, and an important animal feed.\nSoy is a key source of food, useful both for its protein and oil content. Soybean oil is widely used in cooking, as well as in industry. Traditional unfermented food uses of soybeans include edamame, as well as soy milk, from which tofu and tofu skin are made. Fermented soy foods include soy sauce, fermented bean paste, natt\u014d, and tempeh. Fat-free (defatted) soybean meal is a significant and cheap source of protein for animal feeds and many packaged meals. For example, soybean products, such as textured vegetable protein (TVP), are ingredients in many meat and dairy substitutes. Soy based foods are traditionally associated with East Asian cuisines, and still constitute a major part of East Asian diets, but processed soy products are increasingly used in Western cuisines.\nSoy was domesticated from the wild soybean \"(Glycine soja)\" in north-central China between 6,000 and 9,000 years ago. Brazil and the United States lead the world in modern soy production. The majority of soybeans are genetically modified, usually for either insect, herbicide, or drought resistance. Three-quarters of soy is used to feed livestock, which in turn go to feed humans. Increasing demand for meat has substantially increased soy production since the 1980s, and contributed to deforestation in the Amazon.\nSoybeans contain significant amounts of phytic acid, dietary minerals and B vitamins. Soy may reduce the risk of cancer and heart disease. Some people are allergic to soy. Soy is a complete protein and therefore important in the diets of many vegetarians and vegans. The association of soy with vegans and the misconception that soy increases estrogen production have led to \"soy boy\" being used as a derogatory term.\nEtymology.\nThe word \"soy\" derives from the Japanese \"soi\", a regional variant of \"sh\u014dyu\", which in turn comes from the Chinese \"jiangyou\" (\u91ac\u6cb9), meaning \"soy sauce\".\nThe name of the genus, \"Glycine\", comes from Linnaeus. When naming the genus, Linnaeus observed that one of the species formerly within the genus, which has since been reclassified to the genus \"Apios\", had a sweet root. Based on the sweetness, the Greek word for sweet, \"glyk\u00f3s\", was Latinized. The genus name is not related to the amino acid glycine.\nDescription.\nLike most plants, soybeans grow in distinct morphological stages as they develop from seeds into fully mature plants.\nGermination.\nThe first stage of growth is germination, a method which first becomes apparent as a seed's radicle emerges. This is the first stage of root growth and occurs within the first 48 hours under ideal growing conditions. The first photosynthetic structures, the cotyledons, develop from the hypocotyl, the first plant structure to emerge from the soil. These cotyledons both act as leaves and as a source of nutrients for the immature plant, providing the seedling nutrition for its first 7 to 10 days.\nMaturation.\nThe first true leaves develop as a pair of single blades. Subsequent to this first pair, mature nodes form compound leaves with three blades. Mature trifoliolate leaves, having three to four leaflets per leaf, are often between long and broad. Under ideal conditions, stem growth continues, producing new nodes every four days. Before flowering, roots can grow per day. If rhizobia are present, root nodulation begins by the time the third node appears. Nodulation typically continues for 8 weeks before the symbiotic infection process stabilizes. The final characteristics of a soybean plant are variable, with factors such as genetics, soil quality, and climate affecting its form; however, fully mature soybean plants are generally between in height and have rooting depths between .\nFlowering.\nFlowering is triggered by day length, often beginning once days become shorter than 12.8 hours. This trait is highly variable however, with different varieties reacting differently to changing day length. Soybeans form inconspicuous, self-fertile flowers which are borne in the axil of the leaf and are white, pink or purple. Though they do not require pollination, they are attractive to bees, because they produce nectar that is high in sugar content. Depending on the soybean variety, node growth may cease once flowering begins. Strains that continue nodal development after flowering are termed \"indeterminates\" and are best suited to climates with longer growing seasons. Often soybeans drop their leaves before the seeds are fully mature.\nThe fruit is a hairy pod that grows in clusters of three to five, each pod is long and usually contains two to four (rarely more) seeds 5\u201311\u00a0mm in diameter. Soybean seeds come in a wide variety of sizes and hull colors such as black, brown, yellow, and green. Variegated and bicolored seed coats are also common.\nSeed resilience.\nThe hull of the mature bean is hard, water-resistant, and protects the cotyledon and hypocotyl (or \"germ\") from damage. If the seed coat is cracked, the seed will not germinate. The scar, visible on the seed coat, is called the hilum (colors include black, brown, buff, gray and yellow) and at one end of the hilum is the micropyle, or small opening in the seed coat which can allow the absorption of water for sprouting.\nSome seeds such as soybeans containing very high levels of protein can undergo desiccation, yet survive and revive after water absorption. A. Carl Leopold began studying this capability at the Boyce Thompson Institute for Plant Research at Cornell University in the mid-1980s. He found soybeans and corn to have a range of soluble carbohydrates protecting the seed's cell viability. Patents were awarded to him in the early 1990s on techniques for protecting biological membranes and proteins in the dry state.\nChemistry.\nDry soybeans contain 36% protein and 20% fat in form of soybean oil by weight. The remainder consists of 30% carbohydrates, 9% water and 5% ash. \nSoybeans comprise approximately 8% seed coat or hull, 90% cotyledons and 2% hypocotyl axis or germ.\nTaxonomy.\nThe genus \"Glycine\" may be divided into two subgenera, \"Glycine\" and \"Soja\". The subgenus \"Soja\" includes the cultivated soybean, \"G.\u00a0max\", and the wild soybean, treated either as a separate species \"G.\u00a0soja\", or as the subspecies \"G.\u00a0max\" subsp. \"soja\". The cultivated and wild soybeans are annuals. The wild soybean is native to China, Japan, Korea and Russia. The subgenus \"Glycine\" consists of at least 25 wild perennial species: for example, \"G. canescens\" and \"G. tomentella\", both found in Australia and Papua New Guinea. Perennial soybean (\"Neonotonia wightii\") belongs to a different genus. It originated in Africa and is now a widespread pasture crop in the tropics.\nLike some other crops of long domestication, the relationship of the modern soybean to wild-growing species can no longer be traced with any degree of certainty. It is a cultigen with a very large number of cultivars.\nSubspecies.\nAs of November\u00a02025[ [update]], Plants of the World Online accepted the following subspecies:\nEcology.\nLike many legumes, soybeans can fix atmospheric nitrogen, due to the presence of symbiotic bacteria from the Rhizobia group.\nCultivation.\nSoybeans are globally important agricultural crops, grown as a major source of protein and oil. It prefers fertile, well-drained soils and requires a warm temperate climate with adequate rainfall or irrigation. Soybeans are mainly grown in the United States, Brazil, and Argentina.\nIt is usually planted in straight rows using modern machinery, and pests and weeds must be controlled to maintain the crop. After maturity, it is harvested using mechanized harvesting machines. Soybeans are used in the production of many food and industrial products, such as tofu, oils, and feed, in addition to their role in improving soil fertility by fixing nitrogen.\nConditions.\nCultivation is successful in climates with hot summers, with optimum growing conditions in mean temperatures of ; temperatures of below and over stunt growth significantly. They can grow in a wide range of soils, with optimum growth in moist alluvial soils with good organic content. Soybeans, like most legumes, perform nitrogen fixation by establishing a symbiotic relationship with the bacterium \"Bradyrhizobium japonicum\" (syn. \"Rhizobium japonicum\"; Jordan 1982). This ability to fix nitrogen allows farmers to reduce nitrogen fertilizer use and increase yields when growing other crops in rotation with soy. There may be some trade-offs, however, in the long-term abundance of organic material in soils where soy and other crops (for example, corn) are grown in rotation. For best results, though, an inoculum of the correct strain of bacteria should be mixed with the soybean (or any legume) seed before planting. Modern crop cultivars generally reach a height of around , and take 80\u2013120\u00a0days from sowing to harvesting.\nSoils.\nSoil scientists Edson Lobato (Brazil), Andrew McClung (U.S.), and Alysson Paolinelli (Brazil) were awarded the 2006 World Food Prize for transforming the ecologically biodiverse savannah of the Cerrado region of Brazil into highly productive cropland that could grow profitable soybeans.\nContamination concerns.\nHuman sewage sludge can be used as fertilizer to grow soybeans. Soybeans grown in sewage sludge likely contain elevated concentrations of metals.\nPests.\nSoybean plants are vulnerable to a wide range of bacterial diseases, fungal diseases, viral diseases, and parasites.\nThe primary bacterial diseases include bacterial blight, bacterial pustule and downy mildew affecting the soybean plant.\nThe Japanese beetle (Popillia japonica) poses a significant threat to agricultural crops, including soybeans, due to its voracious feeding habits. Found commonly in both urban and suburban areas, these beetles are frequently observed in agricultural landscapes where they can cause considerable damage to crops like corn, soybeans, and various fruits.\nSoybean cyst nematode (SCN) is the worst pest of soybean in the US. Losses of 30% or 40% are common even without symptoms.\nThe corn earworm moth and bollworm (Helicoverpa zea) is a common and destructive pest of soybean growth in Virginia.\nSoybeans are consumed by whitetail deer which may damage soybean plants through feeding, trampling and bedding, reducing crop yields by as much as 15%. Groundhogs are also a common pest in soybean fields, living in burrows underground and feeding nearby. One den of groundhogs can consume a tenth to a quarter of an acre of soybeans. Chemical repellents or firearms are effective for controlling pests in soybean fields.\nSoybeans suffer from the fungus \"Pythium spinosum\" in Arkansas and Indiana (United States), and China.\nIn Japan and the United States, the Soybean dwarf virus (SbDV) causes a disease in soybeans and is transmitted by aphids.\nCultivars.\nDisease resistant cultivars.\nResistant varieties are available. In Indian cultivars, Nataraj \"et al.\" 2020 find that anthracnose caused by \"Colletotrichum truncatum\" is resisted by a combination of 2 major genes.\nPI 88788.\nThe vast majority of cultivars in the US have soybean cyst nematode resistance (SCN resistance), but rely on only one breeding line (PI 88788) as their sole source of resistance. (The resistance genes provided by PI 88788, &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Visible anchor/styles.css\" /&gt;Peking, and &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Visible anchor/styles.css\" /&gt;PI 90763 were characterized in 1997.) As a result, for example, in 2012 only 18 cultivars out of 807 recommended by the Iowa State University Extension had any ancestry outside of PI 88788. By 2020 the situation was still about the same: Of 849 there were 810 with some ancestry from PI 88788, 35 from Peking, and only 2 from PI 89772. (On the question of exclusively PI 88788 ancestry, that number was not available for 2020.) That was speculated to be in 2012\u2014and was clearly by 2020\u2014producing SCN populations that are virulent on PI 88788.\nProduction.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Table alignment/tables.css\" /&gt;\nIn 2020, world production of soybeans was over 353 million tonnes, led by Brazil and the United States combined with 66% of the total (table). Production has dramatically increased across the globe since the 1960s, but particularly in South America after a cultivar that grew well in low latitudes was developed in the 1980s. The rapid growth of the industry has been primarily fueled by large increases in worldwide demand for meat products, particularly in developing countries like China, which alone accounts for more than 60% of imports. Soy is a staple crop; global soy production accounts for four times more legume production than all other legumes combined.\nEnvironmental issues.\nIn spite of the Amazon \"Soy Moratorium\", soy production continues to play a significant role in deforestation when its indirect impacts are taken into account, as land used to grow soy continues to increase. This land either comes from pasture land (which increasingly supplants forested areas), or areas outside the Amazon not covered by the moratorium, such as the Cerrado region. Roughly one-fifth of deforestation can be attributed to expanding land use to produce oilseeds, primarily for soy and palm oil, whereas the expansion of beef production accounts for 41%. The main driver of deforestation is the global demand for meat, which in turn requires huge tracts of land to grow feed crops for livestock. Around 80% of the global soybean crop is used to feed livestock.\nHistory.\nSoybeans were a crucial crop in East Asia long before written records began. The origin of soy cultivation remains scientifically debated. The closest living relative of the soybean is \"Glycine soja\" (previously called \"G. ussuriensis\"), a legume native to central China. Genomic data increasingly supports a single domestication event in north-central China between 6,000 and 9,000 years ago, although some evidence suggests a more complex scenario involving low-intensity pre-domestication cultivation across multiple locations in East Asia, followed by the eventual dominance of the Chinese lineage.\nThere is evidence for soybean domestication between 7000 and 6600 BC in China, between 5000 and 3000 BC in Japan and 1000 BC in Korea. The first unambiguously domesticated, cultigen-sized soybean was discovered in Korea at the Mumun-period Daundong site. Prior to fermented products such as fermented black soybeans (\"douchi\"), \"jiang\" (Chinese miso), soy sauce, tempeh, natt\u014d, and miso, soy was considered sacred for its beneficial effects in crop rotation, and it was eaten by itself, and as bean curd and soy milk.\nSoybeans were introduced to Java in Malay Archipelago circa 13th century or probably earlier. By the 17th century through their trade with Far East, soybeans and its products were traded by European traders (Portuguese, Spanish, and Dutch) in Asia, and reached Indian Subcontinent by this period. By the 18th century, soybeans were introduced to the Americas and Europe from China. Soy was introduced to Africa from China in the late 19th century, and is now widespread across the continent.\nEast Asia.\nSoy was most likely domesticated 6,000\u20139,000 years ago in the region between the Yellow River and the Huai River in China. The earliest documented evidence for the use of \"Glycine\" of any kind comes from charred plant remains of wild soybean recovered from Jiahu in Henan province, a Neolithic site occupied between 9,000 and 7,800 years ago. An abundance of archaeological charred soybean specimens have been found centered around this region.\nSoybeans became an important crop by the Zhou dynasty (c.\u20091046\u2013256 BC) in China. According to an ancient Chinese myth, in 2853 BC, the legendary Emperor Shennong of China proclaimed that five plants were sacred: soybeans, rice, wheat, barley, and millet. Early Chinese records mention that soybeans were a gift from the region of the Yangtze River delta and Southeast China. However, there is no archaeological evidence that soybeans were domesticated in southern China, and it appears that soy was unknown there prior to the Han dynasty.\nThe oldest preserved soybeans resembling modern varieties in size and shape were found in archaeological sites in Korea dated about 1000 BC. Radiocarbon dating of soybean samples recovered through flotation during excavations at the Early Mumun period Okbang site in Korea indicated soybean was cultivated as a food crop in around 1000\u2013900 BC. Soybeans from the J\u014dmon period in Japan from 3000 BC are also significantly larger than wild varieties. The earliest Japanese textual reference to the soybean is in the classic \"Kojiki\" (\"Records of Ancient Matters\"), which was completed in 712 CE.\nSoutheast Asia.\nSoybeans were mentioned as \"kad\u00eal\u00ea\" (modern Indonesian term: ) in an old Javanese manuscript, Serat Sri Tanjung, which dates to 12th- to 13th-century Java. By the 13th century, the soybean had arrived and cultivated in Indonesia; it probably arrived much earlier however, carried by traders or merchants from Southern China.\nThe earliest known reference to it as \"tempeh\" appeared in 1815 in the Serat Centhini manuscript. The development of tempeh fermented soybean cake probably took place earlier, circa 17th century in Java.\nIndian subcontinent.\nBy the 1600s, soy sauce spread from southern Japan across the region through the Dutch East India Company (VOC).\nWhile the origins and history of Soybean cultivation in the Eastern Himalayas is debated, it was potentially introduced from southern China, more specifically Yunnan province. Alternatively, it could have reached here through traders from Indonesia via Myanmar. Northeast India is viewed as a passive micro-centre within the soybean secondary gene centre. Central India is considered a tertiary gene centre particularly the area encompassing Madhya Pradesh which is also the country largest soybean producer.\nIberia.\nVocabvlario da Lingoa de Iapam, a Japanese-Portuguese dictionary, was compiled and published in 1603 by Jesuit priests in Nagasaki. It contains short but clear definitions for about 20 words related to soyfoods\u2014the first in any European language.\nThe Luso-Hispanic traders were familiar with soybeans and soybean product through their trade with Far East since at least the 17th century. However, it was not until the late 19th century that the first attempt to cultivate soybeans in the Iberian peninsula was undertaken. In 1880, the soybean was first cultivated in Portugal in the Botanical Gardens at Coimbra (Crespi 1935).\nIn about 1910 in Spain the first attempts at Soybean cultivation were made by the Count of San Bernardo, who cultivated soybeans on his estates at Almillo (in southwest Spain) about 48 miles east-northeast of Seville.\nNorth America.\nSoybeans were first introduced to North America from China in 1765, by Samuel Bowen, a former East India Company sailor who had visited China in conjunction with James Flint, the first Englishman legally permitted by the Chinese authorities to learn Chinese. The first \"New World\" soybean crop was grown on Skidaway Island, Georgia, in 1765 by Henry Yonge from seeds given him by Samuel Bowen. Bowen grew soy near Savannah, Georgia, possibly using funds from Flint, and made soy sauce for sale to England. Although soybean was introduced into North America in 1765, for the next 155 years, the crop was grown primarily for forage.\nIn 1831, the first soy product \"a few dozen India Soy\" [sauce] arrived in Canada. Soybeans were probably first cultivated in Canada by 1855, and definitely in 1895 at Ontario Agricultural College.\nIt was not until Lafayette Mendel and Thomas Burr Osborne showed that the nutritional value of soybean seeds could be increased by cooking, moisture or heat, that soy went from a farm animal feed to a human food.\nWilliam Joseph Morse is considered the \"father\" of modern soybean agriculture in America. In 1910, he and Charles Piper began to popularize what was regarded as a relatively unknown Oriental peasant crop in America into a \"golden bean\", with the soybean becoming one of America's largest and most nutritious farm crops.\nPrior to the 1920s in the US, the soybean was mainly a forage crop, a source of oil, meal (for feed) and industrial products, with very little used as food. However, it took on an important role after World War I. During the Great Depression, the drought-stricken (Dust Bowl) regions of the United States were able to use soy to regenerate their soil because of its nitrogen-fixing properties. Farms were increasing production to meet with government demands, and Henry Ford became a promoter of soybeans. In 1931, Ford hired chemists Robert Boyer and Frank Calvert to produce artificial silk. They succeeded in making a textile fiber of spun soy protein fibers, hardened or tanned in a formaldehyde bath, which was given the name Azlon. It never reached the commercial market. Soybean oil was used by Ford in paint for the automobiles, as well as a fluid for shock absorbers.\nDuring World War II, soybeans became important in both North America and Europe chiefly as substitutes for other protein foods and as a source of edible oil. During the war, the soybean was discovered as fertilizer due to nitrogen fixation by the United States Department of Agriculture.\nPrior to the 1970s, Asian-Americans and Seventh-Day Adventists were essentially the only users of soy foods in the United States. \"The soy foods movement began in small pockets of the counterculture, notably the Tennessee commune named simply The Farm, but by the mid-1970s a vegetarian revival helped it gain momentum and even popular awareness through books such as \"The Book of Tofu\".\"\nAlthough practically unseen in 1900, by 2000 soybean plantings covered more than 70 million acres, second only to corn, and it became America's largest cash crop. In 2021, 87,195,000 acres were planted, with the largest acreage in the states of Illinois, Iowa, and Minnesota.\nCaribbean and West Indies.\nThe soybean arrived in the Caribbean in the form of soy sauce made by Samuel Bowen in Savannah, Georgia, in 1767. It remains only a minor crop there, but its uses for human food are growing steadily.\nMediterranean area.\nThe soybean was first cultivated in Italy by 1760 in the Botanical Garden of Turin. During the 1780s, it was grown in at least three other botanical gardens in Italy. The first soybean product, soy oil, arrived in Anatolia during 1909 under Ottoman Empire. The first clear cultivation occurred in 1931. This was also the first time that soybeans were cultivated in Middle East. By 1939, soybeans were cultivated in Greece.\nAustralia.\nWild soybeans were discovered in northeastern Australia in 1770 by explorers Banks and Solander. In 1804, the first soyfood product (\"Fine India Soy\" [sauce]) was sold in Sydney. In 1879, the first domesticated soybeans arrived in Australia, a gift of the Minister of the Interior Department, Japan.\nFrance.\nThe soybean was first cultivated in France by 1779 (and perhaps as early as 1740). The two key early people and organizations introducing the soybean to France were the Society of Acclimatization (starting in 1855) and Li Yu-ying (from 1910). Li started a large tofu factory, where the first commercial soyfoods in France were made.\nAfrica.\nThe soybean first arrived in Africa via Egypt in 1857. Soya Meme (Baked Soya) is produced in the village called Bame Awudome near Ho, the capital of the Volta Region of Ghana, by the Ewe people of Southeastern Ghana and southern Togo.\nCentral Europe.\nIn 1873, Professor Friedrich J. Haberlandt first became interested in soybeans when he obtained the seeds of 19 soybean varieties at the Vienna World Exposition (Wiener Weltausstellung). He cultivated these seeds in Vienna, and soon began to distribute them throughout Central and Western Europe. In 1875, he first grew the soybeans in Vienna, then in early 1876 he sent samples of seeds to seven cooperators in central Europe, who planted and tested the seeds in the spring of 1876, with good or fairly good results in each case. Most of the farmers who received seeds from him cultivated them, then reported their results. Starting in February 1876, he published these results first in various journal articles, and finally in his \"magnum opus\", Die Sojabohne (The Soybean) in 1878. In northern Europe, lupin (lupine) is known as the \"soybean of the north\".\nCentral Asia.\nThe soybean is first in cultivated Transcaucasia in Central Asia in 1876, by the Dungans. This region has never been important for soybean production.\nCentral America.\nThe first reliable reference to the soybean in this region dates from Mexico in 1877.\nSouth America.\nThe soybean first arrived in South America in Argentina in 1882.\nAndrew McClung showed in the early 1950s that with soil amendments the Cerrado region of Brazil would grow soybeans. In June 1973, when soybean futures markets mistakenly portended a major shortage, the Nixon administration imposed an embargo on soybean exports. It lasted only a week, but Japanese buyers felt that they could not rely on U.S. supplies, and the rival Brazilian soybean industry came into existence. This led Brazil to become the world's largest producer of soybeans in 2020, with 131 million tons.\nIndustrial soy production in South America is characterized by wealthy management who live far away from the production site which they manage remotely. In Brazil, these managers depend heavily on advanced technology and machinery, and agronomic practices such as zero tillage, high pesticide use, and intense fertilization. One contributing factor is the increased attention on the Brazilian Cerrado in Bahia, Brazil by US farmers in the early 2000s. This was due to rising values of scarce farmland and high production costs in the US Midwest. There were many promotions of the Brazilian Cerrado by US farm producer magazines and market consultants who portrayed it as having cheap land with ideal production conditions, with infrastructure being the only thing it was lacking. These same magazines also presented Brazilian soy as inevitably out-competing American soy. Another draw to investing was the insider information about the climate and market in Brazil. A few dozen American farmers purchased varying amounts of land by a variety of means including finding investors and selling off land holdings. Many followed the ethanol company model and formed an LLC with investments from neighboring farmers, friends, and family while some turned to investment companies. Some soy farmers either liquidated their Brazilian assets or switched to remote management from the US to return to farming there and implement new farming and business practices to make their US farms more productive. Others planned to sell their now expensive Bahia land to buy land cheaper land in the frontier regions of Piau\u00ed or Tocantins to create more soybean farms.\nGenetics.\nChinese landraces were found to have a slightly higher genetic diversity than inbred lines by Li \"et al.\", 2010. Specific locus amplified fragment sequencing (SLAF-seq) has been used by Han \"et al.\", 2015 to study the genetic history of the domestication process, perform genome-wide association studies (GWAS) of agronomically relevant traits, and produce high-density linkage maps. An SNP array was developed by Song \"et al.\", 2013 and has been used for research and breeding; the same team applied their array in Song \"et al.\", 2015 against the USDA Soybean Germplasm Collection and obtained mapping data that are expected to yield association mapping data for such traits.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Visible anchor/styles.css\" /&gt;Rpp1-R1 is a resistance gene against soybean rust. Rpp1-R1 is an R gene (NB-LRR) providing resistance against the rust pathogen \"Phakopsora pachyrhizi\". Its synthesis product includes a ULP1 protease.\nQijian \"et al.\", 2017 provides the &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Visible anchor/styles.css\" /&gt;SoySNP50K gene array.\nGenetic modification.\nSoybeans are one of the \"biotech food\" crops that have been genetically modified, and genetically modified soybeans are being used in an increasing number of products. In 1995, Monsanto company introduced glyphosate-tolerant soybeans that have been genetically modified to be resistant to Monsanto's glyphosate herbicides through substitution of the \"Agrobacterium sp.\" (strain CP4) gene EPSP (5-enolpyruvyl shikimic acid-3-phosphate) synthase. The substituted version is not sensitive to glyphosate.\nIn 1997, about 8% of all soybeans cultivated for the commercial market in the United States were genetically modified. In 2010, the figure was 93%. As with other glyphosate-tolerant crops, concern is expressed over damage to biodiversity. A 2003 study concluded the \"Roundup Ready\" (RR) gene had been bred into so many different soybean cultivars, there had been little decline in genetic diversity, but \"diversity was limited among elite lines from some companies\".\nThe widespread use of such types of GM soybeans in the Americas has caused problems with exports to some regions. GM crops require extensive certification before they can be legally imported into the European Union, where there is considerable supplier and consumer reluctance to use GM products for consumer or animal use. Difficulties with coexistence and subsequent traces of cross-contamination of non-GM stocks have caused shipments to be rejected and have put a premium on non-GM soy.\nA 2006 United States Department of Agriculture report found the adoption of genetically engineered (GE) soy, corn and cotton reduced the amount of pesticides used overall, but did result in a slightly greater amount of herbicides used for soy specifically. The use of GE soy was also associated with greater conservation tillage, indirectly leading to better soil conservation, as well as increased income from off-farming sources due to the greater ease with which the crops can be managed. Though the overall estimated benefits of the adoption of GE soybeans in the United States was $310\u00a0million, the majority of this benefit was experienced by the companies selling the seeds (40%), followed by biotechnology firms (28%) and farmers (20%). The patent on glyphosate-tolerant soybeans expired in 2014, so benefits can be expected to shift.\nAdverse effects.\nSoy allergy.\nAllergy to soy is common, and the food is listed with other foods that commonly cause allergy, such as milk, eggs, peanuts, tree nuts, and shellfish. The problem has been reported among younger children, and the diagnosis of soy allergy is often based on symptoms reported by parents and results of skin tests or blood tests for allergy. Only a few reported studies have attempted to confirm allergy to soy by direct challenge with the food under controlled conditions. It is very difficult to give a reliable estimate of the true prevalence of soy allergy in the general population. To the extent that it does exist, soy allergy may cause cases of urticaria and angioedema, usually within minutes to hours of ingestion. In rare cases, true anaphylaxis may also occur. The reason for the discrepancy is likely that soy proteins, the causative factor in allergy, are far less potent at triggering allergy symptoms than the proteins of peanut and shellfish. An allergy test that is positive demonstrates that the immune system has formed IgE antibodies to soy proteins. However, this is only a factor when soy proteins reach the blood without being digested, in sufficient quantities to reach a threshold to provoke actual symptoms.\nSoy can also trigger symptoms via food intolerance, a situation where no allergic mechanism can be proven. One scenario is seen in very young infants who have vomiting and diarrhoea when fed soy-based formula, which resolves when the formula is withdrawn. Older infants can suffer a more severe disorder with vomiting, diarrhoea that may be bloody, anemia, weight loss and failure to thrive. The most common cause of this unusual disorder is a sensitivity to cow's milk, but soy formulas can also be the trigger. The precise mechanism is unclear and it could be immunologic, although not through the IgE-type antibodies that have the leading role in urticaria and anaphylaxis. However, it is also self-limiting and will often disappear in the toddler years.\nIn the European Union, identifying the presence of soy either as an ingredient or unintended contaminant in packaged food is compulsory. The regulation (EC) 1169/2011 on food-labeling lists 14 allergens, including soy, in packaged food must be clearly indicated on the label as part of the list of ingredients, using a distinctive typography (such as bold type or capital letters).\nThyroid function.\nOne review noted that soy-based foods may inhibit absorption of thyroid hormone medications required for treatment of hypothyroidism. A 2015 scientific review by the European Food Safety Authority concluded that intake of isoflavones from supplements did not affect thyroid hormone levels in postmenopausal women.\nUses.\nAmong the legumes, the soybean is valued for its high (38\u201345%) protein content as well as its high (approximately 20%) oil content. Soybeans are the most valuable agricultural export of the United States. Approximately 85% of the world's soybean crop is processed into soybean meal and soybean oil, the remainder processed in other ways or eaten whole.\nSoybeans can be broadly classified as \"vegetable\" (garden) or field (oil) types. Vegetable types cook more easily, have a mild, nutty flavor, and better texture, are larger in size, higher in protein, and are lower in oil than field types. Tofu, soy milk, and soy sauce are among the top edible commodities made using soybeans. Producers prefer the higher protein cultivars bred from vegetable soybeans originally brought to the United States in the late 1930s. The \"garden\" cultivars are generally not suitable for mechanical combine harvesting because there is a tendency for the pods to shatter upon reaching maturity.\nNutrition.\nA 100-gram reference quantity of raw soybeans supplies of food energy and are 9% water, 30% carbohydrates, 20% total fat and 36% protein.\nPeanuts are the only legumes with a higher fat content (48%) and calorie count (2,385 kJ). They contain less carbohydrates (21%), protein (25%) and dietary fiber (9%).\nSoybeans are a rich source of essential nutrients, providing in a 100-gram serving (raw, for reference) high contents of the Daily Value (DV) especially for protein (36% DV), dietary fiber (37%), iron (121%), manganese (120%), phosphorus (101%) and several B\u00a0vitamins, including folate (94%) (table). High contents also exist for vitamin\u00a0K, magnesium, zinc and potassium.\nFor human consumption, soybeans must be processed prior to consumption\u2013either by cooking, roasting, or fermenting\u2013to destroy the trypsin inhibitors (serine protease inhibitors). Raw soybeans, including the immature green form, are toxic to all monogastric animals.\nProtein.\nMost soy protein is a relatively heat-stable storage protein. This heat stability enables soy food products requiring high temperature cooking, such as tofu, soy milk and textured vegetable protein (soy flour) to be made. Soy protein is essentially identical to the protein of other legume seeds and pulses.\nSoy is a good source of protein for vegetarians and vegans or for people who want to reduce the amount of meat they eat, according to the US Food and Drug Administration:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Soy protein products can be good substitutes for animal products because, unlike some other beans, soy offers a 'complete' protein profile. ... Soy protein products can replace animal-based foods\u2014which also have complete proteins but tend to contain more fat, especially saturated fat\u2014without requiring major adjustments elsewhere in the diet.\nAlthough soybeans have high protein content, soybeans also contain high levels of protease inhibitors, which can prevent digestion. Protease inhibitors are reduced by cooking soybeans, and are present in low levels in soy products such as tofu and soy milk.\nThe Protein Digestibility Corrected Amino Acid Score (PDCAAS) of soy protein is the nutritional equivalent of meat, eggs, and casein for human growth and health. Soybean protein isolate has a biological value of 74, whole soybeans 96, soybean milk 91, and eggs 97.\nAll spermatophytes, except for the family of grasses and cereals (Poaceae), contain 7S (vicilin) and 11S (legumin) soy protein-like globulin storage proteins; or only one of these globulin proteins. S denotes Svedberg, sedimentation coefficients. Oats and rice are anomalous in that they also contain a majority of soybean-like protein. Cocoa, for example, contains the 7S globulin, which contributes to cocoa/chocolate taste and aroma, whereas coffee beans (coffee grounds) contain the 11S globulin responsible for coffee's aroma and flavor.\nVicilin and legumin proteins belong to the cupin superfamily, a large family of functionally diverse proteins that have a common origin and whose evolution can be followed from bacteria to eukaryotes including animals and higher plants.\n2S albumins form a major group of homologous storage proteins in many dicot species and in some monocots but not in grasses (cereals). Soybeans contain a small but significant 2S storage protein. 2S albumin are grouped in the prolamin superfamily. Other allergenic proteins included in this 'superfamily' are the non-specific plant lipid transfer proteins, alpha amylase inhibitor, trypsin inhibitors, and prolamin storage proteins of cereals and grasses.\nPeanuts, for instance, contain 20% 2S albumin but only 6% 7S globulin and 74% 11S. It is the high 2S albumin and low 7S globulin that is responsible for the relatively low lysine content of peanut protein compared to soy protein.\nCarbohydrates.\nThe principal soluble carbohydrates of mature soybeans are the disaccharide sucrose (range 2.5\u20138.2%), the trisaccharide raffinose (0.1\u20131.0%) composed of one sucrose molecule connected to one molecule of galactose, and the tetrasaccharide stachyose (1.4 to 4.1%) composed of one sucrose connected to two molecules of galactose. While the oligosaccharides raffinose and stachyose protect the viability of the soybean seed from desiccation (see above section on physical characteristics) they are not digestible sugars, so contribute to flatulence and abdominal discomfort in humans and other monogastric animals, comparable to the disaccharide trehalose. Undigested oligosaccharides are broken down in the intestine by native microbes, producing gases such as carbon dioxide, hydrogen, and methane.\nSince soluble soy carbohydrates are found in the whey and are broken down during fermentation, soy concentrate, soy protein isolates, tofu, soy sauce, and sprouted soybeans are without flatus activity. On the other hand, there may be some beneficial effects to ingesting oligosaccharides such as raffinose and stachyose, namely, encouraging indigenous bifidobacteria in the colon against putrefactive bacteria.\nThe insoluble carbohydrates in soybeans consist of the complex polysaccharides cellulose, hemicellulose, and pectin. The majority of soybean carbohydrates can be classed as belonging to dietary fiber.\nFats.\nRaw soybeans are 20% fat, including saturated fat (3%), monounsaturated fat (4%) and polyunsaturated fat, mainly as linoleic acid (table).\nWithin soybean oil or the lipid portion of the seed is contained four phytosterols: stigmasterol, sitosterol, campesterol, and brassicasterol accounting for about 2.5% of the lipid fraction; and which can be converted into steroid hormones. Additionally soybeans are a rich source of sphingolipids.\nOther constituents.\nSoy contains isoflavones\u2014polyphenolic compounds, produced by legumes including peanuts and chickpeas. Isoflavones are closely related to flavonoids found in other plants, vegetables and flowers.\nSoy contains the phytoestrogen coumestans, also are found in beans and split-peas, with the best sources being alfalfa, clover, and soybean sprouts. Coumestrol, an isoflavone coumarin derivative, is the only coumestan in foods.\nSaponins, a class of natural surfactants (soaps), are sterols that are present in small amounts in various plant foods, including soybeans, other legumes, and cereals, such as oats.\nComparison to other major staple foods.\nThe following table shows the nutrient content of green soybean and other major staple foods, each in respective raw form on a dry weight basis to account for their different water contents. Raw soybeans, however, are not edible and cannot be digested. These must be sprouted, or prepared and cooked for human consumption. In sprouted and cooked form, the relative nutritional and anti-nutritional contents of each of these grains is remarkably different from that of raw form of these grains reported in this table. The nutritional value of soybean and each cooked staple depends on the processing and the method of cooking: boiling, frying, roasting, baking, etc.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;A raw yellow dent corn\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;B raw unenriched long-grain white rice\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;C raw hard red winter wheat\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;D raw potato with flesh and skin\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;E raw cassava\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;F raw green soybeans\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;G raw sweet potato\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;H raw sorghum\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;Y raw yam\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;Z raw plantains\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;/* unofficial\nSoybean oil.\nSoybean seed contains 18\u201319% oil. To extract soybean oil from seed, the soybeans are cracked, adjusted for moisture content, rolled into flakes, and solvent-extracted with commercial hexane. The oil is then refined, blended for different applications, and sometimes hydrogenated. Soybean oils, both liquid and partially hydrogenated, are exported abroad, sold as \"vegetable oil,\" or end up in a wide variety of processed foods.\nSoybean meal.\nSoybean meal, or soymeal, is the material remaining after solvent extraction of oil from soybean flakes, with a 50% soy protein content. The meal is 'toasted' (a misnomer because the heat treatment is with moist steam) and ground in a hammer mill. Ninety-seven percent of soybean meal production globally is used as livestock feed. Soybean meal is also used in some dog foods.\nLivestock feed.\nOne of the major uses of soybeans globally is as livestock feed, predominantly in the form of soybean meal. In the European Union, for example, though it does not make up most of the weight of livestock feed, soybean meal provides around 60% of the protein fed to livestock. In the United States, 70 percent of soybean production is used for animal feed, with poultry being the number one livestock sector of soybean consumption. Spring grasses are rich in omega-3 fatty acids, whereas soy is predominantly omega-6. The soybean hulls, which mainly consist of the outer coats of the beans removed before oil extraction, can also be fed to livestock and whole soybean seeds after processing.\nFood for human consumption.\nIn addition to their use in livestock feed, soybean products are widely used for human consumption. Common soybean products include soy sauce, soy milk, tofu, soy meal, soy flour, textured vegetable protein (TVP), soy curls, tempeh, soy lecithin and soybean oil. Soybeans may also be eaten with minimal processing, for example, in the Japanese food , in which immature soybeans are boiled whole in their pods and served with salt.\nIn China, Japan, Vietnam and Korea, soybean and soybean products are a standard part of the diet. Tofu (\u8c46\u8150 \"d\u00f2ufu\") is thought to have originated in China, along with soy sauce and several varieties of soybean paste used as seasonings. Japanese foods made from soya include \"miso\" (), \"natt\u014d\" (), \"kinako\" () and \"edamame\" (), as well as products made with tofu such as atsuage and aburaage. In China, whole dried soybeans are sold in supermarkets and used to cook various dishes, usually after rehydration by soaking in water; they find their use in soup or as a savory dish. In Korean cuisine, soybean sprouts (\ucf69\ub098\ubb3c \"kongnamul\") are used in a variety of dishes, and soybeans are the base ingredient in \"doenjang\", \"cheonggukjang\" and \"ganjang\". In Vietnam, soybeans are used to make soybean paste (\"t\u01b0\u01a1ng\") in the North with the most popular products are \"t\u01b0\u01a1ng B\u1ea7n\", \"t\u01b0\u01a1ng Nam \u0110\u00e0n\", \"t\u01b0\u01a1ng C\u1ef1 \u0110\u00e0\" as a garnish for \"ph\u1edf\" and \"g\u1ecfi cu\u1ed1n\" dishes, as well as tofu ( or or ), soy sauce (), soy milk ( in the North or in the South), and (tofu sweet soup).\nFlour.\nSoy flour refers to soybeans ground finely enough to pass through a 100-mesh or smaller screen where special care was taken during desolventizing (not toasted) to minimize denaturation of the protein to retain a high protein dispersibility index, for uses such as food extrusion of textured vegetable protein. It is the starting material for soy concentrate and protein isolate production.\nSoy flour can also be made by roasting the soybean, removing the coat (hull), and grinding it into flour. Soy flour is manufactured with different fat levels. Alternatively, raw soy flour omits the roasting step.\nSoy lecithin can be added (up to 15%) to soy flour to make lecithinated soy flour. It increases dispersibility and gives it emulsifying properties.\nSoy flour has 50% protein and 5% fiber. It has higher levels of protein, thiamine, riboflavin, phosphorus, calcium, and iron than wheat flour. It does not contain gluten. As a result, yeast-raised breads made with soy flour are dense in texture. Among many uses, soy flour thickens sauces, prevents staling in baked food, and reduces oil absorption during frying. Baking food with soy flour gives it tenderness, moistness, a rich color, and a fine texture.\nSoy grits are similar to soy flour, except the soybeans have been toasted and cracked into coarse pieces.\n\"Kinako\" is a soy flour used in Japanese cuisine.\nSoy-based infant formula.\nSoy-based infant formula (SBIF) is sometimes given to infants who are not being strictly breastfed; it can be useful for infants who are either allergic to pasteurized cow milk proteins or who are being fed a vegan diet. It is sold in powdered, ready-to-feed, and concentrated liquid forms.\nSome reviews have expressed the opinion that more research is needed to determine what effect the phytoestrogens in soybeans may have on infants. Diverse studies have concluded there are no adverse effects in human growth, development, or reproduction as a result of the consumption of soy-based infant formula. One of these studies, published in the \"Journal of Nutrition\", concludes that there are:\n... no clinical concerns with respect to nutritional adequacy, sexual development, neurobehavioral development, immune development, or thyroid disease. SBIFs provide complete nutrition that adequately supports normal infant growth and development. FDA has accepted SBIFs as safe for use as the sole source of nutrition.\nMeat and dairy alternatives and extenders.\nSoybeans can be processed to produce a texture and appearance similar to many other foods. For example, soybeans are the primary ingredient in many dairy product substitutes (e.g., soy milk, margarine, soy ice cream, soy yogurt, soy cheese, and soy cream cheese) and meat alternatives (e.g. veggie burgers). These substitutes are readily available in most supermarkets. Soy milk does not naturally contain significant amounts of digestible calcium. Many manufacturers of soy milk sell calcium-enriched products, as well.\nSoy products also are used as a low-cost substitute for meat and poultry products. Food service, retail and institutional (primarily school lunch and correctional) facilities regularly use such \"extended\" products. The extension may result in diminished flavor, but fat and cholesterol are reduced. Vitamin and mineral fortification can be used to make soy products nutritionally equivalent to animal protein; the protein quality is already roughly equivalent. The soy-based meat substitute textured vegetable protein has been used for more than 50\u00a0years as a way of inexpensively extending ground beef without reducing its nutritional value.\nSoy nut butter.\nThe soybean is used to make a product called soy nut butter which is similar in texture to peanut butter.\nSweetened soybean.\nSweet-boiled beans are popular in Japan and Korea, and the sweet-boiled soybeans are called \"Daizu no Nimame\" in Japan and Kongjorim () in Korea. Sweet-boiled beans are even used in sweetened buns, especially in Mame Pan.\nThe boiled and pasted edamame, called Zunda, is used as one of the Sweet bean pastes in Japanese confections.\nCoffee substitute.\nRoasted and ground soybeans can be a caffeine-free substitute for coffee. After the soybeans are roasted and ground, they look similar to regular coffee beans or can be used as a powder similar to instant coffee, with the aroma and flavor of roasted soybeans.\nOther products.\nSoybeans with black hulls are used in Chinese fermented black beans, \"douchi\", not to be confused with black turtle beans.\nSoybeans are also used in industrial products, including oils, soap, cosmetics, resins, plastics, inks, crayons, solvents, and clothing. Soybean oil is the primary source of biodiesel in the United States, accounting for 80% of domestic biodiesel production. Soybeans have also been used since 2001 as fermenting stock in the manufacture of a brand of vodka. In 1936, Ford Motor Company developed a method where soybeans and fibers were rolled together producing a soup which was then pressed into various parts for their cars, from the distributor cap to knobs on the dashboard. Ford also informed in public relation releases that in 1935 over five million acres (20,000\u00a0km2) was dedicated to growing soybeans in the United States.\nReducing risk of cancer.\nAccording to the American Cancer Society, \"There is growing evidence that eating traditional soy foods such as tofu may lower the risk of cancers of the breast, prostate, or endometrium (lining of the uterus), and there is some evidence it may lower the risk of certain other cancers.\" There is insufficient research to indicate whether taking soy dietary supplements (e.g., as a pill or capsule) has any effect on health or cancer risk.\nAs of 2018, rigorous dietary clinical research in people with cancer has proved inconclusive.\nBreast cancer.\nAlthough considerable research has examined the potential for soy consumption to lower the risk of breast cancer in women, as of 2016 there is insufficient evidence to reach a conclusion about a relationship between soy consumption and any effects on breast cancer. A 2011 meta-analysis stated: \"Our study suggests soy isoflavones intake is associated with a significant reduced risk of breast cancer incidence in Asian populations, but not in Western populations.\"\nGastrointestinal and colorectal cancer.\nReviews of preliminary clinical trials on people with colorectal or gastrointestinal cancer suggest that soy isoflavones may have a slight protective effect against such cancers.\nProstate cancer.\nA 2016 review concluded that \"current evidence from observational studies and small clinical trials is not robust enough to understand whether soy protein or isoflavone supplements may help prevent or inhibit the progression of prostate cancer.\" A 2010 review showed that neither soy foods nor isoflavone supplements alter measures of bioavailable testosterone or estrogen concentrations in men. Soy consumption has been shown to have no effect on the levels and quality of sperm. Meta-analyses on the association between soy consumption and prostate cancer risk in men concluded that dietary soy may lower the risk of prostate cancer.\nCardiovascular health.\nThe Food and Drug Administration (FDA) granted the following health claim for soy: \"25 grams of soy protein a day, as part of a diet low in saturated fat and cholesterol, may reduce the risk of heart disease.\" One serving, (1 cup or 240 mL) of soy milk, for instance, contains 6 or 7\u00a0grams of soy protein.\nAn American Heart Association (AHA) review of a decade long study of soy protein benefits did not recommend isoflavone supplementation. The review panel also found that soy isoflavones have not been shown to reduce post-menopausal \"hot flashes\" and the efficacy and safety of isoflavones to help prevent cancers of the breast, uterus or prostate is in question. AHA concluded that \"many soy products should be beneficial to cardiovascular and overall health because of their high content of polyunsaturated fats, fiber, vitamins, and minerals and low content of saturated fat\". Other studies found that soy protein consumption could lower the concentration of low-density lipoproteins (LDL) transporting fats in the extracellular water to cells.\nResearch by constituent.\nLignans.\nPlant lignans are associated with high fiber foods such as cereal brans and beans are the principal precursor to mammalian lignans which have an ability to bind to human estrogen sites. Soybeans are a significant source of mammalian lignan precursor secoisolariciresinol containing 13\u2013273\u00a0\u03bcg/100\u00a0g dry weight.\nPhytochemicals.\nSoybeans and processed soy foods are among the richest foods in total phytoestrogens (wet basis per 100\u00a0g), which are present primarily in the form of the isoflavones, daidzein and genistein. Because most naturally occurring phytoestrogens act as selective estrogen receptor modulators, or SERMs, which do not necessarily act as direct agonists of estrogen receptors, normal consumption of foods that contain these phytoestrogens should not provide sufficient amounts to elicit a physiological response in humans. The major product of daidzein microbial metabolism is equol. Only 33% of Western Europeans have a microbiome that produces equol, compared to 50\u201355% of Asians.\nSoy isoflavones\u2014polyphenolic compounds that are also produced by other legumes like peanuts and chickpeas\u2014are under preliminary research. As of 2016, no cause-and-effect relationship has been shown in clinical research to indicate that soy isoflavones lower the risk of cardiovascular diseases.\nPhytic acid.\nSoybeans contain phytic acid, which may act as a chelating agent and inhibit mineral absorption, especially for diets already low in minerals.\nIn culture.\nAlthough observations of soy consumption inducing gynecomastia on men are not conclusive, a pejorative term, \"soy boy\", has emerged to describe perceived emasculated young men with feminine traits.\nFutures.\nSoybean futures are traded on the Chicago Board of Trade and have delivery dates in January (F), March (H), May (K), July (N), August (Q), September (U), November (X).\nThey are also traded on other commodity futures exchanges under different contract specifications:\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "62785", "revid": "8565473", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62785", "title": "Edamame", "text": "Immature soybean pod used as a specialty food\n is an East Asian dish prepared with immature soybeans in their pods, which are boiled or steamed, and may be served with salt or other condiments. It is consumed in many world regions. Edamame is a common side dish in Japanese cuisine and as an appetizer to alcoholic beverages, such as beer or sh\u014dch\u016b. As an ingredient, edamame is used in both sweet and savory dishes, such as takikomi gohan, tempura, and zunda-mochi.\nWhen the beans are outside the pod, the term mukimame is also sometimes used in Japanese.\nName.\nIn Japanese, the name \"edamame\" is commonly used to refer to the dish. It literally means \"stem beans\" (\u679d \"eda\" = \"branch\" or \"stem\" + \u8c46 \"mame\" = \"bean\"), because the beans were often sold while still attached to the stem.\nIn Chinese, \"maodou\" is used commonly to refer to the dish, which literally means \"fur peas\" (\u6bdb \"m\u00e1o\" = \"fur\" + \u8c46 \"d\u00f2u\" = \"bean\").\nHistory.\nSoybeans were first cultivated in China some 7000 years ago, while the earliest documented reference to the term \"edamame\" dates from the year 1275, when the Japanese monk Nichiren wrote a note thanking a parishioner for the gift of \"edamame\" he had left at the temple.\nIn 1406, during the Ming dynasty in China, the leaves of the soybeans were eaten and during outbreaks of famine; it was recommended that citizens eat the beans whole or use them ground up and added to flour. Centuries later, in China, in 1620, they are referred to again, but as \"maodou\", which translates to the term \"hairy bean\". Edamame appeared in haikai verse in Japanese in the Edo period (1603\u20131868), with one example as early as 1638.\nThey were first recognized in the United States in 1855, when a farmer commented on the difficulties he had shelling them after harvest. In March 1923, the immature soybean is first referred to in text in the United States in the book \"The Soybean\" by C. V. Piper and Joseph W. Morse. In this book, they are first pictured and shown as being eaten out of open shell pods. The first nutritional facts about them are published and some recipes are included, as they were a new type of vegetable to the public. The earliest recorded usage in English of the word \"edamame\" is in 1951 in the journal \"Folklore Studies\".\nWriting in \"The New York Times\" in 1999, food writer Florence Fabricant reported that frozen edamame beans were starting to be sold in supermarkets and speciality food retailers in New York and New Jersey. \"Edamame\" appeared as a new term in the Oxford English Dictionary in 2003 and in the Merriam-Webster dictionary in 2008.\nIn 2008, the first soybeans grown in Europe were sold in grocery stores as edamame and eaten as an alternative source of protein.\nPreparation.\nHarvesting.\nEdamame is typically harvested by hand to avoid damaging the crop's stems and leaves. Green soybean pods are picked before they fully ripen, typically 35 to 40 days after the crop first flowers. Soybeans harvested at this stage are sweeter because they contain more sucrose than soybeans picked later in the growing season. Other factors contributing to edamame's flavor include free amino acids such as glutamic acid, aspartic acid, and alanine. Often these unbound amino acids decrease as the pods fully expand and ripen.\nCooking.\nPods may be boiled in water, steamed, or microwaved. The ends of the pod are sometimes cut before boiling or steaming. The most common preparations use salt for taste, either dissolved in the boiling water before introducing the soybean pods or added after cooking.\nEdamame is a popular side dish at Japanese izakaya restaurants with local varieties being in demand, depending on the season. Salt and garlic are typical condiments for edamame. In Japan, a coarse salt wet with brine is preferred on beans eaten directly from the pod.\nStorage.\nEdamame purchased fresh is preferably eaten the same day, with flavor degradation being noticeable in as few as 10 hours after harvest. However, fresh edamame will stay edible for three days when stored in the refrigerator. Damaged pods brown more rapidly however, mainly due to the enzyme polyphenol oxidase. If stored fresh, the pods should be kept humid to prevent discoloration and wilting. This can be accomplished by wrapping the pods in plastic or another material which traps moisture.\nFreezing fresh edamame is another option for maintaining good quality over a few months. Fresh edamame should be blanched first before being frozen.\nEating.\nEdamame can come in two forms: pods or beans. Edamame beans are easy to eat and can be cooked just like any other type of beans. The edamame pods require using the teeth or fingers to slide the edamame beans into the mouth, after which the pods (or shells) are discarded.\nNutrition.\nThe United States Department of Agriculture states that edamame beans are a \"soybean that can be eaten fresh and are best known as a snack with a nutritional punch\". Frozen, prepared edamame beans are 73% water, 12% protein, 9% carbohydrates, and 5% fat. A reference amount of provides 121 calories of food energy, and rich amounts (20% or more the Daily Value, DV) of protein, dietary fiber, folate (78% DV), manganese (45% DV), and vitamin K (22% DV) (table). The fat content in edamame supplies 358 mg of omega\u22123 fatty acids, 1,790 mg of omega\u22126 fatty acids, and 1,260 mg of oleic acid (USDA reference in table).\nAllergy.\nEdamame is soy and is classed as a major food allergen, and must be clearly identified on all food ingredient labels of pre-packed foods for sale in the UK and EU.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "62786", "revid": "29615425", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62786", "title": "Soy", "text": ""}
{"id": "62787", "revid": "21479757", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62787", "title": "Soya", "text": "Soya may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "62788", "revid": "29615425", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62788", "title": "Soya bean", "text": ""}
{"id": "62790", "revid": "29615425", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62790", "title": "Preabelian category", "text": ""}
{"id": "62791", "revid": "9092818", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62791", "title": "Winston churchhill", "text": ""}
{"id": "62793", "revid": "43252809", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62793", "title": "Cheeleaders", "text": ""}
{"id": "62794", "revid": "197953", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62794", "title": "Milkyway", "text": ""}
{"id": "62795", "revid": "4", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62795", "title": "Ohm Law", "text": ""}
{"id": "62797", "revid": "11555324", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62797", "title": "Colombus", "text": ""}
{"id": "62798", "revid": "39104771", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62798", "title": "Fabaceae", "text": "Family of legume flowering plants\nFabaceae () or Leguminosae, commonly known as the legume, pea, or bean family, is a large and agriculturally important family of flowering plants. It includes trees, shrubs, and perennial or annual herbaceous plants, which are easily recognized by their fruit (legume) and their compound, stipulate leaves. The family is widely distributed, and is the third-largest land plant family in number of species, behind only the Orchidaceae and Asteraceae, with about 765 genera and nearly 20,000 known species.\nThe five largest genera of the family are \"Astragalus\" (over 3,000 species), \"Acacia\" (over 1,000 species), \"Indigofera\" (around 700 species), \"Crotalaria\" (around 700 species), and \"Mimosa\" (around 400 species), which constitute about a quarter of all legume species. The c.\u200919,000 known legume species amount to about 7% of flowering plant species. Fabaceae is the most common family found in tropical rainforests and dry forests of the Americas and Africa.\nRecent molecular and morphological evidence supports the fact that the Fabaceae is a single monophyletic family. This conclusion has been supported not only by the degree of interrelation shown by different groups within the family compared with that found among the Leguminosae and their closest relations, but also by all the recent phylogenetic studies based on DNA sequences. These studies confirm that the Fabaceae are a monophyletic group that is closely related to the families Polygalaceae, Surianaceae and Quillajaceae and that they belong to the order Fabales.\nAlong with the cereals, some fruits and tropical roots, a number of Leguminosae have been a staple human food for millennia and their use is closely related to human evolution.\nThe family Fabaceae includes a number of plants that are common in agriculture including \"Glycine max\" (soybean), \"Phaseolus\" (beans), \"Pisum sativum\" (pea), \"Cicer arietinum\" (chickpeas), \"Vicia faba\" (broad bean), \"Medicago sativa\" (alfalfa), \"Arachis hypogaea\" (peanut), \"Ceratonia siliqua\" (carob), Tamarindus indica (tamarind), \"Trigonella foenum-graecum\" (fenugreek), and \"Glycyrrhiza glabra\" (liquorice). A number of species are also weedy pests in different parts of the world, including \"Cytisus scoparius\" (broom), \"Robinia pseudoacacia\" (black locust)\", Ulex europaeus\" (gorse), \"Pueraria montana\" (kudzu), and a number of \"Lupinus\" species.\nEtymology.\nThe name 'Fabaceae' comes from the defunct genus \"Faba\", now included in \"Vicia\". The term \"faba\" comes from Latin, and appears to simply mean \"bean\". Leguminosae is an older name still considered valid, and refers to the fruit of these plants, which are called legumes.\nDescription.\nFabaceae range in habit from giant trees (like \"Koompassia excelsa\") to small annual herbs, with the majority being herbaceous perennials. Plants have indeterminate inflorescences, which are sometimes reduced to a single flower. The flowers have a short hypanthium and a single carpel with a short gynophore, and after fertilization produce fruits that are legumes.\nGrowth habit.\nThe Fabaceae have a wide variety of growth forms, including trees, shrubs, herbaceous plants, and even vines or lianas. The herbaceous plants can be annuals, biennials, or perennials, without basal or terminal leaf aggregations. Many Legumes have tendrils. They are upright plants, epiphytes, or vines. The latter support themselves by means of shoots that twist around a support or through cauline or foliar tendrils. Plants can be heliophytes, mesophytes, or xerophytes.\nLeaves.\nThe leaves are usually alternate and compound. Most often they are even- or odd-pinnately compound (e.g. \"Caragana\" and \"Robinia\" respectively), often trifoliate (e.g. \"Trifolium\", \"Medicago\") and rarely palmately compound (e.g. \"Lupinus\"), in the Mimosoideae and the Caesalpinioideae commonly bipinnate (e.g. \"Acacia\", \"Mimosa\"). They always have stipules, which can be leaf-like (e.g. \"Pisum\"), thornlike (e.g. \"Robinia\") or be rather inconspicuous. Leaf margins are entire or, occasionally, serrate. Both the leaves and the leaflets often have wrinkled pulvini to permit nastic movements. In some species, leaflets have evolved into tendrils (e.g. \"Vicia\").\nMany species have leaves with structures that attract ants which protect the plant from herbivore insects (a form of mutualism). Extrafloral nectaries are common among the Mimosoideae and the Caesalpinioideae, and are also found in some Faboideae (e.g. \"Vicia sativa\"). In some \"Acacia\", the modified hollow stipules are inhabited by ants and are known as domatia.\nRoots.\nMany Fabaceae host bacteria in their roots within structures called root nodules. These bacteria, known as rhizobia, have the ability to take nitrogen gas (N2) out of the air and convert it to a form of nitrogen that is usable to the host plant (NO3\u2212 or NH3). This process is called nitrogen fixation. The legume, acting as a host, and rhizobia, acting as a provider of usable nitrate, form a symbiotic relationship. Members of the Phaseoleae genus \"Apios\" form tubers, which can be edible.\nFlowers.\nThe flowers often have five generally fused sepals and five free petals. They are generally hermaphroditic and have a short hypanthium, usually cup-shaped. There are normally ten stamens and one elongated superior ovary, with a curved style. They are usually arranged in indeterminate inflorescences. Fabaceae are typically entomophilous plants (i.e. they are pollinated by insects), and the flowers are usually showy to attract pollinators.\nIn the Caesalpinioideae, the flowers are often zygomorphic, as in \"Cercis\", or nearly symmetrical with five equal petals, as in \"Bauhinia\". The upper petal is the innermost one, unlike in the Faboideae. Some species, like some in the genus \"Senna\", have asymmetric flowers, with one of the lower petals larger than the opposing one, and the style bent to one side. The calyx, corolla, or stamens can be showy in this group.\nIn the Mimosoideae, the flowers are actinomorphic and arranged in globose inflorescences. The petals are small and the stamens, which can be more than just 10, have long, coloured filaments, which are the showiest part of the flower. All of the flowers in an inflorescence open at once.\nIn the Faboideae, the flowers are zygomorphic, and have a specialized structure. The upper petal, called the banner or standard, is large and envelops the rest of the petals in bud, often reflexing when the flower blooms. The two adjacent petals, the wings, surround the two bottom petals. The two bottom petals are fused together at the apex (remaining free at the base), forming a boat-like structure called the keel. The stamens are always ten in number, and their filaments can be fused in various configurations, often in a group of nine stamens plus one separate stamen. Various genes in the \"CYCLOIDEA (CYC)/DICHOTOMA (DICH)\" family are expressed in the upper (also called dorsal or adaxial) petal; in some species, such as \"Cadia\", these genes are expressed throughout the flower, producing a radially symmetrical flower.\nFruit.\nThe ovary most typically develops into a legume. A legume is a simple dry fruit that usually dehisces (opens along a seam) on two sides. A common name for this type of fruit is a \"pod\", although that can also be applied to a few other fruit types. A few species have evolved samarae, loments, follicles, indehiscent legumes, achenes, drupes, and berries from the basic legume fruit.\nPhysiology and biochemistry.\nThe Fabaceae are rarely cyanogenic. Where they are, the cyanogenic compounds are derived from tyrosine, phenylalanine or leucine. They frequently contain alkaloids. Proanthocyanidins can be present either as cyanidin or delphinidine or both at the same time. Flavonoids such as kaempferol, quercitin and myricetin are often present. Ellagic acid has never been found in any of the genera or species analysed. Sugars are transported within the plants in the form of sucrose. C3 photosynthesis has been found in a wide variety of genera. The family has also evolved a unique chemistry. Many legumes contain toxic and indigestible substances, antinutrients, which may be removed through various processing methods. Pterocarpans are a class of molecules (derivatives of isoflavonoids) found only in the Fabaceae. Forisome proteins are found in the sieve tubes of Fabaceae; uniquely they are not dependent on ADT.\nEvolution, phylogeny and taxonomy.\nEvolution.\nThe order Fabales contains around 7.3% of eudicot species and the greatest part of this diversity is contained in just one of the four families that the order contains: Fabaceae. This clade also includes the families Polygalaceae, Surianaceae and Quillajaceae and its origins date back 94 to 89 million years, although it started its diversification 79 to 74 million years ago. The Fabaceae diversified during the Paleogene to become a ubiquitous part of the modern earth's biota, along with many other families belonging to the flowering plants.\nThe Fabaceae have an abundant and diverse fossil record, especially for the Tertiary period. Fossils of flowers, fruit, leaves, wood and pollen from this period have been found in numerous locations. The earliest fossils that can be definitively assigned to the Fabaceae appeared in the early Palaeocene (approximately 65 million years ago). Representatives of the 3 sub-families traditionally recognised as being members of the Fabaceae \u2013 Cesalpinioideae, Papilionoideae and Mimosoideae\u00a0\u2013 as well as members of the large clades within these sub-families\u00a0\u2013 such as the genistoides\u00a0\u2013 have been found in periods later, starting between 55 and 50 million years ago. In fact, a wide variety of taxa representing the main lineages in the Fabaceae have been found in the fossil record dating from the middle to the late Eocene, suggesting that the majority of the modern Fabaceae groups were already present and that a broad diversification occurred during this period. Therefore, the Fabaceae started their diversification approximately 60 million years ago and the most important clades separated 50 million years ago. The age of the main Cesalpinioideae clades have been estimated as between 56 and 34 million years and the basal group of the Mimosoideae as 44 \u00b1 2.6 million years. The division between Mimosoideae and Faboideae is dated as occurring between 59 and 34 million years ago and the basal group of the Faboideae as 58.6 \u00b1 0.2 million years ago. It has been possible to date the divergence of some of the groups within the Faboideae, even though diversification within each genus was relatively recent. For instance, \"Astragalus\" separated from the \"Oxytropis\" 16 to 12 million years ago. In addition, the separation of the aneuploid species of \"Neoastragalus\" started 4 million years ago. \"Inga\", another genus of the Papilionoideae with approximately 350 species, seems to have diverged in the last 2 million years.\nIt has been suggested, based on fossil and phylogenetic evidence, that legumes originally evolved in arid and/or semi-arid regions along the Tethys seaway during the Palaeogene Period. However, others contend that Africa (or even the Americas) cannot yet be ruled out as the origin of the family.\nThe current hypothesis about the evolution of the genes needed for nodulation is that they were recruited from other pathways after a polyploidy event. Several different pathways have been implicated as donating duplicated genes to the pathways need for nodulation. The main donors to the pathway were the genes associated with the arbuscular mycorrhiza symbiosis genes, the pollen tube formation genes and the haemoglobin genes. One of the main genes shown to be shared between the arbuscular mycorrhiza pathway and the nodulation pathway is SYMRK and it is involved in the plant-bacterial recognition. The pollen tube growth is similar to the infection thread development in that infection threads grow in a polar manner that is similar to a pollen tubes polar growth towards the ovules. Both pathways include the same type of enzymes, pectin-degrading cell wall enzymes. The enzymes needed to reduce nitrogen, nitrogenases, require a substantial input of ATP but at the same time are sensitive to free oxygen. To meet the requirements of this paradoxical situation, the plants express a type of haemoglobin called leghaemoglobin that is believed to be recruited after a duplication event. These three genetic pathways are believed to be part of a gene duplication event then recruited to work in nodulation.\nPhylogeny and taxonomy.\nPhylogeny.\nThe phylogeny of the legumes has been the object of many studies by research groups from around the world. These studies have used morphology, DNA data (the chloroplast intron \"trnL\", the chloroplast genes \"rbcL\" and \"matK\", or the ribosomal spacers \"ITS\") and cladistic analysis in order to investigate the relationships between the family's different lineages. Fabaceae is consistently recovered as monophyletic. The studies further confirmed that the traditional subfamilies Mimosoideae and Papilionoideae were each monophyletic but both were nested within the paraphyletic subfamily Caesalpinioideae. All the different approaches yielded similar results regarding the relationships between the family's main clades. Following extensive discussion in the legume phylogenetics community, the Legume Phylogeny Working Group reclassified Fabaceae into six subfamilies, which necessitated the segregation of four new subfamilies from Caesalpinioideae and merging Caesapinioideae \"sensu stricto\" with the former subfamily Mimosoideae. The exact branching order of the different subfamilies is still unresolved.\nTaxonomy.\nThe Fabaceae are placed in the order Fabales according to most taxonomic systems, including the APG III system. The family now includes six subfamilies:\nEcology.\nDistribution and habitat.\nThe Fabaceae have an essentially worldwide distribution, being found everywhere except Antarctica and the high Arctic. The trees are often found in tropical regions, while the herbaceous plants and shrubs are predominant outside the tropics.\nBiological nitrogen fixation.\nBiological nitrogen fixation (BNF, performed by the organisms called diazotrophs) is a very old process that probably originated in the Archean eon when the primitive atmosphere lacked oxygen. It is only carried out by Euryarchaeota and just 6 of the more than 50 phyla of bacteria. Some of these lineages co-evolved together with the flowering plants establishing the molecular basis of a mutually beneficial symbiotic relationship. BNF is carried out in nodules that are mainly located in the root cortex, although they are occasionally located in the stem as in \"Sesbania rostrata\". The spermatophytes that co-evolved with actinorhizal diazotrophs (\"Frankia\") or with rhizobia to establish their symbiotic relationship belong to 11 families contained within the Rosidae clade (as established by the gene molecular phylogeny of \"rbcL\", a gene coding for part of the RuBisCO enzyme in the chloroplast). This grouping indicates that the predisposition for forming nodules probably only arose once in flowering plants and that it can be considered as an ancestral characteristic that has been conserved or lost in certain lineages. However, such a wide distribution of families and genera within this lineage indicates that nodulation had multiple origins. Of the 10 families within the Rosidae, 8 have nodules formed by actinomyces (Betulaceae, Casuarinaceae, Coriariaceae, Datiscaceae, Elaeagnaceae, Myricaceae, Rhamnaceae and Rosaceae), and the two remaining families, Ulmaceae and Fabaceae have nodules formed by rhizobia.\nThe rhizobia and their hosts must be able to recognize each other for nodule formation to commence. Rhizobia are specific to particular host species although a rhizobia species may often infect more than one host species. This means that one plant species may be infected by more than one species of bacteria. For example, nodules in \"Acacia senegal\" can contain seven species of rhizobia belonging to three different genera. The most distinctive characteristics that allow rhizobia to be distinguished apart are the rapidity of their growth and the type of root nodule that they form with their host. Root nodules can be classified as being either indeterminate, cylindrical and often branched, and determinate, spherical with prominent lenticels. Indeterminate nodules are characteristic of legumes from temperate climates, while determinate nodules are commonly found in species from tropical or subtropical climates.\nNodule formation is common throughout the Fabaceae. It is found in the majority of its members that only form an association with rhizobia, which in turn form an exclusive symbiosis with the Fabaceae (with the exception of \"Parasponia\", the only genus of the 18 Ulmaceae genera that is capable of forming nodules). Nodule formation is present in all the Fabaceae sub-families, although it is less common in the Caesalpinioideae. All types of nodule formation are present in the subfamily Papilionoideae: indeterminate (with the meristem retained), determinate (without meristem) and the type included in \"Aeschynomene\". The latter two are thought to be the most modern and specialised type of nodule as they are only present in some lines of the subfamily Papilionoideae. Even though nodule formation is common in the two monophyletic subfamilies Papilionoideae and Mimosoideae they also contain species that do not form nodules. The presence or absence of nodule-forming species within the three sub-families indicates that nodule formation has arisen several times during the evolution of the Fabaceae and that this ability has been lost in some lineages. For example, within the genus \"Acacia\", a member of the Mimosoideae, \"A. pentagona\" does not form nodules, while other species of the same genus readily form nodules, as is the case for \"Acacia senegal\", which forms both rapidly and slow growing rhizobial nodules.\nChemical ecology.\nA large number of species within many genera of leguminous plants, e.g. \"Astragalus\", \"Coronilla\", \"Hippocrepis\", \"Indigofera\", \"Lotus\", \"Securigera\" and \"Scorpiurus\", produce chemicals that derive from the compound 3-nitropropanoic acid (3-NPA, beta-nitropropionic acid). The free acid 3-NPA is an irreversible inhibitor of mitochondrial respiration, and thus the compound inhibits the tricarboxylic acid cycle. This inhibition caused by 3-NPA is especially toxic to nerve cells and represents a very general toxic mechanism suggesting a profound ecological importance due to the big number of species producing this compound and its derivatives. A second and closely related class of secondary metabolites that occur in many species of leguminous plants is defined by isoxazolin-5-one derivatives. These compounds occur in particular together with 3-NPA and related derivatives at the same time in the same species, as found in \"Astragalus canadensis\" and \"Astragalus collinus\". 3-NPA and isoxazlin-5-one derivatives also occur in many species of leaf beetles (see defense in insects).\nEconomic and cultural importance.\nLegumes are economically and culturally important plants due to their extraordinary diversity and abundance, the wide variety of edible vegetables they represent and due to the variety of uses they can be put to: in horticulture and agriculture, as a food, for the compounds they contain that have medicinal uses and for the oil and fats they contain that have a variety of uses.\nFood and forage.\nThe history of legumes is tied in closely with that of human civilization, appearing early in Asia, the Americas (the common bean, several varieties) and Europe (broad beans) by 6,000 BCE, where they became a staple, essential as a source of protein.\nTheir ability to fix atmospheric nitrogen reduces fertilizer costs for farmers and gardeners who grow legumes, and means that legumes can be used in a crop rotation to replenish soil that has been depleted of nitrogen. Legume seeds and foliage have a comparatively higher protein content than non-legume materials, due to the additional nitrogen that legumes receive through the process. Legumes are commonly used as natural fertilizers. Some legume species perform hydraulic lift, which makes them ideal for intercropping.\nFarmed legumes can belong to numerous classes, including forage, grain, blooms, pharmaceutical/industrial, fallow/green manure and timber species, with most commercially farmed species filling two or more roles simultaneously.\nThere are of two broad types of forage legumes. Some, like alfalfa, clover, vetch, and \"Arachis\", are sown in pasture and grazed by livestock. Other forage legumes such as \"Leucaena\" or \"Albizia\" are woody shrub or tree species that are either broken down by livestock or regularly cut by humans to provide fodder.\nGrain legumes are cultivated for their seeds, and are also called pulses. The seeds are used for human and animal consumption or for the production of oils for industrial uses. Grain legumes include both herbaceous plants like beans, lentils, lupins, peas and peanuts, and trees such as carob, mesquite and tamarind.\n\"Lathyrus tuberosus\", once extensively cultivated in Europe, forms tubers used for human consumption.\nBloom legume species include species such as lupin, which are farmed commercially for their blooms, and thus are popular in gardens worldwide. \"Laburnum\", \"Robinia\", \"Gleditsia\" (honey locust), \"Acacia\", \"Mimosa\", and \"Delonix\" are ornamental trees and shrubs.\nIndustrial farmed legumes include \"Indigofera\", cultivated for the production of indigo, \"Acacia\", for gum arabic, and \"Derris\", for the insecticide action of rotenone, a compound it produces.\nFallow or green manure legume species are cultivated to be tilled back into the soil to exploit the high nitrogen levels found in most legumes. Numerous legumes are farmed for this purpose, including \"Leucaena\", \"Cyamopsis\" and \"Sesbania\".\nVarious legume species are farmed for timber production worldwide, including numerous \"Acacia\" species, \"Dalbergia\" species, and \"Castanospermum australe\".\nMelliferous plants offer nectar to bees and other insects to encourage them to carry pollen from the flowers of one plant to others thereby ensuring pollination. Many Fabaceae species are important sources of pollen and nectar for bees, including for honey production in the beekeeping industry. Example Fabaceae such as alfalfa, and various clovers including white clover and sweet clover, are important sources of nectar and honey for the Western honey bee.\nIndustrial uses.\nNatural gums.\nNatural gums are vegetable exudates that are released as the result of damage to the plant such as that resulting from the attack of an insect or a natural or artificial cut. These exudates contain heterogeneous polysaccharides formed of different sugars and usually containing uronic acids. They form viscous colloidal solutions. There are different species that produce gums. The most important of these species belong to the Fabaceae. They are widely used in the pharmaceutical, cosmetic, food, and textile sectors. They also have interesting therapeutic properties; for example gum arabic is antitussive and anti-inflammatory. The most well known gums are tragacanth (\"Astragalus gummifer\"), gum arabic (\"Acacia senegal\") and guar gum (\"Cyamopsis tetragonoloba\").\nDyes.\nSeveral species of Fabaceae are used to produce dyes. The heartwood of logwood, \"Haematoxylon campechianum\", is used to produce red and purple dyes. The histological stain called haematoxylin is produced from this species. The wood of the Brazilwood tree (\"Caesalpinia echinata\") is also used to produce a red or purple dye. The Madras thorn (\"Pithecellobium dulce\") has reddish fruit that are used to produce a yellow dye. Indigo dye is extracted from the indigo plant \"Indigofera tinctoria\" that is native to Asia. In Central and South America dyes are produced from two species in the same genus: indigo and Maya blue from \"Indigofera suffruticosa\" and Natal indigo from \"Indigofera arrecta\". Yellow dyes are extracted from \"Butea monosperma\", commonly called flame of the forest and from dyer's greenweed, (\"Genista tinctoria\").\nOrnamentals.\nLegumes have been used as ornamental plants throughout the world for many centuries. Their vast diversity of heights, shapes, foliage and flower colour means that this family is commonly used in the design and planting of everything from small gardens to large parks. The following is a list of the main ornamental legume species, listed by subfamily.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "62799", "revid": "29615425", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62799", "title": "Binomial name", "text": ""}
{"id": "62801", "revid": "985561257", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62801", "title": "Achaemenid", "text": ""}
{"id": "62805", "revid": "14423536", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62805", "title": "Glycine max", "text": ""}
{"id": "62808", "revid": "48442598", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62808", "title": "Soul music", "text": "Genre of music\nSoul music is a popular music genre that originated in African American communities throughout the United States in the late 1950s and early 1960s. Catchy rhythms, stressed by handclaps and extemporaneous body movements, are an important hallmark of soul. Other characteristics are a call and response between the lead and backing vocalists, an especially tense vocal sound, and occasional improvisational additions, twirls, and auxiliary sounds. Soul music is known for reflecting African American identity and stressing the importance of African American culture.\nSoul has its roots in African-American gospel music and rhythm and blues, and primarily combines elements of gospel, R&amp;B and jazz. The genre emerged from the power struggle to increase black Americans' awareness of their African ancestry, as a newfound consciousness led to the creation of music that boasted pride in being black. Soul music became popular for dancing and listening, and American record labels such as Motown, Atlantic and Stax were influential in its proliferation during the civil rights movement. Soul also became popular worldwide, directly influencing rock music and the music of Africa. It had a resurgence in the mid-to late 1990s with the subgenre neo soul, which incorporated modern production elements and hip-hop influences.\nSoul music dominated the U.S. R&amp;B charts in the 1960s, and many recordings crossed over into the pop charts in the United States, United Kingdom, and elsewhere. Many prominent soul artists, including Ray Charles, Sam Cooke, Otis Redding, James Brown, Aretha Franklin, and various acts under the Motown label, such as the Supremes and the Temptations, were highly influential in the genre's development and all gained widespread popularity during this time. By 1968, the soul music genre had begun to splinter. Some soul artists moved to funk music, while other singers and groups developed slicker, more sophisticated, and in some cases more socially conscious varieties. By the early 1970s, soul music had begun to absorb influences from psychedelic rock and progressive rock, among other genres, leading to the creation of psychedelic soul and progressive soul. Prominent soul artists of this era include Marvin Gaye, Jackson 5, Stevie Wonder, Curtis Mayfield, Isaac Hayes, Al Green, and Bill Withers. Neo soul, which adopted hip-hop influences, developed around 1994. \nOther subgenres of soul include the \"Motown sound\", a more rhythmic and pop-friendly style that originated from the eponymous label; Southern soul, a driving, energetic variety combining R&amp;B with southern gospel music influences; Memphis soul, a shimmering, sultry style; New Orleans soul, which emerged from the rhythm and blues style; Chicago soul, a lighter gospel-influenced sound; and Philadelphia soul, a lush orchestral variety with doo-wop-inspired vocals.\nHistory.\nOrigins.\nSoul music has its roots in traditional African-American gospel music and rhythm and blues and as the hybridization of their respective religious and secular styles \u2013 in both lyrical content and instrumentation \u2013 that began in the 1950s. The term \"soul\" had been used among African-American musicians to emphasize the feeling of being an African-American in the United States. According to musicologist Barry Hansen,Though this hybrid produced a clutch of hits in the R&amp;B market in the early 1950s, only the most adventurous white fans felt its impact at the time; the rest had to wait for the coming of soul music in the 1960s to feel the rush of rock and roll sung gospel-style.\nAccording to AllMusic, \"Soul music was the result of the urbanization and commercialization of rhythm and blues in the '60s.\" The phrase \"soul music\" itself, referring to gospel-style music with secular lyrics, was first attested in 1961. The term \"soul\" in African-American parlance has connotations of African-American pride and culture. Gospel groups in the 1940s and '50s occasionally used the term as part of their names. The jazz style that originated from gospel became known as soul jazz. As singers and arrangers began using techniques from both gospel and soul jazz in African-American popular music during the 1960s, soul music gradually functioned as an umbrella term for African-American popular music at the time.\nAccording to the Acoustic Music Organization, the \"first clear evidence of soul music shows up with the \"5\" Royales, an ex-gospel group that turned to R&amp;B and in Faye Adams, whose \"Shake A Hand\" becomes an R&amp;B standard\".\nImportant innovators whose recordings in the 1950s contributed to the emergence of soul music included Clyde McPhatter, Hank Ballard, and Etta James. Ray Charles is often cited as popularizing the soul music genre with his series of hits, starting with 1954's \"I Got a Woman\". Singer Bobby Womack said, \"Ray was the genius. He turned the world onto soul music.\" Charles was open in acknowledging the influence of Pilgrim Travelers vocalist Jesse Whitaker on his singing style.\nLittle Richard, who inspired Otis Redding, and James Brown both were equally influential. Brown was nicknamed the \"Godfather of Soul Music\", and Richard proclaimed himself as the \"King of Rockin' and Rollin', Rhythm and Blues Soulin'\", because his music embodied elements of all three, and since he inspired artists in all three genres.\nSam Cooke and Jackie Wilson also are often acknowledged as soul forefathers. Cooke became popular as the lead singer of the gospel group the Soul Stirrers, before controversially moving into secular music. His recording of \"You Send Me\" in 1957 launched a successful pop music career. Furthermore, his 1962 recording of \"Bring It On Home to Me\" has been described as \"perhaps the first record to define the soul experience\". Jackie Wilson, a contemporary of both Cooke and James Brown, also achieved crossover success, especially with his 1957 hit \"Reet Petite\". He even was particularly influential for his dramatic delivery and performances.\n1960s.\nHusband-wife duo Ike &amp; Tina Turner emerged as \"leading exponents\" of soul music in the 1960s. Their debut single \"A Fool in Love\" crossed over to the pop charts in 1960. They earned a Grammy nomination for their song \"It's Gonna Work Out Fine\" in 1962. Along with the Kings of Rhythm and the Ikettes, they toured the Chitlin\u2019 Circuit as the Ike &amp; Tina Turner Revue.\nWriter Peter Guralnick is among those to identify Solomon Burke as a key figure in the emergence of soul music, and Atlantic Records as the key record label. Burke's early 1960s songs, including \"Cry to Me\", \"Just Out of Reach (of My Two Open Arms)\" and \"Down in the Valley\" are considered classics of the genre. Guralnick wrote: Soul started, in a sense, with the 1961 success of Solomon Burke's \"Just Out of Reach\". Ray Charles, of course, had already enjoyed enormous success (also on Atlantic), as had James Brown and Sam Cooke \u2014 primarily in a pop vein. Each of these singers, though, could be looked upon as an isolated phenomenon; it was only with the coming together of Burke and Atlantic Records that you could begin to see anything even resembling a movement.\nBen E. King also achieved success in 1961 with \"Stand by Me\", a song directly based on a gospel hymn. By the mid-1960s, the initial successes of Burke, King, and others had been surpassed by new soul singers, including Stax artists such as Otis Redding and Wilson Pickett, who mainly recorded in Memphis, Tennessee, and Muscle Shoals, Alabama. According to Jon Landau:Between 1962 and 1964 Redding recorded a series of soul ballads characterized by unabashedly sentimental lyrics usually begging forgiveness or asking a girlfriend to come home... He soon became known as \"Mr. Pitiful\" and earned a reputation as the leading performer of soul ballads.\nThe most important female soul singer to emerge was Aretha Franklin, originally a gospel singer who began to make secular recordings in 1960 but whose career was later revitalized by her recordings for Atlantic. Her 1967 recordings, such as \"I Never Loved a Man (The Way I Love You)\", \"Respect\" (written and originally recorded by Otis Redding), and \"Do Right Woman, Do Right Man\" (written by Chips Moman and Dan Penn), were significant and commercially successful recordings.\nSoul music dominated the U.S. African-American music charts in the 1960s, and many recordings crossed over into the pop charts in the U.S. Otis Redding was a huge success at the Monterey International Pop Festival in 1967. The genre also became highly popular in the UK, where many leading acts toured in the late 1960s. \"Soul\" became an umbrella term for an increasingly wide variety of R&amp;B-based music styles \u2013 from the dance and pop-oriented acts at Motown Records in Detroit, such as the Temptations, Marvin Gaye and Stevie Wonder, to \"deep soul\" performers such as Percy Sledge and James Carr. Different regions and cities within the U.S., including New York City, Detroit, Chicago, Memphis, New Orleans, Philadelphia, and Muscle Shoals, Alabama (the home of FAME Studios and Muscle Shoals Sound Studios) became noted for different subgenres of the music and recording styles.\nBy 1968, while at its peak of popularity, soul began to fragment into different subgenres. Artists such as James Brown and Sly and the Family Stone evolved into funk music, while other singers such as Marvin Gaye, Stevie Wonder, Curtis Mayfield and Al Green developed slicker, more sophisticated and in some cases more politically conscious varieties of the genre. However, soul music continued to evolve, informing most subsequent forms of R&amp;B from the 1970s-onward, with pockets of musicians continuing to perform in traditional soul style.\n1970s and 1980s.\nMitchell's Hi Records continued in the Stax tradition of the previous decade, releasing a string of hits by Green, Ann Peebles, Otis Clay, O.\u00a0V. Wright and Syl Johnson. Bobby Womack, who recorded with Chips Moman in the late 1960s, continued to produce soul recordings in the 1970s and 1980s.&lt;ref name=\"Hurt (Womak/Moman)\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;&lt;ref name=\"Graceland (Womak/Moman)\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;\nIn Detroit, producer Don Davis worked with Stax artists such as Johnnie Taylor and the Dramatics.&lt;ref name=\"Hogan (Davis/AllMusic)\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; Early 1970s recordings by the Detroit Emeralds, such as \"Do Me Right\", are a link between soul and the later disco style.&lt;ref name=\"Wynn (Detroit Emeralds/AllMusic)\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; Motown Records artists such as Marvin Gaye, Michael Jackson, Stevie Wonder and Smokey Robinson contributed to the evolution of soul music, although their recordings were considered more in a pop music vein than those of Redding, Franklin and Carr. Although stylistically different from classic soul music, recordings by Chicago-based artists are often considered part of the genre.\nBy the early 1970s, soul music had been influenced by psychedelic rock and other genres. Artists like James Brown led soul towards funk music, which became typified by 1970s bands like Parliament-Funkadelic and the Meters. More versatile groups such as War, the Commodores, and Earth, Wind and Fire became popular around this time. During the 1970s, some slick and commercial blue-eyed soul acts like Philadelphia's Hall &amp; Oates and Oakland's Tower of Power achieved mainstream success, as did a new generation of street-corner harmony or \"city-soul\" groups such as the Delfonics and the historically black Howard University's Unifics.&lt;ref name=\"Erlewine (Hall/Oats)\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;\nThe syndicated music/dance variety television series \"Soul Train\", hosted by Chicago native Don Cornelius, debuted in 1971. The show provided an outlet for soul music for several decades, also spawning a franchise that saw the creation of a record label (Soul Train Records) that distributed music by the Whispers, Carrie Lucas, and an up-and-coming group known as Shalamar. Numerous disputes led to Cornelius spinning off the record label to his talent booker, Dick Griffey, who transformed the label into Solar Records, itself a prominent soul music label throughout the 1980s. The TV series continued to air until 2006, although other predominantly African-American music genres such as hip-hop began overshadowing soul on the show beginning in the 1980s.\nBeyond.\nAs disco and funk musicians had hits in the late 1970s and early 1980s, soul went in the direction of quiet storm. With its relaxed tempos and soft melodies, quiet storm soul took influences from fusion and adult contemporary. Some funk bands, such as EW&amp;F, the Commodores and Con Funk Shun would have a few quiet storm tracks on their albums. Among the most successful acts in this era include Smokey Robinson, Jeffry Osbourne, Peabo Bryson, Chaka Khan, and Larry Graham.\nAfter the decline of disco and funk in the early 1980s, soul music became influenced by electro music. It became less raw and more slickly produced, resulting in a style that is known as contemporary R&amp;B, which sounded very different from the original rhythm and blues style. The United States saw the development of neo-soul around 1994.\nNotable labels and producers.\nMotown Records.\nBerry Gordy's successful Tamla/Motown group of labels was notable for being African-American owned, unlike most of the earlier independent R&amp;B labels. Notable artists under this label were Gladys Knight &amp; the Pips, the Supremes, the Temptations, the Miracles, the Four Tops, the Marvelettes, Mary Wells, Jr. Walker &amp; the All-Stars, Stevie Wonder, Marvin Gaye, Tammi Terrell, Martha and the Vandellas, and the Jackson 5.\nHits were made using a quasi-industrial \"assembly line\" approach. The producers and songwriters brought artistic sensitivity to the three-minute tunes. Brian Holland, Lamont Dozier and Eddie Holland were rarely out of the charts for their work as songwriters and record producers for the Supremes, the Four Tops and Martha and the Vandellas. They allowed important elements to shine through the dense musical texture. The rhythm was emphasized by handclaps or tambourine. Smokey Robinson was another writer and record producer who added lyrics to \"The Tracks of My Tears\" by his group the Miracles, which was one of the most important songs of the decade.\nStax Records and Atlantic Records.\nStax Records and Atlantic Records were independent labels that produced high-quality dance records featuring many well-known singers of the day. They tended to have smaller ensembles marked by expressive gospel-tinged vocals. Brass and saxophones were also used extensively. Stax Records, founded by siblings Estelle and James Stewart, was the second most successful record label behind Motown Records. They were responsible for releasing hits by Otis Redding, Wilson Pickett, the Staple Singers, and many more. Ahmet Ertegun, who had anticipated being a diplomat until 1944 when his father died, founded Atlantic Records in 1947 with his friend Herb Abramson. Ertegun wrote many songs for Ray Charles and the Clovers. He even sang backup vocals for his artist Big Joe Turner on the song \"Shake, Rattle and Roll\".\nSubgenres.\nDetroit (Motown).\nDominated by Berry Gordy's Motown Records empire, Detroit's soul is strongly rhythmic and influenced by gospel music. The Motown sound often includes hand clapping, a powerful bassline, strings, brass and vibraphone. Motown Records' house band was the Funk Brothers. AllMusic cites Motown as the pioneering label of pop-soul, a style of soul music with raw vocals, but polished production and toned-down subject matter intended for pop radio and crossover success. Artists of this style included Diana Ross, the Jackson 5, Stevie Wonder, and Billy Preston. Popular during the 1960s, the style became glossier during the 1970s and led to disco. In the late 2000s, the style was revisited by contemporary soul singers such as Amy Winehouse, Raphael Saadiq (specifically his 2008 album \"The Way I See It\") and Solange Knowles (her 2008 album \"Sol-Angel and the Hadley St. Dreams\").\nDeep and Southern.\nThe terms \"deep soul\" and \"Southern soul\" generally refer to a driving, energetic soul style combining R&amp;B's energy with pulsating southern United States gospel music sounds. Memphis, Tennessee, label Stax Records nurtured a distinctive sound, which included putting vocals further back in the mix than most contemporary R&amp;B records, using vibrant horn parts in place of background vocals, and a focus on the low end of the frequency spectrum. The vast majority of Stax releases were backed by house bands Booker T. &amp; the M.G.'s (with Booker T. Jones, Steve Cropper, Duck Dunn, and Al Jackson) and the Memphis Horns (the splinter horn section of the Mar-Keys, trumpeter Wayne Jackson and saxophonist Andrew Love).\nMemphis.\nMemphis soul is a shimmering, sultry style of soul music produced in the 1960s and 1970s at Stax Records and Hi Records in Memphis, Tennessee. It featured melancholic and melodic horns, Hammond organ, bass, and drums, as heard in recordings by Hi's Al Green and Stax's Booker T. &amp; the M.G.'s. The latter group also sometimes played in the harder-edged Southern soul style. The Hi Records house band (Hi Rhythm Section) and producer Willie Mitchell developed a surging soul style heard in the label's 1970s hit recordings. Some Stax recordings fit into this style but had their own unique sound.\nNew Orleans.\nThe New Orleans soul scene directly came out of the rhythm and blues era, when such artists as Little Richard, Fats Domino, and Huey \"Piano\" Smith made a huge impact on the pop and R&amp;B charts and a huge direct influence on the birth of funk music. The principal architect of Crescent City's soul was songwriter, arranger, and producer Allen Toussaint. He worked with such artists as Irma Thomas (\"the Soul Queen of New Orleans\"), Jessie Hill, Chris Kenner, Benny Spellman, and Ernie K-Doe on the Minit/Instant label complex to produce a distinctive New Orleans soul sound that generated a passel of national hits. Other notable New Orleans hits came from Robert Parker, Betty Harris, and Aaron Neville. While record labels in New Orleans largely disappeared by the mid-1960s, producers in the city continued to record New Orleans soul artists for other mainly New York City and Los Angeles\u2013based record labels\u2014notably Lee Dorsey for New York-based Amy Records and the Meters for New York\u2013based Josie Records and then LA-based Reprise Records.\nChicago.\nChicago soul generally had a light gospel-influenced sound, but the large number of record labels based in the city tended to produce a more diverse sound than other cities. Vee Jay Records, which lasted until 1966, produced recordings by Jerry Butler, Betty Everett, Dee Clark, and Gene Chandler. Chess Records, mainly a blues and rock and roll label, produced several major soul artists, including the Dells and Billy Stewart. Curtis Mayfield not only scored many hits with his group, the Impressions, but wrote many hit songs for Chicago artists and produced hits on his own labels for the Fascinations, Major Lance, and the Five Stairsteps.\nPhiladelphia.\nBased primarily in the Philadelphia International record label, Philadelphia soul (or Philly soul) had lush string and horn arrangements and doo-wop-inspired vocals. Thom Bell, and Kenneth Gamble &amp; Leon Huff are considered the founders of Philadelphia soul, which produced hits for Patti LaBelle, the O'Jays, the Intruders, the Three Degrees, the Delfonics, the Stylistics, Harold Melvin &amp; the Blue Notes, and the Spinners.\nProgressive.\nBy the 1970s, African-American popular musicians had drawn from the conceptual album-oriented approach of the then-burgeoning progressive rock development. This progressive-soul development inspired a newfound sophisticated musicality and ambitious lyricism in black pop. Among these musicians were Sly Stone, Stevie Wonder, Marvin Gaye, Curtis Mayfield, and George Clinton. In discussing the progressive soul of the 1970s, Martin cites this period's albums from Wonder (\"Talking Book\", \"Innervisions\", \"Songs in the Key of Life\"), War (\"All Day Music\", \"The World Is a Ghetto\", \"War Live\"), and the Isley Brothers (\"3 + 3\"). Isaac Hayes's 1969 recording of \"Walk On By\" is considered a \"classic\" of prog-soul, according to \"City Pages\" journalist Jay Boller. Later prog-soul music includes recordings by Prince, Peter Gabriel, Meshell Ndegeocello, Joi, Bilal, Dwele, Anthony David, Janelle Mon\u00e1e, and the Soulquarians, an experimental black-music collective active during the late 1990s and early 2000s.\nPsychedelic.\nPsychedelic soul, sometimes known as \"black rock\", was a blend of psychedelic rock and soul music in the late 1960s, which paved the way for the mainstream emergence of funk music a few years later. Early pioneers of this subgenre of soul music include Jimi Hendrix, Sly and the Family Stone, Norman Whitfield, and Isaac Hayes. While psychedelic rock began its decline, the influence of psychedelic soul continued on and remained prevalent through the 1970s.\nBritish.\nIn the early 1960s, small soul scenes began popping up around the UK. Liverpool in particular had an established black community from which artists such as Chants and Steve Aldo emerged and go on to record within the British music industry. As a result, many recordings were commercially released by British soul acts during the 1960s which were unable to connect with the mainstream market. Nevertheless, soul has been a major influence on British popular music since the 1960s including bands of the British Invasion, most significantly the Beatles. There were a handful of significant British blue-eyed soul acts, including Dusty Springfield and Tom Jones. In the 1970s Carl Douglas, the Real Thing and Delegation had hits in the UK. American soul was extremely popular among some youth sub-cultures like the mod, Northern soul and modern soul movements, but a clear genre of British soul did not emerge until the 1980s when several artists including George Michael, Sade, Simply Red, Lisa Stansfield and Soul II Soul enjoyed commercial success. The popularity of British soul artists in the U.S., most notably Amy Winehouse, Adele, Estelle, Duffy, Joss Stone and Leona Lewis, led to talk of a \"Third British Invasion\" or \"British Soul Invasion\" in the 2000s and 2010s.\nNeo.\nNeo soul is a blend of 1970s soul-style vocals and instrumentation with contemporary R&amp;B sounds, hip-hop beats, and poetic interludes. The style was developed in the early to mid-1990s, and the term was coined in the early 1990s by producer and record label executive Kedar Massenburg. A key element in neo-soul is a heavy dose of Fender Rhodes or Wurlitzer electronic piano \"pads\" over a mellow, grooving interplay between the drums (usually with a rim shot snare sound) and a muted, deep funky bass. The Fender Rhodes piano sound gives the music a warm, organic character. \nNotable artists include Jill Scott, Lauryn Hill, Aloe Blacc and Erykah Badu. Newer artists like H.E.R. and SZA are also influenced by neo soul.\nNorthern.\nNorthern soul is a music and dance movement that emerged in the late 1960s out of the British mod subculture in Northern England and the English Midlands, based on a particular style of soul music with a heavy beat and fast tempo. The phrase \"northern soul\" was coined by a journalist Dave Godin and popularised through his column in \"Blues and Soul\" magazine. The rare soul records were played by DJs at nightclubs, and included obscure 1960s and early 1970s American recordings with an uptempo beat, such as those on Motown and smaller labels, not necessarily from the Northern United States.\nNu jazz and other influenced electronica.\nMany artists in various genres of electronic music (such as house, drum and bass, UK garage, and downtempo) are heavily influenced by soul, and have produced many soul-inspired compositions.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "62809", "revid": "91088", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62809", "title": "Warren Beatty", "text": "American actor and filmmaker (born 1937)\nHenry Warren Beatty (n\u00e9 Beaty; born March 30, 1937) is an American actor and filmmaker. His career has spanned over six decades, and he has received an Academy Award and three Golden Globe Awards. He also received the Irving G. Thalberg Award in 1999, the BAFTA Fellowship in 2002, the Kennedy Center Honors in 2004, the Cecil B. DeMille Award in 2007, and the AFI Life Achievement Award in 2008.\nBeatty has been nominated for 14 Academy Awards, including four for Best Actor, four for Best Picture, two for Best Director, three for Original Screenplay, and one for Adapted Screenplay \u2013 winning Best Director for \"Reds\" (1981). He was nominated for his performances as Clyde Barrow in the crime drama \"Bonnie and Clyde\" (1967), a quarterback mistakenly taken to heaven in the sports fantasy drama \"Heaven Can Wait\" (1978), John Reed in the historical epic \"Reds\" (1981), and Bugsy Siegel in the crime drama \"Bugsy\" (1991).\nBeatty made his acting debut as a teenager in love in the Elia Kazan drama \"Splendor in the Grass\" (1961). He later acted in John Frankenheimer's drama \"All Fall Down\" (1962), Robert Altman's revisionist western \"McCabe &amp; Mrs. Miller\" (1971), Alan J. Pakula's political thriller \"The Parallax View\" (1974), Hal Ashby's comedy \"Shampoo\" (1975), and Elaine May's road movie \"Ishtar\" (1987). He also directed and starred in the action crime film \"Dick Tracy\" (1990), the political satire \"Bulworth\" (1998), and the romance \"Rules Don't Apply\" (2016), all of which he also produced. \nOn stage, Beatty made his Broadway debut in the William Inge kitchen sink drama \"A Loss of Roses\" (1960) for which he was nominated for the Tony Award for Best Featured Actor in a Play.\nEarly life and education.\nHenry Warren Beaty was born on March 30, 1937, in Richmond, Virginia. His mother, Kathlyn Corinne (n\u00e9e MacLean), was a teacher from Nova Scotia. His father, Ira Owens Beaty, studied for a PhD in educational psychology and was a teacher and school administrator, in addition to working in real estate. His grandparents were also teachers. The family was Baptist. During Warren's childhood, Ira Beaty moved his family from Richmond to Norfolk and then to Arlington and Waverly, then back to Arlington, eventually taking a position at Arlington's Thomas Jefferson Junior High School in 1945. During the 1950s the family resided in the Dominion Hills section of Arlington. Beatty's older sister is actress, dancer and writer Shirley MacLaine (who altered the phonetic spelling of her mother's maiden surname). His uncle by marriage was Canadian politician A.A. MacLeod.\nBeatty became interested in movies as a child, often accompanying his sister to theaters. One film that had an important early influence on him was \"The Philadelphia Story\" (1940), which he saw when it was re-released in the 1950s. He noticed a strong resemblance between its star, Katharine Hepburn, and his mother, in both appearance and personality, saying that they symbolized \"perpetual integrity\". Another film that influenced him was \"Love Affair\" (1939), starring one of his favorite actors, Charles Boyer. He found it \"deeply moving\", and recalled that \"[t]his is a movie I always wanted to make.\" He remade \"Love Affair\" in 1994, starring alongside his wife Annette Bening and Katharine Hepburn.\nAmong his favorite TV shows in the 1950s was the \"Texaco Star Theatre\", and he began to mimic one of its regular host comedians, Milton Berle. Beatty learned to do a \"superb imitation of Berle and his routine\", said a friend, and often used Berle-type humor at home. His sister's memories of her brother include seeing him reading books by Eugene O'Neill or singing along to Al Jolson records. In \"Rules Don't Apply\" (2016), Beatty plays Howard Hughes, who is shown talking about and singing Jolson songs while flying his plane.\nMacLaine noted \u2014 on what made her brother want to become a filmmaker, sometimes writing, producing, directing and starring in his films: \"That's why he's more comfortable behind the camera\u00a0... He's in the total-control aspect. He has to have control over everything.\" Beatty doesn't deny that need; in speaking about his earliest parts, he said \"When I acted in films I used to come with suggestions about the script, the lighting, the wardrobe, and people used to say 'Waddya want, to produce the picture as well?' And I used to say that I supposed I did.\"\nBeatty played football at Washington-Lee High School in Arlington. Encouraged to act by the success of his sister, who established herself as a Hollywood star, he decided to work as a stagehand at the National Theatre in Washington, D.C. during the summer before his senior year. After graduation, he was reportedly offered ten college football scholarships, but turned them down to study liberal arts at Northwestern University (1954\u201355), where he joined the Sigma Chi fraternity. Beatty left college after his first year and moved to New York City to study acting under Stella Adler at the Stella Adler Studio of Acting. He often subsisted on peanut butter and jelly sandwiches, and worked odd jobs, including dishwasher, piano player, bricklayer's assistant, construction worker, and, relatively briefly, a sandhog.\nCareer.\n1957\u20131969: Early roles and breakthrough.\nBeatty started his career making appearances on television shows such as \"Studio One\" (1957), \"Kraft Television Theatre\" (1957), and \"Playhouse 90\" (1959). He was a semi-regular on \"The Many Loves of Dobie Gillis\" during its first season (1959\u20131960). His performance in William Inge's \"A Loss of Roses\" on Broadway garnered him a 1960 Tony Award nomination for Best Featured Actor in a Play and a 1960 Theatre World Award. It was his sole appearance on Broadway. Beatty enlisted in the California Air National Guard in February 1960 but was discharged the following year due to a physical disability. He remained on inactive duty after that time.\nBeatty made his film debut in Elia Kazan's \"Splendor in the Grass\" (1961) opposite Natalie Wood. The film was a major critical and box office success; Beatty was nominated for a Golden Globe Award for Best Actor and received the award for New Star of the Year \u2013 Actor. The film was also nominated for two Oscars, winning one.\nAuthor Peter Biskind points out that Kazan \"was the first in a string of major directors Beatty sought out, mentors or father figures from whom he wanted to learn.\" Years later during a Kennedy Center tribute to Kazan, Beatty told the audience that Kazan \"had given him the most important break in his career.\" Biskind adds that they \"were wildly dissimilar\u2014mentor vs. proteg\u00e9, director vs. actor, immigrant outsider vs. native son. Kazan was armed with the confidence born of age and success, while Beatty was virtually aflame with the arrogance of youth.\" Kazan recalls his impressions of Beatty:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Warren\u2014it was obvious the first time I saw him\u2014wanted it all and wanted it his way. Why not? He had the energy, a very keen intelligence, and more \"chutzpah\" than any Jew I've ever known. Even more than me. Bright as they come, intrepid, and with that thing all women secretly respect: complete confidence in his sexual powers, confidence so great that he never had to advertise himself, even by hints.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nMr. Beatty's career has had all the hallmarks of the conventional Hollywood golden boy. Ingratiating good looks, disarming youthfulness, a delight in the social life and no apparently strong feelings about his craft. This image has now been strikingly shattered with his emergence as a vividly individual actor and as a highly imaginative producer in the gangster ballad, \"Bonnie and Clyde\"\u00a0... At 28 [\"sic\"], the image of Warren Beatty, fun-loving playboy, is dead. Warren Beatty, a man of the cinema, is born.\n\u2014Gerald Garrett, syndicated movie columnist\nBeatty followed his initial film with Tennessee Williams' \"The Roman Spring of Mrs. Stone\" (1961), with Vivien Leigh and Lotte Lenya, directed by Jose Quintero; \"All Fall Down\" (1962), with Angela Lansbury, Karl Malden and Eva Marie Saint, directed by John Frankenheimer; \"Lilith\" (1963), with Jean Seberg and Peter Fonda, directed by Robert Rossen; \"Promise Her Anything\" (1964), with Leslie Caron, Bob Cummings and Keenan Wynn, directed by Arthur Hiller; \"Mickey One\" (1965), with Alexandra Stewart and Hurd Hatfield, directed by Arthur Penn; and \"Kaleidoscope\" (1966), with Susannah York and Clive Revill, directed by Jack Smight. In 1965, he formed a production company, Tatira, which he named for Kathlyn (whose nickname was \"Tat\") and Ira.\n1967\u20131977: Stardom and acclaim.\nAt age 30, Beatty produced and acted in \"Bonnie and Clyde\", released in 1967. He assembled a team that included the writers Robert Benton and David Newman, and the director Arthur Penn. Beatty selected most of the cast, including Faye Dunaway, Gene Hackman, Estelle Parsons, Gene Wilder and Michael J. Pollard. Beatty also oversaw the script and spearheaded the delivery of the film. Beatty chose Gene Hackman because he had acted with him in \"Lilith\" in 1964 and felt he was a \"great\" actor. Upon completion of the film, he credited Hackman with giving the \"most authentic performance in the movie, so textured and so moving\", recalls Dunaway. Beatty had been so impressed by Gene Wilder after seeing him in a play, that he cast him without an audition for what became Wilder's screen debut. Beatty already knew Pollard: \"Michael J. Pollard was one of my oldest friends\", Beatty said. \"I'd known him forever; I met him the day I got my first television show. We did a play together on Broadway.\"\n\"Bonnie and Clyde\" became a critical and commercial success, despite the early misgivings by studio head Jack Warner who put up the production money. Before filming began, Warner said, \"What does Warren Beatty think he's doing? How did he ever get us into this thing? This gangster stuff went out with Cagney.\" The film was nominated for ten Academy Awards, including Best Picture and Best Actor, and seven Golden Globe Awards, including Best Picture and Best Actor. Beatty was originally entitled to 40% of the film's profits but gave 10% to Penn, and his 30% share earned him more than US$6\u00a0million. After \"Bonnie and Clyde\", Beatty acted with Elizabeth Taylor in \"The Only Game in Town\" (1970), directed by George Stevens; \"McCabe &amp; Mrs. Miller\" (1971), directed by Robert Altman; and \"Dollars\" (1971), directed by Richard Brooks.\nIn 1972, Beatty produced a series of benefit concerts to help with publicity and fundraising in the George McGovern 1972 presidential campaign. Beatty first put together Four for McGovern at The Forum in the Los Angeles area, convincing Barbra Streisand, Carole King and James Taylor to perform. Streisand brought Quincy Jones and his Orchestra, and recorded the album \"Live Concert at the Forum\". Two weeks later, Beatty mounted another concert at the Cleveland Arena, in which Joni Mitchell and Paul Simon joined James Taylor. In June 1972, Beatty produced Together for McGovern at Madison Square Garden, reuniting Simon and Garfunkel, Nichols and May, and Peter, Paul and Mary, and featuring Dionne Warwick. With these productions, campaign manager Gary Hart said that Beatty had \"invented the political concert\". He had mobilized Hollywood celebrities for a political cause on a scale previously unseen, creating a new power dynamic.\nBeatty appeared in the films \"The Parallax View\" (1974), directed by Alan Pakula; and \"The Fortune\" (1975), directed by Mike Nichols. Taking greater control, Beatty produced, co-wrote and acted in \"Shampoo\" (1975), directed by Hal Ashby, which was nominated for four Academy Awards, including Best Original Screenplay, as well as five Golden Globe Awards, including Best Motion Picture and Best Actor.\n1978\u20131999: Directorial debut and expansion.\nIn 1978, Beatty directed, produced, wrote and acted in \"Heaven Can Wait\" (1978) (sharing co-directing credit with Buck Henry). The film was nominated for nine Academy Awards, including Best Picture, Director, Actor, and Adapted Screenplay. It also won three Golden Globe Awards, including Best Motion Picture and Best Actor.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nA film [\"Reds\"] of this scope and size demands incredible work from the director, and when you consider that Beatty also served as producer, writer and star, it's hard to believe so much work could come from one man. As a film, it's a marvelous view of America in the 1912\u201319 era, and Beatty brought some superior performances from a large cast.\n\u2014Joe Pollack, syndicated columnist\nBeatty's next film was \"Reds\" (1981), a historical epic about American Communist journalist John Reed who observed the Russian October Revolution \u2013 a project Beatty had begun researching and filming for as far back as 1970. It was a critical and commercial success, despite being an American film about an American Communist, made and released at the height of the Cold War. It received 12 Academy Award nominations \u2013 including four for Beatty (for Best Picture, Director, Actor, and Original Screenplay), winning three. Beatty won for Best Director, Maureen Stapleton won for Best Supporting Actress (playing anarchist Emma Goldman), and Vittorio Storaro won for Best Cinematography. The film received seven Golden Globe nominations, including Best Motion Picture, Director, Actor and Screenplay. Beatty won the Golden Globe Award for Best Director.\nFollowing \"Reds\", Beatty did not appear in a film for five years until 1987's \"Ishtar\", written and directed by Elaine May. Following severe criticism in press reviews by the new British studio chief David Puttnam just prior to its release, the film received mixed reviews and was unimpressive commercially. Puttnam attacked several other over-budget American films greenlighted by his predecessor and was fired shortly thereafter.\nUnder his second production company, Mulholland Productions, Beatty produced, directed and played the title role of comic strip-based detective Dick Tracy in the 1990 film of the same name. The film received positive reviews and was one of the highest-grossing films of the year. It received seven Academy Award nominations, winning three for Best Art Direction, Best Makeup, and Best Original Song. It also received four Golden Globe Award nominations, including Best Motion Picture.\nIn 1991, he produced and starred as the real-life gangster Bugsy Siegel in the critically acclaimed and commercially successful film \"Bugsy\", directed by Barry Levinson, which was nominated for ten Academy Awards, including Best Picture and Best Actor; it later won two of the awards for Best Art Direction and Best Costume Design. The film also received eight Golden Globe Award nominations, including Best Motion Picture and Best Actor, winning for Best Motion Picture. Beatty's next film, \"Love Affair\" (1994), directed by Glenn Gordon Caron, received mixed reviews and was a commercial failure.\nIn 1998, he wrote, produced, directed and starred in the political satire \"Bulworth\", which was critically acclaimed and nominated for the Academy Award for Best Original Screenplay. The film also received three Golden Globe Award nominations, for Best Motion Picture, Best Actor, and Best Screenplay. Beatty has appeared briefly in numerous documentaries, including ' (1991) and ' (2005).\n2000\u2013present.\nFollowing the poor box office performance of \"Town &amp; Country\" (2001), in which Beatty starred, he did not appear in or direct another film for 15 years. In May 2005, Beatty sued Tribune Media, claiming he still maintained the rights to \"Dick Tracy\". On March 25, 2011, U.S. District Judge Dean Pregerson ruled in Beatty's favor.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"Rules Don't Apply\" (2016)\nWho else is better equipped to understand the symbiosis between show business and politics and to assert that when a certain degree of wealth and power have been achieved, the ordinary rules of human behavior can be flouted?... Fools and idiots abound, but demonic, systemic evil does not. Mr. Beatty obviously loves Hollywood, which has been good to him.\n\u2014Stephen Holden, \"The New York Times\"\nIn 2010, Beatty directed and reprised his role as Dick Tracy in the 30-minute television special \"Dick Tracy Special\", which premiered on TCM. The metafictional special features an interview with Tracy and film critic and historian Leonard Maltin, the latter of whom discusses the history and creation of Tracy. Tracy talks about how he admired Ralph Byrd and Morgan Conway who portrayed him in several films, but says he didn't care much for Beatty's portrayal of him or his film. The production of the special allowed Beatty to retain the rights to the character. At CinemaCon In April 2016, Beatty reiterated that he intends to make a \"Dick Tracy\" sequel. In 2023, Beatty reprised the role of Tracy and played the character opposite himself in \"Dick Tracy Special: Tracy Zooms In\", a follow-up to the \"Dick Tracy Special\" that also aired on TCM. The 30-minute special, which mostly consists of a Zoom interview with Ben Mankiewicz and a returning Maltin in which Tracy criticizes aspects of the 1990 film adaptation to Beatty's face and suggests that a younger actor should take over the role of Tracy, concludes with Beatty and Tracy meeting in person and suggesting that Dick Tracy will return in the future.\nIn the mid-1970s, Beatty signed a contract with Warner Bros. to star in, produce, write, and possibly direct a film about Howard Hughes. The project was put on hold when Beatty began \"Heaven Can Wait\". Initially, Beatty planned to film the life story of John Reed and Hughes back-to-back, but as he was getting deeper into the project, he eventually focused primarily on the Reed film \"Reds\". In June 2011, it was reported that Beatty would produce, write, direct and star in a film about Hughes, focusing on an affair he had with a younger woman in the final years of his life. During this period, Beatty interviewed actors to star in his ensemble cast. He met with Andrew Garfield, Alec Baldwin, Owen Wilson, Justin Timberlake, Shia LaBeouf, Jack Nicholson, Evan Rachel Wood, Rooney Mara, and Felicity Jones. The film would eventually be released under the title \"Rules Don't Apply\", a fictionalized true-life romantic comedy set in 1958 Hollywood and Las Vegas. Beatty wrote, co-produced, directed and starred alongside Alden Ehrenreich and Lily Collins, with supporting cast including Baldwin, Annette Bening, Matthew Broderick, Candice Bergen, Ed Harris and Martin Sheen. Some have said that Beatty's film was 40 years in the making. It was released on November 23, 2016, and was Beatty's first film in 15 years. Rotten Tomatoes' \"Top Critics\" gave the film a 55% \"Rotten\" rating. The film was also a commercial disappointment.\nIn 2017, Beatty reunited with his \"Bonnie and Clyde\" co-star Faye Dunaway at the 89th Academy Awards, in celebration of the film's 50th anniversary. After being introduced by Jimmy Kimmel, they walked out onto the stage to present the Best Picture Award. They had been given the wrong envelope, leading Dunaway to incorrectly announce \"La La Land\" as Best Picture, instead of the actual winner, \"Moonlight\". This became a social media sensation, trending all over the world. In 2018, Beatty and Dunaway returned to present Best Picture at the 90th Academy Awards, earning a standing ovation upon their entrance, making jokes about the previous year's flub. Without incident, Beatty announced \"The Shape of Water\" as the winner.\nPersonal life.\nMarriage and relationships.\nBeatty has been married to actress Annette Bening since 1992. They have four children, including actress Ella Beatty.\nPrior to marrying Bening, Beatty was notorious for his large number of romantic relationships that received generous media coverage, having been linked to over 100 female celebrities. Cher stated that \"Warren has probably been with everybody I know.\" Leslie Caron said \"Warren always had girlfriends who resembled his sister [Shirley MacLaine]\". She thought he was too self-centered, and refused his marriage proposals. Carly Simon revealed in 2015 that the second verse of her 1972 song \"You're So Vain\" was about a previous romantic relationship with Beatty.\nActivism.\nBeatty was a founding board member of the Center for National Policy, a founding member of the Progressive Majority, a member of the Council on Foreign Relations, has served as the Campaign Chair for the Permanent Charities Committee, and has participated in the World Economic Forum at Davos, Switzerland. He served on the Board of Trustees at the Scripps Research Institute, and the Board of Directors of the Motion Picture and Television Fund Foundation. He was named Honorary Chairman of the Stella Adler Studio of Acting in 2004. Director and collaborator Arthur Penn described Beatty as \"the perfect producer\", adding, \"He makes everyone demand the best of themselves. Warren stays with a picture through editing, mixing, and scoring. He plain works harder than anyone else I have ever seen.\"\nPolitical views.\nBeatty is a longtime supporter of the Democratic Party. In 1972, he was part of the \"inner circle\" of Senator George McGovern's presidential campaign. He traveled extensively and was instrumental in organizing fundraising. Despite differences in politics, Beatty was also a friend of Republican Senator John McCain, with whom he agreed on the need for campaign finance reform. He was chosen by McCain to be one of the pallbearers at the senator's funeral in 2018.\nFilmography.\nFilm.\n Acting roles \nTelevision.\nActing roles\n Theatre \nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "62810", "revid": "20483999", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62810", "title": "Reelin", "text": "Large secreted extracellular matrix glycoprotein involved in neuronal migration\nReelin, encoded by the RELN gene, is a large secreted extracellular matrix glycoprotein that helps regulate processes of neuronal migration and positioning in the developing brain by controlling cell\u2013cell interactions. Besides this important role in early development, reelin continues to work in the adult brain. It modulates synaptic plasticity by enhancing the induction and maintenance of long-term potentiation. It also stimulates dendrite and dendritic spine development in the hippocampus, and regulates the continuing migration of neuroblasts generated in adult neurogenesis sites of the subventricular and subgranular zones. It is found not only in the brain but also in the liver, thyroid gland, adrenal gland, fallopian tube, breast and in comparatively lower levels across a range of anatomical regions.\nReelin has been suggested to be implicated in pathogenesis of several brain diseases. The expression of the protein has been found to be significantly lower in schizophrenia and psychotic bipolar disorder, but the cause of this observation remains uncertain, as studies show that psychotropic medication itself affects reelin expression. Moreover, epigenetic hypotheses aimed at explaining the changed levels of reelin expression are controversial. Total lack of reelin causes a form of lissencephaly. Reelin may also play a role in Alzheimer's disease, temporal lobe epilepsy and autism.\nReelin's name comes from the abnormal reeling gait of \"reeler\" mice, which were later found to have a deficiency of this brain protein and were homozygous for mutation of the RELN gene.\nThe primary phenotype associated with loss of reelin function is a failure of neuronal positioning throughout the developing central nervous system (CNS). The mice heterozygous for the reelin gene, while having little neuroanatomical defects, display the endophenotypic traits linked to psychotic disorders.\nDiscovery.\nMutant mice have provided insight into the underlying molecular mechanisms of the development of the central nervous system. Useful spontaneous mutations were first identified by scientists who were interested in motor behavior, and it proved relatively easy to screen littermates for mice that showed difficulties moving around the cage. A number of such mice were found and given descriptive names such as reeler, weaver, lurcher, nervous, and staggerer.\nThe \"reeler\" mouse was described for the first time in 1951 by D.S.Falconer in Edinburgh University as a spontaneous variant arising in a colony of at least mildly inbred snowy-white bellied mice stock in 1948. Histopathological studies in the 1960s revealed that the cerebellum of reeler mice is dramatically decreased in size while the normal laminar organization found in several brain regions is disrupted. The 1970s brought about the discovery of cellular layer inversion in the mouse neocortex, which attracted more attention to the reeler mutation.\nIn 1994, a new allele of reeler was obtained by means of insertional mutagenesis. This provided the first molecular marker of the locus, permitting the RELN gene to be mapped to chromosome 7q22 and subsequently cloned and identified. Japanese scientists at Kochi Medical School successfully raised antibodies against normal brain extracts in reeler mice, later these antibodies were found to be specific monoclonal antibodies for reelin, and were termed CR-50 (Cajal-Retzius marker 50). They noted that CR-50 reacted specifically with Cajal-Retzius neurons, whose functional role was unknown until then.\nThe Reelin receptors, apolipoprotein E receptor 2 (ApoER2) and very-low-density lipoprotein receptor (VLDLR), were discovered by Trommsdorff, Herz and colleagues, who initially found that the cytosolic adaptor protein Dab1 interacts with the cytoplasmic domain of LDL receptor family members. They then went on to show that the double knockout mice for ApoER2 and VLDLR, which both interact with Dab1, had cortical layering defects similar to those in reeler.\nThe downstream pathway of reelin was further clarified with the help of other mutant mice, including yotari and scrambler. These mutants have phenotypes similar to that of reeler mice, but without mutation in reelin. It was then demonstrated that the mouse \"disabled homologue 1\" (Dab1) gene is responsible for the phenotypes of these mutant mice, as Dab1 protein was absent (yotari) or only barely detectable (scrambler) in these mutants. Targeted disruption of Dab1 also caused a phenotype similar to that of reeler. Pinpointing the DAB1 as a pivotal regulator of the reelin signaling cascade started the tedious process of deciphering its complex interactions.\nThere followed a series of speculative reports linking reelin's genetic variation and interactions to schizophrenia, Alzheimer's disease, autism and other highly complex dysfunctions. These and other discoveries, coupled with the perspective of unraveling the evolutionary changes that allowed for the creation of human brain, highly intensified the research. As of 2008, some 13 years after the gene coding the protein was discovered, hundreds of scientific articles address the multiple aspects of its structure and functioning.\nTissue distribution and secretion.\nStudies show that reelin is absent from synaptic vesicles and is secreted via constitutive secretory pathway, being stored in Golgi secretory vesicles. Reelin's release rate is not regulated by depolarization, but strictly depends on its synthesis rate. This relationship is similar to that reported for the secretion of other extracellular matrix proteins.\nDuring the brain development, reelin is secreted in the cortex and hippocampus by the so-called Cajal-Retzius cells, Cajal cells, and Retzius cells. Reelin-expressing cells in the prenatal and early postnatal brain are predominantly found in the marginal zone (MZ) of the cortex and in the temporary subpial granular layer (SGL), which is manifested to the highest extent in human, and in the hippocampal stratum lacunosum-moleculare and the upper marginal layer of the dentate gyrus.\nIn the developing cerebellum, reelin is expressed first in the external granule cell layer (EGL), before the granule cell migration to the internal granule cell layer (IGL) takes place.\nHaving peaked just after the birth, the synthesis of reelin subsequently goes down sharply, becoming more diffuse compared with the distinctly laminar expression in the developing brain. In the adult brain, reelin is expressed by GABA-ergic interneurons of the cortex and glutamatergic cerebellar neurons, the glutamatergic stellate cells and fan cells in the superficial entorhinal cortex that are supposed to carry a role in encoding new episodic memories, and by the few extant Cajal-Retzius cells. Among GABAergic interneurons, reelin seems to be detected predominantly in those expressing calretinin and calbindin, like bitufted, horizontal, and Martinotti cells, but not parvalbumin-expressing cells, like chandelier or basket neurons. In the white matter, a minute proportion of interstitial neurons has also been found to stain positive for reelin expression.\nOutside the brain, reelin is found in adult mammalian blood, liver, pituitary pars intermedia, and adrenal chromaffin cells. In the liver, reelin is localized in hepatic stellate cells. The expression of reelin increases when the liver is damaged, and returns to normal following its repair.\nIn the eyes, reelin is secreted by retinal ganglion cells and is also found in the endothelial layer of the cornea. Just as in the liver, its expression increases after an injury has taken place.\nThe protein is also produced by the odontoblasts, which are cells at the margins of the dental pulp. Reelin is found here both during odontogenesis and in the mature tooth. Some authors suggest that odontoblasts play an additional role as sensory cells able to transduce pain signals to the nerve endings. According to the hypothesis, reelin participates in the process by enhancing the contact between odontoblasts and the nerve terminals.\nStructure.\nReelin is composed of 3461 amino acids with a relative molecular mass of . It also has serine protease activity. Murine RELN gene consists of 65 exons spanning approximately 450 kb. One exon, coding for only two amino acids near the protein's C-terminus, undergoes alternative splicing, but the exact functional impact of this is unknown. Two transcription initiation sites and two polyadenylation sites are identified in the gene structure.\nThe reelin protein starts with a signaling peptide 27 amino acids in length, followed by a region bearing similarity to F-spondin (the reeler domain), marked as \"SP\" on the scheme, and by a region unique to reelin, marked as \"H\". Next comes 8 repeats of 300\u2013350 amino acids. These are called \"reelin repeats\" and have an epidermal growth factor motif at their center, dividing each repeat into two subrepeats, \"A\" (the BNR/Asp-box repeat) and \"B\" (the EGF-like domain). Despite this interruption, the two subdomains make direct contact, resulting in a compact overall structure.\nThe final reelin domain contains a highly basic and short C-terminal region (CTR, marked \"+\") with a length of 32 amino acids. This region is highly conserved, being 100% identical in all investigated mammals. It was thought that CTR is necessary for reelin secretion, because the Orleans reeler mutation, which lacks a part of 8th repeat and the whole CTR, is unable to secrete the misshaped protein, leading to its concentration in cytoplasm. However, other studies have shown that the CTR is not essential for secretion itself, but mutants lacking the CTR were much less efficient in activating downstream signaling events.\nReelin is cleaved \"in vivo\" at two sites located after domains 2 and 6 \u2013 approximately between repeats 2 and 3 and between repeats 6 and 7, resulting in the production of three fragments. This splitting does not decrease the protein's activity, as constructs made of the predicted central fragments (repeats 3\u20136) bind to lipoprotein receptors, trigger Dab1 phosphorylation and mimic functions of reelin during cortical plate development. Moreover, the processing of reelin by embryonic neurons may be necessary for proper corticogenesis.\nFunction.\nThe primary functions of Reelin are the regulation of corticogenesis and neuronal cell positioning in the prenatal period, but the protein also continues to play a role in adults. Reelin is found in numerous tissues and organs, and one could roughly subdivide its functional roles by the time of expression and by localisation of its action.\nDuring development.\nA number of non-nervous tissues and organs express reelin during development, with the expression sharply going down after organs have been formed. The role of the protein here is largely unexplored, because the knockout mice show no major pathology in these organs. Reelin's role in the growing central nervous system has been extensively characterized. It promotes the differentiation of progenitor cells into radial glia and affects the orientation of its fibers, which serve as the guides for the migrating neuroblasts. The position of reelin-secreting cell layer is important, because the fibers orient themselves in the direction of its higher concentration. For example, reelin regulates the development of layer-specific connections in hippocampus and entorhinal cortex.\nMammalian corticogenesis is another process where reelin plays a major role. In this process the temporary layer called preplate is split into the marginal zone on the top and subplate below, and the space between them is populated by neuronal layers in the inside-out pattern. Such an arrangement, where the newly created neurons pass through the settled layers and position themselves one step above, is a distinguishing feature of mammalian brain, in contrast to the evolutionary older reptile cortex, in which layers are positioned in an \"outside-in\" fashion. When reelin is absent, like in the mutant reeler mouse, the order of cortical layering becomes roughly inverted, with younger neurons finding themselves to be unable to pass the settled layers. Subplate neurons fail to stop and invade the upper most layer, creating the so-called superplate in which they mix with Cajal-Retzius cells and some cells normally destined for the second layer.\nThere is no agreement concerning the role of reelin in the proper positioning of cortical layers. The original hypothesis, that the protein is a stop signal for the migrating cells, is supported by its ability to induce the dissociation, its role in asserting the compact granule cell layer in the hippocampus, and by the fact that migrating neuroblasts evade the reelin-rich areas. But an experiment in which murine corticogenesis went normally despite the malpositioned reelin secreting layer, and lack of evidence that reelin affects the growth cones and leading edges of neurons, caused some additional hypotheses to be proposed. According to one of them, reelin makes the cells more susceptible to some yet undescribed positional signaling cascade.\nReelin may also ensure correct neuronal positioning in the spinal cord: according to one study, location and level of its expression affects the movement of sympathetic preganglionic neurons.\nThe protein is thought to act on migrating neuronal precursors and thus controls correct cell positioning in the cortex and other brain structures. The proposed role is one of a dissociation signal for neuronal groups, allowing them to separate and go from tangential chain-migration to radial individual migration. Dissociation detaches migrating neurons from the glial cells that are acting as their guides, converting them into individual cells that can strike out alone to find their final position.\nReelin takes part in the developmental change of NMDA receptor configuration, increasing mobility of NR2B-containing receptors and thus decreasing the time they spend at the synapse. It has been hypothesized that this may be a part of the mechanism behind the \"NR2B-NR2A switch\" that is observed in the brain during its postnatal development. Ongoing reelin secretion by GABAergic hippocampal neurons is necessary to keep NR2B-containing NMDA receptors at a low level.\nIn adults.\nIn the adult nervous system, reelin plays an eminent role at the two most active neurogenesis sites, the subventricular zone and the dentate gyrus. In some species, the neuroblasts from the subventricular zone migrate in chains in the rostral migratory stream (RMS) to reach the olfactory bulb, where reelin dissociates them into individual cells that are able to migrate further individually. They change their mode of migration from tangential to radial, and begin using the radial glia fibers as their guides. There are studies showing that along the RMS itself the two receptors, ApoER2 and VLDLR, and their intracellular adapter DAB1 function independently of Reelin, most likely by the influence of a newly proposed ligand, thrombospondin-1. In the adult dentate gyrus, reelin provides guidance cues for new neurons that are constantly arriving to the granule cell layer from subgranular zone, keeping the layer compact.\nReelin also plays an important role in the adult brain by modulating cortical pyramidal neuron dendritic spine expression density, the branching of dendrites, and the expression of long-term potentiation as its secretion is continued diffusely by the GABAergic cortical interneurons those origin is traced to the medial ganglionic eminence.\nIn the adult organism the non-neural expression is much less widespread, but goes up sharply when some organs are injured. The exact function of reelin upregulation following an injury is still being researched.\nEvolutionary significance.\nReelin-DAB1 interactions could have played a key role in the structural evolution of the cortex that evolved from a single layer in the common predecessor of the amniotes into multiple-layered cortex of contemporary mammals. Research shows that reelin expression goes up as the cortex becomes more complex, reaching the maximum in the human brain in which the reelin-secreting Cajal-Retzius cells have significantly more complex axonal arbour. Reelin is present in the telencephalon of all the vertebrates studied so far, but the pattern of expression differs widely. For example, zebrafish have no Cajal-Retzius cells at all; instead, the protein is being secreted by other neurons. These cells do not form a dedicated layer in amphibians, and radial migration in their brains is very weak.\nAs the cortex becomes more complex and convoluted, migration along the radial glia fibers becomes more important for the proper lamination. The emergence of a distinct reelin-secreting layer is thought to play an important role in this evolution. There are conflicting data concerning the importance of this layer, and these are explained in the literature either by the existence of an additional signaling positional mechanism that interacts with the reelin cascade, or by the assumption that mice that are used in such experiments have redundant secretion of reelin compared with more localized synthesis in the human brain.\nCajal-Retzius cells, most of which disappear around the time of birth, coexpress reelin with the HAR1 gene that is thought to have undergone the most significant evolutionary change in humans compared with chimpanzee, being the most \"evolutionary accelerated\" of the genes from the human accelerated regions. There is also evidence of that variants in the DAB1 gene have been included in a recent selective sweep in Chinese populations.\nMechanism of action.\nReceptors.\nReelin's control of cell-cell interactions is thought to be mediated by binding of reelin to the two members of low density lipoprotein receptor gene family: VLDLR and the ApoER2. The two main reelin receptors seem to have slightly different roles: VLDLR conducts the stop signal, while ApoER2 is essential for the migration of late-born neocortical neurons. It also has been shown that the N-terminal region of reelin, a site distinct from the region of reelin shown to associate with VLDLR/ApoER2 binds to the alpha-3-beta-1 integrin receptor. The proposal that the protocadherin CNR1 behaves as a Reelin receptor has been disproven.\nAs members of lipoprotein receptor superfamily, both VLDLR and ApoER2 have in their structure an internalization domain called NPxY motif. After binding to the receptors reelin is internalized by endocytosis, and the N-terminal fragment of the protein is re-secreted. This fragment may serve postnatally to prevent apical dendrites of cortical layer II/III pyramidal neurons from overgrowth, acting via a pathway independent of canonical reelin receptors.\nReelin receptors are present on both neurons and glial cells. Furthermore, radial glia express the same amount of ApoER2 but being ten times less rich in VLDLR. beta-1 integrin receptors on glial cells play more important role in neuronal layering than the same receptors on the migrating neuroblasts.\nReelin-dependent strengthening of long-term potentiation is caused by ApoER2 interaction with NMDA receptor. This interaction happens when ApoER2 has a region coded by exon 19. ApoER2 gene is alternatively spliced, with the exon 19-containing variant more actively produced during periods of activity. According to one study, the hippocampal reelin expression rapidly goes up when there is need to store a memory, as demethylases open up the RELN gene. The activation of dendrite growth by reelin is apparently conducted through Src family kinases and is dependent upon the expression of Crk family proteins, consistent with the interaction of Crk and CrkL with tyrosine-phosphorylated Dab1. Moreover, a Cre-loxP recombination mouse model that lacks Crk and CrkL in most neurons was reported to have the reeler phenotype, indicating that Crk/CrkL lie between DAB1 and Akt in the reelin signaling chain.\nSignaling cascades.\nReelin activates the signaling cascade of Notch-1, inducing the expression of FABP7 and prompting progenitor cells to assume radial glial phenotype. In addition, corticogenesis \"in vivo\" is highly dependent upon reelin being processed by embryonic neurons, which are thought to secrete some as yet unidentified metalloproteinases that free the central signal-competent part of the protein. Some other unknown proteolytic mechanisms may also play a role. It is supposed that full-sized reelin sticks to the extracellular matrix fibers on the higher levels, and the central fragments, as they are being freed up by the breaking up of reelin, are able to permeate into the lower levels. It is possible that as neuroblasts reach the higher levels they stop their migration either because of the heightened combined expression of all forms of reelin, or due to the peculiar mode of action of the full-sized reelin molecules and its homodimers.\nThe intracellular adaptor DAB1 binds to the VLDLR and ApoER2 through an NPxY motif and is involved in transmission of Reelin signals through these lipoprotein receptors. It becomes phosphorylated by Src and Fyn kinases and apparently stimulates the actin cytoskeleton to change its shape, affecting the proportion of integrin receptors on the cell surface, which leads to the change in adhesion. Phosphorylation of DAB1 leads to its ubiquitination and subsequent degradation, and this explains the heightened levels of DAB1 in the absence of reelin. Such negative feedback is thought to be important for proper cortical lamination. Activated by two antibodies, VLDLR and ApoER2 cause DAB1 phosphorylation but seemingly without the subsequent degradation and without rescuing the reeler phenotype, and this may indicate that a part of the signal is conducted independently of DAB1.\nA protein having an important role in lissencephaly and accordingly called LIS1 (PAFAH1B1), was shown to interact with the intracellular segment of VLDLR, thus reacting to the activation of reelin pathway.\nComplexes.\nReelin molecules have been shown to form a large protein complex, a disulfide-linked homodimer. If the homodimer fails to form, efficient tyrosine phosphorylation of DAB1 \"in vitro\" fails. Moreover, the two main receptors of reelin are able to form clusters that most probably play a major role in the signaling, causing the intracellular adaptor DAB1 to dimerize or oligomerize in its turn. Such clustering has been shown in the study to activate the signaling chain even in the absence of Reelin itself. In addition, reelin itself can cut the peptide bonds holding other proteins together, being a serine protease, and this may affect the cellular adhesion and migration processes. Reelin signaling leads to phosphorylation of actin-interacting protein cofilin 1 at ser3; this may stabilize the actin cytoskeleton and anchor the leading processes of migrating neuroblasts, preventing their further growth.\nInteraction with Cdk5.\nCyclin-dependent kinase 5 (Cdk5), a major regulator of neuronal migration and positioning, is known to phosphorylate DAB1 and other cytosolic targets of reelin signaling, such as Tau, which could be activated also via reelin-induced deactivation of GSK3B, and NUDEL, associated with Lis1, one of the DAB1 targets. LTP induction by reelin in hippocampal slices fails in p35 knockouts. P35 is a key Cdk5 activator, and double p35/Dab1, p35/RELN, p35/ApoER2, p35/VLDLR knockouts display increased neuronal migration deficits, indicating a synergistic action of reelin \u2192 ApoER2/VLDLR \u2192 DAB1 and p35/p39 \u2192 Cdk5 pathways in the normal corticogenesis.\nPossible pathological role.\nLissencephaly.\nDisruptions of the RELN gene are considered to be the cause of the rare form of lissencephaly with cerebellar hypoplasia classed as a microlissencephaly called Norman-Roberts syndrome. The mutations disrupt splicing of the RELN mRNA transcript, resulting in low or undetectable amounts of reelin protein. The phenotype in these patients was characterized by hypotonia, ataxia, and developmental delay, with lack of unsupported sitting and profound mental retardation with little or no language development. Seizures and congenital lymphedema are also present. A novel chromosomal translocation causing the syndrome was described in 2007.\nSchizophrenia.\nReduced expression of reelin and its mRNA levels in the brains of schizophrenia sufferers had been reported in 1998 and 2000, and independently confirmed in postmortem studies of the hippocampus, cerebellum, basal ganglia, and cerebral cortex. The reduction may reach up to 50% in some brain regions and is coupled with reduced expression of GAD-67 enzyme, which catalyses the transition of glutamate to GABA. Blood levels of reelin and its isoforms are also altered in schizophrenia, along with mood disorders, according to one study. Reduced reelin mRNA prefrontal expression in schizophrenia was found to be the most statistically relevant disturbance found in the multicenter study conducted in 14 separate laboratories in 2001 by Stanley Foundation Neuropathology Consortium.\nEpigenetic hypermethylation of DNA in schizophrenia patients is proposed as a cause of the reduction, in agreement with the observations dating from the 1960s that administration of methionine to schizophrenic patients results in a profound exacerbation of schizophrenia symptoms in sixty to seventy percent of patients. The proposed mechanism is a part of the \"epigenetic hypothesis for schizophrenia pathophysiology\" formulated by a group of scientists in 2008 (D. Grayson; A. Guidotti; E. Costa). A postmortem study comparing a DNA methyltransferase (DNMT1) and Reelin mRNA expression in cortical layers I and V of schizophrenic patients and normal controls demonstrated that in the layer V both DNMT1 and Reelin levels were normal, while in the layer I DNMT1 was threefold higher, probably leading to the twofold decrease in the Reelin expression. There is evidence that the change is selective, and DNMT1 is overexpressed in reelin-secreting GABAergic neurons but not in their glutamatergic neighbours. Methylation inhibitors and histone deacetylase inhibitors, such as valproic acid, increase reelin mRNA levels, while L-methionine treatment downregulates the phenotypic expression of reelin.\nOne study indicated the upregulation of histone deacetylase HDAC1 in the hippocampi of patients. Histone deacetylases suppress gene promoters; hyperacetylation of histones was shown in murine models to demethylate the promoters of both reelin and GAD67. DNMT1 inhibitors in animals have been shown to increase the expression of both reelin and GAD67, and both DNMT inhibitors and HDAC inhibitors shown in one study to activate both genes with comparable dose- and time-dependence. As one study shows, S-adenosyl methionine (SAM) concentration in patients' prefrontal cortex is twice as high as in the cortices of non-affected people. SAM, being a methyl group donor necessary for DNMT activity, could further shift epigenetic control of gene expression.\nChromosome region 7q22 that harbours the \"RELN\" gene is associated with schizophrenia, and the gene itself was associated with the disease in a large study that found the polymorphism rs7341475 to increase the risk of the disease in women, but not in men. The women that have the single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) are about 1.4 times more likely to get ill, according to the study. Allelic variations of RELN have also been correlated with working memory, memory and executive functioning in nuclear families where one of the members suffers from schizophrenia. The association with working memory was later replicated. In one small study, nonsynonymous polymorphism Val997Leu of the gene was associated with left and right ventricular enlargement in patients.\nOne study showed that patients have decreased levels of one of reelin receptors, VLDLR, in the peripheral lymphocytes. After six months of antipsychotic therapy the expression went up; according to authors, peripheral VLRLR levels may serve as a reliable peripheral biomarker of schizophrenia.\nConsidering the role of reelin in promoting dendritogenesis, suggestions were made that the localized dendritic spine deficit observed in schizophrenia could be in part connected with the downregulation of reelin.\nReelin pathway could also be linked to schizophrenia and other psychotic disorders through its interaction with risk genes. One example is the neuronal transcription factor NPAS3, disruption of which is linked to schizophrenia and learning disability. Knockout mice lacking NPAS3 or the similar protein NPAS1 have significantly lower levels of reelin; the precise mechanism behind this is unknown. Another example is the schizophrenia-linked gene MTHFR, with murine knockouts showing decreased levels of reelin in the cerebellum. Along the same line, it is worth noting that the gene coding for the subunit NR2B that is presumably affected by reelin in the process of NR2B-&gt;NR2A developmental change of NMDA receptor composition, stands as one of the strongest risk gene candidates. Another shared aspect between NR2B and RELN is that they both can be regulated by the TBR1 transcription factor.\nThe heterozygous reeler mouse, which is haploinsufficient for the RELN gene, shares several neurochemical and behavioral abnormalities with schizophrenia and bipolar disorder, but the exact relevance of these murine behavioral changes to the pathophysiology of schizophrenia remains debatable.\nAs previously described, reelin plays a crucial role in modulating early neuroblast migration during brain development. Evidences of altered neural cell positioning in post-mortem schizophrenia patient brains and changes to gene regulatory networks that control cell migration suggests a potential link between altered reelin expression in patient brain tissue to disrupted cell migration during brain development. To model the role of reelin in the context of schizophrenia at a cellular level, olfactory neurosphere-derived cells were generated from the nasal biopsies of schizophrenia patients, and compared to cells from healthy controls. Schizophrenia patient-derived cells have reduced levels of reelin mRNA and protein when compared to healthy control cells, but expresses the key reelin receptors and DAB1 accessory protein. When grown \"in vitro\", schizophrenia patient-derived cells were unable to respond to reelin coated onto tissue culture surfaces; In contrast, cells derived from healthy controls were able to alter their cell migration when exposed to reelin. This work went on to show that the lack of cell migration response in patient-derived cells were caused by the cell's inability to produce enough focal adhesions of the appropriate size when in contact with extracellular reelin. More research into schizophrenia cell-based models are needed to look at the function of reelin, or lack of, in the pathophysiology of schizophrenia.\nBipolar disorder.\nDecrease in RELN expression with concurrent upregulation of DNMT1 is typical of bipolar disorder with psychosis, but is not characteristic of patients with major depression without psychosis, which could speak of specific association of the change with psychoses. One study suggests that unlike in schizophrenia, such changes are found only in the cortex and do not affect the deeper structures in psychotic bipolar patients, as their basal ganglia were found to have the normal levels of DNMT1 and subsequently both the reelin and GAD67 levels were within the normal range.\nIn a genetic study conducted in 2009, preliminary evidence requiring further DNA replication suggested that variation of the RELN gene (SNP rs362719) may be associated with susceptibility to bipolar disorder in women.\nAutism.\nAutism is a neurodevelopmental disorder that is generally believed to be caused by mutations in several locations, likely triggered by environmental factors. The role of reelin in autism is not decided yet.\nReelin was originally in 2001 implicated in a study finding associations between autism and a polymorphic GGC/CGG repeat preceding the 5' ATG initiator codon of the RELN gene in an Italian population. Longer triplet repeats in the 5' region were associated with an increase in autism susceptibility. However, another study of 125 multiple-incidence families and 68 single-incidence families from the subsequent year found no significant difference between the length of the polymorphic repeats in affected and controls. Although, using a family based association test larger \"reelin\" alleles were found to be transmitted more frequently than expected to affected children. An additional study examining 158 subjects with German lineage likewise found no evidence of triplet repeat polymorphisms associated with autism. And a larger study from 2004 consisting of 395 families found no association between autistic subjects and the CGG triplet repeat as well as the allele size when compared to age of first word.\nIn 2010 a large study using data from 4 European cohorts would find some evidence for an association between autism and the rs362780 RELN polymorphism.\nStudies of transgenic mice have been suggestive of an association, but not definitive.\nTemporal lobe epilepsy: granule cell dispersion.\nDecreased reelin expression in the hippocampal tissue samples from patients with temporal lobe epilepsy was found to be directly correlated with the extent of granule cell dispersion (GCD), a major feature of the disease that is noted in 45%\u201373% of patients. The dispersion, according to a small study, is associated with the RELN promoter hypermethylation. According to one study, prolonged seizures in a rat model of mesial temporal lobe epilepsy have led to the loss of reelin-expressing interneurons and subsequent ectopic chain migration and aberrant integration of newborn dentate granule cells. Without reelin, the chain-migrating neuroblasts failed to detach properly. Moreover, in a kainate-induced mouse epilepsy model, exogenous reelin had prevented GCD, according to one study.\nAlzheimer's disease.\nThe Reelin receptors ApoER2 and VLDLR belong to the LDL receptor gene family. All members of this family are receptors for Apolipoprotein E (ApoE). Therefore, they are often synonymously referred to as 'ApoE receptors'. ApoE occurs in 3 common isoforms (E2, E3, E4) in the human population. ApoE4 is the primary genetic risk factor for late-onset Alzheimer's disease. This strong genetic association has led to the proposal that ApoE receptors play a central role in the pathogenesis of Alzheimer's disease. According to one study, reelin expression and glycosylation patterns are altered in Alzheimer's disease. In the cortex of the patients, reelin levels were 40% higher compared with controls, but the cerebellar levels of the protein remain normal in the same patients. This finding is in agreement with an earlier study showing the presence of Reelin associated with amyloid plaques in a transgenic AD mouse model. A large genetic study of 2008 showed that RELN gene variation is associated with an increased risk of Alzheimer's disease in women. The number of reelin-producing Cajal-Retzius cells is significantly decreased in the first cortical layer of patients. Reelin has been shown to interact with amyloid precursor protein, and, according to one in-vitro study, is able to counteract the A\u03b2-induced dampening of NMDA-receptor activity. This is modulated by ApoE isoforms, which selectively alter the recycling of ApoER2 as well as AMPA and NMDA receptors.\nCancer.\nDNA methylation patterns are often changed in tumours, and the RELN gene could be affected: according to one study, in the pancreatic cancer the expression is suppressed, along with other reelin pathway components In the same study, cutting the reelin pathway in cancer cells that still expressed reelin resulted in increased motility and invasiveness. On the contrary, in prostate cancer the RELN expression is excessive and correlates with Gleason score. Retinoblastoma presents another example of RELN overexpression. This gene has also been seen recurrently mutated in cases of acute lymphoblastic leukaemia.&lt;ref name=\"doi.10.1038/nature10725\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;\nOther conditions.\nOne genome-wide association study indicates a possible role for RELN gene variation in otosclerosis, an abnormal growth of bone of the middle ear. In a statistical search for the genes that are differentially expressed in the brains of cerebral malaria-resistant versus cerebral malaria-susceptible mice, Delahaye et al. detected a significant upregulation of both RELN and DAB1 and speculated on possible protective effects of such over-expression. In 2020, a study reported a novel variant in \"RELN\" gene (S2486G) which was associated with ankylosing spondylitis in a large family. This suggested a potential insight into the pathophysiological involvement of reelin via inflammation and osteogenesis pathways in ankylosing spondylitis, and it could broaden the horizon toward new therapeutic strategies. A 2020 study from UT Southwestern Medical Center suggests circulating Reelin levels might correlate with MS severity and stages, and that lowering Reelin levels might be a novel way to treat MS.\nFactors affecting reelin expression.\nThe expression of reelin is controlled by a number of factors besides the sheer number of Cajal-Retzius cells. For example, TBR1 transcription factor regulates RELN along with other T-element-containing genes. On a higher level, increased maternal care was found to correlate with reelin expression in rat pups; such correlation was reported in hippocampus and in the cortex. According to one report, prolonged exposure to corticosterone significantly decreased reelin expression in murine hippocampi, a finding possibly pertinent to the hypothetical role of corticosteroids in depression. One small postmortem study has found increased methylation of RELN gene in the neocortex of persons past their puberty compared with those that had yet to enter the period of maturation.\nPsychotropic medication.\nAs reelin is being implicated in a number of brain disorders and its expression is usually measured posthumously, assessing the possible medication effects is important.\nAccording to the epigenetic hypothesis, drugs that shift the balance in favour of demethylation have a potential to alleviate the proposed methylation-caused downregulation of RELN and GAD67. In one study, clozapine and sulpiride but not haloperidol and olanzapine were shown to increase the demethylation of both genes in mice pretreated with l-methionine. Valproic acid, a histone deacetylase inhibitor, when taken in combination with antipsychotics, is proposed to have some benefits. But there are studies conflicting the main premise of the epigenetic hypothesis, and a study by Fatemi et al. shows no increase in RELN expression by valproic acid; that indicates the need for further investigation.\nFatemi et al. conducted the study in which RELN mRNA and reelin protein levels were measured in rat prefrontal cortex following a 21-day of intraperitoneal injections of the following drugs:\nIn 2009, Fatemi et al. published the more detailed work on rats using the same medication. Here, cortical expression of several participants (VLDLR, DAB1, GSK3B) of the signaling chain was measured besides reelin itself, and also the expression of GAD65 and GAD67.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "62811", "revid": "543434", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62811", "title": "Walter Matthau", "text": "American actor (1920\u20132000)\nWalter John Matthau (n\u00e9\u00a0Matthow; ; October 1, 1920 \u2013 July 1, 2000) was an American actor, known for his \"hangdog face\" and for playing world-weary characters. He starred in 10 films alongside his real-life friend Jack Lemmon, including \"The Odd Couple\" (1968) and \"Grumpy Old Men\" (1993). \"The New York Times\" called this \"one of Hollywood's most successful pairings\". Among other accolades, Matthau won an Academy Award, two BAFTA Awards, and two Tony Awards.\nOn Broadway, Matthau originated the role of Oscar Madison in \"The Odd Couple\" by playwright Neil Simon, for which he received a Tony Award for Best Leading Actor in a Play in 1965, his second after \"A Shot in the Dark\" in 1962. Matthau won the Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor for his performance in the Billy Wilder film \"The Fortune Cookie\" (1966), with further Best Actor nominations for \"Kotch\" (1971) and \"The Sunshine Boys\" (1975). He gained further recognition for his portrayal of the coach of a hapless little league team in the baseball comedy \"The Bad News Bears\" (1976).\nMatthau is also known for his performances in Elia Kazan's \"A Face in the Crowd\" (1957), the Elvis Presley vehicle \"King Creole\" (1958), Stanley Donen's romance \"Charade\" (1963), \"Fail Safe\" (1964), Gene Kelly's musical \"Hello, Dolly!\" (1969), Elaine May's screwball comedy \"A New Leaf\" (1971) and Herbert Ross's ensemble comedy \"California Suite\" (1978). He also starred in \"Plaza Suite\" (1971), \"Charley Varrick\" (1973), \"The Taking of Pelham One Two Three\" (1974), \"The Sunshine Boys\" (1975), \"House Calls\" (1978), \"Hopscotch\" (1980) and \"Dennis the Menace\" (1993).\nIn 1982, Matthau received a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame.\nEarly life.\nMatthau was born Walter John Matthow on October 1, 1920, in New York City's Lower East Side. He had two brothers, one older and one younger.\nMatthau's parents were Jewish; his mother, Rose (n\u00e9e Berolsky or Beransky), was a Lithuanian immigrant who worked in a garment factory, and his father, Milton Matuschansky then Matthow was a Ukrainian peddler and electrician from Kiev (now Kyiv, Ukraine). They got married in New York in 1917.\nA \"New York Times\" interview described his early years: \"When Matthau was 3 years old, and his older brother, Henry, was 5, his father ... lit out for parts unknown, leaving him and his brother to be raised by their mother... In 1935 ... Matthau learned of his father's death in Bellevue Hospital... During his childhood, Matthau ... lived in a succession of cold-water tenement apartments in the Ukrainian area of the Lower East Side ... being forced to vacate each apartment after only a few months because they'd got so hopelessly far behind in the rent that their landlord would have them evicted... Matthau ... hasn't the slightest nostalgia these days for his poverty-ridden childhood, 'It was a nightmare\u2014a dreadful, horrible, stinking nightmare,' he grimly remembers.\"\nAs part of a lifelong love of practical jokes, Matthau created the rumors that his middle name was \"Foghorn\" and his last name was originally \"Matuschanskayasky\" (under which Matthau is credited for a cameo role in the film \"Earthquake\").\nAs a young boy, Matthau attended a Jewish non-profit sleepaway camp, Tranquillity Camp, where he began acting in the shows that the camp staged on Saturday nights. Matthau also attended Surprise Lake Camp. His high school was Seward Park High School. Matthau acted in several Yiddish theater productions and worked for a short time as a concession stand cashier in the Yiddish Theatre District.\nWorld War II.\nDuring World War II, Matthau saw active service as a radioman-gunner on a Consolidated B-24 Liberator bomber in the U.S. Army Air Forces with the Eighth Air Force in England. He was with the same 453rd Bombardment Group as James Stewart. While based in England at RAF Old Buckenham, Norfolk, Matthau flew missions to continental Europe during the Battle of the Bulge. He ended the war with the rank of Staff Sergeant and returned home to America for demobilization at the war's end, intent on pursuing a career as an actor.\nActing career.\nEarly work.\nMatthau parlayed a childhood job selling soda in Yiddish theaters into appearing in their productions.\nMatthau was trained in acting at the Dramatic Workshop of The New School with German director Erwin Piscator. Matthau often joked that his best early review came in a play where he posed as a derelict. One reviewer said, \"The others just looked like actors in make-up, Walter Matthau really looks like a skid row bum!\" Matthau was a respected stage actor for years in such fare as \"Will Success Spoil Rock Hunter?\" and \"A Shot in the Dark\", for his performance in the latter winning the 1962 Tony Award for Best Featured Actor in a Play.\nMatthau played the gym teacher, Coach Burr, in the pilot episode of \"Mister Peepers\" (1952), credited as David Tyrell. He made his motion picture debut as a whip-wielding bad guy in \"The Kentuckian\" (1955) opposite Burt Lancaster. Matthau played a villain in \"King Creole\" (1958), where he gets beaten up by Elvis Presley. Around the same time, Matthau made \"Ride a Crooked Trail\" with Audie Murphy, and \"Onionhead\" (both 1958) starring Andy Griffith; the latter a box-office flop. Matthau and Griffith appeared previously in the critical and box-office hit \"A Face in the Crowd\" (1957), directed by Elia Kazan. Matthau appeared with James Mason in \"Bigger Than Life\" (1956), directed by Nicholas Ray. Matthau directed a low-budget film called \"The Gangster Story\" (1960) and played a sympathetic sheriff in \"Lonely Are the Brave\" (1962), which starred Kirk Douglas. Matthau appeared in the Cary Grant-Audrey Hepburn crime thriller \"Charade\" (1963).\nOn television, Matthau appeared twice on \"Naked City\", as well as in four installments of \"Alfred Hitchcock Presents\". He appeared eight times between 1962 and 1964 on \"The DuPont Show of the Week\" and as Franklin Gaer in an episode of \"Dr. Kildare\" (\"Man Is a Rock\", 1964).\n1960s.\nComedies were rare in Matthau's work at that time. He was cast in a number of stark dramas, such as \"Fail Safe\" (1964), where he portrayed Pentagon adviser Dr. Groeteschele, who urges an all-out nuclear attack on the Soviet Union in response to an accidental transmission of an attack signal to U.S. Air Force bombers. Neil Simon cast Matthau in the play \"The Odd Couple\" in 1965, where he played slovenly sportswriter Oscar Madison, opposite Art Carney as Felix Ungar. Matthau reprised the role in the film version, with Jack Lemmon as Felix Unger. He played detective Ted Casselle in the Hitchcockian thriller \"Mirage\" (1965), directed by Edward Dmytryk.\nMatthau achieved great success in the comedy film \"The Fortune Cookie\" (1966) as shyster lawyer William H. \"Whiplash Willie\" Gingrich, starring yet again opposite Lemmon; the first of many collaborations with Billy Wilder, and a role that would earn him an Oscar for Best Supporting Actor. Filming had to be placed on a five-month hiatus after Matthau had a serious heart attack. He gave up his three-pack-a-day smoking habit as a result. Matthau appeared during the Oscar telecast shortly after having been injured in a bicycle accident; nonetheless, he scolded actors who had not attended the ceremony, especially the other major award winners that night: Paul Scofield, Elizabeth Taylor and Sandy Dennis. Broadway-hits-cum-films continued to cast Matthau in lead roles such as \"Hello, Dolly!\" and \"Cactus Flower\" (both 1969); for the latter, Goldie Hawn received an Oscar for Best Supporting Actress.\n1970s.\nIn the 1970s, Matthau began to appear in more comedy films, including the black comedy \"A New Leaf\" (1971) and the comedy-drama \"Pete 'n' Tillie\" (1972). Oscar nominations would come his way again for \"Kotch\" (1971), directed by Lemmon, and \"The Sunshine Boys\" (1975). The latter was another adaptation of a Neil Simon stage play\u2014this time about a pair of former vaudeville stars. For the latter, Matthau won a Golden Globe Award for Best Actor in a Musical or Comedy, tying with his co-star George Burns. Meanwhile, their other co-star, Richard Benjamin, won a supporting award.\nMatthau played three roles in the film version of Simon's \"Plaza Suite\" (1971), and was in the cast of its followup \"California Suite\" (1978). He starred in \"House Calls\" (1978), sharing the screen with Glenda Jackson and his \"Odd Couple\" stage partner, Carney.\nMatthau starred in three crime dramas in the mid-1970s: as a detective investigating a mass murder on a bus in \"The Laughing Policeman\" (1973), as a bank robber on the run from the Mafia and the law in \"Charley Varrick\" (also 1973) and as a New York transit official in the action-thriller \"The Taking of Pelham One Two Three\" (1974). He also reunited with Lemmon in the black comedy-drama \"The Front Page\" (1974). A change of pace about misfits and delinquents on a Little League baseball team turned out to be a solid hit when Matthau starred as coach Morris Buttermaker in the comedy \"The Bad News Bears\" (1976).\n1980s.\nMatthau produced some films with Universal Pictures, with his son Charlie also becoming involved in his production company, Walcar Productions, but the only film that he produced was the third remake of \"Little Miss Marker\" (1980).\nMatthau was nominated for the Golden Globe Award for Best Actor in a Motion Picture \u2013 Musical or Comedy for his portrayal of former CIA field operative Miles Kendig in the elaborate spy comedy \"Hopscotch\" (1980), reuniting with Jackson. The original script, a dark work based on the novel of the same name, was rewritten and transformed into a comedy to play to Matthau's specific talents. The rewrite was a condition of his participation. Matthau participated in the script revisions, and the film's director Ronald Neame observed that Matthau's contributions entitled him to screen credit, but that was never pursued. Matthau wrote the scene in which Kendig and Isobel\u2014apparently strangers\u2014meet in a Salzburg restaurant and strike up a conversation about wine that ends in a passionate kiss. He also wrote the last scene of the film, where Kendig, presumed to be dead, disguises himself as a Sikh to enter a bookshop. Matthau also helped to choose appropriate compositions by Mozart that made up much of the score. TCM's Susan Doll observes that \"\"Hopscotch\" could be considered the end of a long career peak or the beginning of (Matthau's) slide downhill, depending on the viewpoint\", as character parts and supporting parts became the only thing available to an actor his age.\nThe next year, Matthau was nominated again for the Golden Globe Award for Best Actor in a Motion Picture \u2013 Musical or Comedy for his portrayal of the fictional Associate justice Daniel Snow in \"First Monday in October\" (1981), about the (then-fictional) first woman (played by Jill Clayburgh) to serve on the Supreme Court of the United States. The film was scheduled for release in early 1982, but when Sandra Day O'Connor was appointed to the high court in July, 1981, the release date was moved up to August, 1981. \"The New York Times\" critic Janet Maslin disliked the film but praised Matthau's performance.\nMatthau reunited with Lemmon in the comedy \"Buddy Buddy\" (1981), the final film from Billy Wilder. He portrayed Herbert Tucker in another Neil Simon comedy \"I Ought to Be in Pictures\" (1982) with Ann-Margret and Dinah Manoff. Matthau co-starred with Robin Williams in the 1983 dark comedy film \"The Survivors\". Although initially a box-office dud that barely grossed its budget, the film became a cult classic via repeated broadcasts on cable TV in the following years. He took the leading role of Captain Thomas Bartholomew Red in Roman Polanski's swashbuckler \"Pirates\" (1986).\nDuring the 1980s and 1990s, Matthau served on the advisory board of the National Student Film Institute.\n1990s.\nMatthau narrated the \"Doctor Seuss Video Classics: How the Grinch Stole Christmas!\" (1992), and played the role of George Wilson in the film \"Dennis the Menace\" (1993). In a change of pace, he played Albert Einstein in the film \"I.Q.\" (1994) starring Tim Robbins and Meg Ryan.\nMatthau's partnership with Jack Lemmon became one of the most enduring collaborations in Hollywood. They became lifelong friends after making \"The Fortune Cookie\" and would make a total of 10 movies together\u201411 counting \"Kotch\", in which Lemmon has a cameo as a sleeping bus passenger. Apart from their many comedies, the two appeared (although they did not share any scenes) in the Oliver Stone drama \"JFK\" (1991). Matthau and Lemmon reunited for the comedy \"Grumpy Old Men\" (1993), co-starring Ann-Margret, and its sequel \"Grumpier Old Men\" (1995), co-starring Sophia Loren. This led to further pairings late in their careers, including appearances in \"The Grass Harp\" (1995), \"Out to Sea\" (1997) and a Simon-scripted sequel to their much earlier success, \"The Odd Couple II\" (1998).\n\"Hanging Up\" (2000), directed by Diane Keaton, was Matthau's final appearance onscreen.\nPersonal life.\nMarriage and children.\nIn 1948, Matthau married Geraldine \"Geri\" Grace Johnson. Their son, David, was born in 1953, and their daughter, Jenny, was born in 1956. The couple divorced in 1959.\nMatthau married Carol Marcus in 1959. She died in 2003. Their son, Charles (Charlie) Matthau, was born in 1962. Charlie is a director and directed his father in several movies.\nGambling.\nIn 1971, Matthau discussed his longtime compulsive gambling with a writer for \"The New York Times\". In 1961, while doing a two-week television shoot in Florida for \"Tallahassee 7000\", Matthau had lost $183,000 (), mostly betting on spring-training baseball games. It took him six years to pay off his \"Mafia-connected bookmaker\", and Matthau somewhat curtailed his betting in the 1970s, although daily racetrack losses of $400\u2013500 were common.\nHealth problems and death.\nA heavy smoker, Matthau had a heart attack in 1966 while filming \"The Fortune Cookie\", the first of at least three in his lifetime. Matthau later quit smoking.\nIn 1976, 10 years after his first heart attack, Matthau underwent heart-bypass surgery. After working in Minnesota for \"Grumpy Old Men\" (1993), he was hospitalized for double pneumonia. In December 1995, Matthau had a colon tumor removed; it was deemed to be benign. He was hospitalized in May 1999 for more than two months, again owing to pneumonia.\nIn the late evening of June 30, 2000, Matthau had a heart attack at his home and was taken by ambulance to the St. John's Health Center in Santa Monica, where he died a few hours later at 1:42\u00a0a.m. on July 1 at age 79. Matthau's death certificate lists the causes of death as \"cardiac arrest\" and \"atherosclerotic heart disease\", with \"end stage renal disease\" and \"atrial fibrillation\" as significant contributing factors. He is buried at Westwood Village Memorial Park Cemetery in Los Angeles. A celebration of his life was held on August 20 at the Directors Guild theater. Matthau's wife, Carol Marcus, died in 2003, and her body is interred in the same plot as her husband.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "62812", "revid": "1215071786", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62812", "title": "Neuropil", "text": "Type of area in the nervous system\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Infobox_microanatomy/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNeuropil (or \"neuropile\") is any area in the nervous system composed of mostly unmyelinated axons, dendrites and glial cell processes that forms a synaptically dense region containing a relatively low number of cell bodies. The most prevalent anatomical region of neuropil is the brain which, although not completely composed of neuropil, does have the largest and highest synaptically concentrated areas of neuropil in the body. For example, the neocortex and olfactory bulb both contain neuropil.\nWhite matter, which is mostly composed of myelinated axons (hence its white color) and glial cells, is generally not considered to be a part of the neuropil.\nNeuropil (pl. neuropils) comes from the Greek: \"neuro\", meaning \"tendon, sinew; nerve\" and \"pilos\", meaning \"felt\". The term's origin can be traced back to the late 19th century.\nLocation.\nNeuropil has been found in the following regions: outer neocortex layer, barrel cortex, inner plexiform layer and outer plexiform layer, posterior pituitary, and glomeruli of the cerebellum. These are all found in humans, with the exception of the barrel cortex, but many species have counterparts similar to our own regions of neuropil. However, the degree of similarity depends upon the composition of neuropil being compared. The concentrations of neuropil within certain regions are important to determine because simply using the proportions of the different postsynaptic elements does not verify the necessary, conclusive evidence. Comparing the concentrations can determine whether or not proportions of different postsynaptic elements contacted a particular axonal pathway. Relative concentrations could signify a reflection of different postsynaptic elements in the neuropil or show that axons sought out and formed synapses only with specific postsynaptic elements.\nFunction.\nSince neuropils have a diverse role in the nervous system, it is difficult to define a certain overarching function for all neuropils. For instance, the olfactory glomeruli function as sorts of way-stations for the information flowing from the olfactory receptor neurons to the olfactory cortex. The inner plexiform layer of the retina is a little more complex. The bipolar cells post-synaptic to either rods or cones are either depolarized or hyperpolarized depending on whether the bipolar cells have sign-inverting synapses or a sign-conserving synapses.\nEfficiency in the brain.\nNeurons are necessary for all connections made in the brain, and thus can be thought of as the \"wires\" of the brain. As in computing, an entity is most efficient when its wires are optimized; therefore, a brain which has undergone millions of years of natural selection would be expected to have optimized neural circuitry. To have an optimized neural system it must balance four variables\u2014it must \"minimize conduction delays in axons, passive cable attenuation in dendrites, and the length of 'wire' used to construct circuits\" as well as \"maximize the density of synapses\", essentially optimizing the neuropil. Researchers at Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory formulated the optimal balance of the four variables and calculated the optimal ratio of axon plus dendrite volume (i.e. the \"wire\" volume or neuropil volume) to total volume of grey matter. The formula predicted an optimal brain with 3/5 (60%) of its volume occupied by neuropil. Experimental evidence taken from three mouse brains agrees with this result. The \"fraction of wire is 0.59 \u00b1 0.036 for layer IV of visual cortex, 0.62 \u00b1 0.055 for layer Ib of piriform cortex, and 0.54 \u00b1 0.035 for the stratum radiatum of hippocampal field CA1. The overall average is 0.585 \u00b1 0.043; these values are not statistically different from the optimal 3/5.\"\nClinical significance.\nSchizophrenia.\nIt has been shown that a certain protein synaptophysin is lost in people with schizophrenia that causes dendrites and spines to deteriorate in the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, a part of the neocortex, which plays a key role in information processing, attention, memory, orderly thinking and planning which are all functions that deteriorate in people with schizophrenia. The deterioration of the neuropil in this cortex has been proposed as a contributor to schizophrenia pathophysiology.\nAlzheimer's disease.\nAlzheimer's is a neuropathological disease that is hypothesized to result from the loss of dendritic spines and/or deformation of these spines in the patient's frontal and temporal cortices. Researchers have tied the disease to a decrease in the expression of drebrin, a protein thought to play a role in long-term potentiation, meaning the neurons would lose plasticity and have trouble forming new connections. This malfunction presents itself in the form of helical filaments that tangle together in the neuropil. This same phenomenon seems to occur in the elderly as well.\nOther animals.\nOther mammals.\nA significant non-human area of neuropil is the barrel cortex found in mammals with whiskers (e.g. cats, dogs and rodents); each \"barrel\" in the cortex is a region of neuropil where the input from a single whisker terminates.\nArthropods.\nThe optic lobe of arthropods and the ganglia of the arthropod brain as well as the ganglia in the ventral nerve cord are unmyelinated and therefore belong to the class of neuropils.\nResearch.\nResearch has focused on where neuropil is found in many different species in order to unveil the range of significance it has and possible functions.\nRecent studies.\nIn chimpanzees and humans the neuropil provides a proxy measure of total connectivity within a local region because it is composed mostly of dendrites, axons, and synapses.\nIn insects the central complex plays an important role in higher-order brain function. The neuropil in \"Drosophila\" Ellipsoid is composed of four substructures. Each section has been observed in several insects as well as the influence it has on behavior, however the exact function of this neuropil has proven elusive. Abnormal walking behavior and flight behavior are controlled primarily by the central complex and genetic mutations that disrupt the structure support the hypothesis that the central complex neuropil is a site of behavioral control. However, only specific components of the behavior were affected with the genetic mutations. For example, basic leg coordination of walking was normal, whereas speed, activity, and turning were affected. These observations suggest that the central complex not only plays a role in locomotor behavior, but fine tuning as well. There is also additional evidence that the neuropil may function in olfactory associative learning and memory.\nResearch has shown reduced neuropil in area 9 of schizophrenics, as well as consistent findings of reduced spine density in layer III pyramidal neurons of the temporal and frontal cortices.\nCitations.\n \"This article incorporates text in the public domain from the 20th edition of\" Gray's Anatomy \"(1918)\"\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "62815", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62815", "title": "Department of Energy", "text": ""}
{"id": "62820", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62820", "title": "478 BC", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 478 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Mamercus and Structus (or, less frequently, year 276 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 478 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy place.\nChina.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "62822", "revid": "43296941", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62822", "title": "Bennelong", "text": "Indigenous Australian cross-cultural pioneer\nWoollarawarre Bennelong (c. 1764 \u2013 3 January 1813) was a senior man of the Eora, an Aboriginal Australian people of the Port Jackson area, at the time of the first British settlement in Australia. Bennelong served as an interlocutor between the Eora and the British, both in the colony of New South Wales and in Great Britain. He was the first Aboriginal Australian to visit Europe and return.\nIn 1789, he was abducted on the authority of Governor Arthur Phillip, who hoped to use Bennelong to establish official dialogue with the Eora people. However, Bennelong escaped after several months. A tenuous relationship subsequently developed between Bennelong and the colonists, with various attacks and reconciliations occurring throughout their ensuing association with each other. Despite this friction, he came to be a significant ambassador of the Eora.\nBennelong was taken to Great Britain in 1792 and he resided in London for three years. Eventually his health deteriorated and in February 1795 he was returned to Australia. Back in his homeland, Bennelong was rejected from British colonial society and branded an alcoholic \"savage\" for vigorously maintaining his connection to a traditional lifestyle. He became a respected leader of the surviving remnants of the various local Indigenous clans in the Sydney region. He died at Kissing Point in 1813, aged about 48, and was buried in James Squire's orchard.\nBackground.\nWoollarawarre Bennelong, the son of Goorah-Goorah and Gagolh, was born circa 1764 on the south shore of the Parramatta River. He was a member of the Wangal clan, connected with the south side of the Parramatta River, having close ties with the Wallumedegal clan, on the west side of the river, and the Burramattagal clan near today's Parramatta. He had several sisters, Wariw\u00e9ar, Karangarang, W\u00fbrrgan and Mun\u00e2nguri, who married important men from nearby clans, thereby creating political links for their brother. The island of Memel in Port Jackson was part of his personal property, inherited through his father.\nHe had five names, given at different times during the various ritual inductions he underwent. The other four are given as Wolarrebarre, Wogultrowe, Boinba, and Bundabunda. According to British officer Watkin Tench, Bennelong preferred to be called Woollarawarre.\nCapture and life in the British settlement.\nBennelong was brought to the settlement at Sydney Cove in November 1789 by order of the governor, Arthur Phillip, who was under instructions from King George III to establish relationships with the indigenous populations. At that time, the Eora conscientiously avoided contact with the newcomers, and in desperation Phillip resorted to kidnapping. A man named Arabanoo was captured, but like many other Aboriginal people near the settlement, he died in a smallpox epidemic a few months later in May 1789. Bennelong was captured with Colebee on 25 November 1789 as part of Phillip's plan to learn the language and customs of the local people. William Bradley painted a watercolour of the occasion and described the capture in his journal as the \"most unpleasant service\" he was ever ordered to undertake. At the time of his capture, Bennelong's age was estimated at 25, and he was described as being \"of good stature, stoutly made\", with a \"bold, intrepid countenance\". His appetite was such that \"the ration of a week was insufficient to have kept him for a day\", and \"love and war seemed his favourite pursuits\".\nColebee soon escaped, but Bennelong stayed in the settlement for several months, then slipped away. Four months later, he was sighted by officers in Manly Cove, and Phillip was notified. The governor hurried over and approached Bennelong, who was with a group of roughly 20 warriors. Phillip took a gesture by Bennelong towards another Aboriginal man, Willemering, as an invitation for an introduction, and extended his hand to the latter, who responded by spearing Phillip in the shoulder. A scuffle broke out, but the officers managed to assist the governor away to safety where the spear was removed and a full recovery followed.\nWillemering was a kurdaitcha of the Kayimai clan from the area now known as Balgowlah. It has been suggested by some historians that he had been enlisted by Bennelong to carry out payback for the latter's sense of personal injury on having been kidnapped. In this view, some form of atonement was necessary as a prelude to any further arrangements with the colonists. Phillip ordered that no retaliation take place and Bennelong, some days later, turned up to visit him as he was recovering from the wound, and their relationship was renewed. In a gesture of kinship, Bennelong bestowed upon Phillip the Aboriginal name Wolawaree and learned to speak English. In 1790, Phillip built a hut for him on what became known as Bennelong Point (now occupied by the Sydney Opera House). \nHowever, their association remained tense after Bennelong's friend, Bangai, was shot dead near Dawe's Point by soldiers in December 1790 for his supposed role in stealing potatoes. Bennelong led a counter-raid by robbing settlers and demanded Phillip to tell him the name of the soldier who killed Bangai. Phillip still wanted to maintain the friendship and by February 1791, Bennelong and the governor had again reached a reconciliation.\nVisit to England.\nBennelong and another Aboriginal man, named Yemmerrawanne (or Imeerawanyee), travelled with Phillip on \"Atlantic\" to England, boarding on 10 December 1792. Many historians have claimed that they were presented to King George III, but there is no direct evidence that this occurred. Soon after their arrival in England, they were hurriedly made clothes that would have been suitable for their presentation to the King.\nJack Brook reconstructs some of their activities from the expense claims lodged with the government. They visited St Paul's Cathedral and the Tower of London. A boat was hired, and they went bathing; they also went to the theatre. While in London, they resided with Henry Waterhouse, and when Yemmerrawanne became sick, they moved to Eltham and resided at the house of Edward Kent, where they were tended by Mr and Mrs Phillips, and met Lord Sydney.\nYemmerrawanne died while in Britain after a serious chest infection, and Bennelong's health deteriorated. He returned to Sydney in February 1795 on , the ship that took surgeon George Bass to the colony for the first time. Bass nursed him back to health and in exchange Bennelong taught him a sufficient amount of Dharug to enable the former to communicate with the indigenous Eora on arriving in Sydney. Of the 2 years and 10 months he spent abroad, 18 months had been passed either at sea or on board ships in a dock.\nReturn to New South Wales.\nBennelong arrived back in Sydney on 7 September 1795. A letter he had drafted in 1796 to Mr and Mrs Phillip, thanking Mrs Phillip for caring for him in England and asking for stockings and a handkerchief, is the first known text written in English by an Indigenous Australian. \nWithin a short time, he took to the bush, reappearing only occasionally to dine at the servants' table in Governor King's residence. Many colonial reports complain of his refusal to rejoin \"polished society\". He participated in fighting contests over women and officiated at traditional ceremonies, including the last recorded initiation ceremony in Port Jackson in 1797. Bennelong also developed an alcohol problem following his return to Australia.\nSpearing of a British soldier.\nIn December 1797, factional feuding between Bennelong's associates and their opponents resulted in Bennelong's colleague, Colebee, killing an Aboriginal man in a dishonourable fashion. Colebee was subsequently punished in public according to cultural law, but when British soldiers interfered to protect Colebee, Bennelong became enraged. He threw a spear at the soldiers, severely wounding one after the weapon pierced right through the man's abdomen. Bennelong would have been instantly killed for this action had not the provost marshal Thomas Smyth, interceded and dragged Bennelong away. Bennelong was beaten on the head with the butt of a musket and incarcerated for a night. On being released, he threatened the white people and left the settlement.\nAfter this incident, Bennelong became a disreputable person amongst the colonists, being described as \"a most insolent and troublesome savage\" whose retaliatory action of spearing a soldier had \"rendered him more hateful than any of his countrymen\". Bennelong also apparently expressed a desire \"of spearing the governor whenever he saw him\".\nLeader of the Kissing Point clan.\nDespite the disparaging view the colonists held toward Bennelong, by the early 1800s he had become the leader of a 100-strong group of Aboriginal people, remnants of the dispossessed Port Jackson clans, living on the north side of the Parramatta River to the west of Kissing Point in Wallumedagal country. He was held in respect as an authoritative elder not only by his own group, but also by the remaining Kamaygal and Gweagal people of Botany Bay.\nDeath.\nHe died on 3 January 1813 at Kissing Point on the Parramatta River in Sydney and was buried in the orchard of the brewer James Squire, a friend to Bennelong and his clan. His death notice in the \"Sydney Gazette\" was dismissive, insisting that \"he was a thorough savage, not to be warped from the form and character that nature gave him\"\u2014which reflected the feelings of some in Sydney's white society that Bennelong had abandoned his role as ambassador in his last years, and also reflects the deteriorating relations between the two groups as more and more land was cleared and fenced for farming, and the hardening attitudes of many colonists towards \"savages\" who were not willing to give up their country and become labourers and servants useful to the colonists.\nBennelong's people mourned his death with a traditional highly ritualised battle for which about two hundred people gathered. As a profound mark of respect, Colebee's nephew Nanbaree, who died in 1821, asked to be buried with Bennelong. Bennelong's final wife, Boorong, was also interred in the same gravesite. Bidgee Bidgee, who led the Kissing Point clan for twenty years after Bennelong's death, asked to be buried with Bennelong as well, but there is no record of his death or of where he is buried.\nOn 20 March 2011, Peter Mitchell of Macquarie University announced that he had located Bennelong's grave site under a residential property at present-day 25 Watson Street, Putney, New South Wales, and stated that local Aboriginal authorities would be consulted about possible further exploration of the site. In November 2018, the New South Wales Government announced that it had bought the house and would turn the site into a public memorial to Bennelong, together with a museum commemorating the impact of British colonisation on the Aboriginal people of the Sydney area.\nFamily.\nBennelong had several wives. The first, whose name is not known, died prior to his capture, probably from smallpox in 1789. He then married the widowed Cammeray clanswoman Barangaroo. Their daughter Dilboong died in infancy. Upon Barangaroo's death in 1791, Bennelong cremated her remains in Arthur Phillip's garden. Bennelong then abducted and took up with a Gweagal woman, Kurubarabulu. They stayed together a year until his departure for England. On his return, she had found another mate. Bennelong had a son named Dickey with his final wife, Boorong. Dickey was adopted by Anglican priest William Walker and christened as Thomas Walter Coke. Boorong was later buried with Bennelong when they had both died.\nLegacy.\nBennelong's legacy was long contested. Among many others, Manning Clark wrote: \"Bennelong disgusted his civilizers and became an exile from his own people.\" He was seen as a tragic figure, due to being \"caught between two worlds\" as well as due to the alcoholism he developed later in life. In recent decades, he has been defended, as someone who saw the best and worst of Western civilization and, having done so, rejected it, recreating a modified form of traditional lifestyle at Kissing Point. Bennelong has also been recognised as a warrior who could switch between the British and Aboriginal worlds, and use the colonists' desire for conciliation as an advantage to both himself and his people. His on-again, off-again friendship with the British governors ultimately saw other Aboriginal people being brought into contact with the colony at Sydney. In contributing to some of the first cross-cultural communication between the groups, he helped establish a tenuous peace between the Eora and the British that enabled some Aboriginal people to continue to exist as survivors in their own colonised land.\nPortrayals.\nBennelong was played by actor Charles Yunupingu in the 1980 TV series \"The Timeless Land\".\nActor Jacob Junior Nayinggul portrayed Bennelong in reenactment sequences in the 2022 documentary series \"The Australian Wars\".\nNotes and citations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "62844", "revid": "2136253", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62844", "title": "Density matrix", "text": "Mathematical tool in quantum physics\nIn quantum mechanics, a density matrix (or density operator) is a matrix used in calculating the probabilities of the outcomes of measurements performed on physical systems. It is a generalization of the state vectors or wavefunctions: while those can only represent pure states, density matrices can also represent mixed ensembles of states.73100 These arise in quantum mechanics in two different situations:\nDensity matrices are thus crucial tools in areas of quantum mechanics that deal with mixed states (not to be confused with superposed states), such as quantum statistical mechanics, open quantum systems and quantum information.\nDefinition and motivation.\nThe density matrix is a representation of a linear operator called the density operator. The density matrix is obtained from the density operator by a choice of an orthonormal basis in the underlying space. In practice, the terms \"density matrix\" and \"density operator\" are often used interchangeably.\nPick a basis with states formula_1, formula_2 in a two-dimensional Hilbert space, then the density operator is represented by the matrix\nformula_3 \nwhere the diagonal elements are real numbers that sum to one (also called populations of the two states formula_1, formula_2). \nThe off-diagonal elements are complex conjugates of each other (also called coherences); they are restricted in magnitude by the requirement that formula_6 be a positive semi-definite operator, see below.\nA density operator is a positive semi-definite, self-adjoint operator of trace one acting on the Hilbert space of the system. This definition can be motivated by considering a situation where some pure states formula_7 (which are not necessarily orthogonal) are prepared with probability formula_8 each. This is known as an \"ensemble\" of pure states. The probability of obtaining projective measurement result formula_9 when using projectors formula_10 is given by99\nformula_11\nwhich makes the density operator, defined as \nformula_12\na convenient representation for the state of this ensemble. It is easy to check that this operator is positive semi-definite, self-adjoint, and has trace one. Conversely, it follows from the spectral theorem that every operator with these properties can be written as formula_13 for some states formula_14 and coefficients formula_8 that are non-negative and add up to one.102 However, this representation will not be unique, as shown by the Schr\u00f6dinger\u2013HJW theorem.\nAnother motivation for the definition of density operators comes from considering local measurements on entangled states. Let formula_16 be a pure entangled state in the composite Hilbert space formula_17. The probability of obtaining measurement result formula_9 when measuring projectors formula_10 on the Hilbert space formula_20 alone is given by107\nformula_21\nwhere formula_22 denotes the partial trace over the Hilbert space formula_23. This makes the operator \nformula_24\na convenient tool to calculate the probabilities of these local measurements. It is known as the reduced density matrix of formula_16 on subsystem 1. It is easy to check that this operator has all the properties of a density operator. Conversely, the Schr\u00f6dinger\u2013HJW theorem implies that all density operators can be written as formula_26 for some state formula_27.\nPure and mixed states.\nA pure quantum state is a state that can not be written as a probabilistic mixture, or convex combination, of other quantum states. There are several equivalent characterizations of pure states in the language of density operators. A density operator represents a pure state if and only if:\nIt is important to emphasize the difference between a probabilistic mixture (i.e. an ensemble) of quantum states and the superposition of two states. If an ensemble is prepared to have half of its systems in state formula_32 and the other half in formula_33, it can be described by the density matrix: \n formula_34\nwhere formula_32 and formula_33 are assumed orthogonal and of dimension 2, for simplicity. On the other hand, a quantum superposition of these two states with equal probability amplitudes results in the pure state formula_37 with density matrix \n formula_38\nUnlike the probabilistic mixture, this superposition can display quantum interference.\n Geometrically, the set of density operators is a convex set, and the pure states are the extremal points of that set. The simplest case is that of a two-dimensional Hilbert space, known as a qubit. An arbitrary mixed state for a qubit can be written as a linear combination of the Pauli matrices, which together with the identity matrix provide a basis for formula_39 self-adjoint matrices:\n formula_40\nwhere the real numbers formula_41 are the coordinates of a point within the unit ball and\n formula_42\nPoints with formula_43 represent pure states, while mixed states are represented by points in the interior. This is known as the Bloch sphere picture of qubit state space.\nExample: light polarization.\nAn example of pure and mixed states is light polarization. An individual photon\ncan be described as having right or left circular polarization, described by the orthogonal quantum states formula_44 and formula_45 or a superposition of the two: it can be in any state formula_46 (with formula_47), corresponding to linear, circular, or elliptical polarization. Consider now a vertically polarized photon, described by the state formula_48. If we pass it through a circular polarizer that allows either only formula_44 polarized light, or only formula_45 polarized light, half of the photons are absorbed in both cases. This may make it \"seem\" like half of the photons are in state formula_44 and the other half in state formula_45, but this is not correct: if we pass formula_53 through a linear polarizer there is no absorption whatsoever, but if we pass either state formula_44 or formula_45 half of the photons are absorbed.\nUnpolarized light (such as the light from an incandescent light bulb) cannot be described as \"any\" state of the form formula_46 (linear, circular, or elliptical polarization). Unlike polarized light, it passes through a polarizer with 50% intensity loss whatever the orientation of the polarizer; and it cannot be made polarized by passing it through any wave plate. However, unpolarized light \"can\" be described as a statistical ensemble, e. g. as each photon having either formula_44 polarization or formula_45 polarization with probability 1/2. The same behavior would occur if each photon had either vertical polarization formula_59 or horizontal polarization formula_60 with probability 1/2. These two ensembles are completely indistinguishable experimentally, and therefore they are considered the same mixed state. For this example of unpolarized light, the density operator equals\n formula_61\nThere are also other ways to generate unpolarized light: one possibility is to introduce uncertainty in the preparation of the photon, for example, passing it through a birefringent crystal with a rough surface, so that slightly different parts of the light beam acquire different polarizations. Another possibility is using entangled states: a radioactive decay can emit two photons traveling in opposite directions, in the quantum state formula_62. The joint state of the two photons \"together\" is pure, but the density matrix for each photon individually, found by taking the partial trace of the joint density matrix, is completely mixed.\nEquivalent ensembles and purifications.\nA given density operator does not uniquely determine which ensemble of pure states gives rise to it; in general there are infinitely many different ensembles generating the same density matrix. Those cannot be distinguished by any measurement. The equivalent ensembles can be completely characterized: let formula_63 be an ensemble. Then for any complex matrix formula_64 such that formula_65 (a partial isometry), the ensemble formula_66 defined by\n formula_67\nwill give rise to the same density operator, and all equivalent ensembles are of this form.\nA closely related fact is that a given density operator has infinitely many different purifications, which are pure states that generate the density operator when a partial trace is taken. Let \n formula_68\nbe the density operator generated by the ensemble formula_63, with states formula_7 not necessarily orthogonal. Then for all partial isometries formula_64 we have that\n formula_72\nis a purification of formula_73, where formula_74 is an orthogonal basis, and furthermore all purifications of formula_73 are of this form.\nMeasurement.\nLet formula_76 be an observable of the system, and suppose the ensemble is in a mixed state such that each of the pure states formula_77 occurs with probability formula_8. Then the corresponding density operator equals\n formula_79\nThe expectation value of the measurement can be calculated by extending from the case of pure states:\n formula_80\nwhere formula_81 denotes trace. Thus, the familiar expression formula_82 for pure states is replaced by\n formula_83\nfor mixed states.\nMoreover, if formula_76 has spectral resolution\n formula_85\nwhere formula_86 is the projection operator into the eigenspace corresponding to eigenvalue formula_87, the post-measurement density operator is given by\n formula_88\nwhen outcome \"i\" is obtained. In the case where the measurement result is not known the ensemble is instead described by\n formula_89\nIf one assumes that the probabilities of measurement outcomes are linear functions of the projectors formula_86, then they must be given by the trace of the projector with a density operator. Gleason's theorem shows that in Hilbert spaces of dimension 3 or larger the assumption of linearity can be replaced with an assumption of non-contextuality. This restriction on the dimension can be removed by assuming non-contextuality for POVMs as well, but this has been criticized as physically unmotivated.\nEntropy.\nThe von Neumann entropy formula_91 of a mixture can be expressed in terms of the eigenvalues of formula_73 or in terms of the trace and logarithm of the density operator formula_73. Since formula_73 is a positive semi-definite operator, it has a spectral decomposition such that formula_95, where formula_96 are orthonormal vectors, formula_97, and formula_98. Then the entropy of a quantum system with density matrix formula_73 is\n formula_100\nThis definition implies that the von Neumann entropy of any pure state is zero. If formula_101 are states that have support on orthogonal subspaces, then the von Neumann entropy of a convex combination of these states,\n formula_102\nis given by the von Neumann entropies of the states formula_101 and the Shannon entropy of the probability distribution formula_104:\n formula_105\nWhen the states formula_101 do not have orthogonal supports, the sum on the right-hand side is strictly greater than the von Neumann entropy of the convex combination formula_73.\nGiven a density operator formula_73 and a projective measurement as in the previous section, the state formula_109 defined by the convex combination\n formula_110\nwhich can be interpreted as the state produced by performing the measurement but not recording which outcome occurred, has a von Neumann entropy larger than that of formula_73, except if formula_112. It is however possible for the formula_109 produced by a \"generalized\" measurement, or POVM, to have a lower von Neumann entropy than formula_73.\nVon Neumann equation for time evolution.\nJust as the Schr\u00f6dinger equation describes how pure states evolve in time, the von Neumann equation (also known as the Liouville\u2013von Neumann equation) describes how a density operator evolves in time. The von Neumann equation dictates that\n formula_115\nwhere the brackets denote a commutator.\nThis equation only holds when the density operator is taken to be in the Schr\u00f6dinger picture, even though this equation seems at first look to emulate the Heisenberg equation of motion in the Heisenberg picture, with a crucial sign difference:\n formula_116\nwhere formula_117 is some \"Heisenberg picture\" operator; but in this picture the density matrix is \"not time-dependent\", and the relative sign ensures that the time derivative of the expected value formula_118 comes out \"the same as in the Schr\u00f6dinger picture\".\nIf the Hamiltonian is time-independent, the von Neumann equation can be easily solved to yield\n formula_119\nFor a more general Hamiltonian, if formula_120 is the wavefunction propagator over some interval, then the time evolution of the density matrix over that same interval is given by\n formula_121\nIf one enters the interaction picture, choosing to focus on some component formula_122 of the Hamiltonian formula_123, the equation for the evolution of the interaction-picture density operator formula_124 possesses identical structure to the von Neumann equation, except the Hamiltonian must also be transformed into the new picture:\nformula_125\nwhere formula_126.\nWigner functions and classical analogies.\nThe density matrix operator may also be realized in phase space. Under the Wigner map, the density matrix transforms into the equivalent Wigner function,\n formula_127\nThe equation for the time evolution of the Wigner function, known as Moyal equation, is then the Wigner-transform of the above von Neumann equation,\n formula_128\nwhere formula_129 is the Hamiltonian, and formula_130 is the Moyal bracket, the transform of the quantum commutator.\nThe evolution equation for the Wigner function is then analogous to that of its classical limit, the Liouville equation of classical physics. In the limit of a vanishing Planck constant formula_131, formula_132 reduces to the classical Liouville probability density function in phase space.\nExample applications.\nDensity matrices are a basic tool of quantum mechanics, and appear at least occasionally in almost any type of quantum-mechanical calculation. Some specific examples where density matrices are especially helpful and common are as follows:\nC*-algebraic formulation of states.\nIt is now generally accepted that the description of quantum mechanics in which all self-adjoint operators represent observables is untenable. For this reason, observables are identified with elements of an abstract C*-algebra \"A\" (that is one without a distinguished representation as an algebra of operators) and states are positive linear functionals on \"A\". However, by using the GNS construction, we can recover Hilbert spaces that realize \"A\" as a subalgebra of operators.\nGeometrically, a pure state on a C*-algebra \"A\" is a state that is an extreme point of the set of all states on \"A\". By properties of the GNS construction these states correspond to irreducible representations of \"A\".\nThe states of the C*-algebra of compact operators \"K\"(\"H\") correspond exactly to the density operators, and therefore the pure states of \"K\"(\"H\") are exactly the pure states in the sense of quantum mechanics.\nThe C*-algebraic formulation can be seen to include both classical and quantum systems. When the system is classical, the algebra of observables become an abelian C*-algebra. In that case the states become probability measures.\nHistory.\nThis formalism of the operators and matrices was introduced in 1927 by John von Neumann and independently, but less systematically, by Lev Landau and later in 1946 by Felix Bloch. Von Neumann introduced a matrix in order to develop both quantum statistical mechanics and a theory of quantum measurements. The term density was introduced by Dirac in 1931 when he used von Neumann's operator to calculate electron density clouds.\nNowadays the term \"density matrix\" obtained a significance of its own, and corresponds to a classical phase-space probability measure (probability distribution of position and momentum) in classical statistical mechanics, which was introduced by Eugene Wigner in 1932.\nIn contrast, the motivation that inspired Landau was the impossibility of describing a subsystem of a composite quantum system by a state vector.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes and references.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "62866", "revid": "50616081", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62866", "title": "United States Department of Energy", "text": "U.S. government department regulating energy production and nuclear material handling\nThe United States Department of Energy (DOE) is an executive department of the U.S. federal government that oversees U.S. national energy policy and energy production, the research and development of nuclear power, the military's nuclear weapons program, nuclear reactor production for the United States Navy, energy-related research, and energy conservation.\nThe DOE was created in 1977 in the aftermath of the 1973 oil crisis. It sponsors more physical science research than any other U.S. federal agency, the majority of which is conducted through its system of National Laboratories. The DOE also directs research in genomics, with the Human Genome Project originating from a DOE initiative.\nThe department is headed by the secretary of energy, who reports directly to the president of the United States and is a member of the Cabinet. The current secretary of energy is Chris Wright, who has served in the position since February 2025. The department's headquarters are in southwestern Washington, D.C., in the James V. Forrestal Building, with additional offices in Germantown, Maryland.\nHistory.\nFormation and consolidation.\nIn 1942, during World War II, the United States started the Manhattan Project to develop the atomic bomb under the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. After the war, in 1946, the Atomic Energy Commission (AEC) was created to control the future of the project. The Atomic Energy Act of 1946 also created the framework for the first National Laboratories. Among other nuclear projects, the AEC produced fabricated uranium fuel cores at locations such as Fernald Feed Materials Production Center in Cincinnati, Ohio. The Energy Reorganization Act of 1974 split the responsibilities of the AEC into the new Nuclear Regulatory Commission, which was charged with regulating the nuclear power industry, and the Energy Research and Development Administration, which was assigned to manage the nuclear weapon, naval reactor, and energy development programs.\nThe 1973 oil crisis called attention to the need to consolidate energy policy. In 1977, President Jimmy Carter signed into law the Department of Energy Organization Act, which established the Department of Energy. The new agency, which began operations on October 1, 1977, consolidated the Federal Energy Administration, the Energy Research and Development Administration, the Federal Power Commission, and programs of various other agencies. Former Secretary of Defense James Schlesinger, who served under Presidents Nixon and Ford during the Vietnam War, was appointed as the first secretary.\nPresident Jimmy Carter proposed the Department of Energy with the goal of promoting energy conservation and energy independence, and developing alternative sources of energy to reduce the use of fossil fuels. With international energy's future uncertain for America, Carter acted quickly to have the department come into action the first year of his presidency. This was an extremely important issue of the time as the oil crisis was causing shortages and inflation. With the Three Mile Island accident, Carter was able to intervene with the help of the department. Through the DOE, Carter was able to make changes within the Nuclear Regulatory Commission, including improving management and procedures, since nuclear energy and weapons are responsibilities of the department.\nWeapon plans stolen.\nIn December 1999, the FBI was investigating how China obtained plans for a specific nuclear device. Wen Ho Lee was accused of stealing nuclear secrets from Los Alamos National Laboratory for the People's Republic of China. Federal officials, including then-Energy Secretary Bill Richardson, publicly named Lee as a suspect before he was charged with a crime. The U.S. Congress held hearings to investigate the Department of Energy's handling of his case. Some senators thought that an independent agency should be in charge of nuclear weapons and security issues, rather than the DOE. All but one of the 59 charges against Lee were eventually dropped because the investigation proved the plans the Chinese obtained could not have come from Lee. Lee filed suit and won a $1.6 million settlement against the federal government and news agencies.\nIn the wake of the scandal and allegations that direct management by the Department of Energy had resulted in U.S. nuclear secrets being leaked to China, the National Nuclear Security Administration was proposed. Originally proposed to be independent, NNSA was instead chartered as a semiautonomous agency within the Department of Energy to be headed by an administrator reporting to the secretary of energy.\nLoan guarantee program of 2005.\nIn 2001, American Solar Challenge was sponsored by the DOE and the National Renewable Energy Laboratory. After the 2005 race, the DOE discontinued its sponsorship.\nTitle XVII of Energy Policy Act of 2005 authorizes the DOE to issue loan guarantees to eligible projects that \"avoid, reduce, or sequester air pollutants or anthropogenic emissions of greenhouse gases\" and \"employ new or significantly improved technologies as compared to technologies in service in the United States at the time the guarantee is issued\". In loan guarantees, a conditional commitment requires to meet an equity commitment, as well as other conditions, before the loan guarantee is completed.\nIn September 2008, the DOE, the Nuclear Threat Initiative (NTI), the Institute of Nuclear Materials Management (INMM), and the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) partnered to develop and launch the World Institute for Nuclear Security (WINS), an international non-governmental organization designed to provide a forum to share best practices in strengthening the security and safety of nuclear and radioactive materials and facilities.\nIn December 2024, the Loan Programs Office announced it would extend the largest loan ever sanctioned \u2013 a $15 billion (US) low-interest loan to support the modernization of Pacific Gas &amp; Electric\u2019s hydroelectric power structure, enhance transmission lines critical for renewable energy integration, data center operations, and the growing fleet of electric vehicles. Initially requested as a $30 billion (US) loan, the amount was reduced due to concerns over the company\u2019s repayment capacity.\nOrganization.\nThe department announced a reorganization with new names of under secretaries in 2022.\nThe department is under the control and supervision of a United States Secretary of Energy, a political appointee of the President of the United States. The Energy Secretary is assisted in managing the department by a United States Deputy Secretary of Energy, also appointed by the president, who assumes the duties of the secretary in the secretary's absence. The department also has three under secretaries, each appointed by the president, who oversee the major areas of the department's work. The president also appoints seven officials with the rank of Assistant Secretary of Energy who have line management responsibility for major organizational elements of the department. The Energy Secretary assigns their functions and duties.\nSymbolism in the seal.\nExcerpt from the Code of Federal Regulations, in Title 10: Energy:\nThe official seal of the Department of Energy \"includes a green shield bisected by a gold-colored lightning bolt, on which is emblazoned a gold-colored symbolic sun, atom, oil derrick, windmill, and dynamo. It is crested by the white head of an eagle, atop a white rope. Both appear on a blue field surrounded by concentric circles in which the name of the agency, in gold, appears on a green background.\"\n\"The eagle represents the care in planning and the purposefulness of efforts required to respond to the Nation's increasing demands for energy. The sun, atom, oil derrick, windmill, and dynamo serve as representative technologies whose enhanced development can help meet these demands. The rope represents the cohesiveness in the development of the technologies and their link to our future capabilities. The lightning bolt represents the power of the natural forces from which energy is derived and the Nation's challenge in harnessing the forces.\"\n\"The color scheme is derived from nature, symbolizing both the source of energy and the support of man's existence. The blue field represents air and water, green represents mineral resources and the earth itself, and gold represents the creation of energy in the release of natural forces. By invoking this symbolism, the color scheme represents the Nation's commitment to meet its energy needs in a manner consistent with the preservation of the natural environment.\"\nFacilities.\nThe Department of Energy operates a system of national laboratories and technical facilities for research and development, as follows:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nOther major DOE facilities include:\nAirstrip:\nNuclear weapons sites.\nThe NNSA has federal responsibility for the design, testing and production of all nuclear weapons. Under its supervision, contractors carry out its responsibilities at the following government-owned sites:\nBudget.\nOn May 7, 2009 President Barack Obama unveiled a $26.4 billion budget request for DOE for fiscal year (FY) 2010, including $2.3 billion for the DOE Office of Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy (EERE). That budget aimed to substantially expand the use of renewable energy sources while improving energy transmission infrastructure. It also proposed significant investments in hybrids and plug-in hybrids, smart grid technologies, and scientific research and innovation.\nAs part of the $789 billion economic stimulus package in the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009, Congress provided Energy with an additional $38.3 billion for fiscal years 2009 and 2010, adding about 75 percent to Energy's annual budgets. Most of the stimulus spending was in the form of grants and contracts. For fiscal year 2013, each of the operating units of the Department of Energy operated with the following budgets:\nIn March 2018, Energy Secretary Rick Perry testified to a Senate panel about the Trump administration's DOE budget request for fiscal year 2019. The budget request prioritized nuclear security while making large cuts to energy efficiency and renewable energy programs. The proposal was a $500 million increase in funds over fiscal year 2017. It \"promotes innovations like a new Office of Cybersecurity, Energy Security, and Emergency Response (CESER) and gains for the Office of Fossil Energy. Investments would be made to strengthen the National Nuclear Security Administration and modernize the nuclear force, as well as in weapons activities and advanced computing.\" However, the budget for the Office of Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy would be lowered to $696 million under the plan, down from $1.3 billion in fiscal year 2017. Overall, the department's energy and related programs would be cut by $1.9 billion.\nPrograms and contracts.\nEnergy Savings Performance Contract.\nEnergy Savings Performance Contracts (ESPCs) are contracts under which a contractor designs, constructs, and obtains the necessary financing for an energy savings project, and the federal agency makes payments over time to the contractor from the savings in the agency's utility bills. The contractor guarantees the energy improvements will generate savings, and after the contract ends, all continuing cost savings accrue to the federal agency.\nEnergy Innovation Hubs.\nEnergy Innovation Hubs are multi-disciplinary, meant to advance highly promising areas of energy science and technology from their early stages of research to the point that the risk level will be low enough for industry to commercialize the technologies. The Consortium for Advanced Simulation of Light Water Reactors (CASL) was the first DOE Energy Innovation Hub established in July 2010, for the purpose of providing advanced modeling and simulation (M&amp;S) solutions for commercial nuclear reactors.\nThe 2009 DOE budget includes $280 million to fund eight Energy Innovation Hubs, each of which is focused on a particular energy challenge. Two of the eight hubs are included in the EERE budget and will focus on integrating smart materials, designs, and systems into buildings to better conserve energy and on designing and discovering new concepts and materials needed to convert solar energy into electricity. Another two hubs, included in the DOE Office of Science budget, were created to tackle the challenges of devising advanced methods of energy storage and creating fuels directly from sunlight without the use of plants or microbes. Yet another hub was made to develop \"smart\" materials to allow the electrical grid to adapt and respond to changing conditions.\nIn 2012, the DOE awarded $120 million to the Ames Laboratory to start a new EIH, the Critical Materials Institute, which will focus on improving the supply of rare earth elements.\nAdvanced Research Projects Agency-Energy.\nARPA-E was officially created by the America COMPETES Act , authored by Congressman Bart Gordon, within the United States Department of Energy (DOE) in 2007, though without a budget. The initial budget of about $400 million was a part of the economic stimulus bill of February 2009.\nHigh Performance Computing for Energy Innovation (HPC4EI).\nHPC4EI is an initiative that leverages supercomputing resources from DOE national laboratories to support industry partnerships in advancing energy-efficient manufacturing, materials development, and decarbonisation technologies. \nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "62877", "revid": "11952314", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62877", "title": "80186", "text": ""}
{"id": "62880", "revid": "4899266", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62880", "title": "80188", "text": ""}
{"id": "62884", "revid": "14423536", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62884", "title": "Faboideae", "text": "Subfamily of plants\nThe Faboideae are a subfamily of the flowering plant family Fabaceae or Leguminosae. An acceptable alternative name for the subfamily is Papilionoideae, or Papilionaceae when this group of plants is treated as a family.\nThis subfamily is widely distributed, and members are adapted to a wide variety of environments. Faboideae may be trees, shrubs, or herbaceous plants. Members include the pea, the sweet pea, the laburnum, and other legumes. The pea-shaped flowers are characteristic of the Faboideae subfamily and root nodulation is very common. The papilionaceous species vary enormously in size from the tiny \"Lupinus uncialis\" only 2\u00a0cm in height to \"Pterocarpus mildbraedii\" subsp. \"usumbarensis\" at up to height.\nGenera.\nThe type genus, \"Faba\", is a synonym of \"Vicia\", and is listed here as \"Vicia\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSystematics.\nModern molecular phylogenetics recommend a clade-based classification of Faboideae as a superior alternative to the traditional tribal classification of Polhill:\nNote: Minor branches have been omitted.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "62888", "revid": "94931", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62888", "title": "Gordon Setter", "text": "The Gordon Setter is a Scottish large breed of dog, a member of the setter family that also includes both the better-known Irish Setter and the English Setter. Setter breeds are classified as members of either the Sporting or Gundog Group depending on the national kennel club or council.\nThe original purpose of the breed was to hunt gamebirds. Their quarry in Scotland, may be partridge or grouse, pheasant, ptarmigan, blackgame, snipe or woodcock: whilst overseas bird dogs are worked on quail, willow grouse, sand grouse, guinea fowl, sagehen, francolin and any other bird that will sit to a dog\u2014that is to say, will attempt to avoid a potential predator by concealment rather than by taking to the wing at the first sign of danger. It is this combination of a bird that will sit fast in front of a dog that will remain on point that makes bird dog work possible.\nDescription.\nAppearance.\nGordon Setters, also known as \"black and tans\", have a coal-black coat with distinctive markings of a rich chestnut or mahogany colour on their paws and lower legs, vents, throat, and muzzles; one spot above each eye; and two spots on their chest. A small amount of white is allowed on the chest. Although uncommon, red Gordons are occasionally born to normal-coloured parents, the result of expression of a recessive red gene. Predominantly tan, red, or buff dogs are ineligible for showing. A Gordon's coat is straight or slightly waved (but not curly), long and silky, with chest, stomach, ear, leg, and tail feathering. According to the AKC breed standard, \"the bearing is intelligent, noble, and dignified\". They are the heaviest of the setter breeds, with males reaching at the withers and up to in weight.\nTemperament.\nThe AKC describes the Gordon Setter temperament as \"alert, interested, and confident. He is fearless and willing, intelligent, and capable. He is loyal and affectionate, and strong-minded enough to stand the rigors of training\". Gordons are intensely loyal to their owners; thrive in an attentive, loving environment; and are good family dogs. Puppies and adult dogs can be quite boisterous, and although they are patient by nature, may not be suitable for households with very young children. Gordons are sensitive and empathic, eager to learn, and need firm but gentle handling. Early socialisation and obedience training are important. The breed is one of the slowest to mature, not hitting prime until three years of age or more, and will show puppy-like characteristics well into their older years.\nGordons were bred to run, and require 60 to 80 minutes of vigorous exercise daily. Young dogs should not be over-exercised or begin agility training until they are at least 18 months old, to avoid joint problems later in life. Because of their hunting instincts, Gordons should not be allowed to roam freely if unsupervised, as they are apt to wander into a potentially dangerous traffic situation while following a scent.\nHealth.\nA 2024 UK study found a life expectancy of 12.4 years for the breed compared to an average of 12.7 for purebreeds and 12 for crossbreeds.\nAlthough not as prone to hip dysplasia as many of the larger breeds, Gordons can suffer from the condition. Other health issues can include hypothyroidism, gastric torsion (bloat) and eye diseases such as progressive retinal atrophy (PRA), and cataracts. Life expectancy for the breed is generally about 10 to 15 years.\nAt the beginning of 2009, a report was issued to all of the Breed Clubs in the UK concerning cases of late onset PRA in Gordon Setters.\nOn March 14, 2011, Animal Health Trust (AHT) made a DNA test available. The mutation is termed rcd4 (for rod-cone degeneration 4) to distinguish it from other, previously described forms of rod-cone degeneration. It is recessive, and 19 out of the 21 Gordons in their study who had clinical signs of PRA were homozygous for this mutation, indicating it is the major cause of PRA in the breed. As many as 50% of Gordon Setters may be carriers.\nOrigin.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Domesticated Dogs Finding Their Game by Scent, But Not Killing It, Being Chiefly Used in Aid of the Gun\"\u2014\u200a\nMany of the gun dogs described by Stonehenge are no longer to be found in the United Kingdom or have been absorbed into one of the other breeds. The Russian Setter, the Welsh Setter, Northern Irish Water Spaniel, Southern Irish Water Spaniel and English Water Spaniel, the Spanish Pointer and the Portuguese Pointer have all disappeared in the past hundred and fifty years, and the pictures of some of the breeds that are still with us show considerable differences to the breed as we see them today.\nEdward Laverick wrote in \"The Setter\", published in 1872: \"the setter is but an improved spaniel\"; while the Rev Pearce in \"The Dog\", published in the same year, said, 'he is a direct descendant of the Spaniel: \"a Setting Spaniel\" was the first Setter'. Since then this is the generally agreed with conclusion that the Setter was primarily derived from the old Land Spaniel, so called so as to distinguish it from the Water Spaniel. It is however likely that outside crosses with Hounds or Pointers did influence its development. William Taplin in \"The Sportsman's Cabinet\" (1803\u201304) maintained that it was \"originally produced by a commixture between the Spanish pointer and the larger breed of the English spaniel\".\nWe now really need not to go back to the Spaniel and its specialised development into the setting-dog, as it was called, and can be found in the work by the famous French sportsman, Gaston de Foix, Vicomte de B\u00e9arn (1331\u201391), who it is said owned about 1500 dogs 'brought from all countries of Europe' and was known as 'Gaston Ph\u00e8bus' owing to his love for the chase. This work is called \"Livre de Chasse\" or \"Miroir de Ph\u00e8bus\", and was started in 1387. This work was the bases of \"The Master of Game\" written between 1406 and 1413 by Edward III's grandson, Edward, second Duke of York, who acknowledged his debt to de Foix. Below is the main passage referring to the Spaniel and the Setting-dog, as republished in 1904:\n&lt;poem&gt;Another kind of dog is that is called falcon-dog or spaniel [\"espaignols\" in the French original] because it comes from Spain, notwithstanding that there are many in other countries...\nA good spaniel should not be too rough, though his tail should be rough. The good qualities that such a dogs are these: They love well their masters and follow them without losing, although they be in a great crowd of men, and commonly they go before their master, running and wagging their tail, and raise or start fowl and wild beasts. But their right craft is of the partridge and of the quail. It is good for a man that has a noble goshawk, or a tierecel, or a sparrowhawk for the partridges to have such dogs; and also, when they are taught to be couchers (\"chiens couchants\" in the original French\u2014ed.), they are good for taking partridge and quail with the net...&lt;/poem&gt;\n\u2014Baillie-Grohman, p. 66\nThe modern Gordon Setter is a predominantly black dog with rich tan marking on the muzzle, legs and chest. A little bigger and heavier than either the Irish or English, he is nevertheless descended from the same genetic mixing pot, which undoubtedly has its origins among those setting spaniels we met earlier. The Kennel Club applied the name 'Gordon Setter' to the breed in 1924. Before that they were known as black and tan setters, and were found in many kennels beside those of the Alexander Gordon, 4th Duke of Gordon (1743\u20131827). Indeed, as we shall see, there is plenty of evidence that the majority of the setters at Gordon Castle during the Duke's time were tri-coloured rather than pure black and tan.\nThe breed was brought to the United States by George Blunt and Daniel Webster in 1842, with the purchase of two dogs named Rake and Rachel from the Duke's kennels. The American Kennel Club officially recognised the breed in 1892.\nBreed development.\nAs a gundog in Scotland and Northern England.\nAmong the many changes which took place in sport and country affairs during the 20th century were those concerned with the method of shooting and consequent role of the gundog. These changes were accelerated after World War II, prior to which there were many \"dogging moors\" in the north of England and especially in Scotland. Walking up game became largely superseded by driving and field-craft by marksmanship. The function of the gundog was as a result limited to the recovery of dead or wounded birds and \u2014 in the age of specialisation \u2014 this meant that the Labrador Retriever came to the forefront while the number of working pointers and setters declined year after year.\nBesides the modernisation of the style of shooting and the work required of gundogs, the situation was altered by the new developments that also took place in farming, which helped to bring about a marked reduction in the partridge population. Factors include the introduction of modernisation such as early cutting of silage, the use of fast-moving mechanical equipment, the burning or ploughing of stubble-fields soon after harvest, the destruction of hedgerows, and the use of chemical sprays for weed-killing. The hedgerows had provided shelter and nesting sites; the weeds and other herbage supplied food and cover; whilst the stubble-fields had been a primary source of winter food; so the partridges were deprived of some important assets, whilst the wide use of chemicals on the land exercised a direct harmful effect. These changes significantly affected the status of setters and pointers. Though often used as a general purpose gundog, the Gordon Setter has been a wide-ranging dog employed in the Scotland to locate red grouse and ptarmigan on the Scottish or North of England moors and partridges on the stubble-fields of the south of England. Up to the late 1930s, most Gordons were kept for this type of work, so that the majority were to be found in Scotland and the north of England; but now they are more evenly distributed and there are no large working kennels.\nThe function of the setter is well summarised by Captain Blaine: \nTwo Gordon Setters have achieved the title of Dual Champion. The Kennel Club regulations state this title can only be claimed by dogs who have achieved the title of Show Champion and Field Trial Champion. The first was a bitch, Amscot Irresista Belle; her pet name was Trisca. The second was Trisca's relative, Boyers Scarlatti.\nGordon Castle and other historically important kennels.\nAlexander, the 4th Duke of Gordon (1743\u20131827), established his kennel of Black and Tan Setters at Gordon Castle, which was situated near Fochabers, not far from the River Spey and a few miles from the coast of Moray. The exact date when this occurred is not known. A Colonel Thornton visited the place during his tour of the Highlands in 1786. He makes no mention of any kennel of Setters at that time, although he does note that \"The Duke of Gordon still keeps up a diversion of falconry\u2026.I saw, also, here a true Highland greyhound, which is now become very scarce\u2026.\" The Duke was indeed devoted to country pursuits and was among the last of his day in Scotland to keep hawks and practise falconry; he was celebrated for his Scottish Deerhounds as well as his Setters. However all that can be inferred from the Colonel's remarks is that there are unlikely to have been any Setters of note at the Castle in 1786.\nThere is much on record that seems reliable about the origin or derivation of the Duke of Gordon's Setters, though verification at this late date is of course impossible. Most of this evidence comes from Samuel Brown, the Veterinary Surgeon of Melton Mowbray, who was a great authority on the breed. In a letter to \"The Field\" in 1864, Samuel Brown stated: \nFive years later, in another letter to the same journal, the Rev F. W. Adye wrote: \nThese facts were well known to J. H. Walsh (\u2018Stonehenge\u2019), Editor of \"The Field\" and a leading authority on sporting dogs, for it is he who mentions in the first chapter of his book \"The Dogs of the British Islands\" (1867) that a Setter \"from Mr Coke of Norfolk and doubtless related to the late Duke of Gordon\u2019s kennel, as Mr Coke and the duke bred together and interchanged setters frequently.\" Therefore, it does appear to be reasonably established that Mr Coke provided most of the original Setters for the Duke's kennel. The Rev Hutchinson, who wrote under the pseudonym \u2018Sixty-one\u2019, insisted that \"the original setter taken or sent to Gordon Castle by the first Marquis of Anglesea\", however what has been seen is that, according to Samuel Brown's \u2018old gentleman sportsman\u2019, the Marquees of Anglesey likewise had his original stock of Setters at Beaudesart from Mr Coke \u2013 probably, although this cannot be confirmed, some years before the Gordon Castle kennel was founded; for in 1869 the Beaudesart Setters were said to have been maintained \u2018for sixty years pure and unmixed with any blood\u2019. It is most unlikely that the Duke obtained his setters from only one source, we know that he interbreed with other kennels besides Mr Coke's, notably with Lord Lovat's.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "62889", "revid": "20483999", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62889", "title": "Night monkey", "text": "Genus of New World monkeys\nNight monkeys, also known as owl monkeys or douroucoulis (), are nocturnal New World monkeys of the genus Aotus, the only living member of the family Aotidae (). The genus comprises eleven species which are found across Panama and much of South America in primary and secondary forests, tropical rainforests and cloud forests up to . Night monkeys have large eyes which improve their vision at night, while their ears are mostly hidden, giving them their name \"Aotus\", meaning \"earless\".\nNight monkeys are the only truly nocturnal monkeys, although some cathemeral populations of Azara's night monkey have irregular bursts of activity during day and night. They have a varied repertoire of vocalisations and live in small family groups of a mated pair and their immature offspring. Night monkeys have monochromatic vision which improves their ability to detect visual cues at night.\nNight monkeys are threatened by habitat loss, the pet trade, hunting for bushmeat, and by biomedical research. They constitute one of the few monkey species affected by the often deadly human malaria protozoan \"Plasmodium falciparum\" and are therefore used as experimental subjects in malaria research. The Peruvian night monkey is classified by the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) as an Endangered species, while four are Vulnerable species, four are Least-concern species, and two are data deficient.\nTaxonomy.\nUntil 1983, all night monkeys were placed into only one (\"A. lemurinus\") or two species (\"A. lemurinus\" and \"A. azarae\"). Chromosome variability showed that there was more than one species in the genus and Hershkovitz (1983) used morphological and karyological evidence to propose nine species, one of which is now recognised as a junior synonym. He split \"Aotus\" into two groups: a northern, gray-necked group (\"A. lemurinus\", \"A. hershkovitzi\", \"A. trivirgatus\" and \"A. vociferans\") and a southern, red-necked group (\"A. miconax\", \"A. nancymaae\", \"A. nigriceps\" and \"A. azarae\"). Arguably, the taxa otherwise considered subspecies of \"A. lemurinus\" \u2013 \"brumbacki\", \"griseimembra\" and \"zonalis\" \u2013 should be considered separate species, whereas \"A. hershkovitzi\" arguably is a junior synonym of \"A. lemurinus\". A new species from the gray-necked group was recently described as \"A. jorgehernandezi\". As is the case with some other splits in this genus, an essential part of the argument for recognizing this new species was differences in the chromosomes. Chromosome evidence has also been used as an argument for merging \"species\", as was the case for considering \"infulatus\" a subspecies of \"A. azarae\" rather than a separate species. Two extinct species of Aotidae are known from the fossil record: \"Aotus dindensis\" and \"Tremacebus harringtoni\".\nClassification.\nFamily Aotidae\nPhysical characteristics.\nNight monkeys have large brown eyes; the size improves their nocturnal vision increasing their ability to be active at night. They are sometimes said to lack a tapetum lucidum, the reflective layer behind the retina possessed by many nocturnal animals. Other sources say they have a tapetum lucidum composed of collagen fibrils. At any rate, night monkeys lack the tapetum lucidum composed of riboflavin crystals possessed by lemurs and other strepsirrhines, which is an indication that their nocturnality is a secondary adaption evolved from ancestrally diurnal primates.\nTheir ears are rather difficult to see; this is why their genus name, \"Aotus\" (meaning \"earless\") was chosen. There is little data on the weights of wild night monkeys. From the figures that have been collected, it appears that males and females are similar in weight; the heaviest species is Azara's night monkey at around , and the lightest is Brumback's night monkey, which weighs between . The male is slightly taller than the female, measuring , respectively.\nEcology.\nNight monkeys can be found in Panama, Colombia, Ecuador, Peru, Brazil, Paraguay, Argentina, Bolivia, and Venezuela. The species that live at higher elevations and colder latitudes tend to have thicker fur. Night monkeys can live in forests undisturbed by humans (primary forest) as well as in forests that are recovering from human logging efforts (secondary forest).\nDistribution.\nA primary distinction between red-necked and gray-necked night monkeys is spatial distribution. Gray-necked night monkeys (\"Aotus lemurinus\" group) are found north of the Amazon River, while the red-necked group (\"Aotus azare\" group) are localized south of the Amazon River. Red-necked night monkeys are found throughout various regions of the Amazon rainforest of South America, with some variation occurring between the four species. Nancy Ma's night monkey occurs in both flooded and unflooded tropical rainforest regions of Peru, preferring moist swamp and mountainous areas. This species has been observed nesting in regions of the Andes and has recently been introduced to Colombia, likely as a result of post-research release into the community. The black-headed night monkey is also found mainly in the Peruvian Amazon (central and upper Amazon), however its range extends throughout Brazil and Bolivia to the base of the Andes mountain chain. Night monkeys such like the black-headed night monkey, generally inhabit cloud forests; areas with consistent presence of low clouds with a high mist and moisture content which allows for lush and rich vegetation to grow year round, providing excellent food and lodging sources. The Peruvian night monkey, like Nancy Ma's night monkey, is endemic to the Peruvian Andes however it is found at a higher elevation, approximately above sea level and therefore exploits different niches of this habitat. The distribution of \"A. azare\", extends further towards the Atlantic Ocean, spanning Argentina, Bolivia and the drier, south western regions of Paraguay, however unlike the other red-necked night monkey species, it is not endemic to Brazil.\nSleep sites.\nDuring the daylight hours, night monkeys rest in shaded tree areas. These species have been observed exploiting four different types of tree nests, monkeys will rest in; holes formed in the trunks of trees, in concave sections of branches surrounded by creepers and epiphytes, in dense areas of epiphyte, climber and vine growth and in areas of dense foliage. These sleeping sites provide protection from environmental stressors such as heavy rain, sunlight and heat. Sleeping sites are therefore carefully chosen based upon tree age, density of trees, availability of space for the group, ability of site to provide protection, ease of access to the site and availability of site with respect to daily routines. While night monkeys are an arboreal species, nests have not been observed in higher strata of the rainforest ecosystem, rather a higher density of nests were recorded at low-mid vegetation levels. Night monkeys represent a territorial species, territories are defended by conspecifics through the use of threatening and agonistic behaviours. Ranges between night monkey species often do overlap and result in interspecific aggressions such as vocalizing and chasing which may last up to an hour.\nDiet.\nNight monkeys are primarily frugivorous, as fruits are easily distinguished through the use of olfactory cues, but leaf and insect consumption has also been observed in the cathemeral night monkey species \"A. azare\". A study conducted by Wolovich et al., indicated that juveniles and females were much better at catching both crawling and flying insects than adult males. In general, the technique used by night monkeys in insect capturing is to use the palm of the hand to flatten a prey insect against a tree branch and then proceed to consume the carcass. During the winter months or when food sources are reduced, night monkeys have also been observed foraging on flowers such as \"Tabebuia heptaphylla\", however this does not represent a primary food source.\nReproduction.\nIn night monkeys, mating occurs infrequently, however females are fertile year-round, with reproductive cycles range from 13 to 25 days. The gestation period for night monkey is approximately 117\u2013 159 days but varies from species to species. Birthing season extends from September to March and is species-dependent, with one offspring being produced per year; however, in studies conducted in captivity, twins were observed. Night monkeys reach puberty at a relatively young age, between 7 and 11 months, and most species attain full sexual maturity by the time they reach 2 years of age. \"A. azare\" represents an exception reaching sexual maturity by the age of 4.\nBehavior.\nThe name \"night monkey\" comes from the fact that all species are active at night and are, in fact, the only truly nocturnal monkeys (an exception is the subspecies of Azara's night monkey, \"Aotus azarae azarae\", which is cathemeral). Night monkeys make a notably wide variety of vocal sounds, with up to eight categories of distinct calls (gruff grunts, resonant grunts, sneeze grunts, screams, low trills, moans, gulps, and hoots), and a frequency range of 190\u20131,950\u00a0Hz. Unusual among the New World monkeys, they are monochromats, that is, they have no colour vision, presumably because it is of no advantage given their nocturnal habits. They have a better spatial resolution at low light levels than other primates, which contributes to their ability to capture insects and move at night. Night monkeys live in family groups consisting of a mated pair and their immature offspring. Family groups defend territories by vocal calls and scent marking.\nThe night monkey is socially monogamous, and all night monkeys form pair bonds. Only one infant is born each year. The male is the primary caregiver, and the mother carries the infant for only the first week or so of its life. This is believed to have developed because it increases the survival of the infant and reduces the metabolic costs on the female. Adults will occasionally be evicted from the group by same-sex individuals, either kin or outsiders.\nNocturnality.\nThe family Aotidae is the only family of nocturnal species within the suborder Anthropoidea. Whereas other divisions of primates, including Strepsirrhini and Tarsiidae, include many nocturnal and cathemeral species, the anthropoids possess very few nocturnal species and therefore it is highly likely that the ancestors of the family Aotidae did not exhibit nocturnality and were rather diurnal species. \u00a0The presence of nocturnal behavior in Aotidae therefore exemplifies a derived trait; an evolutionary adaptation that conferred greater fitness advantages onto the night monkey. \u00a0Night monkey share some similarities with nocturnal prosimians including low basal metabolic rate, small body size and good ability to detect visual cues at low light levels. Their responses to olfactory stimulus are intermediate between those of the prosimians and diurnal primate species, however the ability to use auditory cues remains more similar to diurnal primate species than to nocturnal primate species. This provides further evidence to support the hypothesis that nocturnality is a derived trait in the family Aotidae.\nAs the ancestor of Aotidae was likely diurnal, selective and environmental pressures must have been exerted on the members of this family which subsequently resulted in the alteration of their circadian rhythm to adapt to fill empty niches. Being active in the night rather than during the day time, gave \"Aotus\" access to better food sources, provided protection from predators, reduced interspecific competition and provided an escape from the harsh environmental conditions of their habitat. To begin, resting during the day allows for decreased interaction with diurnal predators. Members of the family Aotidae apply predation avoidance in choosing strategic covered nest sites in trees. These primates carefully choose areas with sufficient foliage and vines to provide cover from the sun and camouflage from predators, but which simultaneously allow for visibility of ground predators and permit effective routes of escape should a predator approach too quickly. Activity at night also permits night monkeys to avoid aggressive interactions with other species such as competing for food and territorial disputes; as they are active when most other species are inactive and resting.\nNight monkeys also benefit from a nocturnal life style as activity in the night provides a degree of protection from the heat of the day and the thermoregulation difficulties associated. Although night monkey, like all primates are endothermic, meaning they are able to produce their own heat, night monkeys undergo behavioural thermoregulation in order to minimize energy expenditure. During the hottest points of the day, night monkeys are resting and therefore expending less energy in the form of heat. As they carefully construct their nests, night monkeys also benefit from the shade provided by the forest canopy which enables them to cool their bodies through the act of displacing themselves into a shady area. Additionally, finding food is energetically costly and completing this process during the day time usually involves the usage of energy in the form of calories and lipid reserves to cool the body down. Foraging during the night when it is cooler, and when there is less competition, supports the optimal foraging theory; maximize energy input while minimizing energy output.\nWhile protection from predators, interspecific interactions, and the harsh environment propose ultimate causes for nocturnal behavior as they increase the species fitness, the proximate causes of nocturnality are linked to the environmental effects on circadian rhythm. While diurnal species are stimulated by the appearance of the sun, in nocturnal species, activity is highly impacted by the degree of moon light available. The presence of a new moon has correlated with inhibition of activity in night monkeys who exhibit lower levels of activity with decreasing levels of moon light. Therefore, the lunar cycle has a significant influence on the foraging and a nocturnal behaviors of night monkey species.\nPair-bonded social animals (social monogamy).\nNight monkeys are socially monogamous\u2014they form a bond and mate with one partner. They live in small groups consisting of a pair of reproductive adults, one infant and one to two juveniles. These species exhibit mate guarding, a practice in which the male individual will protect the female he is bonded to and prevent other conspecifics from attempting to mate with her.\u00a0 Mate guarding likely evolved as a means of reducing energy expenditure when mating. As night monkey territories generally have some edge overlap, there can be a large number of individuals coexisting in one area which may make it difficult for a male to defend many females at once due to high levels of interspecific competition for mates. Night monkeys form bonded pairs and the energy expenditure of protecting a mate is reduced. Pair bonding may also be exhibited as a result of food distribution. In the forest, pockets of food can be dense or very patchy and scarce. Females, as they need energy stores to support reproduction are generally distributed to areas with sufficient food sources. Males will therefore also have to distribute themselves to be within proximity to females, this form of food distribution lends itself to social monogamy as finding females may become difficult if males have to constantly search for females which may be widely distributed depending on food availability that year.\nHowever, while this does explain social monogamy, it does not explain the high degree of paternal care which is exhibited by these primates. After the birth of an infant, males are the primary carrier of the infant, carrying offspring up to 90% of the time. In addition to aiding in child care, males will support females during lactation through sharing their foraged food with lactating females. Generally, food sharing is not observed in nature as the search for food requires a great degree of energy expenditure, but in the case of night monkey males, food sharing confers offspring survival advantages. As lactating females may be too weak to forage themselves, they may lose the ability to nurse their child, food sharing therefore ensures that offspring will be well feed. The act of food sharing is only observed among species where there is a high degree of fidelity in paternity. Giving up valuable food sources would not confer an evolutionary advance unless it increased an individual's fitness; in this case, paternal care ensures success of offspring and therefore increases the father's fitness.\nOlfactory communication and foraging.\nRecent studies have proposed that night monkeys rely on olfaction and olfactory cues for foraging and communication significantly more than other diurnal primate species. This trend is reflected in the species physiology; members of Aotidae possess larger scent perception organs than their diurnal counterparts. The olfactory bulb, accessory olfactory bulb and volume of lateral olfactory tract are all larger in \"Aotus\" than in any of the other new world monkey species. It is therefore likely that increased olfaction capacities improved the fitness of these nocturnal primate species; they produced more offspring and passed on these survival enhancing traits. The benefits of increased olfaction in night monkeys are twofold; increased ability to use scent cues has facilitated night time foraging and is also an important factor in mate selection and sexual attractivity.\nAs a substantial portion of the night monkey's activities occurring during the dark hours of the night, there is a much lower reliance of visual and tactile cues. When foraging at night, members of the family Aotidae will smell fruits and leaves before ingesting to determine the quality and safety of the food source. As they are highly frugivorous and cannot perceive colour well, smell becomes the primary determinant of the ripeness of fruits and is therefore an important component in the optimal foraging methods of these primates. Upon finding a rich food source, night monkeys have been observed scent marking not only the food source, but the route from their sleeping site to the food source as well. Scent can therefore be used as an effective method of navigation and reduce energy expenditure during subsequent foraging expeditions. Night monkeys possess several scent glands covered by greasy hair patches, which secrete pheromones that can be transferred onto vegetation or other conspecifics. Scent glands are often located subcaudal, but also occur near the muzzle and the sternum. The process of scent marking is accomplished through the rubbing of the hairs covering scent glands onto the desired \"marked item\".\nOlfactory cues are also of significant importance in the process of mating and mate guarding. Male night monkeys will rub subcaudal glands onto their female partner in a process called \"partner marking\" in order to relay the signal to coexisting males that the female is not available for mating. Night monkeys also send chemical signals through urine to communicate reproductive receptivity. In many cases, male night monkeys have been observed drinking the urine of their female mate; it is proposed that the pheromones in the urine can indicate the reproductive state of a female and indicate ovulation. This is especially important in night monkeys as they cannot rely on visual cues, such as the presence of a tumescence, to determine female reproductive state. Therefore, night monkey olfactory communication, as a sexually dimorphic trait conferring increased reproductive success, is a result of sexual selection. This trait demonstrates sexual dimorphism, as males have larger subcaudal scent glands compared to female counterparts and sex differences have been recorded in the glandular secretions of each sex. There is a preference for scents of a particular type; those which indicate reproductive receptivity, which increases species fitness by facilitating the production of offspring.\nConservation.\nAccording to the IUCN (the International Union for Conservation of Nature), the Peruvian night monkey is classified an Endangered species, four species are Vulnerable, four are Least-concern species, and two are data deficient. Most night monkey species are threatened by varying levels of habitat loss throughout their range, caused by agricultural expansion, cattle ranching, logging, armed conflict, and mining operations. To date, it is estimated that more than 62% of the habitat of the Peruvian night monkey has been destroyed or degraded by human activities. However, some night monkey species have become capable of adapting exceptionally well to anthropogenic influences in their environment. Populations of Peruvian night monkey have been observed thriving in small forest fragments and plantation or farmland areas, however this is likely possible given their small body size and may not be an appropriate alternate habitat option for other larger night monkey species. Studies have already been conducted into the feasibility of agroforestry; plantations which simultaneously support local species biodiversity. In the case of \"A. miconax\", coffee plantations with introduced shade trees, provided quality habitat spaces. While the coffee plantation benefited from the increased shade\u2014reducing weed growth and desiccation, night monkeys used the space as a habitat, a connection corridor or stepping stone area between habitats that provided a rich food source. However, some researchers question the agroforestry concept, maintaining that monkeys are more susceptible to hunting, predator and pathogens in plantation fields, thus indicating the need for further research into the solution before implementation.\nNight monkeys are additionally threatened by both national and international trade for bushmeat and domestic pets. Since 1975, the pet trade of night monkeys has been regulated by CITES (the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species).\u00a0 In the last forty years, nearly 6,000 live night monkeys and more than 7,000 specimens have been traded from the nine countries which they call home. While the restrictive laws put into place by CITES are aiding in the reduction of these numbers, 4 out of 9 countries, show deficiencies in maintaining the standards outlined by CITES Increased attention and enforcement of these laws will be imperative for the sustainability of night monkey populations.\nUse in biomedical research poses another threat to night monkey biodiversity. Species such as Nancy Ma's night monkey, like human beings, are susceptible to infection by the \"Plasmodium falciparum\" parasite responsible for malaria. This trait caused them to be recommended by the World Health Organization as test subjects in the development of malaria vaccines. Up to 2008, more than 76 night monkeys died as a result of vaccine testing; some died from malaria, while others perished due to medical complications from the testing.\nIncreased research and knowledge of night monkey ecology is an invaluable tool in determining conservation strategies for these species and raising awareness for consequences of the anthropogenic threats facing these primates. Radio-collaring of free ranging primates proposes a method of obtaining more accurate and complete data surrounding primate behavior patterns. This in turn can aid in understanding what measures need to be taken to promote the conservation of these species. Radio collaring not only allows for the identification of individuals within a species, increased sample size, more detailed dispersal and range patterns, but also facilitates educational programs which raise awareness for the current biodiversity crisis. The usage of radio-collaring while potentially extremely valuable, has been shown to interfere with social group interactions, the development of better collaring techniques and technology will therefore be imperative in the realisation and successful use of radio collars on night monkeys.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "62891", "revid": "49389032", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62891", "title": "English Setter", "text": "The English Setter is a medium-size breed of dog. It is part of the setter group, which includes the red Irish Setters, Irish Red and White Setters, and black-and-tan Gordon Setters. The mainly white coat has long silky fringes on the back of the legs, under the belly and on the tail. The coat features flecks of colour (known as ticking), and the different colour varieties are referred to as 'belton'.\nAs a gun dog, it is used to hunt for game such as quail, pheasant, and grouse. It is sometimes referred to as the Laverack or Llewellin Setter as these were famous strains of the breed during the major development period in the 19th century. Those from hunting stock are generally of a finer build and with less coat than those bred for show exhibition.\nDescription.\nAppearance.\nThe English Setter is a medium-sized dog which should have an elegant overall appearance. Its size can range from for females up to for males. The field or hunting type can be finer in build and construction than those from bench or show lines. The breed was designed to hunt game such as quail, pheasant, and grouse so should be able to cover a lot of ground when seeking the airborne scent of the birds, carrying its head high. The head should be slightly domed with a muzzle of good depth and show chiselling under the eyes, which should be dark in colour with a kind, gentle expression. The top of the ears (sometimes the ears are referred to as \"leathers\") are positioned in line with the eyes and lie in an elegant fold. It has a long muscular neck, well angled shoulders and a brisket of good depth. The body is of a moderate length proportionate to its height and it has strong powerful hindquarters. It carries its tail in line with its back and the tail should be long enough to reach the hock.\nThe main body coat is short to medium length, lies flat and has a silky texture. Long silky coat \u2013 usually called \"feathering\", forms fringes on the outside of the ears, neck, chest, down the back of the front legs, under the belly and on the back legs. The tail is also feathered with long coat.\nThe body coat and feathering should be straight and flat but not profuse and never curly although a slight wave can be seen.\nThe bench or show type has a long, flowing coat that requires regular grooming. The field or hunting type has a shorter coat that requires less grooming.\nThe base colour of the coat is white with differing coloured ticking also called flecks or speckling. The various speckled coat colours when occurring in English Setters are referred to as \"belton\"; valid combinations are white with black flecks (\"blue belton\"), white with orange flecks (\"orange belton\"), white with orange flecks and lighter nose (\"lemon belton\"), white with liver flecks (\"liver belton\"), or \"tricolour\", which is blue or liver belton with tan markings on the face, chest, and legs. The flecking should not form large patches on the body and the flecks should be distributed all over the body. The use of the word \"belton\" was first coined by Laverack, who developed the breed in the 19th century, to describe his ideal for flecking and is also the name of a village in the extreme north of England. Puppies' coats may not have all the markings that they have as adults.\nTemperament.\nThis breed's standard temperament is best described as a \"Gentleman by Nature\". However, it can also be strong-willed and mischievous, especially if coming from working/field breeding lines. English Setters are energetic, people-oriented dogs, that are well suited to families who can give them attention and activity, or to working with a hunter, where they have a job to do. They are active dogs that need plenty of exercise and up to two hours a day of exercise is recommended. Inside they tend to be lower energy and love to be couch potatoes and lap dogs; the breed is described as \"intensely friendly,\" \"good natured,\" and \"adores visitors and is particularly happy with children.\"\nThey rank 37th in Stanley Coren's \"The Intelligence of Dogs\", being of above average working/obedience intelligence. English Setters are very intelligent and can be trained to perform about any task another breed can do, with the exception of herding. However, they are not always easy to train, as their natural bird instinct tends to distract them in outdoor environments. Their temperament is considered to be gentle and as English Setters can be very sensitive to criticism, positive reinforcement training methods using treats and praise work best when undertaking basic training.\nHealth.\nA 2024 UK study found a life expectancy of 13.1 years for the breed compared to an average of 12.7 for purebreeds and 12 for crossbreeds. A 2024 Italian study found a life expectancy of 10 years for the breed compared to 10 years overall.\nDogs, both pedigree and cross breeds, can be affected with genetic problems. Those known to sometimes occur in English Setters can include congenital deafness, which was reported as affecting 12.4 percent of the 701 English Setters tested by the Louisiana State University in 2010. As at 2013, there has not been any detailed research on this condition undertaken in the UK; autoimmune thyroiditis, which was shown to affect 26.2 percent of 747 English Setters examined between January 1974 until December 2012 in an Orthopedic Foundation for Animals listing; canine hypothyroidism; elbow dysplasia; and allergies, which can include some sensitivity to certain food ingredients and also skin conditions, are known to occur.\nThe breed is predisposed to atopic dermatitis.\nFunction.\nSetters hunt by ranging over large distances in a systematic, methodical manner, silently seeking game by scent. When prey is found by scenting the air, the dog will freeze rather than give chase. The dog will stop in a sort of crouch or \"set\" by freezing in a standing position upon finding their quarry and this distinctive stance is how the term \"setter\" evolved. Once the dog has indicated where the birds are by freezing on point, on command it would then slowly creep forward to disturb the birds into flight. Once the birds were in flight the hunter who had been following the dog would release hawks to capture the birds in the air. When netting superseded the use of hawks, setting dogs would still be used to indicate the whereabouts of the birds, but the hunter would come up behind the dog and throw a net over the birds. In the mid-1600s, guns became more readily available and shooting game birds became a popular pastime of the landed gentry. The basic work of setters was still to find and point to the location of game birds but it also had to be steady to shot.\nThe scent of game birds is airborne so to pick up this scent the setter carries its head well up and should never follow foot scent. Most setters are born with a natural proclivity to hunting. Dogs that show excitement and interest in birds are described as being \"birdy\", and trainers look for puppies that show this particular trait. Training is usually done with quail as a first choice or domesticated pigeons.\nWriting in 1876, Arnold Burges described the \"pure-blooded English Setter\" as \"the best animal for American upland shooting\" in his book \"The American Kennel and Sporting Field\".\nEarly history.\n\"Setting dogges\" is an old term used for setters and the original purpose of the English Setter was to set or point upland game birds. From the best available information, it appears that the English Setter was a trained bird dog in England more than 400 years ago and there are works of art created in the early 15th century showing dogs that are discernible as being of a \"setter type\". There is evidence that the English Setter originated in crosses of the Spanish Pointer, large Water Spaniel, and English Springer Spaniel, which combined to produce an excellent bird dog with a high degree of proficiency in finding and pointing game in open country.\nWriting in 1576, Dr Johannes Caius states: \"There is also at this date among us a new kind of dogge brought out of Fraunce, and they bee speckled all over with white and black, which mingled colours incline to a marble blewe\". Argue speculates this may be a description of the blue belton colour found in English Setters.\nCaius went on to describe the dog called a setter using the Latin name index:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Another sort of Dogges be there, serviceable for fowling, making no noise either with foote or with tongue, whiles they follow the game. They attend diligently upon their Master and frame their condition to such beckes, motions and gestures, as it shall please him to exhibite and make, either going forward, drawing backeward, inclinding to the right hand, or yealding toward the left. When he hath founde the byrde, he keepeth sure and fast silence, he stayeth his steppes and wil proceede no further, and weth a close, covert watching eye, layeth his belly to the grounde and so creepth forward like a worme. When he approaches neere to the place where the byrde is, he layes him downe, and with a marcke of his pawes, betrayeth the place of the byrdes last abode, whereby it is supposed that this kind of dogge is calles in Index, Setter, being in deede a name most consonant and agreeable to his quality.\nBy the 17th century setters, or \"setting dogges\", had become established and were widespread on British estates, although the evolution into the more specific individual breeds of setters occurred at a later date. The interbreeding of the different colours was still taking place during this period but it gradually changed and sportsman/breeders began to segregate matings to dogs adapted to the terrain it was required to work on.\nBreed development.\nThe modern English Setter owes its appearance to Edward Laverack (1800\u20131877), who developed his own strain of the breed by careful breeding during the 19th century in England and to another Englishman, Richard Purcell Llewellin (1840\u20131925), who founded his strain using Laverack's best dogs and outcrossed them with the Duke, Rhoebe and later Duke's littermate Kate bloodlines with the best results.\nHistorically, many dogs descending from the same bloodline were referred to by the name of their breeder or owner and the nomenclatures \"Laverack Setter\" and \"Llewellin Setter\" describe English Setters bred by Laverack and Llewellin. Horace Lytle, one time gundog editor of \"Field &amp; Stream\", author and a well-known gundog trainer, clarified this in the book \"How to train your bird dog\", which he wrote in 1928:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Another tremendous uncertainty exists among the widest possible class of hunters with reference to the so-called Llewellin Setters. Llewellin Setters are nothing more \u2013 and nothing less \u2013 than English Setters. Llewellin Setters are simply English Setters that trace back to two particular English Setters. They represent a certain definite English Setter ancestry. That's all there is to it. Thus an English Setter may not always be a \"Llewellin\"; but a \"Llewellin\" is always an English Setter. Furthermore, the craze for this particular strain that came to this country with the importation of the first \"Llewellins\" caused ninety per cent of the owners of all Setters that are not either distinctly Irish or Gordon, to refer to their dogs as \"Llewellins\". Yet in ninety per cent of these cases, the dogs so referred to are not of the Llewellin strain at all. Not one person in a hundred who owns an English Setter can tell even from the pedigree whether the dog is of the Llewellin strain or not. They simply don't know. Most of those who refer to their Setters as \"Llewellins\" do so because the name is rather euphonious and pleasing to pronounce. Many of those who really do know, insist that their Llewellins be one hundred per cent, and they refer to those that are not as \"grades\". If there is even as little as 3 per cent \"outcross,\" these few are inclined to feel that the dog is nothing but a rank plebeian. All of which is really ridiculous \u2013 at least so think a good many of us who have thought the matter out.\nAround 1826, Reverend A Harrison of Carlisle in Cumbria sold a male dog called \"Ponto\" and a female named \"Old Moll\" to Laverack and this pair formed the foundation of his English Setters. Laverack did not know the exact pedigree of these dogs but maintained the strain had been pure-bred for the previous thirty-five years. Laverack closely inbred to these two dogs for generations and his bloodline was successful in dog shows and as a working dog in field trials.\nIn 1874, C. H. Raymond from Morris Plains, New Jersey imported the first English Setter from the Laverack bloodline to America. The working setter Count Noble descended from these early imports and is commemorated in the Carnegie Museums of Pittsburgh.\nLlewellin's strain was based on Laverack's best dogs, which were then outcrossed with the bloodlines of his dogs Duke, Rhoebe and later Duke's littermate, Kate. It was Kate bred with Laverack's best hunting males that produced Llewellin's ideals Fd.Ch.Ch. Armstrong's Dash II and later Fd.Ch.Ch Dashing Bondhu. They were the foundation of Llewellin's personal strain known as \"Dashing Bondhu\". William Humphrey (1882\u20131963) inherited them from Llewellin in 1925 and continued them pure until his death in 1963.\nJim the Wonder Dog, described as a Llewellin setter, was said to have \"possessed an occult power\" and there is a bronze statue of him in a memorial garden on the square in Marshall, Missouri, built to commemorate him.\nIn competitions.\nThe field type and show type English Setter look very different, even though they are the same breed. Field type setters are often smaller and are seen with less feathering and usually more distinctive spotting than show type setters. Both traits are beneficial in the field: less feathering makes getting burs out of their coat easier and the spotting makes them easier to see in the field.\nEnglish Setters are classified within the gundog group in the UK and the Sporting group in America and Canada. The FCI place them in section 2, British and Irish Pointers and Setters, of Group 7.\nIn the English Setter breed, compared to other breeds, there are very few Dual Champions. The Kennel Club have four champion titles available to be achieved by setters competing in the UK. These are Show Champion (Sh Ch) which is awarded to dogs who have won three Challenge Certificates (CCs) under three different judges with at least one CC won after 12 months of age; Champion (Ch) is the title gained by dogs who have won a Sh Ch title plus a field trial award, Diploma of Merit or a Show Gundog Working Certificate; Field Trial Champion (Ft Ch) means the dog has won a pointer or setter open stake or two first prizes at two different stakes under two different A Panel judges. There must be no less than 16 runners entered; and a Dual Champion \u2013 the highest award available to setters \u2013 is a dog who has achieved the titles of Show Champion and Field Trial Champion.\nAn English Setter called \"Countess\" was the first gun dog to ever attain a Dual Champion title. She was sired by Dash 2nd and her dam was Moll 3rd. Her breeder was Laverack, who sold her to Sam Lang; he in turn passed her on to Llewellin in whose name she was entered in field trials.\nIn the U.K., the breed has been successful at Crufts and secured the award of Best in Show in 1964, 1977 and 1988. At the Westminster show in America an English Setter won the Best in Show title in 1938. He was only 11 months old and at his first show. This was before entry to the show was restricted to Champions in 1992. As of 2013, he is the only setter to achieve Best in Show at Westminster since the award of Best in Show started to be made in 1907.\nRegistrations.\nWhen the American Kennel Club was established in 1878, English Setters, together with eight other sporting breeds, were accepted as the first pure-bred registrations by the club. The very first dog registered with the AKC and the holder of registration number one was an English Setter named \"Adonis\". He was born in 1875 and is recorded as sired by \"Leicester\" out of a bitch named \"Dart\". His colours were given as black, white and tan. He was owned by his breeder George E. Delano of New Bedford, MA.\nEnglish Setters were especially popular in the UK during the 1960s, 70s and 80s and registrations of puppies reached 1344 during 1974. In 2012, the Kennel Club listed the English Setter amongst the Vulnerable Native Breeds as only 234 puppies were registered. A decade earlier, in 2002, there were 568 English Setter puppies registered. However, during 2012 the number of English Setter puppies registered increased to 314, so the breed was moved to the Kennel Club's \"At Watch\" list, which is for breeds with registrations from 300 to 450. In 2015 registrations fell to 289 resulting in a return to the Vulnerable Native Breeds list for 2016. The breed is still fairly well represented in Italy, where it is popular as a working gun-dog. Even in Italy, however the breed is in sharp decline, going from 20,999 registrations in 2002, to 14510 registrations in 2011. In contrast, the American Kennel Club stated that 2011 was the \"year of the setters, with all four making big jumps over the past year\". English Setters had previously ranked at 101 in 2010 but moved up to 87 in 2011, a position the breed maintained in 2012. As of 2024 the ranking has dropped to 93rd.\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "62893", "revid": "13286072", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62893", "title": "Dingo", "text": "Canid species native to Australia\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Taxobox/core/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe dingo (either included in the species Canis familiaris, or considered one of the following independent taxa: Canis familiaris dingo, Canis dingo, or Canis lupus dingo) is an ancient (basal) lineage of dog found in Australia. Its taxonomic classification is debated as indicated by the variety of scientific names presently applied in different publications. It is variously considered a form of domestic dog not warranting recognition as a subspecies, a subspecies of dog or wolf, or a full species in its own right.\nThe dingo is a medium-sized canine that possesses a lean, hardy body adapted for speed, agility, and stamina. The dingo's three main coat colourations are light ginger or tan, black and tan, or creamy white. The skull is wedge-shaped and appears large in proportion to the body. The dingo is closely related to the New Guinea singing dog: their lineage split early from the lineage that led to today's domestic dogs, and can be traced back through Maritime Southeast Asia to Asia. The oldest remains of dingoes discovered in Australia are around 3,500 years old.\nA dingo pack usually consists of a mated pair, their offspring from the current year, and sometimes offspring from the previous year.\nEtymology.\nThe name \"dingo\" comes from the Dharug language used by the Indigenous Australians of the Sydney area. \nThe first British colonists to arrive in Australia in 1788 established a settlement at Port Jackson and noted \"dingoes\" living with Indigenous Australians. The name was first recorded in 1789 by Watkin Tench in his \"Narrative of the Expedition to Botany Bay\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nRelated Dharug words include \"ting-ko\" meaning \"bitch\", and \"tun-go-wo-re-gal\" meaning \"large dog\". The dingo has different names in different indigenous Australian languages, such as \"boolomo\", \"dwer-da\", \"joogoong\", \"kal\", \"kurpany\", \"maliki\", \"mirigung\", \"noggum\", \"papa-inura\", and \"wantibirri\". Some authors propose that a difference existed between camp dingoes and wild dingoes as they had different names among indigenous tribes. The people of the Yarralin, Northern Territory, region frequently call those dingoes that live with them \"walaku\", and those that live in the wilderness \"ngurakin\". They also use the name \"walaku\" to refer to both dingoes and dogs. The colonial settlers of New South Wales wrote using the name dingo only for camp dogs. It is proposed that in New South Wales the camp dingoes only became wild after the colonial destruction of Aboriginal society.\nTaxonomy.\nDogs associated with indigenous people were first recorded by Jan Carstenszoon in the Cape York Peninsula area in 1623. In 1699, Captain William Dampier visited the coast of what is now Western Australia and recorded that \"my men saw two or three beasts like hungry wolves, lean like so many skeletons, being nothing but skin and bones\". In 1788, the First Fleet arrived in Botany Bay under the command of Australia's first colonial governor, Arthur Phillip, who took ownership of a dingo and in his journal made a brief description with an illustration of the \"Dog of New South Wales\". In 1793, based on Phillip's brief description and illustration, the \"Dog of New South Wales\" was classified by Friedrich Meyer as \"Canis dingo\".\nIn 1999, a study of the maternal lineage through the use of mitochondrial DNA (mDNA) as a genetic marker indicates that the dingo and New Guinea singing dog developed at a time when human populations were more isolated from each other. In the third edition of \"Mammal Species of the World,\" published in 2005, the mammalogist W. Christopher Wozencraft listed under the wolf \"Canis lupus\" its wild subspecies, and proposed two additional subspecies: \"\"familiaris\" Linnaeus, 1758 [domestic dog]\" and \"\"dingo\" Meyer, 1793 [domestic dog]\". Wozencraft included \"hallstromi\"\u2014the New Guinea singing dog\u2014as a taxonomic synonym for the dingo. He referred to the mDNA study as one of the guides in forming his decision. The inclusion of \"familiaris\" and \"dingo\" under a \"domestic dog\" clade has been noted by other mammalogists, and their classification under the wolf debated.\nIn 2019, a workshop hosted by the IUCN/SSC Canid Specialist Group considered the New Guinea singing dog and the dingo to be feral dogs (\"Canis familiaris\"), which therefore should not be assessed for the IUCN Red List.\nIn 2020, the American Society of Mammalogists considered the dingo a synonym of the domestic dog. Recent DNA sequencing of a 'pure' wild dingo from South Australia suggests that the dingo has a different DNA methylation pattern to the German Shepherd. In 2024, a study found that the Dingo and New Guinea singing dog show 5.5% genome introgression from the ancestor of the recently extinct Japanese wolf, with Japanese dogs showing 4% genome introgression. This introgression occurred before the ancestor of the Japanese wolf arrived in Japan.\nDomestic status.\nThe dingo is regarded as a feral dog because it descended from domesticated ancestors. The dingo's relationship with Indigenous Australians is one of commensalism, in which two organisms live in close association, but do not depend on each other for survival. They both hunt and sleep together. The dingo is, therefore, comfortable enough around humans to associate with them, but is still capable of living independently. Any free-ranging, unowned dog can be socialised to become an owned dog, as some dingoes do when they join human families. Although the dingo exists in the wild, it associates with humans, but has not been selectively bred unlike other domesticated animals. Therefore, its status as a domestic animal is not clear. Whether the dingo was a wild or domesticated species was not clarified from Meyer's original description, which translated from the German language reads:\nIt is not known if it is the only dog species in New South Wales, and if it can also still be found in the wild state; however, so far it appears to have lost little of its wild condition; moreover, no divergent varieties have been discovered.\nHistory.\nThe earliest known dingo remains, found in Western Australia, date to 3,450 years ago. Based on a comparison of modern dingoes with these early remains, dingo morphology has not changed over these thousands of years. This suggests that no artificial selection has been applied over this period and that the dingo represents an early form of dog. They have lived, bred, and undergone natural selection in the wild, isolated from other dogs until the arrival of European settlers, resulting in a unique breed.\nIn 2020, an mDNA study of ancient dog remains from the Yellow River and Yangtze River basins of southern China showed that most of the ancient dogs fell within haplogroup A1b, as do the Australian dingoes and the pre-colonial dogs of the Pacific, but in low frequency in China today. The specimen from the Tianluoshan archaeological site, Zhejiang province dates to 7,000\u00a0YBP (years before present) and is basal to the entire haplogroup A1b lineage. The dogs belonging to this haplogroup were once widely distributed in southern China, then dispersed through Southeast Asia into New Guinea and Oceania, but were replaced in China by dogs of other lineages 2,000\u00a0YBP.\nThe oldest reliable date for dog remains found in mainland Southeast Asia is from Vietnam at 4,000\u00a0YBP, and in Island Southeast Asia from Timor-Leste at 3,000\u00a0YBP. The earliest dingo remains in the Torres Straits date to 2,100\u00a0YBP. In New Guinea, the earliest dog remains date to 2,500\u20132,300 YBP from Caution Bay near Port Moresby, but no ancient New Guinea singing dog remains have been found.\nThe earliest dingo skeletal remains in Australia are estimated at 3,450\u00a0YBP from the Madura Caves on the Nullarbor Plain, south-eastern Western Australia; 3,320\u00a0YBP from Woombah Midden near Woombah, New South Wales; and 3,170\u00a0YBP from Fromme's Landing on the Murray River near Mannum, South Australia. Dingo bone fragments were found in a rock shelter located at Mount Burr, South Australia, in a layer that was originally dated 7,000\u20138,500 YBP. Excavations later indicated that the levels had been disturbed, and the dingo remains \"probably moved to an earlier level.\" The dating of these early Australian dingo fossils led to the widely held belief that dingoes first arrived in Australia 4,000 YBP and then took 500 years to disperse around the continent. However, the timing of these skeletal remains was based on the dating of the sediments in which they were discovered, and not the specimens themselves.\nIn 2018, the oldest skeletal bones from the Madura Caves were directly carbon dated between 3,348 and 3,081 YBP, providing the earliest evidence of the dingo and that dingoes may have arrived later than had previously been proposed. The next-most reliable timing is based on desiccated flesh dated 2,200\u00a0YBP from Thylacine Hole, 110\u00a0km west of Eucla on the Nullarbor Plain, southeastern Western Australia. When dingoes first arrived, they would have been taken up by Indigenous Australians, who then provided a network for their swift transfer around the continent. Based on the recorded distribution time for dogs across Tasmania and cats across Australia once indigenous Australians had acquired them, the dispersal of dingoes from their point of landing until they occupied continental Australia is proposed to have taken only 70 years. The red fox is estimated to have dispersed across the continent in only 60\u201380 years.\nAt the end of the last glacial maximum and the associated rise in sea levels, Tasmania became separated from the Australian mainland 12,000\u00a0YBP, and New Guinea 6,500\u20138,500 YBP by the inundation of the Sahul Shelf. Fossil remains in Australia date to around 3,500\u00a0YBP and no dingo remains have been uncovered in Tasmania, so the dingo is estimated to have arrived in Australia at a time between 3,500 and 12,000 YBP. To reach Australia through Island Southeast Asia even at the lowest sea level of the last glacial maximum, a journey of at least over open sea between ancient Sunda and Sahul was necessary, so they must have accompanied humans on boats.\nPhylogeny.\nWhole genome sequencing indicates that, while dogs are a genetically divergent subspecies of the grey wolf, the dog is not a descendant of the extant grey wolf. Rather, these are sister taxa that share a common ancestor from a ghost population of wolves that disappeared at the end of the Late Pleistocene. The dog and the dingo are not considered separate species by all researchers, with those considering the dingo to be a member of C. familiaris referring to them as a basal breed, alongside the Basenji.\nMitochondrial genome sequences indicate that the dingo falls within the domestic dog clade, and that the New Guinea singing dog is genetically closer to those dingoes that live in southeastern Australia than to those that live in the northwest. The dingo and New Guinea singing dog lineage can be traced back from Island Southeast Asia to Mainland Southeast Asia. Gene flow from the genetically divergent Tibetan wolf forms 2% of the dingo's genome, which likely represents ancient admixture in eastern Eurasia.\nBy the close of the last ice age 11,700\u00a0years ago, five ancestral dog lineages had diversified from each other, with one of these being represented today by the New Guinea singing dog. In 2020, the first whole genome sequencing of the dingo and the New Guinea singing dog was undertaken. The study indicates that the ancestral lineage of the dingo/New Guinea singing dog clade arose in southern East Asia, migrated through Island Southeast Asia 9,900\u00a0YBP, and reached Australia 8,300\u00a0YBP; however, the human population which brought them remains unknown. The dingo's genome indicates that it was once a domestic dog which commenced a process of feralisation since its arrival 8,300\u00a0years ago, with the new environment leading to changes in those genomic regions which regulate metabolism, neurodevelopment, and reproduction.\nA 2016 genetic study shows that the lineage of those dingoes found today in the northwestern part of the Australian continent split from the lineage of the New Guinea singing dog and southeastern dingo 8,300\u00a0years ago, followed by a split between the New Guinea singing dog lineage from the southeastern dingo lineage 7,800\u00a0years ago. The study proposes that two dingo migrations occurred when sea levels were lower and Australia and New Guinea formed one landmass named Sahul that existed until 6,500\u20138,000 years ago. Whole genome analysis of the dingo indicates there are three sub-populations which exist in Northeast (Tropical), Southeast (Alpine), and West/Central Australia (Desert). Morphological data showing the dingo skulls from Southeastern Australia (Alpine dingoes) being quite distinct from the other ecotypes. And genomic and mitochondrial DNA sequencing demonstrating at least 2 dingo mtDNA haplotypes colonised Australia.\nIn 2020, a genetic study found that the New Guinea Highland wild dogs were genetically basal to the dingo and the New Guinea singing dog, and therefore the potential originator of both.\nDescription.\nThe dingo is a medium-sized canid with a lean, hardy body that is adapted for speed, agility, and stamina. The head is the widest part of the body, wedge-shaped, and large in proportion to the body. Captive dingoes are longer and heavier than wild dingoes, as they have access to better food and veterinary care. The average wild dingo male weighs and the female , compared with the captive male and the female . The average wild dingo male length is and the female , compared with the captive male and the female . The average wild dingo male stands at the shoulder height of and the female , compared with the captive male and the female . Dingoes rarely carry excess fat and the wild ones display exposed ribs. Dingoes from northern and northwestern Australia are often larger than those found in central and southern Australia. The dingo is similar to the New Guinea singing dog in morphology apart from the dingo's greater height at the withers. The average dingo can reach speeds of up to 60 kilometres per hour.\nCompared with the dog, the dingo is able to rotate its wrists and can turn doorknobs or raise latches in order to escape confinement. Dingo shoulder joints are unusually flexible, and they can climb fences, cliffs, trees, and rocks. These adaptations help dingoes climbing in difficult terrain, where they prefer high vantage points. A similar adaptation can be found in the Norwegian Lundehund, which was developed on isolated Norwegian islands to hunt in cliff and rocky areas. Wolves do not have this ability.\nCompared with the skull of the dog, the dingo possesses a longer muzzle, longer carnassial teeth, longer and more slender canine teeth, larger auditory bullae, a flatter cranium with a larger sagittal crest, and larger nuchal lines. In 2014, a study was conducted on pre-20th century dingo specimens that are unlikely to have been influenced by later hybridisation. The dingo skull was found to differ relative to the domestic dog by its larger palatal width, longer rostrum, shorter skull height, and wider sagittal crest. However, this was rebutted with the figures falling within the wider range of the domestic dog and that each dog breed differs from the others in skull measurements. Based on a comparison with the remains of a dingo found at Fromme's Landing, the dingo's skull and skeleton have not changed over the past 3,000 years. Compared to the wolf, the dingo possesses a paedomorphic cranium similar to domestic dogs. However, the dingo has a larger brain size compared to dogs of the same body weight, with the dingo being more comparable with the wolf than dogs are. In this respect, the dingo resembles two similar mesopredators, the dhole and the coyote. The eyes are triangular (or almond-shaped) and are hazel to dark in colour with dark rims. The ears are erect and occur high on the skull.\nCoat colour.\nThe dingo's three main coat colours are described as being light ginger (or tan), black and tan, and creamy white. The ginger colour ranges from a deep rust to a pale cream and can be found in 74% of dingoes. Often, small white markings are seen on the tip of the tail, the feet, and the chest, but with no large white patches. Some do not exhibit white tips. The black and tan dingoes possess a black coat with a tan muzzle, chest, belly, legs, and feet and can be found in 12% of dingoes. Solid white can be found in 2% of dingoes and solid black 1%.\nOnly three genes affect coat colour in the dingo compared with nine genes in the domestic dog. The ginger colour is dominant and carries the other three main colours \u2013 black, tan, and white. White dingoes breed true, and black and tan dingoes breed true; when these cross, the result is a sandy colour. The coat is not oily, nor does it have a dog-like odour. The dingo has a single coat in the tropical north of Australia and a double thick coat in the cold mountains of the south, the undercoat being a wolf-grey colour. Patchy and brindle coat colours can be found in dingoes with no dog ancestry and these colours are less common in dingoes of mixed ancestry.\nTail.\nThe dingo's tail is flattish, tapering after mid-length and does not curve over the back, but is carried low.\nGait.\nWhen walking, the dingo's rear foot steps in line with the front foot, and these do not possess dewclaws.\nLifespan.\nDingoes in the wild live 3\u20135 years with few living past 7\u20138 years. Some have been recorded living up to 10 years. In captivity, they live for 14\u201316 years. One dingo has been recorded to live just under 20 years.\nAdaptation.\nHybrids, distribution and habitat.\nThe wolf-like canids are a group of large carnivores that are genetically closely related because their chromosomes number 78; therefore they can potentially interbreed to produce fertile hybrids. In the Australian wild there exist dingoes, feral dogs, and the crossings of these two, which produce dingo\u2013dog hybrids. Most studies looking at the distribution of dingoes focus on the distribution of dingo\u2013dog hybrids, instead.\nDingoes occurred throughout mainland Australia before European colonisation. They are not found in the fossil record of Tasmania, so they apparently arrived in Australia after Tasmania had separated from the mainland due to rising sea levels. The introduction of agriculture reduced dingo distribution, and by the early 1900s, large barrier fences, including the Dingo Fence, excluded them from the sheep-grazing areas. Land clearance, poisoning, and trapping caused the extinction of the dingo and hybrids from most of their former range in southern Queensland, New South Wales, Victoria, and South Australia. Today, they are absent from most of New South Wales, Victoria, the southeastern third of South Australia, and the southwestern tip of Western Australia. They are sparse in the eastern half of Western Australia and the adjoining areas of the Northern Territory and South Australia. They are regarded as common across the remainder of the continent.\nThe dingo could be considered an ecotype or an ecospecies that has adapted to Australia's unique environment. The dingo's present distribution covers a variety of habitats, including the temperate regions of eastern Australia, the alpine moorlands of the eastern highlands, the arid hot deserts of Central Australia, and the tropical forests and wetlands of Northern Australia. The occupation of, and adaption to, these habitats may have been assisted by their relationship with indigenous Australians.\nPrey and diet.\nA 20-year study of the dingo's diet was conducted across Australia by the federal and state governments. These examined a total of 13,000 stomach contents and fecal samples. For the fecal samples, determining the matching tracks of foxes and feral cats was possible without including these samples in the study, but in distinguishing between the tracks left by dingoes and those of dingo hybrids or feral dogs was impossible. The study found that these canines prey on 177 species represented by 72.3% mammals (71 species), 18.8% birds (53 species), 3.3% vegetation (seeds), 1.8% reptiles (23 species), and 3.8% insects, fish, crabs, and frogs (28 species). The relative proportions of prey are much the same across Australia, apart from more birds being eaten in the north and south-east coastal regions, and more lizards in Central Australia. Some 80% of the diet consisted of 11 species: red kangaroo, swamp wallaby, cattle, sheep, dusky rat, magpie goose, common brushtail possum, long-haired rat, agile wallaby, European rabbit, and common wombat. Of the mammals eaten, 20% could be regarded as large.\nHowever, the relative proportions of the size of prey mammals varied across regions. In the tropical coast region of northern Australia, agile wallabies, dusky rats, and magpie geese formed 80% of the diet. In Central Australia, the rabbit has become a substitute for native mammals, and during droughts, cattle carcasses provide most of the diet. On the Barkly Tableland, no rabbits occur nor does any native species dominate the diet, except for long-haired rats that form occasional plagues. In the Fortescue River region, the large red kangaroo and common wallaroo dominate the diet, as few smaller mammals are found in this area. On the Nullarbor Plain, rabbits and red kangaroos dominate the diet, and twice as much rabbit is eaten as red kangaroo. In the temperate mountains of eastern Australia, swamp wallaby and red-necked wallaby dominate the diet on the lower slopes and wombat on the higher slopes. Possums are commonly eaten here when found on the ground. In coastal regions, dingoes patrol the beaches for washed-up fish, seals, penguins, and other birds.\nDingoes drink about a litre of water each day in the summer and half a litre in winter. In arid regions during the winter, dingoes may live from the liquid in the bodies of their prey, as long as the number of prey is sufficient. In arid Central Australia, weaned pups draw most of their water from their food. There, regurgitation of water by the females for the pups was observed. During lactation, captive females have no higher need of water than usual, since they consume the urine and feces of the pups, thus recycling the water and keeping the den clean. Tracked dingoes in the Strzelecki Desert regularly visited water-points every 3\u20135 days, with two dingoes surviving 22 days without water during both winter and summer.\nHunting behaviour.\nDingoes, dingo hybrids, and feral dogs usually attack from the rear as they pursue their prey. They kill their prey by biting the throat, which damages the trachea and the major blood vessels of the neck. The size of the hunting pack is determined by the type of prey targeted, with large packs formed to help hunt large prey. Large prey can include kangaroos, cattle, water buffalo, and feral horses. Dingoes will assess and target prey based on the prey's ability to inflict damage. Large kangaroos are the most commonly killed prey. The main tactic is to sight the kangaroo, bail it up, then kill it.\nDingoes typically hunt large kangaroos by having lead dingoes chase the quarry toward the paths of their pack mates, which are skilled at cutting corners in chases. The kangaroo becomes exhausted and is then killed. This same tactic is used by wolves, African wild dogs, and hyenas. Another tactic shared with African wild dogs is a relay pursuit until the prey is exhausted. A pack of dingoes is three times as likely to bring down a kangaroo than an individual because the killing is done by those following the lead chaser, which has also become exhausted.\nTwo patterns are seen for the final stage of the attack. An adult or juvenile kangaroo is nipped at the hamstrings of the hind legs to slow it before an attack to the throat. A small adult female or juvenile is bitten on the neck or back by dingoes running beside it. In one area of Central Australia, dingoes hunt kangaroos by chasing them into a wire fence, where they become temporarily immobilised.\nThe largest male red kangaroos tend to ignore dingoes, even when the dingoes are hunting the younger males and females. A large eastern grey kangaroo successfully fought off an attack by a single dingo that lasted over an hour. Wallabies are hunted in a similar manner to kangaroos, the difference being that a single dingo hunts using scent rather than sight and the hunt may last several hours.\nDingo packs may attack young cattle and buffalo, but never healthy, grown adults. They focus on the sick or injured young. The tactics include harassing a mother with young, panicking a herd to separate the adults from the young, or watching a herd and looking for any unusual behaviour that might then be exploited.\nOne 1992 study in the Fortescue River region observed that cattle defend their calves by circling around the calves or aggressively charging dingoes. In one study of 26 approaches, 24 were by more than one dingo and only four resulted in calves being killed.\nDingoes often revisited carcasses. They did not touch fresh cattle carcasses until these were largely skin and bone, and even when these were plentiful, they still preferred to hunt kangaroos.\nOf 68 chases of sheep, 26 sheep were seriously injured, but only eight were killed. The dingoes could outrun the sheep and the sheep were defenceless. However, the dingoes in general appeared not to be motivated to kill sheep, and in many cases just loped alongside the sheep before veering off to chase another sheep. For those that did kill and consume sheep, a large quantity of kangaroo was still in their diet, indicating once again a preference for kangaroo. \nLone dingoes can run down a rabbit, but are more successful by targeting kits near rabbit warrens. Dingoes take nestling birds, in addition to birds that are moulting and therefore cannot fly. Predators often use highly intelligent hunting techniques. Dingoes on Fraser Island have been observed using waves to entrap, tire, and help drown an adult swamp wallaby and an echidna. In the coastal wetlands of northern Australia, dingoes depend on magpie geese for a large part of their diet and a lone dingo sometimes distracts these while a white-breasted sea eagle makes a kill that is too heavy for it to carry off, with the dingo then driving the sea eagle away. They also scavenge on prey dropped from the nesting platforms of sea eagles. Lone dingoes may hunt small rodents and grasshoppers in grass by using their senses of smell and hearing, then pouncing on them with their forepaws.\nCompetitors.\nDingoes and their hybrids co-exist with the native quoll. They also co-occur in the same territory as the introduced European red fox and feral cat, but little is known about the relationships among these three. Dingoes and their hybrids can drive off foxes from sources of water and occasionally eat feral cats. Dingoes can be killed by feral water buffalo and cattle goring and kicking them, from snake bite, and predation on their pups (and occasionally adults) by wedge-tailed eagles.\nCommunication.\nLike all domestic dogs, dingoes tend towards phonetic communication. However, in contrast to domestic dogs, dingoes howl and whimper more, and bark less. Eight sound classes with 19 sound types have been identified.\nBarking.\nCompared to most domestic dogs, the bark of a dingo is short and monosyllabic, and is rarely used. Barking was observed to make up only 5% of vocalisations. Dog barking has always been distinct from wolf barking. Australian dingoes bark mainly in swooshing noises or in a mixture of atonal and tonal sounds. In addition, barking is almost exclusively used for giving warnings. Warn-barking in a homotypical sequence and a kind of \"warn-howling\" in a heterotypical sequence have also been observed. The bark-howling starts with several barks and then fades into a rising and ebbing howl and is probably (similar to coughing) used to warn the puppies and members of the pack. Additionally, dingoes emit a sort of \"wailing\" sound, which they mostly use when approaching a watering hole, probably to warn already present dingoes.\nAccording to the present state of knowledge, getting Australian dingoes to bark more frequently by putting them in contact with other domestic dogs is not possible. However, German zoologist Alfred Brehm reported a dingo that learned the more \"typical\" form of barking and how to use it, while its brother did not. Whether dingoes bark or bark-howl less frequently in general is not certain.\nHowling.\nDingoes have three basic forms of howling (moans, bark-howls, and snuffs) with at least 10 variations. Usually, three kinds of howls are distinguished: long and persistent, rising and ebbing, and short and abrupt.\nObservations have shown that each kind of howling has several variations, though their purpose is unknown. The frequency of howling varies with the season and time of day, and is also influenced by breeding, migration, lactation, social stability, and dispersal behaviour. Howling can be more frequent in times of food shortage, because the dogs become more widely distributed within their home range.\nAdditionally, howling seems to have a group function, and is sometimes an expression of joy (for example, greeting-howls). Overall, howling was observed less frequently in dingoes than among grey wolves. It may happen that one dog will begin to howl, and several or all other dogs will howl back and bark from time to time. In the wilderness, dingoes howl over long distances to attract other members of the pack, to find other dogs, or to keep intruders at bay. Dingoes howl in chorus with significant pitches, and with increasing number of pack members, the variability of pitches also increases. Therefore, dingoes are suspected to be able to measure the size of a pack without visual contact. Moreover, their highly variable chorus howls have been proposed to generate a confounding effect in the receivers by making pack size appear larger.\nOther forms.\nGrowling, making up about 65% of the vocalisations, is used in an agonistic context for dominance, and as a defensive sound. Similar to many domestic dogs, a reactive usage of defensive growling is only rarely observed. Growling very often occurs in combination with other sounds, and has been observed almost exclusively in swooshing noises (similar to barking).\nDuring observations in Germany, dingoes were heard to produce a sound that observers have called \"Schrappen\". It was only observed in an agonistic context, mostly as a defence against obtrusive pups or for defending resources. It was described as a bite intention, during which the receiver is never touched or hurt. Only a clashing of the teeth could be heard.\nAside from vocal communication, dingoes communicate, like all domestic dogs, via scent marking specific objects (for example, \"Spinifex\") or places (such as waters, trails, and hunting grounds) using chemical signals from their urine, feces, and scent glands. Males scent mark more frequently than females, especially during the mating season. They also scent rub, whereby a dog rolls its neck, shoulders, or back on something that is usually associated with food or the scent markings of other dogs.\nUnlike wolves, dingoes can react to social cues and gestures from humans.\nBehaviour.\nDingoes tend to be nocturnal in warmer regions, but less so in cooler areas. Their main period of activity is around dusk and dawn, making them a crepuscular species in the colder climates. The periods of activity are short (often less than 1 hour) with short times of resting. Dingoes have two kinds of movement: a searching movement (apparently associated with hunting) and an exploratory movement (probably for contact and communication with other dogs). According to studies in Queensland, the wild dogs (dingo hybrids) there move freely at night through urban areas and cross streets and seem to get along quite well.\nSocial behaviour.\nThe dingo's social behaviour is about as flexible as that of a coyote or grey wolf, which is perhaps one of the reasons the dingo was originally believed to have descended from the Indian wolf. While young males are often solitary and nomadic in nature, breeding adults often form a settled pack. However, in areas of the dingo's habitat with a widely spaced population, breeding pairs remain together, apart from others. Dingo distributions are a single dingo, 73%; two dingoes, 16%; three dingoes, 5%; four dingoes, 3%; and packs of five to seven dingoes, 3%. A dingo pack usually consists of a mated pair, their offspring from the current year, and sometimes offspring from the previous year.\nWhere conditions are favourable among dingo packs, the pack is stable with a distinct territory and little overlap between neighbours. The size of packs often appears to correspond to the size of prey available in the pack's territory. Desert areas have smaller groups of dingoes with a more loose territorial behaviour and sharing of the water sites. The average monthly pack size was noted to be between three and 12 members.\nSimilar to other canids, a dingo pack largely consists of a mated pair, their current year's offspring, and occasionally a previous year's offspring. Dominance hierarchies exist both between and within males and females, with males usually being more dominant than females. However, a few exceptions have been noted in captive packs. During travel, while eating prey, or when approaching a water source for the first time, the breeding male will be seen as the leader, or alpha. Subordinate dingoes approach a more dominant dog in a slightly crouched posture, ears flat, and tail down, to ensure peace in the pack. Establishment of artificial packs in captive dingoes has failed.\nReproduction.\nDingoes breed once annually, depending on the estrous cycle of the females, which according to most sources, only come in heat once per year. Dingo females can come in heat twice per year, but can only be pregnant once a year, with the second time only seeming to be pregnant.\nMales are virile throughout the year in most regions, but have a lower sperm production during the summer in most cases. During studies on dingoes from the Eastern Highlands and Central Australia in captivity, no specific breeding cycle could be observed. All were potent throughout the year. The breeding was only regulated by the heat of the females. A rise in testosterone was observed in the males during the breeding season, but this was attributed to the heat of the females and copulation. In contrast to the captive dingoes, captured dingo males from Central Australia did show evidence of a male breeding cycle. Those dingoes showed no interest in females in heat (this time other domestic dogs) outside the mating season (January to July) and did not breed with them.\nThe mating season usually occurs in Australia between March and May (according to other sources between April and June). During this time, dingoes may actively defend their territories using vocalisations, dominance behaviour, growling, and barking.\nMost females in the wild start breeding at the age of 2 years. Within packs, the alpha female tends to go into heat before subordinates and actively suppresses mating attempts by other females. Males become sexually mature between the ages of 1 and 3 years. The precise start of breeding varies depending on age, social status, geographic range, and seasonal conditions. Among dingoes in captivity, the pre-estrus was observed to last 10\u201312 days. However, the pre-estrus may last as long as 60 days in the wild.\nIn general, the only dingoes in a pack that successfully breed are the alpha pair, and the other pack members help with raising the pups. Subordinates are actively prevented from breeding by the alpha pair and some subordinate females have a false pregnancy. Low-ranking or solitary dingoes can successfully breed if the pack structure breaks up.\nThe gestation period lasts for 61\u201369 days and the size of the litter can range from 1 to 10 (usually 5) pups, with the number of males born tending to be higher than that of females. Pups of subordinate females usually get killed by the alpha female, which causes the population increase to be low even in good times. This behaviour possibly developed as an adaptation to the fluctuating environmental conditions in Australia. Pups are usually born between May and August (the winter period), but in tropical regions, breeding can occur at any time of the year.\nAt the age of 3 weeks, the pups leave the den for the first time, and leave it completely at 8 weeks. Dens are mostly underground. Reports exist of dens in abandoned rabbit burrows, rock formations, under boulders in dry creeks, under large spinifex, in hollow logs, and augmented burrows of monitor lizards and wombat burrows. The pups usually stray around the den within a radius of , and are accompanied by older dogs during longer travels. The transition to consuming solid food is normally accomplished by all members of the pack during the age of 9 to 12 weeks. Apart from their own experiences, pups also learn through observation. Young dingoes usually become independent at the age of 3\u20136 months or they disperse at the age of 10 months, when the next mating season starts.\nMigration.\nDingoes usually remain in one area and do not undergo seasonal migrations. However, during times of famine, even in normally \"safe\" areas, dingoes travel into pastoral areas, where intensive, human-induced control measures are undertaken. In Western Australia in the 1970s, young dogs were found to travel for long distances when necessary. About 10% of the dogs captured\u2014all younger than 12 months\u2014were later recaptured far away from their first location. Among these, the average travelled distance for males was and for females . Therefore, travelling dingoes had lower chances of survival in foreign territories, and they are apparently unlikely to survive long migrations through occupied territories. The rarity of long migration routes seemed to confirm this. During investigations in the Nullarbor Plain, even longer migration routes were recorded. The longest recorded migration route of a radio-collared dingo was about .\nAttacks on humans.\nDingoes generally avoid conflict with humans, but they are large enough to be dangerous. Most attacks involve people feeding wild dingoes, particularly on K'gari (formerly Fraser Island), which is a special centre of dingo-related tourism. The vast majority of dingo attacks are minor in nature, but some can be major, and a few have been fatal: the death of two-month-old Azaria Chamberlain in the Northern Territory in 1980 is one of them. Many Australian national parks have signs advising visitors not to feed wildlife, partly because this practice is not healthy for the animals, and partly because it may encourage undesirable behaviour, such as snatching or biting by dingoes, kangaroos, goannas, and some birds.\nImpact.\nEcological.\nExtinction of thylacines.\nSome researchers propose that the dingo caused the extirpation of the thylacine, the Tasmanian devil, and the Tasmanian native hen from mainland Australia because of the correlation in space and time with the dingo's arrival. Recent studies have questioned this proposal, suggesting that climate change and increasing human populations may have been the cause. Dingoes do not seem to have had the same ecological impact that invasive red foxes have in modern times. This might be connected to the dingo's way of hunting and the size of their favoured prey, as well as to the low number of dingoes in the time before European colonisation.\nIn 2017, a genetic study found that the population of the northwestern dingoes had commenced expanding since 4,000\u20146,000 years ago. This was proposed to be due either to their first arrival in Australia or to the commencement of the extinction of the thylacine, with the dingo expanding into the thylacine's former range.\nInteractions with humans.\nThe first British colonists who settled at Port Jackson, in 1788, recorded the dingo living with indigenous Australians, and later at Melville Island, in 1818. Furthermore, they were noted at the lower Darling and Murray rivers in 1862, indicating that the dingo was possibly semi-domesticated (or at least utilised in a \"symbiotic\" manner) by aboriginal Australians. When livestock farming began expanding across Australia, in the early 19th century, dingoes began preying on sheep and cattle. Numerous population-control measures have been implemented since then, including a nation-wide fencing project, with only limited success.\nDingoes can be tame when they come in frequent contact with humans. Furthermore, some dingoes live with humans. Many indigenous Australians and early European settlers lived alongside dingoes. Indigenous Australians would take dingo pups from the den and tame them until sexual maturity and the dogs would leave.\nAccording to David Jenkins, a research fellow at Charles Sturt University, the breeding and reintroduction of pure dingoes is no easy option and, as of 2007, there were no studies that seriously dealt with this topic, especially in areas where dingo populations are already present.\nInteractions with other animals.\nMuch of the present place of dingoes in the Australian ecosystem, especially in the urban areas, remains unknown. Although the ecological role of dingoes in Northern and Central Australia is well understood, the same does not apply to the role of those in the east of the continent. In contrast to some claims, dingoes are assumed to have a positive impact on biodiversity in areas where feral foxes are present. Recently, the largest known population of critically endangered Night Parrots was discovered in an area kept free of introduced predators by dingos. Dingos have also been recorded regularly visiting the termite mound nests of another critically endangered species, the Golden-Shouldered Parrot, with successful fledging of these parrots noted by researchers as evidence that dingos actively drive other predators from the area.\nDingoes are regarded as apex predators and perform a key ecological function within the Australian continent. Increasingly, scientific evidence is proving they control the diversity of the ecosystem by limiting the population of prey species and keeping competition in check. Dingos hunt feral livestock such as goats and pigs, as well as other introduced animals and native wildlife species. The low number of feral goats in Northern Australia is possibly caused by the presence of the dingoes, but whether they control the goats' numbers is still disputable. Studies from 1995 in the northern wet forests of Australia found the dingoes there did not reduce the number of feral pigs, but their predation only affects the pig population together with the presence of water buffaloes (which hinder the pigs' access to food).\nObservations concerning the interaction between dingoes and populations of red fox and feral cats suggest dingoes limit the access of these predators to certain resources. As a result, a reduction in dingo population may cause an increase of red fox and feral cat numbers, and therefore, a higher pressure on native animals. These studies found the presence of dingoes is one of the factors that keep fox numbers in an area low, and therefore reduces pressure on native animals, which then do not disappear from the area. The countrywide numbers of red foxes are especially high where dingo numbers are low, but other factors might be responsible for this, depending on the area. Evidence was found for a competition between dingoes and red foxes in the Blue Mountains of New South Wales, since many overlaps occurred in the spectrum of preferred prey, but only evidence for local competition, not on a grand scale, was found.\nDingos can coexist with red foxes and feral cats without reducing their numbers in areas with sufficient food resources (for example, high rabbit numbers) and hiding places. Very little is known about the relationships between dingos and feral cats, except that both tend to live in the same areas. Although dingoes are also known to eat cats, whether this significantly affects the cat populations is unclear.\nAdditionally, the disappearance of dingoes might increase the prevalence of kangaroo, rabbit, and Australian brushturkey. In the areas outside the Dingo Fence, the number of emus is lower than in the areas inside. However, the numbers changed depending on the habitat. Since the environment is the same on both sides of the fence, the dingo appears to be a significant factor for the regulation of these species. Therefore, many conservationists suggest that dingo numbers should be allowed to increase, or dingoes reintroduced in areas with low dingo populations, to lower the pressure on endangered populations of native species and to aid reintroduction of these species in certain areas. In addition, the presence of the Australian brushturkey in Queensland increased significantly after dingo baiting was conducted.\nThe dingo's habitat covers most of Australia, but they are largely absent in the southeast and Tasmania, and an area in the southwest (see map). As Australia's largest extant terrestrial predators, dingoes prey on mammals up to the size of the large red kangaroo, in addition to the grey kangaroo, wombat, wallaby, quoll, possum and most other marsupials; they frequently pursue birds, lizards, fish, crabs, crayfish, eels, snakes, frogs, young crocodiles, larger insects, snails, carrion, human refuse, and sometimes fallen fruits or seeds.\nDingoes can also be of potential benefit to their environment, as they will hunt Australia's many introduced and invasive species. This includes human-introduced animals such as deer and their offspring (sambar, chital, and red deer) and water buffalo, in addition to the highly invasive rabbits, red foxes, feral and domestic cats, some feral dogs, sheep, and calves. Rarely, a pack of dingoes will pursue the larger and more dangerous dromedary camel, feral donkey, or feral horse; unattended young animals, or sick, weak, or elderly individuals are at greatest risk.\nCultural.\nCultural opinions about the dingo are often based on its perceived \"cunning\", and the idea that it is an intermediate between civilisation and wildness.\nSome of the early European settlers looked on dingoes as domestic dogs, while others thought they were more like wolves. Over the years, dingoes began to attack sheep, and their relationship to the Europeans changed very quickly; they were regarded as devious and cowardly, since they did not fight bravely in the eyes of the Europeans, and vanished into the bush. Additionally, they were seen as promiscuous or as devils with a venomous bite or saliva, so they could be killed unreservedly. Over the years, dingo trappers gained some prestige for their work, especially when they managed to kill hard-to-catch dingoes. Dingoes were associated with thieves, vagabonds, bushrangers, and parliamentary opponents. From the 1960s, politicians began calling their opponents \"dingo\", meaning they were cowardly and treacherous, and it has become a popular form of attack since then. Today, the word \"dingo\" still stands for \"coward\" and \"cheat\", with verb and adjective forms used, as well.\nThe image of the dingo has ranged among some groups from the instructive to the demonic.\nCeremonies (like a keen at the Cape York Peninsula in the form of howling) and dreamtime stories are connected to the dingo, which were passed down through the generations.\nThe dingo plays a prominent role in the Dreamtime stories of indigenous Australians, but it is rarely depicted in their cave paintings when compared with the extinct thylacine. One of the tribal elders of the people of the Yarralin, Northern Territory region tells that the Dreamtime dingo is the ancestor of both dingoes and humans. The dingoes \"are what we would be if we were not what we are.\"\nSimilar to how Europeans acquired dingoes, the Aboriginal people of Australia acquired dogs from the immigrants very quickly. This process was so fast that Francis Barrallier (surveyor on early expeditions around the colony at Port Jackson) discovered in 1802 that five dogs of European origin were there before him. One theory holds that other domestic dogs adopt the role of the \"pure\" dingo. Introduced animals, such as the water buffalo and the domestic cat, have been adopted into the indigenous Aboriginal culture in the forms of rituals, traditional paintings, and dreamtime stories.\nMost of the published myths originate from the Western Desert and show a remarkable complexity. In some stories, dingoes are the central characters, while in others, they are only minor ones. One time, an ancestor from the Dreamtime created humans and dingoes or gave them their current shape. Stories mention creation, socially acceptable behaviour, and explanations why some things are the way they are. Myths exist about shapeshifters (human to dingo or vice versa), \"dingo-people\", and the creation of certain landscapes or elements of those landscapes, like waterholes or mountains.\nEconomic.\nLivestock farming expanded across Australia from the early 1800s, which led to conflict between the dingo and graziers. Sheep, and to a lesser extent cattle, are an easy target for dingoes. The pastoralists and the government bodies that support this industry have shot, trapped, and poisoned dingoes or destroyed dingo pups in their dens. After two centuries of persecution, the dingo or dingo\u2013dog hybrids can still be found across most of the continent.\nResearch on the real extent of the damage and the reason for this problem only started recently. Livestock can die from many causes, and when the carcass is found, determining with certainty the cause of death is often difficult. Since the outcome of an attack on livestock depends to a high degree on the behaviour and experience of the predator and the prey, only direct observation is certain to determine whether an attack was by dingoes or other domestic dogs. Even the existence of remnants of the prey in the scat of wild dogs does not prove they are pests, since wild dogs also eat carrion.\nThe cattle industry can tolerate low to moderate, and sometimes high, numbers of wild dogs (therefore dingoes are not so easily regarded as pests in these areas). In the case of sheep and goats, a zero-tolerance attitude is common. The biggest threats are dogs that live inside or near the paddock areas. The extent of sheep loss is hard to determine due to the wide pasture lands in some parts of Australia.\nIn 2006, cattle losses in the Northern Territory rangeland grazing areas were estimated to be up to 30%.\nTherefore, factors such as availability of native prey, as well as the defending behaviour and health of the cattle, play an important role in the number of losses. A study in Central Australia in 2003 confirmed that dingoes only have a low impact on cattle numbers when a sufficient supply of other prey (such as kangaroos and rabbits) is available. In some parts of Australia, the loss of calves is assumed to be minimised if horned cattle are used instead of polled. The precise economic impact is not known, and the rescue of some calves is unlikely to compensate for the necessary costs of control measures. Calves usually suffer less lethal wounds than sheep due to their size and the protection by adult cattle, so they have a higher chance of surviving an attack. As a result, the evidence of a dog attack may only be discovered after the cattle have been herded back into the enclosure, and signs such as bitten ears, tails, and other wounds are discovered.\nThe opinions of cattle owners regarding dingoes are more variable than those of sheep owners. Some cattle owners believe that the weakened mother losing her calf is better in times of drought so that she does not have to care for her calf, too. Therefore, these owners are more hesitant to kill dingoes. The cattle industry may benefit from the predation of dingoes on rabbits, kangaroos, and rats. Furthermore, the mortality rate of calves has many possible causes, and discriminating between them is difficult. The only reliable method to assess the damage would be to document all pregnant cows, then observe their development and those of their calves. The loss of calves in observed areas where dingoes were controlled was higher than in other areas. Loss of livestock is, therefore, not necessarily caused by the occurrence of dingoes and is independent from wild dogs. One researcher has stated that for cattle stations where dingoes were controlled, kangaroos were abundant, and this affects the availability of grass.\nDomestic dogs are the only terrestrial predators in Australia that are big enough to kill fully grown sheep, and only a few sheep manage to recover from the severe injuries. In the case of lambs, death can have many causes apart from attacks by predators, which are blamed for the deaths because they eat from the carcasses. Although attacks by red foxes are possible, such attacks are more rare than previously thought. The fact that the sheep and goat industry is much more susceptible to damage caused by wild dogs than the cattle industry is mostly due to two factors \u2013 the flight behaviour of the sheep and their tendency to flock together in the face of danger, and the hunting methods of wild dogs, along with their efficient way of handling goats and sheep.\nTherefore, the damage to the livestock industry does not correlate to the numbers of wild dogs in an area (except that no damage occurs where no wild dogs occur).\nAccording to a report from the government of Queensland, wild dogs cost the state about $30 million annually due to livestock losses, the spread of diseases, and control measures. Losses for the livestock industry alone were estimated to be as high as $18 million. In Barcaldine, Queensland, up to one-fifth of all sheep are killed by dingoes annually, a situation which has been described as an \"epidemic\". According to a survey among cattle owners in 1995, performed by the Park and Wildlife Service, owners estimated their annual losses due to wild dogs (depending on the district) to be from 1.6% to 7.1%.\nIn 2018, a study in northern South Australia indicates that fetal/calf loss averages 18.6%, with no significant reduction due to dingo baiting. The calf losses did not correlate with increased dingo activity, and the cattle diseases pestivirus and leptospirosis were a major cause. Dingoes then scavenged on the carcasses. There was also evidence of dingo predation on calves.\nAmong the indigenous Australians, dingoes were also used as hunting aids, living hot water bottles, and camp dogs. Their scalps were used as a kind of currency, their teeth were traditionally used for decorative purposes, and their fur for traditional costumes.\nSometimes \"pure\" dingoes are important for tourism, when they are used to attract visitors. However, this seems to be common only on Fraser Island, where the dingoes are extensively used as a symbol to enhance the attraction of the island. Tourists are drawn to the experience of personally interacting with dingoes. Pictures of dingoes appear on brochures, many websites, and postcards advertising the island.\nLegal status.\nThe dingo is recognised as a native animal under the laws of all Australian jurisdictions. Australia has over 500 national parks of which all but six are managed by the states and territories. As of 2017[ [update]], the legal status of the dingo varies between these jurisdictions and in some instances it varies between different regions of a single jurisdiction. As of 2008[ [update]] some of these jurisdictions classify dingoes as an invasive native.\nControl measures.\nDingo attacks on livestock led to widescale efforts to repel them from areas with intensive agricultural usage, and all states and territories have enacted laws for the control of dingoes. In the early 20th century, fences were erected to keep dingoes away from areas frequented by sheep, and a tendency to routinely eradicate dingoes developed among some livestock owners. Established methods for the control of dingoes in sheep areas entailed the employment of specific workers on every property. The job of these people (who were nicknamed \"doggers\") was to reduce the number of dingoes by using steel traps, baits, firearms and other methods. The responsibility for the control of wild dogs lay solely in the hands of the landowners. At the same time, the government was forced to control the number of dingoes. As a result, a number of measures for the control of dingoes developed over time. It was also considered that dingoes travel over long distances to reach areas with richer prey populations, and the control methods were often concentrated along \"paths\" or \"trails\" and in areas that were far away from sheep areas. All dingoes were regarded as a potential danger and were hunted.\nApart from the introduction of the poison 1080 (extensively used for 40 years and nicknamed \"doggone\"), the methods and strategies for controlling wild dogs have changed little over time. Information concerning cultural importance to indigenous people and the importance of dingoes and the impact of control measures on other species is also lacking in some areas. Historically, the attitudes and needs of indigenous people were not taken into account when dingoes were controlled. Other factors that might be taken into account are the genetic status (degree of interbreeding) of dingoes in these areas, ownership and land usage, as well as a reduction of killing measures to areas outside the zones. However, most control measures and the appropriate studies are there to minimise the loss of livestock and not to protect dingoes.\nIncreasing pressure from environmentalists against the random killing of dingoes, as well as the impact on other animals, demanded that more information needed to be gathered to prove the necessity of control measures and to disprove the claim of unnecessary killings. Today, permanent population control is regarded as necessary to reduce the impact of all wild dogs and to ensure the survival of the \"pure\" dingo in the wild.\nGuardian animals.\nTo protect livestock, livestock guardian dogs (for example, Maremmas), donkeys, alpacas and llamas are used.&lt;ref name=\"wilddogs/dingo\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;\nDingo Fence.\nIn the 1920s, the Dingo Fence was erected on the basis of the \"Wild Dog Act (1921)\" and, until 1931, thousands of miles of Dingo Fences had been erected in several areas of South Australia. In the year 1946, these efforts were directed to a single goal, and the Dingo Fence was finally completed. The fence connected with other fences in New South Wales and Queensland. The main responsibilities in maintaining the Dingo Fence still lies with the landowners whose properties border on the fence and who receive financial support from the government.\nReward system.\nA reward system (local, as well from the government) was active from 1846 to the end of the 20th century, but there is no evidence that \u2013 despite the billions of dollars spent \u2013 it was ever an efficient control method. Therefore, its importance declined over time.\nDingo scalping commenced in 1912 with the passage of the Wild Dogs Act by the government of South Australia. In an attempt to reduce depredation on livestock, that government offered a bounty for dingo skins, and this program was later repeated in Western Australia and the Northern Territory. One writer argues that this new legislation and economic driver had significant impacts on Aboriginal society in the region. This act was followed by updates and amendments, including 1931, 1938, and 1948.\nPoisoning.\nBaits with the poison 1080 are regarded as the fastest and safest method for dog control, since they are extremely susceptible. Even small amounts of poison per dog are sufficient (0.3\u00a0mg per kg). The application of aerial baiting is regulated in the Commonwealth by the \"Civil Aviation Regulations (1988)\". The assumption that the tiger quoll might be damaged by the poison led to the dwindling of areas where aerial baiting could be performed. In areas where aerial baiting is no longer possible, it is necessary to put down baits.\nFrom 2004, cyanide-ejectors and protection collars (filled with 1080 on certain spots) have been tested.\nIn 2016, controversy surrounded a plan to inject a population of dingoes on Pelorus Island, off the coast of northern Queensland, Australia, with pills that would release a fatal dose of 1080 poison two years after the dingoes were to be intentionally released to help eradicate goats. The dingoes were dubbed 'death-row dingoes', and the plan was blocked due to concerns for a locally threatened shorebird.\nNeutering.\nOwners of dingoes and other domestic dogs are sometimes asked to neuter their pets and keep them under observation to reduce the number of stray/feral dogs and prevent interbreeding with dingoes.\nEfficiency of measures.\nThe efficiency of control measures was questioned in the past and is often questioned today, as well as whether they stand in a good cost-benefit ratio. The premium system proved to be susceptible to deception and to be useless on a large scale, and can therefore only be used for getting rid of \"problem-dogs\". Animal traps are considered inhumane and inefficient on a large scale, due to the limited efficacy of baits. Based on studies, it is assumed that only young dogs that would have died anyway can be captured. Furthermore, wild dogs are capable of learning and sometimes are able to detect and avoid traps quite efficiently. In one case, a dingo bitch followed a dogger and triggered his traps one after another by carefully pushing her paw through the sand that covered the trap.\nPoisonous baits can be very effective when they are of good meat quality; however, they do not last long and are occasionally taken by red foxes, quolls, ants and birds. Aerial baiting can nearly eliminate entire dingo populations. Livestock guardian dogs can effectively minimise livestock losses, but are less effective on wide open areas with widely distributed livestock. Furthermore, they can be a danger to the livestock or be killed by control measures themselves when they are not sufficiently supervised by their owners. Fences are reliable in keeping dingoes from entering certain areas, but they are expensive to build, need permanent maintenance, and only cause the problem to be relocated.\nControl measures mostly result in smaller packs and a disruption of pack structure. Culling of dingos, particularly older animals with clearly defined territories, may be a rather counterintuitive solution used by the livestock industry, because the empty territories are taken over by younger, less experienced individuals. Predation then often increases, as the younger dingoes tend to be more curious and impulsive, and less wary of human activity than their older counterparts. Additionally, removing adults from a family group prevents them passing learned behaviours, such as avoidance of human areas, on to their offspring. Nonetheless, it is regarded as unlikely that the control measures could completely eradicate the dingo in Central Australia, and the elimination of all dingoes is not considered to be a viable option.\nOne study has indicated that culling a small percentage of immature dingoes on Fraser Island had little significant negative impact on the overall island population, though this is being disputed.\nConservation of purebreds.\nUntil 2004, the dingo was categorised as of \"least concern\" on the Red List of Threatened Species. In 2008, it was recategorised as \"vulnerable\", following the decline in numbers to around 30% of \"pure\" dingoes, due to crossbreeding with domestic dogs. In 2018, the IUCN regarded the dingo as a feral dog and discarded it from the Red List. The current population of dingoes is unknown, with the IUCN red list listing it as \"Not Evaluated\"\nDingoes are reasonably abundant in large parts of Australia, but there is some argument that they are endangered due to interbreeding with other dogs in many parts of their range. Dingoes receive varying levels of protection in conservation areas such as national parks and natural reserves in New South Wales, the Northern Territory and Victoria, Arnhem Land and other Aboriginal lands, UNESCO World Heritage Sites, and the whole of the Australian Capital Territory. In some states, dingoes are regarded as declared pests and landowners are allowed to control the local populations. Throughout Australia, all other wild dogs are considered pests.\nK'gari is a 1,840 square kilometre World Heritage Site located off Australia's eastern coast. The island is home to a genetically distinct population of dingoes that are free of dog introgression, estimated to number 120. These dingoes are unique because they are closely related to the southeastern dingoes but share a number of genes with the New Guinea singing dog and show some evidence of admixture with the northwestern dingoes. Because of their conservation value, in February 2013, a report on Fraser Island dingo management strategies was released, with options including ending the intimidation of dingoes, tagging practice changes and regular veterinarian checkups, as well as a permanent dingo sanctuary on the island. According to DNA examinations from 2004, the dingoes of Fraser Island are \"pure\", as opposed to dingo\u2013dog hybrids. However, skull measurements from the mid-1990s had a different result. A 2013 study showed that dingoes living in the Tanami Desert are among the \"purest\" in Australia.\nGroups that have devoted themselves to the conservation of the \"pure\" dingo by using breeding programs include the \"Australian Native Dog Conservation Society\" and the \"Australian Dingo Conservation Association\". Presently, the efforts of the dingo conservation groups are considered to be ineffective because most of their dogs are untested or are known to be hybrids.\nDingo conservation efforts focus primarily on preventing interbreeding between dingoes and other domestic dogs in order to conserve the population of pure dingoes. This is extremely difficult and costly. Conservation efforts are hampered by the fact that it is not known how many pure dingoes still exist in Australia. Steps to conserve the pure dingo can only be effective when the identification of dingoes and other domestic dogs is absolutely reliable, especially in the case of living specimens. Additionally, conservation efforts are in conflict with control measures.\nConservation of pure and survivable dingo populations is promising in remote areas, where contact with humans and other domestic dogs is rare. Under New South Wales state policy in parks, reserves and other areas not used by agriculture, these populations are only to be controlled when they pose a threat to the survival of other native species. The introduction of \"dog-free\" buffer zones around areas with pure dingoes is regarded as a realistic method to stop interbreeding. This is enforced to the extent that all wild dogs can be killed outside the conservation areas. However, studies from the year 2007 indicate that even an intensive control of core areas is probably not able to stop the process of interbreeding.\nAccording to the Dingo Discovery Sanctuary and Research Centre, many studies are finding a case for the re-introduction of the dingo into previously occupied areas in order to return some balance to badly degraded areas as a result of \"unregulated and ignorant farming practices\".\nDingo densities have been measured at up to 3 per square kilometre (0.8/sq\u00a0mi) in both the Guy Fawkes River region of New South Wales and in South Australia at the height of a rabbit plague.\nHybridisation.\nIn 2023, a study of 402 wild and captive dingoes using 195,000 points across the dingo genome indicates that past studies of hybridisation were over-estimated and that pure dingoes are more common than they were originally thought to be. Dingoes according to the study were found to exist in four genetically distinct populations; previous studies assumed there was only one type of dingo, and that therefore any differences between dingoes across the country was due to hybridisation - when it was found that it's actually because there are different types of dingoes.\nIn 2021, DNA testing of over 5,000 wild-living canines from across Australia found that 31 were feral domestic dogs and 27 were first generation hybrids. This finding challenges the perception that dingoes are nearly extinct and have been replaced by feral domestic dogs.\nCoat colour cannot be used to distinguish hybrids. Dingo-like domestic dogs and dingo-hybrids can be generally distinguished by the more dog-typical kind of barking that exists among the hybrids, and differences in the breeding cycle, certain skull characteristics, and genetic analyses can be used for differentiation. Despite all the characteristics that can be used for distinguishing between dingoes and other domestic dogs, there are two problems that should not be underestimated. First, there is no real clarity regarding at what point a dog is regarded as a \"pure\" dingo, and, secondly, no distinguishing feature is completely reliable \u2014 it is not known which characteristics permanently remain under the conditions of natural selection.\nThere are two main opinions regarding this process of interbreeding. The first, and likely most common, position states that the \"pure\" dingo should be preserved via strong controls of the wild dog populations, and only \"pure\" or \"nearly-pure\" dingoes should be protected. The second position is relatively new and is of the opinion that people must accept that the dingo has changed and that it is impossible to bring the \"pure\" dingo back. Conservation of these dogs should therefore be based on where and how they live, as well as their cultural and ecological role, instead of concentrating on precise definitions or concerns about \"genetic purity\". Both positions are controversially discussed.\nDue to this interbreeding, there is a wider range of fur colours, skull shapes and body size in the modern-day wild dog population than in the time before the arrival of the Europeans. Over the course of the last 40 years, there has been an increase of about 20% in the average wild dog body size. It is currently unknown whether, in the case of the disappearance of \"pure\" dingoes, remaining hybrids would alter the predation pressure on other animals. It is also unclear what kind of role these hybrids would play in the Australian ecosystems. However, it is unlikely that the dynamics of the various ecosystems will be excessively disturbed by this process.\nIn 2011, a total of 3,941 samples were included in the first continent-wide DNA study of wild dogs. The study found that 46% were pure dingoes which exhibited no dog alleles (gene expressions). There was evidence of hybridisation in every region sampled. In Central Australia only 13% were hybrids; however, in southeastern Australia 99% were hybrids or feral dogs. Pure dingo distribution was 88% in the Northern Territory, intermediate numbers in Western Australia, South Australia and Queensland, and 1% in New South Wales and Victoria. Almost all wild dogs showed some dingo ancestry, with only 3% of dogs showing less than 80% dingo ancestry. This indicates that domestic dogs have a low survival rate in the wild or that most hybridisation is the result of roaming dogs that return to their owners. No populations of feral dogs have been found in Australia.\nIn 2016, a three dimensional geometric morphometric analysis of the skulls of dingoes, dogs and their hybrids found that dingo\u2013dog hybrids exhibit morphology closer to the dingo than to the parent group dog. Hybridisation did not push the unique \"Canis dingo\" cranial morphology towards the wolf phenotype, therefore hybrids cannot be distinguished from dingoes based on cranial measures. The study suggests that the wild dingo morphology is dominant when compared with the recessive dog breed morphology, and concludes that although hybridisation introduces dog DNA into the dingo population, the native cranial morphology remains resistant to change.\nResearch has also suggested that lethal management strategies such as aerial 1080 baiting, particularly during the dingo breeding season, increases the risk of dingo x dog hybridisation by fracturing social structures and reducing the availability of dingo mates. Like all wolf species, dingoes are highly territorial and aggressive, and it is with great difficulty that outsiders join stable packs thus under natural conditions genetic lines are protected through kin selection, and genetic variation within packs may be small due to inbreeding and aggressive behavior towards outsiders, nevertheless Dingo control increases the number of floaters which are more likely to breed with dogs. Similarly, hybridization between wolves and dogs has been reported to exist in great numbers from Latvia where wolf-hunting was common.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "62895", "revid": "7196877", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62895", "title": "Australian Kelpie", "text": "Dog breed\nThe Australian Kelpie, or simply Kelpie, is an Australian sheepdog capable of mustering and droving with little or no guidance. It is a medium-sized dog and comes in a variety of colours. The Kelpie has been exported throughout the world and is used to muster livestock, primarily sheep, cattle and goats.\nThe breed has been separated into two distinct varieties: the Show (or Bench) Kelpie and the Working Kelpie. The Show Kelpie is seen at conformation dog shows in some countries and is selected for appearance rather than working instinct, while the Working Kelpie is bred for its working ability.\nHistory.\nThe ancestors of most Kelpies were British dogs known loosely as collies (sometimes spelled colleys). These were mostly black, or very dark brown, dogs \u2013 hence the name collie, which has the same root as coal. (The official collie breeds were not formed until about 10 or 15 years after the Kelpie was established as a breed, and the first recognised Border Collie was not brought to Australia until after the Federation in 1901). Some collies were imported to Australia for stock work in the early 19th century, and were bred with other types of dogs \u2013 usually with an eye to working sheep without direct supervision.\nA 1950 article in the Dungog Chronicle as an example, amongst a number of them that can be found in public archives, reports a then-popular account claiming that the first Kelpies descended from a deliberate cross between a smooth-haired Scottish Collie and a dingo around 1870. The story reflected a widespread belief of the time that Australian working dogs owed some of their hardiness to native dingo blood.\nIn May 2019, several media outlets reported that a University of Sydney genomic study had found \u201cno dingo ancestry\u201d in the Kelpie. However, the study\u2019s lead author, Professor Claire Wade, later clarified that this interpretation was incorrect. The research examined only specific genes associated with visible traits such as ear shape and coat colour, not the breed\u2019s entire genome. Wade stated that she had never suggested there was \u201cno dingo blood in the Kelpie breed,\u201d explaining that the study merely showed no genetic link for those particular characteristics.\nThe first dog known as a Kelpie was a black and tan female pup with floppy ears bought by Jack Gleeson about 1872 from a litter born on Warrock Station near Casterton, owned by George Robertson, a Scot. This dog was named after the kelpie, a mythological shapeshifting water spirit of Celtic folklore. In later years she was referred to as \"(Gleeson's) Kelpie\", to differentiate her from \"(King's) Kelpie\", her daughter.\nThe second \"Kelpie\" was \"(King's) Kelpie\", another black and tan bitch out of \"Kelpie\" by \"Caesar\", a pup from two sheepdogs imported from Scotland. \"(King's) Kelpie\" tied for the prestigious Forbes Trial in 1879, and the strain was soon popularly referred to as \"Kelpie's pups\", or just Kelpies. The King brothers joined another breeder, McLeod, to form a dog breeding partnership whose dogs dominated trials during 1900 to 1920.\nAn early Kelpie, Sally, was mated to Moss, a Smooth Collie, and she produced a black pup that was named Barb after The Barb, a black horse which had won the Melbourne Cup in 1866. Consequently, black Kelpies became known as Barb Kelpies or Barbs.\nThere were a number of Kelpies named Red Cloud. The first and most famous was John Quinn's Red Cloud in the early 20th century. In the 1960s, another Red Cloud became well known in Western Australia. This started the tradition in Western Australia of calling all Red or Red and Tan Kelpies, especially those with white chests, Red Cloud Kelpies. Other notable specimens include Gunner and Red Dog (c. 1971 \u2013 21 November 1979), a Kelpie mix which was the subject of a movie, \"Red Dog\", released in 2011.\nKelpies have been exported to many countries including Argentina, Canada, Italy, Korea, New Caledonia, New Zealand, Sweden, the United Kingdom and the United States for various pursuits.\nBy 1990, Kelpies had been trained as scent dogs with good success rates. In Sweden they have been widely used for tracking and rescue work.\nAppearance.\nThe Kelpie is a soft-coated, medium-sized dog, usually with prick ears and an athletic appearance. Their coat colours include black, black and tan, red, red and tan, blue, blue and tan, fawn, fawn and tan, cream, black and blue, and white and gold. The Kelpie generally weighs and measures at the withers. They can reach a maximum weight of .\nBreed standards.\nRobert Kaleski published the first standard for the Kelpie in 1904. The standard was accepted by leading breeders of the time and adopted by the Kennel Club of New South Wales. Contemporary breed standards vary depending on whether the registry is for working or show Kelpies. It is possible for a dog to both work and show, but options for competition in conformation shows might be limited depending on ancestry and the opinions of the kennel clubs or breed clubs involved.\nIn Australia, there are two separate registries for Kelpies. Working Kelpies are registered with the Working Kelpie Council (WKC) and/or the Australian Sheepdog Workers Association. The WKC encourages breeding for working ability, and allows a wide variety of coat colours. Show Kelpies are registered with the Australian National Kennel Council, which encourages breeding for a certain appearance and limits acceptable colours. The wide standards allowed by the WKC mean that many Working Kelpies do not meet the standard for showing.\nIn the US, the Kelpie is not recognised as a breed by the American Kennel Club (AKC). However, the United Kennel Club and the Canadian Kennel Club recognise the Kelpie and allow them to compete in official events. As of 2015, Australian Kelpies have been accepted by the AKC as Herding Dogs allowed to compete in AKC sanctioned Sheep Herding Trials.\nWorking Kelpie.\nThe Working Kelpie comes in three coat types: short, smooth and rough. The coat can be almost any colour from black to light tan or cream. Some Kelpies have a white blaze on the chest, and a few have white points. Kelpies sometimes have a double coat, which sheds out in spring in temperate climates. Agouti is not unusual, and can look like a double coat.\nWorking Kelpies vary in size, ranging from about and . \nA Working Kelpie can be a cheap and efficient worker that can save farmers and graziers the cost of several hands when mustering livestock. The good Working Kelpies are herding dogs that will prevent stock from moving away from the stockman. This natural instinct is crucial when mustering stock in isolated gorge country, where a good dog will silently move ahead of the stockman and block up the stock (usually cattle) until the rider appears. Kelpies have natural instincts for managing livestock. They will work sheep, cattle, goats, pigs, poultry, and other domestic livestock. The Kelpie's signature move is to jump on the backs of sheep and walk across the tops of the sheep to reach the other side and break up the jam. Kelpies compete and are exhibited in livestock working trials, ranging from yards or arenas to large open fields working sheep, goats, cattle, or ducks.\nShow Kelpie.\nKelpies that are bred under the ANKC registrations are registered for show (Main Register) only in the following colours: Black, Chocolate, Red, Smoky Blue, Fawn, Black and Tan, and Red and Tan. They have a double coat and pricked ears. The other colours can be registered as pets and sporting dogs (Limited Register): Blue and Tan, Fawn and Tan and Yellow/Cream. Kelpies were first exhibited in the early 20th century, at the Sydney Royal Easter Show. ANKC \"Show\" Kelpies are now becoming very popular both nationally and internationally as family pets, companion dogs, running mates and sport dogs due to their trainability, good nature and low maintenance of care and can be found all over the world.\nTemperament.\nShow Kelpies generally excel in agility trials and may be shown in conformation in Australia.\nKelpies are intelligent and easy to train dogs making them good-tempered and good pets, especially with children. However they require a lot of physical exercise and mental stimulation, otherwise they can become bored and hence be disruptive by constantly barking or digging, or by chewing on objects. Working Kelpies are often described as \"workaholics\", with a strong drive to herd.\nHealth.\nKelpies are a hardy breed with few health problems, but they are susceptible to disorders common to all breeds, such as cryptorchidism, hip dysplasia, cerebellar abiotrophy and luxating patella. Research is underway to find the genetic marker for cerebellar abiotrophy in the breed. \nA 2024 UK study found a life expectancy of 12 years based on a sample of 49 deaths for the breed compared to an average of 12.7 for purebreeds and 12 for crossbreeds.\nNotable Kelpies.\nA 30-year-old Kelpie owned by a Victorian dairy farmer, Maggie, was thought to be the world's oldest dog at her time of death.\nIn popular culture.\nA Black and Tan Kelpie, named Roy, is featured in the Australian drama series \"McLeod's Daughters\", while another Black and Tan Kelpie, named Turbo (offspring of Roy), appears in the series several years later.\nA Red Kelpie boy and one of Bluey's best friends, Rusty, is featured in the show \"Bluey\". Rusty is joined by older brother Digger and younger sister Dusty.\nThe film \"The Fall Guy\" features a Kelpie.\nA Kelpie named Dart portrays the dog, Frankie (Francesca Camilla Kelpington III), in the Australian-British crime drama television series, \"Return to Paradise\".\nExplanatory notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "62896", "revid": "43320205", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62896", "title": "George McGovern", "text": "American politician and historian (1922\u20132012)\nGeorge Stanley McGovern (July 19, 1922\u00a0\u2013 October 21, 2012) was an American politician, diplomat, and historian from South Dakota who served in both chambers of the United States Congress as a member of the United States House of Representatives for two terms representing South Dakota's 1st congressional district from 1957 to 1961, the director of Food for Peace in 1961 and 1962 under John F. Kennedy, and a member of the United States Senate for three terms from 1963 to 1981, and was the Democratic Party presidential nominee in the 1972 U.S. presidential election.\nBorn in Avon, South Dakota, McGovern grew up in Mitchell, South Dakota, where he became a renowned debater. He volunteered for the U.S.\u00a0Army Air Forces upon the country's entry into World War\u00a0II. As a B-24 Liberator pilot, he flew 35\u00a0missions over German-occupied Europe from a base in Italy. Among the medals he received was a Distinguished Flying Cross for making a hazardous emergency landing of his damaged plane and saving his crew. After the war, he earned degrees from Dakota Wesleyan University and Northwestern University, culminating in a PhD, and served as a history professor. He was elected to the U.S.\u00a0House of Representatives in 1956 and re-elected in 1958. After a failed bid for the U.S.\u00a0Senate in 1960, he was a successful candidate in 1962.\nAs a senator, McGovern was a prominent example of modern American liberalism. He became most known for his outspoken opposition to the growing U.S.\u00a0involvement in the Vietnam War. He staged a brief nomination run in the 1968 U.S. presidential election as a stand-in for the assassinated Robert F. Kennedy. The subsequent McGovern\u2013Fraser Commission fundamentally altered the presidential nominating process, by increasing the number of caucuses and primaries and reducing the influence of party insiders. The McGovern\u2013Hatfield Amendment sought to end the Vietnam War by legislative means but was defeated in 1970 and 1971. McGovern's long-shot, grassroots-based 1972 presidential campaign found triumph in gaining the Democratic nomination but left the party split ideologically, and the failed vice-presidential pick of Thomas Eagleton undermined McGovern's credibility. In the general election, McGovern lost to incumbent Richard Nixon in one of the biggest landslides in U.S. electoral history. Although re-elected to the Senate in 1968 and 1974, McGovern was defeated in his bid for a fourth term in 1980.\nBeginning with his experiences in war-torn Italy and continuing throughout his career, McGovern was involved in issues related to agriculture, food, nutrition, and hunger. As the first director of the Food for Peace program in 1961, McGovern oversaw the distribution of U.S. surpluses to the needy abroad and was instrumental in the creation of the United Nations-run World Food Programme. As sole chairman of the Senate Select Committee on Nutrition and Human Needs from 1968 to 1977, McGovern publicized the problem of hunger within the United States and issued the \"McGovern Report\", which led to a new set of nutritional guidelines for Americans. McGovern later served as U.S. ambassador to the United Nations Agencies for Food and Agriculture from 1998 to 2001 and was appointed the first UN global ambassador on world hunger by the World Food Programme in 2001. The McGovern\u2013Dole International Food for Education and Child Nutrition Program has provided school meals for millions of children in dozens of countries since 2000 and resulted in McGovern's being named World Food Prize co\u2011laureate in 2008.\nEarly years and education.\nMcGovern was born in the 600\u2011person farming community of Avon, South Dakota. His father, the Rev. Joseph C. McGovern, born in 1868, was pastor of the local Wesleyan Methodist Church there. Joseph, the son of an alcoholic who had immigrated from Ireland, had grown up in several states, working in coal mines from the age of nine and parentless from the age of thirteen. He had been a professional baseball player in the minor leagues, but had given it up due to his teammates' heavy drinking, gambling, and womanizing, and entered the seminary instead. George's mother was the former Frances McLean, born c.\u20091890 and initially raised in Ontario, Canada; her family had later moved to Calgary, Alberta, and then she came to South Dakota looking for work as a secretary. George was the second oldest of four children. Joseph McGovern's salary never reached $100 per month, and he often received compensation in the form of potatoes, cabbages, or other food items. Joseph and Frances McGovern were both firm Republicans, but were not politically active or doctrinaire.\nWhen George was about three years old, the family moved to Calgary for a while to be near Frances's ailing mother, and he formed memories of events such as the Calgary Stampede. When George was six, the family returned to the United States and moved to Mitchell, South Dakota, a community of 12,000. McGovern attended public schools there and was an average student. He was painfully shy as a child and was afraid to speak in class during first grade. His only reproachable behavior was going to see movies, which were among the worldly amusements forbidden to good Wesleyan Methodists. Otherwise he had a normal childhood marked by visits to the renowned Mitchell Corn Palace and what he later termed \"a sense of belonging to a particular place and knowing your part in it\". He would long remember the Dust Bowl storms and grasshopper plagues that swept the prairie states during the Great Depression. The McGovern family lived on the edge of the poverty line for much of the 1920s and 1930s. Growing up so close to privation gave young George a lifelong sympathy for underpaid workers and struggling farmers. He was influenced by the currents of populism and agrarian unrest, as well as the \"practical divinity\" teachings of cleric John Wesley that sought to fight poverty, injustice, and ignorance.\nMcGovern attended Mitchell High School, where he was a solid but unspectacular member of the track team. A turning point came when his tenth-grade English teacher recommended him to the debate team, where he became quite active. His high-school debate coach, a history teacher who capitalized on McGovern's interest in that subject, proved to be a great influence in his life, and McGovern spent many hours honing his meticulous, if colorless, forensic style. McGovern and his debating partner won events in his area and gained renown in a state where debating was passionately followed by the general public. Debate changed McGovern's life, giving him a chance to explore ideas to their logical end, broadening his perspective, and instilling a sense of personal and social confidence. He graduated in 1940 in the top ten percent of his class.\nMcGovern enrolled at small Dakota Wesleyan University in Mitchell and became a star student there. He supplemented a forensic scholarship by working a variety of odd jobs. With World War II under way overseas and feeling insecure about his own courage, McGovern took flying lessons in an Aeronca aircraft and received a pilot's license through the government's Civilian Pilot Training Program. McGovern recalled: \"Frankly, I was scared to death on that first solo flight. But when I walked away from it, I had an enormous feeling of satisfaction that I had taken the thing off the ground and landed it without tearing the wings off.\" In late 1940 or early 1941, McGovern had pre-marital sex with an acquaintance that resulted in her giving birth to a daughter during 1941, although this did not become public knowledge during his lifetime. In April 1941 McGovern began dating fellow student Eleanor Stegeberg, who had grown up in Woonsocket, South Dakota. They had first encountered each other during a high school debate in which Eleanor and her twin sister Ila defeated McGovern and his partner.\nMcGovern was listening to a radio broadcast of the New York Philharmonic Orchestra for a sophomore-year music appreciation class when he heard the news of the December 7, 1941, attack on Pearl Harbor. In January 1942 he drove with nine other students to Omaha, Nebraska, and volunteered to join the United States Army Air Forces. The military accepted him, but they did not yet have enough airfields, aircraft, or instructors to start training all the volunteers, so McGovern stayed at Dakota Wesleyan. George and Eleanor became engaged, but initially decided not to marry until the war was over. During his sophomore year, McGovern won the statewide intercollegiate South Dakota Peace Oratory Contest with a speech called \"My Brother's Keeper\", which was later selected by the National Council of Churches as one of the nation's twelve best orations of 1942. Smart, handsome, and well liked, McGovern was elected president of his sophomore class and voted \"Glamour Boy\" during his junior year. In February 1943, during his junior year, he and a partner won a regional debate tournament at North Dakota State University that featured competitors from thirty-two schools across a dozen states; upon his return to campus, he discovered that the Army had finally called him up.\nMilitary service.\nGroundschool and trainers.\nSoon thereafter McGovern was sworn in as a private at Fort Snelling in Minnesota. He spent a month at Jefferson Barracks Military Post in Missouri and then five months at Southern Illinois Normal University in Carbondale, Illinois, for ground school training. McGovern later maintained that both the academic work and physical training were the toughest he ever experienced. He spent two months at a base in San Antonio, Texas, and then went to Hatbox Field in Muskogee, Oklahoma, for basic flying school, training in a single-engined PT\u201119. McGovern married Eleanor Stegeberg on October 31, 1943, during a three-day leave (lonely and in love, the couple had decided to not wait any longer). His father presided over the ceremony at the Methodist church in Woonsocket.\nAfter three months in Muskogee, McGovern went to Coffeyville Army Airfield in Kansas for a further three months of training on the BT\u201113. Around April 1944, McGovern went on to advanced flying school at Pampa Army Airfield in Texas for twin-engine training on the AT\u201117 and AT\u20119. Throughout, Air Cadet McGovern showed skill as a pilot, with his exceptionally good depth perception aiding him. Eleanor McGovern followed him to these duty stations, and was present when he received his wings and was commissioned a second lieutenant.\nTraining in the B-24.\nMcGovern was assigned to Liberal Army Airfield in Kansas and its transition school to learn to fly the B\u201124 Liberator, an assignment he was pleased with. McGovern recalled later: \"Learning how to fly the B\u201124 was the toughest part of the training. It was a difficult airplane to fly, physically, because in the early part of the war they didn't have hydraulic controls. If you can imagine driving a Mack truck without any power steering or power brakes, that's about what it was like at the controls. It was the biggest bomber we had at the time.\" Eleanor was constantly afraid. Accidents while training claimed a huge toll of airmen over the course of the war.\nThis schooling was followed by a stint at Lincoln Army Airfield in Nebraska, where McGovern met his B-24 crew. Traveling around the country and mixing with people from different backgrounds proved to be a broadening experience for McGovern and others of his generation. The USAAF sped up training times for McGovern and others, owing to the heavy losses that bombing missions were suffering over Europe. Despite, and partly because of, the risk that McGovern might not come back from combat, the McGoverns decided to have a child, and Eleanor became pregnant. In June 1944, McGovern's crew received final training at Mountain Home Army Air Field in Idaho. They then shipped out via Camp Patrick Henry in Virginia, where McGovern found history books with which to fill downtime, especially during the trip overseas on a slow troopship.\nItaly.\nIn September 1944 McGovern joined the 741st Squadron of the 455th Bombardment Group of the Fifteenth Air Force, stationed at San Giovanni Airfield near Cerignola in the Apulia region of Italy. There he and his crew found a starving, disease-ridden local population wracked by the ill fortunes of war and far worse off than anything they had seen back home during the Depression. Those sights would form part of his later motivation to fight hunger. Starting on November 11, 1944, McGovern flew 35\u00a0missions over enemy territory from San Giovanni, the first five as co-pilot for an experienced crew and the rest as pilot for his own plane, known as the \"Dakota Queen\" after his wife Eleanor. His targets were in Austria; Czechoslovakia; Nazi Germany; Hungary; Poland; and northern, German-controlled Italy, and were often either oil refinery complexes or rail marshaling yards, all as part of the U.S.\u00a0strategic bombing campaign in Europe. The eight- or nine-hour missions were grueling tests of endurance for pilots and crew, and while German fighter aircraft were a diminished threat by this time as compared with earlier in the war, his missions often faced heavy anti-aircraft artillery fire that filled the sky with flak bursts.\nOn McGovern's December 15 mission over Linz, his second as pilot, a piece of shrapnel from flak came through the windshield and missed fatally wounding him by only a few inches. The following day on a mission to Br\u00fcx, he nearly collided with another bomber during close-formation flying in complete cloud cover. The following day, he was recommended for a medal after surviving a blown wheel on the always-dangerous B-24 take-off, completing a mission over Germany, and then landing without further damage to the plane. On a December 20 mission against the \u0160koda Works at Pilsen, Czechoslovakia, McGovern's plane had one engine out and another in flames after being hit by flak. Unable to return to Italy, McGovern flew to a British airfield on Vis, a small island in the Adriatic Sea off the Yugoslav coast that was controlled by Josip Broz Tito's Partisans. The short field, normally used by small fighter planes, was so unforgiving to four-engined aircraft that many of the bomber crews who tried to make emergency landings there perished. But McGovern successfully landed, saving his crew, a feat for which he was awarded the Distinguished Flying Cross.\nIn January 1945 McGovern used R&amp;R time to see every sight that he could in Rome, and to participate in an audience with the pope. Bad weather prevented many missions from being carried out during the winter, and during such downtime McGovern spent much time reading and discussing how the war had come about. He resolved that if he survived it, he would become a history professor. In February, McGovern was promoted to first lieutenant. On March 14 McGovern had an incident over Austria in which he accidentally bombed a family farmhouse when a jammed bomb inadvertently released above the structure and destroyed it, an event that haunted McGovern. Four decades later, after McGovern related the incident during an Austrian television program and indicated he was still haunted by it, the owner of the farm called the television station to say that his farm was hit by that bomb but that no one had been hurt and the farmer felt that it had been worth the price if that event helped achieve the defeat of Nazi Germany in some small way. McGovern said finding this out was \"an enormous release\".\nOn returning to base from the flight, McGovern was told his first child Ann had been born four days earlier. April 25 saw McGovern's 35th\u00a0mission, which marked fulfillment of the Fifteenth Air Force's requirement for a combat tour, against heavily defended Linz. The sky turned black and red with flak \u2013 McGovern later said, \"Hell can't be any worse than that\" \u2013 and the \"Dakota Queen\" was hit multiple times, resulting in 110\u00a0holes in its fuselage and wings and an inoperative hydraulic system. McGovern's waist gunner was injured, and his flight engineer was so unnerved by his experience that he would subsequently be hospitalized with battle fatigue, but McGovern managed to bring back the plane safely with the assistance of an improvised landing technique. According to a McGovern associate speaking after McGovern's passing, sometime during his wartime experiences in Europe, McGovern had an extramarital affair and fathered a child with an unknown woman.\nPostwar relief.\nIn May and June 1945, following the end of the European war, McGovern continued with the 741st Bomb Squadron delivering surplus food and supplies near Trieste in Northeastern Italy; this was then trucked to the hungry in nearby locations, including to German prisoners of war. McGovern liked making these relief flights, as it gave a way to address the kinds of deprivations he had witnessed when first arriving in Italy. He then flew back to the United States with his crew. McGovern was discharged from the Army Air Forces in July 1945, with the rank of first lieutenant. He was also awarded the Air Medal with three oak leaf clusters, one instance of which was for the safe landing on his final mission.\nLater education and early career.\nUpon coming home, McGovern returned to Dakota Wesleyan University, aided by the G.I. Bill, and graduated from there in June 1946 with a B.A. degree \"magna cum laude\". For a while he suffered from nightmares about flying through flak barrages or his plane being on fire. He continued with debate, again winning the state Peace Oratory Contest with a speech entitled \"From Cave to Cave\" that presented a Christian-influenced Wilsonian outlook. The couple's second daughter, Susan, was born in March 1946.\nMcGovern switched from Wesleyan Methodism to less fundamentalist regular Methodism. Influenced by Walter Rauschenbusch and the Social Gospel movement, McGovern began divinity studies at Garrett\u2013Evangelical Theological Seminary in Evanston, Illinois, near Chicago. Among Methodist seminaries, Garrett tended towards social involvement paired with a theologically liberal approach, and many of the students there leaned towards pacifism. McGovern was influenced by the weekly sermons of a well-known local minister, Ernest Fremont Tittle, and the ideas of Boston Personalism. McGovern preached as a Methodist student supply minister at Diamond Lake Church in Mundelein, Illinois, during 1946 and 1947, but became dissatisfied by the minutiae of his pastoral duties. In late 1947 McGovern left the ministry and enrolled in graduate studies at Northwestern University in Evanston, where he also worked as a teaching assistant. The relatively small history program there was among the best in the country, and McGovern took courses given by noted academics Ray Allen Billington, Richard W. Leopold, and L. S. Stavrianos. He received an Master of Arts in history in 1949.\nMcGovern then returned to his alma mater, Dakota Wesleyan, and became a professor of history and political science. With the assistance of a Hearst fellowship for 1949\u201350, he continued pursuing graduate studies during summers and other free time. The couple's third daughter, Teresa, was born in June 1949. Eleanor McGovern began to suffer from bouts of major depressive disorder but continued to assume the large share of household and child-rearing duties. McGovern earned a Ph.D. in history from Northwestern University in 1953. His 450-page dissertation, \"The Colorado Coal Strike, 1913\u20131914\", was a sympathetic account of the miners' revolt against the Rockefeller family interests in the Colorado Coalfield War. His thesis advisor, noted historian Arthur S. Link, later said he had not seen a better student than McGovern in 26 years of teaching. McGovern was influenced not only by Link and the \"Consensus history\" of American historians but also by the previous generation of progressive historians. Most of his future analyses of world events would be informed by his training as a historian, as well as his personal experiences during the Great Depression and World War II. Meanwhile, McGovern had become a popular if politically outspoken teacher at Dakota Wesleyan, with students dedicating the college yearbook to him in 1952.\nNominally a Republican growing up, McGovern began to admire Democratic president Franklin D. Roosevelt during World War II, even though he supported Roosevelt's opponent Thomas Dewey in the 1944 U.S. presidential election. At Northwestern, his exposure to the work of China scholars John King Fairbank and Owen Lattimore had convinced him that unrest in Southeast Asia was homegrown and that U.S.\u00a0foreign policy toward Asia was counterproductive. Discouraged by the onset of the Cold War, and never thinking well of incumbent president Harry S. Truman, in the 1948 U.S. presidential election McGovern was attracted to the campaign of former vice president and secretary of agriculture Henry A. Wallace. He wrote columns supporting Wallace in the \"Mitchell Daily Republic\" and attended the Wallace Progressive Party's first national convention as a delegate. There he became disturbed by aspects of the convention atmosphere, decades later referring to \"a certain rigidity and fanaticism on the part of a few of the strategists.\" He remained a public supporter of Wallace and the Progressive Party afterward. As Wallace was kept off the ballot in Illinois where McGovern was now registered, McGovern did not vote in the general election.\nBy 1952, McGovern was coming to think of himself as a Democrat. He was captivated by a radio broadcast of Governor Adlai Stevenson II's speech accepting the presidential nomination at the 1952 Democratic National Convention. He immediately dedicated himself to Stevenson's campaign, publishing seven articles in the \"Mitchell Daily Republic\" newspaper outlining the historical issues that separated the Democratic Party from the Republicans. The McGoverns named their only son, Steven, born immediately after the convention, after his new hero. Although Stevenson lost the election, McGovern remained active in politics, believing that \"the engine of progress in our time in America is the Democratic Party.\" In early 1953, McGovern left a tenure-track position at the university to become executive secretary of the South Dakota Democratic Party, the state chair having recruited him after reading his articles. Democrats in the state were at a low, holding no statewide offices and only 2 of the 110 seats in the state legislature. Friends and political figures had counseled McGovern against making the move, but despite his mild, unassuming manner, McGovern had an ambitious nature and was intent upon starting a political career of his own.\nMcGovern spent the following years rebuilding and revitalizing the party, building up a large list of voter contacts via frequent travel around the state. Democrats showed improvement in the 1954 elections, winning 25 seats in the state legislature. From 1954 to 1956 he also was on a political organization advisory group for the Democratic National Committee. The McGoverns' fifth and final child, Mary, was born in 1955.\nU.S. House of Representatives.\nIn 1956, McGovern sought elective office himself, and ran for the House of Representatives from South Dakota's 1st congressional district, which consisted of the counties east of the Missouri River. He faced four-term incumbent Republican Party representative Harold Lovre. Aided by the voter lists he had earlier accumulated, McGovern ran a low-budget campaign, spending $12,000 while borrowing $5,000. His quiet personality appealed to voters he met, while Lovre suffered from a general unhappiness over the Eisenhower administration farm policy. When polls showed McGovern gaining, Lovre's campaign implied that McGovern's support for admitting China to the United Nations and his past support for Henry Wallace meant that McGovern was a communist appeaser or sympathizer. In his closing speech, McGovern responded: \"I have always despised communism and every other ruthless tyranny over the mind and spirit of man.\" McGovern staged an upset victory, gaining 116,516 votes to his opponent's 105,835, and became the first Democrat elected to Congress from South Dakota in 22 years. The McGoverns established a home in Chevy Chase, Maryland.\nEntering the 85th United States Congress, McGovern became a member of the United States House Committee on Education and Workforce. As a representative, McGovern was attentive to his district. He became a staunch supporter of higher commodity prices, farm price supports, grain storage programs, and beef import controls, believing that such stored commodities programs guarded against drought and similar emergencies. He favored rural development, federal aid to small business and to education, and medical coverage for the aged under Social Security. In 1957 he traveled and studied conditions in the Middle East under a fellowship from the American Palestine Committee. McGovern first allied with the Kennedy family by supporting a House version of Massachusetts U.S. Senate member John F. Kennedy's eventually unsuccessful labor reform bill.\nIn his 1958 reelection campaign, McGovern faced a strong challenge from South Dakota's two-term Republican governor and World War II Medal of Honor recipient Joe Foss, who was initially considered the favorite to win. McGovern ran an effective campaign that showcased his political strengths of having firm beliefs and the ability to articulate them in debates and on the stump. He prevailed with a slightly larger margin than two years before. In the 86th United States Congress, McGovern was assigned to the United States House Committee on Agriculture. The longtime chairman of the committee, Harold D. Cooley, would subsequently say, \"I cannot recall a single member of Congress who has fought more vigorously or intelligently for American farmers than Congressman McGovern.\" He helped pass a new food-stamp law. He was one of nine representatives from Congress to the NATO Parliamentary Assembly conferences of 1958 and 1959. Along with Senator Hubert H. Humphrey, McGovern strongly advocated a reconstruction of Public Law 480 under Food for Peace (an agricultural surplus act that had come into being under Eisenhower) with a greater emphasis on feeding the hungry around the world, the establishment of an executive office to run operations, and the goal of promoting peace and stability around the world. During his time in the House, McGovern was regarded as a liberal overall, and voted in accordance with the rated positions of Americans for Democratic Action (ADA) 34 times and against 3 times. Two of the themes of his House career, improvements for rural America and the war on hunger, would be defining ones of his legislative career and public life.\nMcGovern did not vote on the initial House bill for the Civil Rights Act of 1957, but voted in favor of the Senate amendment to the bill in August 1957. McGovern voted in favor initial House bill for the Civil Rights Act of 1960, but did not vote on the Senate amendment to the bill in April 1960. In 1960, McGovern decided to run for the U.S. Senate and challenge the Republican incumbent Karl Mundt, a formidable figure in South Dakota politics whom McGovern loathed as an old-style McCarthyite. The race centered mostly on rural issues, but John F. Kennedy's Catholicism was a drawback at the top of the ticket in the mostly Protestant state. McGovern made careless charges during the campaign, and the press turned against him; he would say eleven years later, \"It was my worst campaign. I hated [Mundt] so much I lost my sense of balance.\" McGovern was defeated in the November 1960 election, gaining 145,217 votes to Mundt's 160,579, but the margin was one third of Kennedy's loss to Vice President Richard M. Nixon in the state's presidential contest.\nFood for Peace director.\nHaving relinquished his House seat to run for the Senate, McGovern was available for a position in the new Kennedy administration. McGovern was picked to become a special assistant to the president and first director of Kennedy's high-priority Food for Peace program, which realized what McGovern had been advocating in the House. McGovern assumed the post on January 21, 1961.\nAs director, McGovern urged the greater use of food to enable foreign economic development, saying, \"We should thank God that we have a food abundance and use the over-supply among the underprivileged at home and abroad.\" He found space for the program in the Executive Office Building rather than be subservient to either the United States Department of State or United States Department of Agriculture. McGovern worked with deputy director James W. Symington from Missouri and Kennedy advisor Arthur M. Schlesinger Jr. in visiting South America to discuss surplus grain distribution, and attended meetings of the United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization. In June 1961, McGovern became seriously ill with hepatitis, contracted from an infected White House dispensary needle used to give him inoculations for his South American trip; he was hospitalized and unable to come to his office for two months; his campaign disguised the condition by saying it was a mild kidney infection.\nBy the close of 1961, the Food for Peace program was operating in a dozen countries, and 10 million more people had been fed with American surplus than the year before. In February 1962, McGovern visited India and oversaw an expanded school meal program thanks to Food for Peace. Subsequently, one in five Indian schoolchildren would be fed from it; by mid-1962, it fed 35 million children around the world. During an audience in Rome, Pope John XXIII warmly praised McGovern's work, and the distribution program was also popular among South Dakota's wheat farmers. In addition, McGovern was instrumental in the creation of the United Nations-run World Food Programme in December 1961; it started distributing food to affected regions of the world the following year and would go on to become the largest humanitarian agency fighting hunger worldwide.\nAdministration was never McGovern's strength, and he was restless for another try at the Senate. With the approval of President Kennedy, McGovern resigned his post on July 18, 1962. Kennedy said that under McGovern the program had \"become a vital force in the world\", improving living conditions and economies of allies and creating \"a powerful barrier to the spread of Communism\". Columnist Drew Pearson wrote that it was one of the \"most spectacular achievements of the young Kennedy administration\", while Schlesinger would later write that Food for Peace had been \"the greatest unseen weapon of Kennedy's third-world policy\".\nU.S. Senator.\n1962 election and early years as a senator.\nIn April 1962, McGovern announced he would run for election to South Dakota's other Senate seat, intending to face incumbent Republican Francis Case. Case died in June, and McGovern instead faced an appointed senator, former lieutenant governor Joe Bottum. Much of the campaign revolved around policies of the Kennedy administration and its New Frontier; Bottum accused the Kennedy family of trying to buy the Senate seat. McGovern appealed to those worried about the outflux of young people from the state, and had the strong support of the National Farmers Union. Polls showed Bottum slightly ahead throughout the race, and McGovern was hampered by a recurrence of his hepatitis problem in the final weeks of the campaign. (During this hospitalization, McGovern read Theodore H. White's classic \"The Making of the President 1960,\" and for the first time began thinking about running for the office someday.) Eleanor McGovern campaigned for her ailing husband and may have preserved his chance of winning. The November 1962 election result was very close and required a recount, but McGovern's 127,458 votes prevailed by a margin of 597, making him the first Democratic senator from the state in 26 years and only the third since statehood in 1889.\nWhen he joined the Senate in January 1963 for the 88th\u00a0United States Congress, McGovern was seated on the United States Senate Committee on Agriculture, Nutrition, and Forestry and the United States Senate Committee on Energy and Natural Resources. On the Agriculture Committee, McGovern supported high farm prices, full parity, and controls on beef importation, as well as the administration's Feed Grains Acreage Diversion Program. McGovern had a fractious relationship with Secretary of Agriculture Orville Freeman, who was less sympathetic to farmers; McGovern's 1966 resolution to informally scold Freeman made the senator popular back in his home state. Fellow new senator Edward M. Kennedy saw McGovern as a serious voice on farm policy and often sought McGovern's guidance on agriculture-related votes. McGovern was largely inactive on the Interior Committee until 1967, when he was given the chairmanship of the subcommittee on Indian affairs; however, Interior Committee chairman Henry M. Jackson, who did not get along with McGovern personally or politically, refused to allow McGovern his own staff, limiting his effectiveness. McGovern regretted not accomplishing more for South Dakota's 30,000 Sioux Indians, although after a McGovern-introduced resolution on Indian self-determination passed in 1969, the Oglala Sioux named McGovern \"Great White Eagle.\"\nIn his first speech on the Senate floor in March 1963, McGovern praised Kennedy's Alliance for Progress initiative but spoke out against Cuba\u2013United States relations, saying that it suffered from \"our Castro fixation\". In August 1963 McGovern advocated reducing the $53 billion defense budget by $5 billion; influenced by advisor Seymour Melman, he held a special antipathy toward the doctrine of nuclear overkill. McGovern would try to reduce defense appropriations or limit military expenditures in almost every year during the 1960s. He also voted against many weapons programs, especially missile and antimissile systems, and also opposed military assistance to foreign nations. In 1964 McGovern published his first book, \"War Against Want: America's Food for Peace Program\". In it he argued for expanding his old program, and a Senate measure he introduced was eventually passed, adding $700 million to the effort's funding.\nPreferring to concentrate on broad policy matters and speeches, McGovern was not a master of Senate legislative tactics, and he developed a reputation among some other senators for \"not doing his homework\". Described as \"a very private, unchummy guy\", he was not a member of the Senate \"club\" nor did he want to be, turning down in 1969 a chance to join the powerful United States Senate Committee on Rules and Administration. Relatively few pieces of legislation bore his name, and his legislative accomplishments were generally viewed as modest, although he would try to influence the contents of others' bills. In his political beliefs, McGovern fit squarely within modern American liberalism; through 1967 he had voted in accordance with the rated positions of the ADA 92\u00a0percent of the time, and when lacking specific knowledge on a particular matter, he would ask his staff, \"What are the liberals doing?\"\nOpposition to Vietnam War.\nIn a speech on the Senate floor in September 1963, McGovern became the first member to challenge the growing national military for United States in the Vietnam War. Bothered by the Buddhist crisis and other recent developments, and with concerns influenced by Vietnam historian Bernard B. Fall, McGovern said:\nAs the speech was little noticed, McGovern backed away from saying anything publicly for over a year afterward, partly because of the November 1963 Assassination of John F. Kennedy and partly to not appear strident. Though more skeptical about it than most senators, McGovern voted in favor of the August 1964 Gulf of Tonkin Resolution, which turned out to be an essentially unbounded authorization for President Lyndon B. Johnson to escalate U.S. involvement in the war. McGovern thought the commander in chief should be given limited authority to retaliate against an attack; subsequently, he said his instinct had been to vote no, but that he had voted yes because of Senator J. William Fulbright's urging to stand behind Johnson politically. The day after the resolution vote, McGovern spoke concerning his fears that the vote would lead to greater involvement in the war; Wayne Morse, one of only U.S. Senate members to oppose the resolution, sardonically noted that this fell into the category of \"very interesting, but very belated.\" This would become the vote that McGovern most bitterly regretted.\nIn January 1965 McGovern made his first major address on Vietnam, saying that \"We are not winning in South Vietnam\u00a0... I am very much opposed to the policy, now gaining support in Washington, of extending the war to the north.\" McGovern instead proposed a five-point plan advocating a negotiated settlement involving a federated Vietnam with local autonomy and a UN\u00a0presence to guarantee security and fair treatment. The speech gave McGovern national visibility as one of the \"doves\" in the debate over Vietnam; however, McGovern made moderate-to-hawkish statements at times too, flatly rejecting unconditional withdrawal of U.S.\u00a0forces and criticizing the Opposition to United States involvement in the Vietnam War draft-card burnings as \"immature, impractical, and illegal\". He eschewed personal criticism of Johnson. In November 1965 McGovern traveled to South Vietnam for three weeks. The human carnage he saw in hospital wards deeply upset him, and he became increasingly outspoken about the war upon his return, more convinced than ever that Vietnam was a political, not military, problem. Now he was ready, as he later said, \"not merely to dissent, but to crusade\" against the war.\nMcGovern voted in favor of Vietnam military appropriations in 1966 through 1968, not wanting to deprive U.S. forces of necessary equipment. Nevertheless, his antiwar rhetoric increased throughout 1967. Over the years, Johnson had invited McGovern and other Senate doves to the White House for attempts to explain the rationale for his actions in Vietnam; McGovern came away from the final such visit, in August 1967, shaken by the sight of a president \"tortured and confused\u00a0... by the mess he has gotten into in Vietnam.\"\n1968 presidential and Senate campaigns.\nIn August 1967 activist Allard K. Lowenstein founded the Dump Johnson movement, and soon it was seeking a Democratic Party figure to make a primaries campaign challenge against Johnson in the 1968 U.S. presidential election. The group's first choice was Senator Robert Kennedy, who declined, as did another, and by late September 1967 they approached McGovern. After much deliberation McGovern declined, largely because he feared such a run would significantly damage his own chances for reelection to his Senate seat in 1968. A month later the anti-Johnson forces were able to persuade Senate member Eugene McCarthy to run; he was one of the few \"dove\" senators not up for reelection that year.\nIn the 1968 Democratic primary campaign, McCarthy staged a strong showing. Robert Kennedy entered the race, President Johnson withdrew and Vice President Hubert Humphrey joined the field. While McGovern privately favored Kennedy, McCarthy and Humphrey were both from the neighboring state of Minnesota and publicly McGovern remained neutral. McGovern hosted all three as they campaigned for the June 4 South Dakota Democratic primary, which resulted in a strong win by Kennedy to go along with his win in the crucial California primary that night. McGovern spoke with Kennedy by phone minutes before the Assassination of Robert F. Kennedy in Los Angeles. The death of Bobby Kennedy left McGovern the most emotionally distraught he had ever been to that point in his life.\nWithin days, some of Kennedy's aides were urging McGovern to run in his place; their antipathy toward McCarthy and ideological opposition to Humphrey made them unwilling to support either candidate. McGovern delayed making a decision, making sure that Bobby's brother Ted Kennedy did not want to enter, and with his staff still concerned about the senator's own reelection prospects. McGovern's voting had changed during 1968, with his ADA rating falling to 43 as he sought more middle-of-the-road stances. In late July, McGovern's decision became more complicated when his daughter Teresa was arrested in Rapid City, South Dakota on drug prohibition charges related to marijuana possession. She had led a troubled life since her teenage years, developing problems with alcohol and depression and suffering the consequences of a relationship with an unstable neighborhood boy. On the basis of a recently enacted strict state drugs law, Terry now faced a minimum five-year prison sentence if found guilty. McGovern was also convinced that the socially conservative voters of South Dakota would reject him owing to his daughter's arrest. Charges against her were subsequently dropped because of an invalid search warrant.\nMcGovern formally announced his candidacy on August 10, 1968, in Washington, two weeks in advance of the 1968 Democratic National Convention, committing himself to \"the goals for which Robert Kennedy gave his life.\" Asked why he was a better choice than McCarthy, he said, \"Well \u2013 Gene really doesn't want to be president, and I do.\" At the convention in Chicago, Humphrey was the near-certain choice, while McGovern became the initial rallying point for around 300 leaderless Kennedy delegates. The chaotic circumstances of the convention found McGovern denouncing the Chicago police tactics against demonstrators as \"police brutality.\" Given the internal politics of the party, it was difficult for McGovern to gain in delegate strength, and black protest candidate Channing E. Phillips drew off some of his support. In the actual roll call, McGovern came in third with 146\u00bd delegates, far behind Humphrey's 1760\u00bc and McCarthy's 601.\nMcGovern endorsed Humphrey at the convention, to the dismay of some antiwar figures who considered it a betrayal. Humphrey went on to lose the general election to Richard Nixon. McGovern returned to his Senate reelection race, facing Republican former governor Archie M. Gubbrud. While South Dakota voters sympathized with McGovern over his daughter's arrest, he initially suffered a substantial drop in popularity over the events in Chicago; however, McGovern conducted an energetic campaign that focused on his service to the state, while Gubbrud ran a lackluster effort. In November, McGovern won 57\u00a0percent of the vote in what he would consider the easiest and most decisive victory of his career.\nMiddle Senate years and continued opposition to the Vietnam War.\nDuring the 1968 Democratic Convention, a motion had been passed to establish a commission to reform the Democratic Party nomination process. In 1969 McGovern was named chairman of the Commission on Party Structure and Delegate Selection, also known as the McGovern\u2013Fraser Commission; owing to the influence of former McCarthy and Kennedy supporters on the staff, the commission significantly reduced the role of party officials and insiders in the nomination process. The commission's 1970 report, \"Mandate for Reform\", was approved by the Democratic National Committee in 1971. It required that delegates be selected either by a party primary where delegate preferences were indicated on the ballot or by a state convention process where the first stage was open caucuses. It also mandated quotas for proportional black, female, and youth delegate representation. The new rules had an immediate effect; in 1972, a third more primaries were held in the Democratic nomination process than in 1968 and those primaries produced half again as many delegates. Over the next few presidential election cycles, this trend towards holding primaries increased in both parties, with eventually over 80\u00a0percent of delegates being chosen via primaries; whereas before McGovern\u2013Fraser, two-thirds of all delegates were chosen by state conventions controlled by party elites. Thus the U.S.\u00a0presidential nominating process has been different ever since the McGovern\u2013Fraser reforms, with scholars and politicians debating whether all the changes are for the better.\nIn the wake of several high-profile reports about hunger and malnutrition in the United States, the United States Senate Select Committee on Nutrition and Human Needs had been created in July 1968, with McGovern as its chairman. Seeking to dramatize the problem, in March 1969 McGovern took the committee to Immokalee, Florida, the base for 20,000 migrant farm workers. They saw graphic examples of hunger and malnutrition firsthand, but also encountered resistance and complaints about bad publicity from local and state officials. McGovern battled the Nixon administration and Southerners in Congress during much of the next year over an expanded Supplemental Nutrititon Assistance Program; he had to compromise on a number of points, but legislation signed in 1970 established the principles of free food stamps and a nationwide standard for eligibility.\nMcGovern generally lacked both interest and expertise in economics, but was outspoken in reaction to Nixon's imposition of incomes policy in 1971. McGovern declared: \"This administration, which pledged to slow inflation and reduce unemployment, has instead given us the highest rate of inflation and the highest rate of unemployment in a decade.\" Regarding another heated domestic issue, \"60 Minutes\" included McGovern in a 1971 report about liberal politicians and journalists who advocated integrated schooling while avoiding it for their children.\nBut most of all, McGovern was known for his continued opposition to the Vietnam War. In March 1969, he became the first senator to explicitly criticize the new president's policy there, an action that was seen as a breach of customary protocol by other Senate doves. The ongoing diversion to South Vietnam of much of Food for Peace's aid, where it was used to subsidize that country's budget, when there were countries around the world affected by drought and food shortages, upset him. By the end of 1969, McGovern was calling for an immediate cease-fire and a total withdrawal of all American troops within a year. In October 1969 McGovern was a featured speaker before 100,000\u00a0demonstrators in Boston at the Moratorium to End the War in Vietnam, and in November he spoke before 350,000 at Moratorium/Mobilization's antiwar march to the Washington Monument. Afterward, he decided that radicalized peace demonstrations were counterproductive and criticized antiwar figures such as Rennie Davis, Tom Hayden, Huey P. Newton, Abbie Hoffman, and Jerry Rubin as \"reckless\" and \"irresponsible\".\nInstead, McGovern focused on legislative means to bring the war to an end. The McGovern\u2013Hatfield Amendment to the annual military procurement bill, co-sponsored by Republican Mark Hatfield of Oregon, required via funding cutoff a complete withdrawal of all American forces from Indochina by the end of 1970. It underwent months of public discussion and alterations to make it acceptable to more senators, including pushing the deadline out to the end of 1971. In May 1970 McGovern obtained a second mortgage on his Washington home in order to fund a half-hour televised panel discussion on the amendment on NBC. The broadcast brought in over $500,000 in donations that furthered work on passage, and eventually the amendment gained the support of the majority of the public in polls. The effort was denounced by opposition groups organized by White House aide Charles Colson, which called McGovern and Hatfield \"apostles of retreat and defeat\" and \"salesmen of surrender\" and maintained that only the president could conduct foreign policy. The amendment was defeated in September 1970 by a 55\u201339 vote, just short of what McGovern had hoped would constitute at least a moral victory. During the floor debate, McGovern criticized his colleagues opposing the measure:\nThe Senate reacted in startled, stunned silence, and some faces showed anger and fury; when one member told McGovern he had been personally offended by the speech, McGovern said, \"That's what I meant to do.\" McGovern believed Vietnam an immoral war that was destroying much of what was pure, hopeful, and different about America's character as a nation.\nThe defeat of the amendment left McGovern embittered and somewhat more radicalized. He accused the vice president of South Vietnam, Nguy\u1ec5n Cao K\u1ef3, of running a heroin trafficking operation that was addicting American soldiers. In a retort to the powerful United States Senate Committee on Armed Services chairperson John C. Stennis's suggestion that U.S.\u00a0troops might have to return to Cambodia, McGovern declared, \"I'm tired of old men dreaming up wars for young men to fight. If he wants to use American ground troops in Cambodia, let him lead the charge himself.\" He denounced Nixon's policy of Vietnamization as \"subsidiz[ing] the continued killing of the people of Indochina by technology and mercenaries.\" In a \"Playboy\" interview, he said that Ho Chi Minh was the North Vietnamese George Washington.\nMcGovern\u2013Hatfield was put up for a vote again in 1971, with somewhat weaker provisions designed to gain more support. In polls, a large majority of the public now favored its intent, and McGovern took his name off a final form of it, as some senators were just objecting to him. Nevertheless, in June 1971, it failed to pass again, gaining only a few more votes than the year before. McGovern was now certain that the only way the war would come to a quick end was if there was a new president.\n1972 presidential campaign.\nMcGovern announced his candidacy on January 18, 1971, during a televised speech from the studios of KELO-TV in Sioux Falls, South Dakota. At the time of his announcement, McGovern ranked fifth among Democrats in a presidential preference poll for Gallup, Inc.. The earliest such entry since Andrew Jackson, it was designed to give him time to overcome the large lead of the frontrunner, Maine senator Edmund Muskie. By January 1972, McGovern had only 3\u00a0percent national support among Democrats in the Gallup Poll and had not attracted significant press coverage. McGovern's campaign manager Gary Hart decided on a guerrilla-like insurgency strategy of battling Muskie in only selected primaries, not everywhere, so as to focus the campaign's organizational strength and resources.\nMuskie fell victim to inferior organizing, an over-reliance on party endorsements, and Nixon's \"dirty tricks\" operatives, and in the March 7, 1972, New Hampshire primary, did worse than expected with McGovern coming in a close second. As Muskie's campaign funding and support dried up, Hubert Humphrey, who had rejoined the Senate, became McGovern's primary rival for the nomination, with Alabama governor George Wallace also in the mix after dominating the March 14 primary in Florida. McGovern won a key breakthrough victory over Humphrey and Wallace on April 4 in Wisconsin, where he added blue-collar economic populism to his appeal. He followed that by dominating the April 25 primary in Massachusetts. At that point, McGovern had become the frontrunner. A late decision to enter the May 2 Ohio primary, considered a Humphrey stronghold, paid dividends when McGovern managed a very close second there amid charges of election fraud by pro-Humphrey forces. The other two leading candidates for the nomination also won primaries, but Wallace's campaign in effect ended when he was seriously wounded in a May assassination attempt, and McGovern's operation was effective in garnering delegates in caucus states.\nThe climactic contest took place in California, with Humphrey attacking McGovern in several televised debates; in the June 6 vote, McGovern defeated him by five percentage points and claimed all the delegates due to the state's winner-take-all rules. He then appeared to clinch the nomination with delegates won in the New York primary on June 20. Humphrey's attacks on McGovern as being too radical began a downward slide in the latter's poll standing against Nixon. McGovern became tagged with the label \"amnesty, abortion, and acid\", supposedly reflecting his positions. During his primary victories, McGovern used an approach that stressed grassroots-level organization while bypassing conventional campaign techniques and traditional party power centers. He capitalized on support from antiwar activists and reform liberals; thousands of students engaged in door-to-door campaigning for him. He benefited by the eight primaries he won being those the press focused on the most; he showed electoral weakness in the South and industrial Midwest, and actually received fewer primary votes overall than Humphrey and had only a modest edge over Wallace.\nMcGovern ran on a political platform that advocated withdrawal from the Vietnam War in exchange for the return of American prisoners of war and amnesty for draft evaders who had left the country. McGovern's platform also included an across-the-board 37-percent reduction in defense spending over three years. He proposed a \"demogrant\" program that would give a $1,000\u00a0payment to every citizen in the United States. Based around existing ideas such as the negative income tax and intended to replace the welfare bureaucracy and complicated maze of existing public-assistance programs, it nonetheless garnered considerable derision as a poorly thought-out \"liberal giveaway\" and was dropped from the platform in August.\nAn \"Anybody But McGovern\" coalition, led by southern Democrats and organized labor, formed in the weeks following the final primaries. McGovern's nomination did not become ensured until the first night of the 1972 Democratic National Convention in Miami Beach, Florida, where, following intricate parliamentary maneuverings led by campaign staffer Richard G. Stearns, a Humphrey credentials challenge regarding the California winner-take-all rules was defeated. Divisive arguments over the party platform then followed; what resulted was arguably the most liberal one of any major U.S. party. On July 12, 1972, McGovern officially won the Democratic nomination. In doing so and in taking over the party's processes and platform, McGovern produced what \"The New York Times\" termed \"a stunning sweep.\" The convention distractions led to a hurried process to pick a vice presidential running mate. Turned down by his first choice, Ted Kennedy, as well as by several others, McGovern selected \u2013 with virtually no vetting \u2013 U.S. Senate member Thomas Eagleton from Missouri. On the final night of the convention, procedural arguments over matters such as a new party charter, and a prolonged vice presidential nomination process that descended into farce, delayed the nominee's acceptance speech. As a result, McGovern delivered his speech, \"Come home America!\", at three o'clock in the morning, reducing his television audience from about 70\u00a0million people to about 15\u00a0million.\nJust over two weeks after the convention, it was revealed that Eagleton had been hospitalized and received electroconvulsive therapy for \"nervous exhaustion\" and \"depression\" several times during the early to mid-1960s. Years later, Eagleton's diagnosis was refined to bipolar II disorder. McGovern initially supported Eagleton, in part because he saw parallels with his daughter Terry's battles with mental illness. He was additionally sympathetic due to his wife Eleanor having experienced depression; and he was also harboring a secret about his own past, that being an undisclosed child. On the following day, July 26, McGovern stated publicly, \"I am 1,000\u00a0percent for Tom Eagleton and have no intention of dropping him from the ticket.\" Though many people still supported Eagleton's candidacy, an increasing number of influential politicians and newspapers questioned his ability to handle the office of vice president and, potentially, president or questioned the McGovern campaign's ability to survive the distraction. The resulting negative attention \u2013 combined with McGovern's consultation with preeminent psychiatrists, including Karl Menninger, as well as doctors who had treated Eagleton \u2013 prompted McGovern to accept, and announce on August 1, Eagleton's offer to withdraw from the ticket. It remains the only time a major party vice presidential nominee has been forced off the ticket. Five prominent Democrats then publicly turned down McGovern's offer of the vice presidential slot: in sequence, Kennedy again, Abraham Ribicoff, Humphrey, Reubin Askew, and Muskie. (Larry O'Brien was also approached but no offer made). Finally, he named U.S. ambassador to France Sargent Shriver, a brother-in-law of John F. Kennedy. McGovern's 1,000 percent statement and subsequent reneging made him look both indecisive and an opportunist, and has since been considered one of the worst gaffes in presidential campaign history. McGovern himself would long view the Eagleton affair as having been \"catastrophic\" for his campaign.\nThe general election campaign did not go well for McGovern. Nixon did little campaigning; he was buoyed by the success of his visit to China and arms-control-signing summit meeting in the Soviet Union earlier that year, and shortly before the election Henry Kissinger's somewhat premature statement that \"peace is at hand\" in Vietnam. Top Republican figures attacked McGovern for being weak on defense issues and \"encouraging the enemy\"; Nixon asserted that McGovern was for \"peace at any price\" in Vietnam rather than the \"peace with honor\" that Nixon said he would bring about. McGovern chose to not emphasize his own war record during the campaign. The McGovern Commission changes to the convention rules marginalized the influence of establishment Democratic Party figures, and McGovern struggled to get endorsements from figures such as former President Johnson and Chicago mayor Richard J. Daley. The AFL\u2013CIO remained neutral, after having always endorsed the Democratic presidential candidate in the past. Some southern Democrats, led by former Governor of Texas John Connally, switched their support to the Republican incumbent through a campaign effort called Democrats for Nixon. Nixon outspent McGovern by more than two-to-one.\nNixon directly requested that his aides use government records to try to dig up dirt on McGovern and his top contributors. McGovern was publicly attacked by Nixon surrogates and was the target of various operations of the Nixon \"dirty tricks\" campaign. The infamous Watergate break-in of the Democratic National Committee headquarters in June 1972 was an alternate target after bugging McGovern's headquarters was explored. The full dimensions of the subsequent Watergate scandal did not emerge during the election; the vast majority of the press focused on McGovern's difficulties and other news rather than the break-in or who was behind it, and a majority of voters were unaware of Watergate. In the end, Nixon's covert operations had little effect in either direction on the election outcome.\nBy the final week of the campaign, McGovern knew he was going to lose. While he was appearing in Battle Creek, Michigan, on November 2, a Nixon admirer heckled him. McGovern told the heckler, \"I've got a secret for you\", then said softly into his ear, \"Kiss my ass.\" The incident was overheard and reported in the press, and became part of the tale of the campaign.\nIn the general election on November 7, 1972, the McGovern\u2013Shriver ticket suffered a 61 percent to 37 percent defeat to Nixon \u2013 at the time, the second biggest landslide in American history, with a United States Electoral College total of 520 to 17. McGovern's two electoral vote victories came in Massachusetts and the District of Columbia, and he failed to win his home state of South Dakota, which had gone Democratic in only three of the previous eighteen presidential elections and would continue to go Republican in presidential elections to come. Over the nation as a whole he carried a mere 135\u00a0counties. At just over four percent of the nation's counties, McGovern's county wins remain the fewest by almost a factor of three for any major-party nominee.\nRemaining Senate years.\nAfter this loss, McGovern remained in the Senate. He was scarred by the enormous defeat, and his wife, Eleanor, took it even worse; during the winter of 1972\u20131973, the couple seriously considered moving to England. His allies were replaced in positions of power within the Democratic Party leadership, and the McGoverns did not get publicly introduced at party affairs they attended. On January 20, 1973, a few hours after Richard Nixon was re-inaugurated, McGovern gave a speech at the Oxford Union that talked about the abuses of Nixon's presidency; it brought criticism, including from some Democrats, for being ill-mannered.\nTo get past the \"bitterness and self-pity\" he felt, McGovern forced himself to deal with the defeat humorously before audiences; starting at the March 1973 Gridiron Club, he frequently related his campaign misadventures in a self-deprecating fashion, such as saying, \"For many years, I wanted to run for the presidency in the worst possible way \u2013 and last year I sure did.\" Emotions surrounding the loss would remain with McGovern for decades, as it did with some other defeated presidential nominees. Nixon resigned in August 1974 because of the Watergate scandal. McGovern said President Gerald Ford's subsequent September 1974 pardon of Nixon was difficult to understand, given that Nixon's subordinates were going to prison.\nMcGovern displayed the political resiliency he had shown in the past. In 1974, he faced possible political peril because of his having neglected the state during his long presidential campaign, and by May 1973, he had already begun campaigning for re-election. An Air Force pilot and Medal of Honor recipient, Leo K. Thorsness, had just been repatriated after six years as a prisoner of war in North Vietnam; he publicly accused McGovern of having given aid and comfort to the enemy and of having prolonged his time as a POW. McGovern replied that if there had been no war, there would have been no POWs, and that everything he had done had been toward the goal of ending the war sooner. Thorsness became the Republican nominee against McGovern, but despite the two men's different roles in it, the war did not become a significant issue. Instead, the campaign was dominated by farm policy differences and economic concerns over the 1973\u20131975 recession. Thorsness charged McGovern with being a \"part-time senator\" more concerned with national office and with spending over $2\u00a0million on his re\u2011election bid, while McGovern labeled Thorsness a carpetbagger owing to his having grown up in Minnesota. In a year in which Democrats were advantaged by the aftereffects of the Watergate scandal, McGovern won re-election in November 1974 with 53 percent of the vote.\nFollowing the Fall of Saigon and the end of the Vietnam War in April 1975, McGovern attributed the outcome not to Congressional refusal to fund more military aid to South Vietnam, as President Ford had wanted. Instead, McGovern said, the regime of Nguy\u1ec5n V\u0103n Thi\u1ec7u \"fell because the leadership was corrupt and decadent and did not have the support of its own people.\" Regarding the Indochina refugee crisis that soon developed, McGovern introduced legislation in early May 1975 to enable Vietnamese refugees who had left the country in panic fearing a post-war bloodbath to return to the country. He said, \"Ninety percent of the refugees would be better off going back to their own land. And I say that in a humanitarian spirit. ... The [new] Saigon government has already given orders that the people are not to be molested ... that is more respect than Thieu's army frequently demonstrated. ... our program for dealing with these refugees should include as the highest priority steps to facilitate their early return to Vietnam.\" McGovern's stance brought immediate criticism from some quarters; syndicated columnist John Lofton said it proved that McGovern was \"the most immoral hypocrite on the American political scene today.\" McGovern objected to what he termed distorted interpretations of his proposal, but newspaper publisher Creed Black considered the criticism fair.\nFollowing his Senate re-election victory, McGovern harbored thoughts of running in the 1976 United States presidential election. Given the magnitude of his defeat in 1972, very few in the Democratic Party wanted him as a presidential candidate again. Unfamiliar and uncomfortable with Democratic nominee Jimmy Carter, McGovern secretly voted for Ford instead. McGovern's view on intervention in Southeast Asia took a turn in 1978 in reaction to the ongoing Cambodian genocide. Noting that it affected a percentage of the population that made \"Hitler's operation look tame\", he advocated an international military intervention in Cambodia to put the Khmer Rouge regime out of power.\nMcGovern's Select Committee on Nutrition and Human Needs expanded its scope to include national nutrition policy. In 1977, it issued a new set of nutritional guidelines for Americans that sought to combat leading killer health conditions. Titled \"Dietary Goals for the United States\", but also known as the \"McGovern Report\", it suggested that Americans eat less fat, less cholesterol, less refined and processed sugars, and more complex carbohydrates and fiber. While many public health officials had said all of this for some time, the committee's issuance of the guidelines gave it higher public profile. The recommendations proved controversial with the cattle, dairy, egg, and sugar industries, including from McGovern's home state. The McGovern committee guidelines led to reorganization of some federal executive functions and became the predecessor to the more detailed Dietary Guidelines for Americans later issued twice a decade by the Center for Nutrition Policy and Promotion.\nIn 1980, McGovern was one of several liberal Democratic senators targeted for defeat by the National Conservative Political Action Committee (NCPAC), which put out a year's worth of negative advertising about McGovern. It and other anti-abortion groups especially focused on McGovern's support for abortion rights laws. McGovern faced a Democratic primary challenge for the first time, from a pro-life candidate. McGovern's Republican opponent was James Abdnor, a four-term incumbent congressman who held identical positions to McGovern's on farm issues, was solidly conservative on national issues, and was well liked within the state. Abdnor's campaign focused on both McGovern's liberal voting record and what it said was McGovern's lack of involvement in South Dakota affairs. McGovern made an issue of NCPAC's outside involvement, and that group eventually withdrew from the campaign after Abdnor denounced a letter it had sent out. Far behind in the polls earlier, McGovern outspent Abdnor two-to-one and repeatedly criticized Abdnor's refusal to debate him, thereby drawing attention to a slight speech defect Abdnor had. Showing the comeback pattern of some of his past races in the state, McGovern closed the gap for a while. In November 1980, McGovern was defeated for re-election, winning only 39 percent of the vote to Abdnor's 58 percent. In what became known as the \"Reagan Revolution\", McGovern was one of many Democratic casualties of that year's Republican sweep.\nPost-Senate life and 1984 presidential campaign.\nMcGovern did not mourn leaving the Senate. Although being rejected by his own state stung, intellectually he could accept that South Dakotans wanted a more conservative representative; he and Eleanor felt out of touch with the country and in some ways liberated by the loss. Nevertheless, he refused to believe that Liberalism in the United States was dead in the time of Reagan; remaining active in politics, in January 1981 he founded the political organization Americans for Common Sense. The group sought to rally liberals, encourage liberal thinking, and combat the Moral Majority and other new Christian right forces. In 1982 he turned the group into a political action committee, which raised $1.2 million for liberal candidates in the 1982 U.S. congressional elections. McGovern shut the committee down when he decided to run again for president.\nMcGovern also began teaching and lecturing at a number of universities in the U.S. and Europe, accepting one-year contracts or less. From 1981 to 1982, McGovern replaced historian Stephen E. Ambrose as a professor at the University of New Orleans. McGovern also began making frequent speeches, earning several hundred thousand dollars a year. McGovern attempted another presidential run in the 1984 Democratic primaries. Friends and political admirers of McGovern initially feared the effort would prove an embarrassment, and McGovern knew that his chances of winning were remote, but he felt compelled to try to influence the intraparty debate in a liberal direction. Freed from the practical concerns of trying to win, McGovern outlined a ten-point program of sweeping domestic and foreign policy changes; because he was not seen as a threat, fellow competitors did not attack his positions, and media commentators praised him as the \"conscience\" of the Democratic Party.\nDespite enjoying good name recognition, McGovern had little funding or staff, although he did garner critical funding from some celebrities and statesmen. He won a surprise third-place showing in the Iowa caucuses amidst a crowded field of candidates but finished fifth in the New Hampshire primary. He announced he would drop out unless he finished first or second in the Massachusetts primary, and when he came in third behind his former campaign manager Gary Hart and former vice president Walter Mondale, he kept his word. He later endorsed Mondale, the eventual Democratic nominee. He hosted the 17th episode of Saturday Night Live Season 9 on April 14, 1984. McGovern addressed the party's platform committee, and his name was placed in nomination at the 1984 Democratic National Convention, where he delivered a speech that strongly criticized President Reagan and praised Democratic unity. He received the votes of four delegates. He actively supported the Mondale\u2013Geraldine Ferraro ticket, whose eventual landslide defeat bore some similarities to his own in 1972.\nDuring the 1980s McGovern was a fellow at the Institute for Policy Studies, a think tank in Washington, D.C. In September 1987, McGovern lectured at the inaugural Waldo Family Lecture Series on International Relations at Old Dominion University in Norfolk, Virginia. In January 1988, McGovern said that he was considering entering the 1988 Democratic Party presidential primaries in the event that a front-runner did not emerge in the race. Ultimately, he did not enter. McGovern had made several real estate investments in the D.C.\u00a0area and became interested in hotel operations. In 1988, using the money he had earned from his speeches, the McGoverns bought, renovated, and began running a 150-room inn in Stratford, Connecticut, with the goal of providing a hotel, restaurant, and public conference facility. It went into bankruptcy in 1990 and closed the following year. In 1992 McGovern published his reflections on the experience in \"The Wall Street Journal\" and the \"Nation's Restaurant News\". He attributed part of the failure to the early 1990s recession, but also part to the cost of dealing with federal, state, and local regulations that were passed with good intentions but made life difficult for small businesses, and to the cost of dealing with frivolous lawsuits. McGovern wrote, \"I\u00a0... wish that during the years I was in public office I had had this firsthand experience about the difficulties business people face every day. That knowledge would have made me a better U.S.\u00a0senator and a more understanding presidential contender.\" His statement would still be resonating with American conservatives two decades later.\nAlthough he briefly explored another presidential run in the 1992 contest, McGovern instead became president of the Middle East Policy Council (a nonprofit organization that seeks to educate American citizens and policymakers about the political, economic and security issues impacting U.S. national interests in the Middle East) in July 1991; he had previously served on its board since 1986. He held this position until 1997, when he was replaced by Chas W. Freeman Jr. On the night of December 12\u201313, 1994, McGovern's daughter Teresa fell into a snowbank in Madison, Wisconsin, while heavily intoxicated and died of hypothermia. Heavy press attention followed, and McGovern revealed his daughter had battled her alcoholism for years and had been in and out of many treatment programs while having had one extended period of sobriety. McGovern authored an account of her life, \"Terry: My Daughter's Life-and-Death Struggle with Alcoholism\"; published in 1996, it presented a harrowing, unsparing view of the depths to which she had descended, the torment that he and the rest of his family had experienced in trying unsuccessfully to help her, and his ongoing thoughts and guilt about whether the demands of his political career and the time he had spent away from the family had made things worse for her. The book was a modest best-seller, and with the proceeds, he founded the Teresa McGovern Center in Madison to help others suffering from the combination of alcoholism and mental health problems. He would later say that Terry's death was by far the most painful event in his life: \"You never get over it, I'm sure of that. You get so you can live with it, that's all.\"\nAmbassador to food agencies and other later activities.\nIn April 1998 McGovern returned to public service when he began a three-year stint as United States ambassador to the United Nations Agencies for Food and Agriculture, serving in Rome, after having been named to the post by President Bill Clinton. The announcement that Clinton was choosing McGovern for the role had come on February 19, McGovern's appointment had been confirmed by voice vote of the Senate on March 6, had become official on March 10, and he presented his credentials to the UN in Rome on April 14. The 75-year-old McGovern said he had not been seeking the position, but that \"it's ideal for someone my age because it carries full ambassadorial rank without the hassle of running a big embassy.\"\nIn an effort to meet the UN's goal of reducing the number of hungry people in the world by half by 2015, Ambassador McGovern formulated detailed plans, urging delivery of more surplus food to foreign school-lunch programs and the establishment of specific targets such as had been done in old American programs. He began working again with fellow former U.S. Senate member Bob Dole from Kansas to persuade the Senate to support this effort, as well as expanded school lunch, food stamps, and nutritional help for pregnant women and poor children in the United States.\nThe McGovern\u2013Dole International Food for Education and Child Nutrition Program that was created in 2000, and funded largely through the Congress, would go on to provide more than 22 million meals to children in 41 countries over the next eight years. It was also credited with improving school attendance, especially among girls, who were more likely to be allowed to go to school if a meal was being provided. In August 2000, President Clinton presented McGovern with the Presidential Medal of Freedom, the nation's highest civilian honor, in recognition of McGovern's service in the effort to eradicate world hunger. McGovern's book \"The Third Freedom: Ending Hunger in Our Time\" was published in January 2001; with its title making reference to Roosevelt's Four Freedoms speech, it proposed a plan whereby chronic world hunger could be eliminated within thirty years. In January 2001, McGovern was asked to stay on at the UN post for a while by the incoming George W. Bush administration. His stint then concluded with a termination of mission on September 28, 2001.\nIn October 2001, McGovern was appointed as the first UN global ambassador on world hunger by the World Food Programme, the agency he had helped found forty years earlier. He was still active in this goodwill ambassador position as of 2011 and remained in it until his death. McGovern was an honorary life member of the board of Friends of the World Food Program. McGovern also served as a senior policy advisor at Olsson Frank Weeda, a food and drug regulatory counseling law and lobbying firm in Washington, D.C., where he specialized on issues of food, nutrition, and agriculture. McGovern's wartime story was at the center of Ambrose's 2001 best-selling profile of the men who flew B\u201124s over Germany in World War\u00a0II, \"The Wild Blue\". It was the first time much of the public became familiar with that part of his life; throughout his political career, McGovern had rarely mentioned his war service or the medals he had won.\nMcGovern continued to lecture and make public appearances, sometimes appearing with Dole on college campuses. McGovern and Dole contributed essays to the 2005 volume \"Ending Hunger Now: A Challenge to Persons of Faith\". From around 2003 to 2005, McGovern owned a bookstore in his summer home of Stevensville in Montana's Bitterroot Valley, until deciding to sell it because of lack of sufficient market. In 2003, the McGoverns became part-time residents of Marco Island, Florida; by then, Eleanor was struggling with heart disease.\nIn October 2006, the $8.5 million George and Eleanor McGovern Library and Center for Leadership and Public Service was dedicated at Dakota Wesleyan University. The couple had helped raise the funds for it. It seeks to prepare the college's best students for future careers in public service through classes, seminars, research, and internships, and also to raise the visibility of the university. The dignitaries in attendance were led by former president Clinton.\nMcGovern's wife Eleanor was too ill to attend the ceremony, and she died of heart disease on January 25, 2007, at their home in Mitchell.\nLater in 2007, several events were held at Dakota Wesleyan and in Washington, D.C., to celebrate McGovern's 85th birthday and the 35th anniversary of his nomination for president. Hundreds of former staff, volunteers, supporters and friends attended, along with public officials.\nMcGovern still sought to have his voice heard in the American political scene. He became an outspoken opponent of the Iraq War, likening U.S. involvement in that country to that of the failed Vietnam effort, and in 2006 co-wrote the book \"Out of Iraq: A Practical Plan for Withdrawal Now\". In January 2004, McGovern campaigned for Wesley Clark in his presidential bid, citing him as the candidate best suited to win in the general election. In January 2008, McGovern wrote an op-ed in \"The Washington Post\" calling for the impeachment of President George W. Bush and Vice-President Dick Cheney, saying they had violated the U.S.\u00a0Constitution, transgressed national and international law, and repeatedly lied to the American people. The subtitle of the article read \"Nixon Was Bad. These Guys Are Worse.\" In the tumultuous 2008 Democratic Party presidential nomination campaign, he first endorsed U.S. Senate member Hillary Clinton from New York and then later switched to U.S. Senate member Barack Obama from Illinois after concluding Clinton could no longer win. On October 16, 2008, McGovern and Dole were made World Food Prize laureates for their efforts to curb hunger in the world and in particular for their joint program for school feeding and enhanced school attendance.\nFinal years and death.\nBy 2009, McGovern had moved to St. Augustine Beach, Florida. McGovern's seventh book (as author, co-author, or contributing editor) issued in the first decade of the 2000s, \"Abraham Lincoln\", was published by Times Books and released at the close of 2008. Throughout 2009, McGovern embarked on a book tour, including a prominent visit to the Richard Nixon Presidential Library and Museum.\nHe was treated for exhaustion during 2011 and then was hospitalized after a serious fall in December 2011 on his way to participate in a live C-SPAN program about his 1972 presidential campaign on the 2011 television show The Contenders. By January 2012 he was promoting his latest book, \"What It Means to Be a Democrat\". He was hospitalized again in April 2012 owing to fainting spells. McGovern's 90th birthday was celebrated on July 19, 2012, with a Washington event hosted by World Food Programme and attended by many liberal Democratic politicians, along with (as \"The Washington Post\" termed it) \"one respectful conservative\", Republican Party U.S. Senate member John Thune. On July 27, 2012, McGovern's son Steven died at age 60. McGovern's daughter Ann said, \"Steve had a long struggle with alcoholism. We will all miss him deeply, but are grateful that he is now at peace.\" In August 2012, McGovern moved back to Sioux Falls, South Dakota, to be nearer to his family. His final public appearance was on October 6, 2012, when he introduced his recorded narration for Aaron Copland's \"Lincoln Portrait\" with the South Dakota Symphony Orchestra.\nOn October 15, 2012, McGovern's family announced he had entered Dougherty Hospice House in Sioux Falls; his daughter Ann said, \"He's coming to the end of his life.\" On the morning of October 21, 2012, McGovern died at the age of 90 at the Sioux Falls hospice, surrounded by family and lifelong friends. The family released this statement: \"We are blessed to know that our father lived a long, successful and productive life advocating for the hungry, being a progressive voice for millions and fighting for peace. He continued giving speeches, writing and advising all the way up to and past his 90th birthday, which he celebrated this summer.\" In addition to his three remaining children, he was survived by ten grandchildren and eight great-grandchildren.\nPresident Obama paid tribute to McGovern as \"a champion for peace\" and a \"statesman of great conscience and conviction\". At a memorial service in Sioux Falls, Vice President Joe Biden eulogized McGovern, addressing his World War II service and his opposition to the Vietnam War by saying to his family, \"Your father was a genuine hero. ... Had your father not been in the Senate, so much more blood, so much more treasure would have been wasted.\" His funeral was held in the Washington Pavilion of Arts and Science in Sioux Falls, with his ashes to be buried alongside his wife and daughter Terry at Rock Creek Cemetery in Washington.\nOn July 26, 2015, the \"Argus Leader\", the daily newspaper in Sioux Falls, published an article detailing the extensive files on McGovern compiled through the years by the Federal Bureau of Investigation, including letters and notations from FBI director J. Edgar Hoover, revealing that Hoover had a direct interest in the FBI monitoring of McGovern. The newspaper also published the complete FBI file on McGovern that was obtained through a Freedom of Information Act request filed shortly after McGovern's death.\nAwards and decorations.\nMcGovern's decorations include:\nLegacy.\nOwing to his resounding loss to Nixon in the 1972 election and the causes behind it, \"McGovernism\" became a label that a generation of Democratic politicians tried to avoid. In 1992, nationally syndicated \"Chicago Tribune\" columnist Bob Greene wrote, \"Once again politicians \u2013 mostly Republicans, but some Democrats, too \u2013 are using his name as a synonym for presidential campaigns that are laughable and out of touch with the American people.\" Conservatives used McGovern's name as a ready synonym for what they saw as liberal failures. According to Daniel McCarthy of \"The American Conservative\", the Republican Party began to act after 1972 as if \"every Democratic leader, no matter how Southern, how pro-war, how middle-of-the-road, is really a McGovernite. Indeed, for nearly 40 years the conservative movement has defined itself in opposition to the Democratic standard-bearer of 1972. Anti-McGovernism has come to play for the Right the unifying role that anticommunism once played, much to the detriment of older principles such as limited government, fiscal continence, and prudence in foreign policy.\"\nThe association with dovishness and weakness on defense has been especially prevalent, although McGovern publicly stated in 1972 that he was not a pacifist and that use of force was sometimes necessary, such as in World War II. McGovern later said in 2001 that his political image had been exaggerated: \"I am a liberal and always have been \u2013 just not the wild-eyed character the Republicans made me out to be.\" He continued to feel that he was marginalized with his views miscast. He saw himself as a son of the prairie, in 2005 reciting his traditional upbringing and family values, culminating with \"I'm what a normal, healthy, ideal American should be like\", and in 2006 asked, \"How the hell do you get elected in South Dakota for twenty years if you're a wild-eyed radical?\"\nIn later decades, McGovern remained a symbol, or standard-bearer, of the American Left, particularly in relation to the turbulent 1960s and early 1970s when the country was torn by U.S.\u00a0involvement in the Vietnam War and the corruption and abuse of power of the Nixon administration. Throughout his career, McGovern's positions reflected his own experiences as well as a personal synthesis of the traditions of American liberalism and progressivism. Southern Methodist University historian Thomas J. Knock wrote in 2003 that \"[McGovern's] career was extraordinary and historic ... primarily because of his impress as searching and prophetic critic\" and that \"few political careers offer an alternative understanding of the American Century as compelling and instructive as McGovern's.\"\nAs chairman of the McGovern\u2013Fraser Commission in 1969\u20131970, McGovern instituted major changes in Democratic party rules that continue to this day and, to a large degree, were ultimately adopted by the Republican Party as well, with large institutional changes taking place in both. Among those was the centralization of decisions about the nominating process at the national party level, rather than with the states. His 1972 campaign fundamentally altered how presidential primary campaigns were waged. Within the Democratic Party, power shifted from the New Deal coalition to younger, more affluent, issue-oriented activists; the women's movement and gay rights movement found a place; skepticism about military buildups and foreign interventions took hold; and the 1960s \"New Politics\" found its culmination in McGovern's nomination. In turn, the overwhelming defeat of McGovern in the general election led to the liberal wing of the Democratic Party being stigmatized for decades to come and a turn in the party towards centrist directions. McGovern himself recognized the mixed results of his 1972 candidacy, saying, \"We made a serious effort to open the doors of the Democratic Party \u2013 and as soon as we did, half the Democrats walked out.\" The 2005 documentary film \"\" captured some of these achievements and lamentations. SUNY Albany political scientist Bruce Miroff wrote in 2007 that the McGovern campaign was the last time in presidential politics that liberals had \"their chance to speak of their goals with enthusiasm and their dreams with fire\u00a0... Yet almost at the instant that the insurgents successfully stormed the heights of American politics, they found themselves on the brink of one of the worst free falls on record.\" Half a century after McGovern's 1972 winning nomination effort, writers were making extensive comparisons between it and the Bernie Sanders 2020 presidential campaign.\nStaffers who worked on McGovern's 1972 campaign later became influential within the Democratic Party. Campaign manager Gary Hart staged his own presidential runs in 1984 and 1988. Future president Bill Clinton, with assistance from his future wife and politician, Hillary Rodham, had managed the McGovern campaign's operations in Texas. Hart both embraced and moved away from aspects of his past affiliation with McGovern, while Clinton, and the Democratic Leadership Council movement of which he was a part, explicitly rejected McGovern's ideology. There was still a legacy in terms of staffing, as the Clinton White House would be full of former \"McGovernites\".\nMcGovern's post-political career generally enhanced his reputation; Tom Brokaw, who referred to McGovern as part of the \"Greatest Generation\", wrote in 1998 that \"he remains one of the country's most decent and thoughtful public servants.\" McGovern's legacy also includes his commitment to combating hunger both in the United States and around the globe. He said, \"After I'm gone, I want people to say about me: He did the best he could to end hunger in this country and the world.\" In the view of Knock, McGovern in all his activities arguably accomplished more for people in need than most presidents or secretaries of state in U.S. history. Responding to the Serenity Prayer's desire to \"grant me the serenity to accept the things I cannot change\", McGovern said simply that he rejected that notion: \"I keep trying to change them.\"\nWritings.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWorks cited.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "62897", "revid": "48035214", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62897", "title": "Sherden", "text": "2nd millennium BC Mediterranean ethnic group\nThe Sherden (Egyptian: \"\u0161rdn\", \"\u0161\ua723rd\ua723n\ua723\" or \"\u0161\ua723rdyn\ua723\"; Ugaritic: \"\u0161rdnn(m)\" and \"trtn(m)\"; possibly Akkadian: \"\u0161\u00eart\u00e2nnu\"; also glossed \"Shardana\" or \"Sherdanu\") are one of the several ethnic groups the Sea Peoples were said to be composed of, appearing in fragmentary historical and iconographic records (ancient Egyptian and Ugaritic) from the Eastern Mediterranean in the late 2nd millennium BC.\nOn reliefs, they are shown carrying round shields and spears, dirks or swords, perhaps of Naue II type. In some cases, they are shown wearing corslets and kilts, but their key distinguishing feature is a horned helmet, which, in all cases but three, features a circular accouterment at the crest. At Medinet Habu the corslet appears similar to that worn by the Philistines. The Sherden sword, it has been suggested by archaeologists since James Henry Breasted, may have developed from an enlargement of European daggers and been associated with the exploitation of Bohemian tin. Robert Drews suggested that use of this weapon by groups of Sherden and Philistine mercenaries made them capable of withstanding attacks by chariotry and so made them valuable allies in warfare, but Drews's theory has been widely criticised by contemporary scholars.\nEarly historical references.\nThe earliest known mention of the people called \"Srdn-w\", more usually called \"Sherden\" or \"Shardana\", is generally thought to be the Akkadian reference to the \"\u0161e-er-ta-an-nu\" in the Amarna Letters correspondence from Rib-Hadda, mayor (\"hazannu\") of Byblos, to the Pharaoh Amenhotep III or Akhenaten in the 14th\u00a0century\u00a0BC. Though they have been referred to as sea raiders and mercenaries, who were prepared to offer their services to local employers, these texts do not provide any evidence of that association, and they shed no light on what the function of these \"\u0161irdannu-people\" was at the time.\nThe first certain mention of the Sherden is found in the records of Ramesses II (ruled 1279-1213\u00a0BC), who defeated them in his second year (1278\u00a0BC) when they attempted to raid Egypt's coast. The pharaoh subsequently incorporated many of these warriors into his personal guard. An inscription by Ramesses\u00a0II on a stele from Tanis that recorded the Sherden pirates' raid and subsequent defeat, speaks of the constant threat which they posed to Egypt's Mediterranean coasts:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;the unruly Sherden whom no one had ever known how to combat, they came boldly sailing in their warships from the midst of the sea, none being able to withstand them.\nAfter Ramesses\u00a0II succeeded in defeating the invaders and capturing some of them, Sherden captives are depicted in this Pharaoh's bodyguard, where they are conspicuous by their helmets with horns with a ball projecting from the middle, their round shields and the great Naue\u00a0II swords, with which they are depicted in inscriptions about the Battle of Kadesh, fought against the Hittites. Ramesses stated in his Kadesh inscriptions that he incorporated some of the Sherden into his own personal guard at the Battle of Kadesh.\nYears later, other waves of Sea People, the Sherden included, were defeated by Merneptah, son of Ramesses\u00a0II, and father of Ramesses III. An Egyptian work written around 1100\u00a0BC, the Onomasticon of Amenope, documents the presence of the Sherden in Canaan. After being defeated by Pharaoh Ramesses\u00a0III, they, along with other \"Sea Peoples\", would be allowed to settle in that territory, subject to Egyptian rule.\nThe Italian orientalist Giovanni Garbini identified the territory colonized by the Sherden as that occupied, according to the Bible, by the Israelite tribe of Zebulun going by the eponym of \"Sared\", which had established themselves in the northern territory of Canaan. Archaeologist Adam Zertal suggests that some Sherden settled in what is now northern Israel. He hypothesizes that biblical Sisera was a Sherden general and that the archaeological site at el-Ahwat (whose architecture resembles nuraghe sites in Sardinia) was Sisera's capital, Harosheth Haggoyim, though this theory has not received wide acceptance in the scholarly community.\nConnection to Sea Peoples.\nThe Sherden seem to have been one of the more prominent groups of pirates that engaged in coastal raiding and the disruption of trade in the years around the 13th\u00a0century\u00a0BC. They are first mentioned by name in the Tanis\u00a0II rhetorical stele of Ramesses II, which says in part, \"As for the Sherden of rebellious mind, whom none could ever fight against, who came bold-hearted, they sailed in, in warships from the midst of the Sea, those whom none could withstand; but he plundered them by the victories of his valiant arm, they being carried off to Egypt.\" It is possible that some of the Sherden captured in the battle recounted in Tanis II were pressed into Egyptian service, perhaps even as shipwrights or advisers on maritime technology, a role in which they may have assisted in the construction of the hybrid Egyptian warships seen on the monumental relief at Medinet Habu that shows the naval battle between Egyptians and Sea Peoples.\nMichael Wood has suggested that their raids contributed greatly to the collapse of the Mycenaean civilization. However, while some Aegean attributes can be seen in the material culture of the Philistines, one of the Sea Peoples who established cities on the southern coastal plain of Canaan at the beginning of the Iron Age, the association of the Sherden with this geographic area is based entirely on their association with that group and the Sea Peoples phenomenon writ large, rather than on physical or literary evidence (of which almost all testifies to their presence in Egypt, rather than their port of origin).\nOrigins.\nNo mention of the Sherden has ever been found in Hittite or Greek legends or documents.\nEastern origin theory.\nEnglish archaeologist Margaret Guido (1912\u20131994) concludes the evidence for the Sherden, Shekelesh, or Teresh coming from the western Mediterranean is flimsy. Guido in 1963 suggests that the Sherden may ultimately derive from Ionia, in the central west coast of Anatolia, in the region of Hermos, east of the island of Chios. It is suggested that Sardis, and the Sardinian plain nearby, may preserve a cultural memory of their name.\nUntil recently it was assumed that Sardis was only settled in the period after the Anatolian and Aegean Dark Age, but American excavations have shown the place was settled in the Bronze Age and was a site of a significant population. If this is so, the Sherden, pushed by Hittite expansionism of the Late Bronze Age and prompted by the famine that affected this region at the same time, may have been pushed to the Aegean Islands, where shortage of space led them to seek adventure and expansion overseas. It is suggested that from here they may have later migrated to Sardinia. Guido suggests that [if a] few dominating leaders arrived as heroes only a few centuries before Phoenician trading posts were established, several features of Sardinian prehistory might be explained as innovations introduced by them: Oriental types of armour, and fighting perpetuated in the bronze representation of warriors several centuries later; the arrival of the Cypriot copper ingots of the Serra Ilixi type; the sudden advance in and inventiveness of design of the Sardinian nuraghes themselves at about the turn of the first millennium; the introduction of certain religious practices such as the worship of water in sacred wells \u2013 if this fact was not introduced [later] by the Phoenician settlers.\nIt has been stated that the only weapons and armour similar to those of the Sherden found in Sardinia have been dated to several centuries after the period of the Sea Peoples, which mainly covered the 13th\u201312th\u00a0centuries\u00a0BC. If the theory that the Sherden moved to Sardinia only after their defeat around 1178\u20131175\u00a0BC by Ramesses\u00a0III is true, then it could be inferred from this that the finds in Sardinia are survivals of earlier types of weapons and armour. On the other hand, if the Sherden only moved into the Western Mediterranean in the ninth century, associated perhaps with the movement of early Etruscans and even Phoenician seafaring peoples into the Western Mediterranean at that time, this would solve the problem of the late appearance of their military gear in Sardinia; but it would remain unknown where they were located between the period of the Sea Peoples and their eventual appearance in Sardinia.\nWestern origin theory.\nThe theory that postulates a migration of peoples from the Eastern Mediterranean to Sardinia during the Late Bronze Age was firmly rejected by Italian archaeologists like Antonio Taramelli and Massimo Pallottino and by Vere Gordon Childe, and more recently by Giovanni Ugas, who instead identifies the Sherden with the indigenous Sardinian Nuragic civilization. He excavated the accidentally-discovered Hypogeum of Sant'Iroxi in Sardinia, where several arsenical bronze swords and daggers dating back to 1600\u00a0BC were found. The discovery suggested that the Nuragic tribes actually used these kind of weapons since the mid-2nd\u00a0millennium\u00a0BC, as is also demonstrated by the Nuragic bronze sculptures dating back to as far as 1200\u00a0BC and depicting warriors with a horned helmet and a round shield. Similar swords are also depicted on the statue menhir of Filitosa, in southern Corsica. Giovanni Lilliu noted that the period in which the Sherden are mentioned in the Egyptian sources coincides with the height of the Nuragic civilization. According to Robert Drews, Sardinians from the Gulf of Cagliari and the nearby areas were encouraged to become warriors and leave their island in order to improve their life conditions in the kingdoms of the Eastern Mediterranean.\nSince 2008, the \"Shardana Project\" has been developed in Corsica and Sardinia by the Centre of Studies J.-Fr. Champollion on Egyptology and Coptic Civilization, based in Genoa in cooperation with the University of Genoa and the University of the Mediterranean in Taranto. The project aims to gather as many data available about the Sherden culture inside and outside the Pharaonic Egypt. The project, conducted by the Egyptologist Giacomo Cavillier, aims to verify the possible interconnections and contacts between the Sherden and the local culture of these islands, in a broader Mediterranenan view, and to reassess all data available on this phenomenon.\nThe identification of the Sherden with the Nuragic Sardinians has also been supported by Sebastiano Tusa in his last book and in its presentations, and by Carlos Roberto Zorea, from the Complutense University of Madrid.\nAnother one to support it has been the Cypriot archaeologist Vassos Karageorghis, that found Nuragic pottery in Cyprus and wrote about the Nuragic role in places like the Syrian city of Tell Kazel.It is most probable that among the Aegean immigrants there were also some refugees from Sardinia. This may corroborate the evidence from Medinet Habu that among the Sea Peoples there were also refugees from various part of the Mediterranean, some from Sardinia, the Shardana or Sherden. [...] It is probable that these Shardana went first to Crete and from there they joined a group of Cretans for an eastward adventure.\nAdam Zertal, and more recently Bar Shay from Haifa University, have also argued that the Shardana were Nuragic Sardinians, and connected them to the site of El-Awat in Canaan.\nWhen you look at plans of sites of the Shardana in Sardinia, in the second millennium BCE, throughout this entire period, you can see wavy walls, you can see corridors... you can see high heaps of stones, which were developed into the classical nuraghic culture of Sardinia. The only good architectural parallels are found in Sardinia and the Shardana culture\nAccording to Malcolm H. Wiener \"some of the Sea Peoples are likely to have started from Sardinia, Sicily, Italy, or the Balkans. Sardinia has long been viewed as a likely or possible homeland of the Sherdana in light of the similarity in names and Egyptian depictions of helmets resembling helmets found in Sardinia\" while for the Austrian archeologist Reinhard Jung \"the hypothesis of a connection between \u0160ardana and Nuragic Sardinians is as old as the archaeology, but it could not be proven so far.\" (2017).\nLate Bronze Age Nuragic pottery had been found in the Aegean and in the Eastern Mediterranean particularly in Crete at Kommos and on the island of Cyprus, at Kokkinokremnos, a site attributed to the Sea Peoples, and Hala Sultan Tekke. Nuragic pottery were also found in a tomb of the Ugarit harbour of Minet el-Beida.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "62898", "revid": "50446187", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62898", "title": "Daphnia", "text": "Genus of crustaceans\nDaphnia is a genus of small planktonic crustaceans, in length. \"Daphnia\" are members of the order Anomopoda, and are one of the several small aquatic crustaceans commonly called water fleas because their saltatory swimming style resembles the movements of fleas. \"Daphnia\" spp. live in various aquatic environments ranging from acidic swamps to freshwater lakes and ponds.\nThe two most commonly found species of \"Daphnia\" are \"D.\u00a0pulex\" (small and most common) and \"D.\u00a0magna\" (large). They are often associated with a related genus in the order Cladocera: \"Moina\", which is in the Moinidae group instead of the Daphniidae, and is much smaller than \"D.\u00a0pulex\" (roughly half the maximum length). \nAppearance and characteristics.\nThe body of a \"Daphnia\" species is usually long, and is divided into segments, although this division is not visible. The head is fused, and is generally bent down towards the body with a visible notch separating the two. In most species, the rest of the body is covered by a carapace, with a ventral gap in which the five or six pairs of legs lie. The most prominent features are the compound eyes, the second antennae, and a pair of abdominal setae. In many species, the carapace is translucent or nearly so, so they make excellent subjects for the microscope, as one can observe the beating heart.\nEven under relatively low-power microscopy, the feeding mechanism can be observed, with immature young moving in the brood pouch; moreover, the eye being moved by the ciliary muscles can be seen, as well as blood cells being pumped around the circulatory system by the simple heart. The heart is at the top of the back, just behind the head, and the average heart rate is about 180\u00a0bpm under normal conditions. \"Daphnia\" spp., like many animals, are prone to alcohol intoxication as well as caffeine effects, which makes them excellent subjects for studying the effects of the depressant and stimulants on the nervous system due to the translucent exoskeleton and the visibly altered heart rate. They are tolerant of being observed live under a coverslip and appear to suffer no harm when returned to open water. This experiment can also be performed using nicotine, or adrenaline, each producing an increase in the heart rate. \nDue to its intermediate size, \"Daphnia\" spp. use both diffusion and circulatory methods, producing hemoglobin in low-oxygen environments.\nSystematics and evolution.\n\"Daphnia\" is a large genus \u2013 comprising over 200 species \u2013 belonging to the cladoceran family Daphniidae. It is subdivided into several subgenera (\"Daphnia\", \"Australodaphnia\", \"Ctenodaphnia\"), but the division has been controversial and is still in development. Each subgenus has been further divided into a number of species complexes. The understanding of species boundaries has been hindered by phenotypic plasticity, hybridization, intercontinental introductions, and poor taxonomic descriptions. Modern members of \"Daphnia\" belonging to the subgenera \"Daphnia\" and \"Ctenodaphnia\" are known since the Cretaceous, though the genus likely originated prior to the beginning of the Cretaceous. There are numerous poorly studied and cryptic species among crustaceans of the genus \"Daphnia\".\nEcology and behaviour.\n\"Daphnia\" species are normally \"r\"-selected, meaning that they invest in early reproduction, so have short lifespans. An individual \"Daphnia\" lifespan depends on factors such as temperature and the abundance of predators, but can be 13\u201314 months in some cold, oligotrophic, fish-free lakes. In typical conditions, however, the lifecycle is much shorter, not usually exceeding 5\u20136 months.\n\"Daphnia\" spp. are typically filter feeders, ingesting mainly unicellular algae and various sorts of organic detritus including protists and bacteria. Beating of the legs produces a constant current through the carapace, which brings such material into the digestive tract. The trapped food particles are formed into a food \"bolus\" which then moves down the digestive tract until voided through the anus located on the ventral surface of the terminal appendage. The second and third pairs of legs are used in the organisms' filter-feeding, ensuring large, unabsorbable particles are kept out, while the other sets of legs create the stream of water rushing into the organism.\nSwimming is powered mainly by the second set of antennae, which are larger in size than the first set. The action of this second set of antennae is responsible for the jumping motion.\n\"Daphnia\" spp. are known to show behavioral changes or modifications to their morphology in the presence of predator kairomones (chemical signals), including larger size at hatching, increased bulkiness, and the development of \"neck-teeth\". For example, juveniles of \"D. pulex\" and \"D. magna\" have a larger size after hatching, along with developing neck-teeth at the back of the head, when in the presence of \"Chaoborus\" kairomones. These morphological defenses have shown to reduce mortality due to \"Chaoborus\" predation, which is a gape-limited predator. Chitin-related genes (deacetylases) are thought to play an important part in the expression/development of these morphological defenses in \"Daphnia\". Chitin-modifying enzymes (chitin deacetylases) have been shown to catalyse the N-deacetylation of chitin to influence the protein-binding affinity of these chitin filaments. In case of \"D. magna\" it was shown that the response to different kairomones also differ: While the presence of fish kairomones up-regulated one specific gene in the folding of proteins, whereas \"Chaoborus\" kairomone down-regulated the same gene. Based on this the response is a reduction of size at first reproduction in response to kairomones from fish whereas it shows increased size when confronted with larvae of \"Chaoborus\". With the same publication it was shown that genes for glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase and ubiquitin conjugating enzyme were up-regulated in the presence of microcystins in the food of \"D. magna\" and with this the enzymes of glycolysis and protein catabolism are significantly upgregulated when daphnids ingest these toxins.\nLife cycle.\nMost \"Daphnia\" species have a lifecycle based on \"cyclical parthenogenesis\", alternating between parthenogenetic (asexual) and sexual reproduction. For most of the growth season, females reproduce asexually. They produce a brood of diploid eggs every time they molt; these broods can contain as few as one or two eggs in smaller species, such as \"D.\u00a0cucullata\", but can be over 100 in larger species, such as \"D.\u00a0magna\". Under typical conditions, these eggs hatch after a day, and remain in the female's brood pouch for around three days (at 20\u00a0\u00b0C). They are then released into the water, and pass through a further four to six instars over 5\u201310 days (longer in poor conditions) before reaching an age where they are able to reproduce. The asexually produced offspring are typically female.\nTowards the end of the growing season, however, the mode of reproduction changes, and the females produce tough \"resting eggs\" or \"winter eggs\". When environmental conditions deteriorate (e.g. crowding), some of the asexually produced offspring develop into males. The females start producing haploid sexual eggs, which the males fertilise. In species without males, resting eggs are also produced asexually and are diploid. In either case, the resting eggs are protected by a hardened coat (consisting of two chitinous plates) called the \"ephippium\", and are cast off at the female's next molt. The ephippia can withstand periods of extreme cold, drought, or poor food availability, and hatch \u2013 when conditions improve \u2013 into females (They are close to being classed as extremophiles) . \nParasites.\nThe diagram on the left shows the lifecycle of \"Pasteuria ramosa\", a bacterial parasite of \"Daphnia\". Susceptible hosts acquire the infection from spores in the sediment or in suspension. The parasite develops mainly in the host's body cavity and muscle tissue, increasing in density and eventually expanding to occupy the entire host. Typical effects on the host are sterility and gigantism. Spores are released mainly after the host dies and sinks to the substrate, and sometimes directly to the water via clumsy predation.\nConservation.\nSeveral \"Daphnia\" species are considered threatened. These are listed as vulnerable by IUCN: \"Daphnia nivalis\", \"Daphnia coronata\", \"Daphnia occidentalis\", and \"Daphnia jollyi\". Some species are halophiles, and can be found in hypersaline lake environments, an example of which is the Makgadikgadi Pan.\nUses.\n\"Daphnia\" spp. are a popular live food in tropical and marine fish keeping. They are often fed to tadpoles or small species of amphibians such as the African dwarf frog (\"Hymenochirus boettgeri\").\n\"Daphnia\" spp. are used in scientific studies as a model organism. They may be used in certain environments to test the effects of toxins on an ecosystem, which makes them an indicator genus, particularly useful because of their short lifespans and reproductive capabilities. Because they are nearly transparent, their internal organs are easy to study in live specimens (e.g. to study the effect of temperature on the heart rate of these ectothermic organisms). Environmental toxicological testing may be undertaken with researchers assessing mortality rates or metabolic perturbations to evaluate ecological impacts. \"Daphnia\" is also commonly used for experiments to test climate change aspects, as UVB that seriously damages zooplankton species (e.g. decrease feeding activity).\nBecause of their thin membranes, which allow drugs to be absorbed, they are used to monitor the effects of certain drugs, such as adrenaline or capsaicin, on the heart.\nInvasive species.\nSome species have developed permanent defenses against fish eating them, such as spines and long hooks on the body, which also cause them to become entangled on fishing lines and cloud water with their high numbers. Species such as \"Daphnia lumholtzi\" (native to east Africa, the Asian subcontinent of India, and east Australia) have these characteristics and great care should be taken to prevent them from spreading further in North American waters.\nSome species of \"Daphnia\" native to North America can develop sharp spines at the end of their bodies and helmet-like structures on their heads when they detect predators, but this is overall temporary for such species and they do not completely overwhelm or discourage native predators from eating them. While \"Daphnia\" spp. are an important base of the food chain in freshwater lakes (and vernal pools), they become a nuisance when they are unable to be eaten by native macroscopic predators, and some concern exists that the original spineless and hookless water fleas and spp. end up outcompeted by the invasive ones. (This may not be the case, however, and the new invaders may mostly be a tangling and clogging nuisance.)\nIn the water bodies of the world, at least 15 species of \"Daphnia\" and hybrids are non-native species, many of which pose a great threat to aquatic ecosystems.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "62902", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62902", "title": "Stuart Kauffman", "text": "American medical doctor &amp; academic\nStuart Alan Kauffman (born September 28, 1939) is an American medical doctor, theoretical biologist, and complex systems researcher who studies the origin of life on Earth. He was a professor at the University of Chicago, University of Pennsylvania, and University of Calgary. He is currently emeritus professor of biochemistry at the University of Pennsylvania and affiliate faculty at the Institute for Systems Biology. He has a number of awards including a MacArthur Fellowship and a Wiener Medal.\nHe is best known for arguing that the complexity of biological systems and organisms might result as much from self-organization and far-from-equilibrium dynamics as from Darwinian natural selection, as discussed in his book \"Origins of Order\" (1993). In 1967 and 1969 he used random Boolean networks to investigate generic self-organizing properties of gene regulatory networks, proposing that cell types are dynamical attractors in gene regulatory networks and that cell differentiation can be understood as transitions between attractors. Recent evidence suggests that cell types in humans and other organisms are attractors. In 1971 he suggested that a zygote may not be able to access all the cell type attractors in its gene regulatory network during development and that some of the developmentally inaccessible cell types might be cancer cell types. This suggested the possibility of \"cancer differentiation therapy\". He also proposed the self-organized emergence of collectively autocatalytic sets of polymers, specifically peptides, for the origin of molecular reproduction, which have found experimental support.\nEducation and early career.\nKauffman graduated from Dartmouth in 1960, was awarded the BA (Hons) by Oxford University (where he was a Marshall Scholar) in 1963, and completed a medical degree (M.D.) at the University of California, San Francisco in 1968. After completing his internship, he moved into developmental genetics of the fruit fly, holding appointments first at the University of Chicago from 1969 to 1973, the National Cancer Institute from 1973 to 1975, and then at the University of Pennsylvania from 1975 to 1994, where he rose to professor of biochemistry and biophysics.\nCareer.\nKauffman became known through his association with the Santa Fe Institute (a non-profit research institute dedicated to the study of complex systems), where he was faculty in residence from 1986 to 1997, and through his work on models in various areas of biology. These included autocatalytic sets in origin of life research, gene regulatory networks in developmental biology, and fitness landscapes in evolutionary biology. With Marc Ballivet, Kauffman holds the founding broad biotechnology patents in combinatorial chemistry and applied molecular evolution, first issued in France in 1987, in England in 1989, and later in North America.\nIn 1996, with Ernst and Young, Kauffman started BiosGroup, a Santa Fe, New Mexico-based for-profit company that applied complex systems methodology to business problems. BiosGroup was acquired by NuTech Solutions in early 2003. NuTech was bought by Netezza in 2008, and later by IBM.\nFrom 2005 to 2009 Kauffman held a joint appointment at the University of Calgary in biological sciences, physics, and astronomy. He was also an adjunct professor in the Department of Philosophy at the University of Calgary. He was an iCORE (Informatics Research Circle of Excellence) chair and the director of the Institute for Biocomplexity and Informatics. Kauffman was also invited to help launch the Science and Religion initiative at Harvard Divinity School; serving as visiting professor in 2009.\nIn January 2009 Kauffman became a Finland Distinguished Professor (FiDiPro) at Tampere University of Technology, Department of Signal Processing. The appointment ended in December, 2012. The subject of the FiDiPro research project is the development of delayed stochastic models of genetic regulatory networks based on gene expression data at the single molecule level.\nIn January 2010 Kauffman joined the University of Vermont faculty where he continued his work for two years with UVM's Complex Systems Center. From early 2011 to April 2013, Kauffman was a regular contributor to the NPR Blog 13.7, Cosmos and Culture, with topics ranging from the life sciences, systems biology, and medicine, to spirituality, economics, and the law.\nIn May 2013 he joined the Institute for Systems Biology, in Seattle, Washington. Following the death of his wife, Kauffman cofounded Transforming Medicine: The Elizabeth Kauffman Institute.\nIn 2014, Kauffman with Samuli Niiranen and Gabor Vattay was issued a founding patent on the \"poised realm\" (see below), an apparently new \"state of matter\" hovering reversibly between quantum and classical realms.\nIn 2015, he was invited to help initiate a general a discussion on rethinking economic growth for the United Nations. Around the same time, he did research with University of Oxford professor Teppo Felin.\nFitness landscapes.\nKauffman's NK model defines a combinatorial phase space, consisting of every string (chosen from a given alphabet) of length formula_1. For each string in this search space, a scalar value (called the \"fitness\") is defined. If a distance metric is defined between strings, the resulting structure is a \"landscape\".\nFitness values are defined according to the specific incarnation of the model, but the key feature of the NK model is that the fitness of a given string formula_2 is the sum of contributions from each locus formula_3 in the string:\nformula_4\nand the contribution from each locus in general depends on the value of formula_5 other loci:\nformula_6\nwhere formula_7 are the other loci upon which the fitness of formula_3 depends.\nHence, the fitness function formula_9 is a mapping between strings of length \"K\"\u00a0+\u00a01 and scalars, which Weinberger's later work calls \"fitness contributions\". Such fitness contributions are often chosen randomly from some specified probability distribution.\nIn 1991, Weinberger published a detailed analysis of the case in which formula_10 and the fitness contributions are chosen randomly. His analytical estimate of the number of local optima was later shown to be flawed. However, numerical experiments included in Weinberger's analysis support his analytical result that the expected fitness of a string is normally distributed with a mean of approximately\nformula_11\nand a variance of approximately\nformula_12.\nRecognition and awards.\nKauffman held a MacArthur Fellowship between 1987 and 1992. He also holds an Honorary Degree in Science from the University of Louvain (1997); He was awarded the Norbert Wiener Memorial Gold Medal for Cybernetics in 1973, the Gold Medal of the Accademia dei Lincei in Rome in 1990, the Trotter Prize for Information and Complexity in 2001, and the Herbert Simon award for Complex Systems in 2013. He became a Fellow of the Royal Society of Canada in 2009.\nWorks.\nKauffman is best known for arguing that the complexity of biological systems and organisms might result as much from self-organization and far-from-equilibrium dynamics as from Darwinian natural selection in three areas of evolutionary biology, namely population dynamics, molecular evolution, and morphogenesis. With respect to molecular biology, Kauffman's structuralist approach has been criticized for ignoring the role of energy in driving biochemical reactions in cells, which can fairly be called self-catalyzing but which do not simply self-organize. Some biologists and physicists working in Kauffman's area have questioned his claims about self-organization and evolution. A case in point is some comments in the 2001 book \"Self-Organization in Biological Systems\". Roger Sansom's 2011 book \"Ingenious Genes: How Gene Regulation Networks Evolve to Control Development\" is an extended criticism of Kauffman's model of self-organization in relation to gene regulatory networks.\nBorrowing from spin glass models in physics, Kauffman invented \"N-K\" fitness landscapes, which have found applications in biology and economics. In related work, Kauffman and colleagues have examined subcritical, critical, and supracritical behavior in economic systems.\nKauffman's work translates his biological findings to the mind-body problem and issues in neuroscience, proposing attributes of a new \"poised realm\" that hovers indefinitely between quantum coherence and classicality. He published on this topic in his paper \"Answering Descartes: beyond Turing\". With Giuseppe Longo and Ma\u00ebl Mont\u00e9vil, he wrote (January 2012) \"No Entailing Laws, But Enablement in the Evolution of the Biosphere\", which argued that evolution is not \"law entailed\" like physics.\nKauffman's work is posted on Physics ArXiv, including \"Beyond the Stalemate: Mind/Body, Quantum Mechanics, Free Will, Possible Panpsychism, Possible Solution to the Quantum Enigma\" (October 2014) and \"Quantum Criticality at the Origin of Life\" (February 2015).\nKauffman has contributed to the emerging field of cumulative technological evolution by introducing a mathematics of the \"adjacent possible\".\nHe has published over 350 articles and 6 books: \"The Origins of Order\" (1993), \"At Home in the Universe\" (1995), \"Investigations\" (2000), \"Reinventing the Sacred\" (2008), \"Humanity in a Creative Universe\" (2016), and \"A World Beyond Physics\" (2019).\nIn 2016, Kauffman wrote a children's story, \"Patrick, Rupert, Sly &amp; Gus Protocells\", a narrative about unprestatable niche creation in the biosphere, which was later produced as a short animated video.\nIn 2017, exploring the concept that reality consists of both ontologically real \"possibles\" (res potentia) and ontologically real \"actuals\" (res extensa), Kauffman co-authored, with Ruth Kastner and Michael Epperson, \"Taking Heisenberg's Potentia Seriously\".\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "62903", "revid": "41833184", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62903", "title": "Complex systems", "text": ""}
{"id": "62904", "revid": "29615425", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62904", "title": "Chemical Brothers", "text": ""}
{"id": "62905", "revid": "10745446", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62905", "title": "Albertville", "text": "Subprefecture of Savoie, Auvergne-Rh\u00f4ne-Alpes, France\nAlbertville (; Arpitan: \"Arb\u00e8rtvile\") is a subprefecture of the Savoie department in the Auvergne-Rh\u00f4ne-Alpes region in Southeastern France. \nIt is best known for hosting the 1992 Winter Olympics and Paralympics. In 2022, the commune had a population of 19,706; its urban area had 40,715 inhabitants.\nGeography.\nAlbertville is one of two subprefectures of the Savoie department, alongside Saint-Jean-de-Maurienne.\nAlbertville is situated on the river Arly, close to the confluence with the river Is\u00e8re. Its altitude ranges from . Nearby mountains include: Belle \u00c9toile, Dent de Cons, N\u00e9gresse, Roche Pourrie, Mirantin, Pointe de la Grande Journ\u00e9e, Cha\u00eene du Grand Arc. Nearby mountain ranges include the Bauges, the Beaufortain and the beginning of the Vanoise.\nHistory.\nThe modern city of Albertville was formed in 1836 by King Charles Albert of Sardinia, who merged the medieval town of Conflans, which had buildings dating to the 14th century, with the town of L'H\u00f4pital. Since then, Albertville has fostered trade between France, Italy and Switzerland. Industries such as paper mills and hydroelectricity are found along its river.\nThe 1992 Winter Olympics were organised in the Savoie region, with Albertville hosting it. Some of the sports venues were later adapted for other uses. Some sports venues still remain, such as the ice rink, La halle de glace Olympique, designed by the architect Jacques Kalisz. Despite this, the town remains more industrial than touristic.\nIn 2003, the town was labelled a \"Town of Art and History\".\nPopulation.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nTransport.\nAlbertville station was put into service in 1879 by the Compagnie des chemins de fer de Paris \u00e0 Lyon et \u00e0 la M\u00e9diterran\u00e9e (PLM).\nInternational relations.\nAlbertville is twinned with:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "62906", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62906", "title": "Albertville, France", "text": ""}
{"id": "62908", "revid": "4796325", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62908", "title": "Pont d'Arc", "text": "Geological formation in France\nThe Pont d'Arc (French \"pont\" = bridge) is a large natural bridge, located in the Ard\u00e8che \"d\u00e9partement\" in the south of France, 5\u00a0km from the town of Vallon-Pont-d'Arc.\nThe arch, formed when the river Ard\u00e8che broke through a narrow escarpment between its meander, is wide and high at the top of the opening. It is a very popular canoeing and kayaking area and is heavily visited by tourists. It is usually described as the natural entrance to the Ard\u00e8che Canyon.\nIn the near vicinity of the arch is the Chauvet-Pont-d'Arc Cave, containing one of the earliest known Paleolithic cave paintings, about 30,000 years old (featured in the 2010 documentary \"Cave of Forgotten Dreams\" by film director Werner Herzog).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "62909", "revid": "37091856", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62909", "title": "Montparnasse", "text": "Neighbourhood of Paris\nMontparnasse () is an area in the south of Paris, France, on the left bank of the river Seine, centred at the crossroads of the Boulevard du Montparnasse and the Rue de Rennes, between the Rue de Rennes and boulevard Raspail. It is split between the 6th, 14th, and 15th arrondissements of the city. Montparnasse has been part of Paris \nThe area also gives its name to:\nStudents in the 17th century who came to recite poetry in the hilly neighbourhood nicknamed it after \"Mount Parnassus\", home to the nine Muses of arts and sciences in Greek mythology. The hill was levelled to construct the Boulevard Montparnasse in the 18th century. During the French Revolution many dance halls and cabarets opened their doors, becoming gathering points for artists. The area is also known for caf\u00e9s and bars, such as the Breton restaurants specialising in cr\u00eapes (thin pancakes) located a few blocks from the Gare Montparnasse. The Pasteur Institute is located in the area. Beneath the ground are tunnels of the Catacombs of Paris.\nDuring the Interwar period, Montparnasse was the central hub of the School of Paris.\nArtistic hub.\nIn the 18th century, students recited poems at the foot of an artificial hillock of rock rubble from the Catacombs of Paris. Ironically, they decided to baptise this mound \"Mount Parnassus\", named after the Mount Parnassus celebrated in Ancient Greek literature. In the early 20th century, many Bretons who were driven out of their region by poverty arrived by train at Gare Montparnasse, in the heart of the Montparnasse district, and settled nearby. Montparnasse became famous in the Roaring Twenties, referred to as \"les Ann\u00e9es Folles\" (the Crazy Years), and the 1930s as the heart of intellectual and artistic life in Paris. From 1910 to the start of World War II, Paris' artistic circles migrated to Montparnasse as the alternative to the Montmartre district which had been the intellectual breeding ground for the previous generation of artists. The Paris of Charles Baudelaire, Robert de Montesquiou, Zola, Manet, France, Degas, Faur\u00e9 typically indulged in the Bohemianism cultural refinements of Dandyism.\nThe cultural scene during the late-1920s for expatriates in Montparnasse and the 6th arrondissement is described in John Glassco's 1970 book \"Memoirs of Montparnasse\". Virtually penniless painters, sculptors, writers, poets and composers came from around the world to thrive in the creative atmosphere of Montparnasse and for the cheap rent at artist communes, such as La Ruche. Living without running water, in damp, unheated Ateliers, many sold their works for a few Francs just to buy food. Jean Cocteau once said that poverty was a luxury in Montparnasse. First promoted by art dealers such as Daniel-Henry Kahnweiler, today works by those artists sell for millions of euros.\nIn post-World War I Paris, Montparnasse was a euphoric meeting place for the artistic world. Fernand L\u00e9ger wrote of that period: \"man...relaxes and recaptures his taste for life, his frenzy to dance, to \"spend money\"...an explosion of \"life-force fills the world\".\" They came to Montparnasse from all over the globe - from Europe, including Russia, Hungary and Ukraine, from the United States, Canada, Mexico, Central and South America, and from as far away as Japan. Manuel Ortiz de Z\u00e1rate, Camilo Mori and others made their way from Chile where the profound innovations in art spawned the formation of the Grupo Montparnasse in Santiago. A few of the other artists who gathered in Montparnasse were Jacob Macznik, Pablo Picasso, Guillaume Apollinaire,Ossip Zadkine, Julio Gonzalez, Moise Kisling, Jean Cocteau, Erik Satie, Marios Varvoglis, Marc Chagall, Nina Hamnett, Jean Rhys, Fernand L\u00e9ger, Jacques Lipchitz, Max Jacob, Blaise Cendrars, Cha\u00efm Soutine, James Joyce, Ernest Hemingway, Yitzhak Frenkel Frenel, Michel Kikoine, Pinchus Kremegne, Amedeo Modigliani, Ford Madox Ford, To\u00f1o Salazar, Ezra Pound, Max Ernst, Marcel Duchamp, Suzanne Duchamp-Crotti, Henri Rousseau, Constantin Br\u00e2ncu\u0219i, Eva Kotchever, Claude Cahun and Marcel Moore, Paul Fort, Juan Gris, Diego Rivera, Federico Cant\u00fa, Angel Zarraga, Marevna, Tsuguharu Foujita, Marie Vassilieff, L\u00e9on-Paul Fargue, Alberto Giacometti, Ren\u00e9 Ich\u00e9, Andr\u00e9 Breton, Alfonso Reyes, Pascin, Nils Dardel, Salvador Dal\u00ed, Henry Miller, Samuel Beckett, Emil Cioran, Reginald Gray, Endre Ady, Joan Mir\u00f3, Hilaire Hiler, Magdalena R\u0103dulescu, and, in his declining years, Edgar Degas.\nMontparnasse was a community where creativity was embraced with all its oddities, each new arrival welcomed unreservedly by its existing members. When Tsuguharu Foujita arrived from Japan in 1913 not knowing a soul, he met Cha\u00efm Soutine, Amedeo Modigliani, Jules Pascin and Fernand L\u00e9ger virtually the same night and within a week became friends with Juan Gris, Pablo Picasso and Henri Matisse. In 1914, when the English painter Nina Hamnett arrived in Montparnasse, on her first evening the smiling man at the next table at Caf\u00e9 de la Rotonde graciously introduced himself as \"Modigliani, painter and Jew\". They became good friends and Hamnett later recounting how she once borrowed a jersey and corduroy trousers from Modigliani, then went to La Rotonde and danced in the street all night.\nBetween 1921 and 1924, the number of Americans in Paris swelled from 6,000 to 30,000. While most of the artistic community gathered here were struggling to eke out an existence, well-heeled American socialites such as Peggy Guggenheim, and Edith Wharton from New York City, Harry Crosby from Boston and Beatrice Wood from San Francisco were caught in the fever of creativity. Robert McAlmon, and Maria and Eugene Jolas came to Paris and published their literary magazine \"Transition\". Harry Crosby and his wife Caresse would establish the Black Sun Press in Paris in 1927, publishing works by such future luminaries as D. H. Lawrence, Archibald MacLeish, James Joyce, Kay Boyle, Hart Crane, Ernest Hemingway, John Dos Passos, William Faulkner, Dorothy Parker and others. As well, Bill Bird published through his \"Three Mountains Press\" until British heiress Nancy Cunard took it over.\nThe caf\u00e9s, bistros and bars of Montparnasse were a meeting place where cultural ideas and connections were hatched and mulled over. The caf\u00e9s at the centre of Montparnasse's night-life were in the Carrefour Vavin, now renamed Place Pablo-Picasso. \nIn Montparnasse's heyday (from 1910 to 1920), the caf\u00e9s \"Le D\u00f4me\", \"Closerie des Lilas\", \"La Rotonde\", \"Le Select\", and \"La Coupole\"\u2014all of which are still in business\u2014were the places where starving artists could occupy a table all evening for a few \"centimes\". If they fell asleep, the waiters were instructed not to wake them. Arguments were common, some fueled by intellect, others by alcohol, and if there were fights (and there often were) the police were never summoned. If you could not pay your bill, people such as La Rotonde's proprietor, Victor Libion, would often accept a drawing, holding it until the artist could pay. As such, there were times when the caf\u00e9's walls were littered with a collection of artworks.\nThere were many areas where the artists congregated, one of them being near Le D\u00f4me at no. 10 rue Delambre called the Dingo Bar. It was the hang-out of artists and ex-patriate Americans and the place where Canadian writer Morley Callaghan, who came with his friend Ernest Hemingway, both still unpublished writers, met the already-established writer F. Scott Fitzgerald. When Man Ray's friend and Dadaist, Marcel Duchamp, left for New York City, Man Ray set up his first studio at l'H\u00f4tel des Ecoles at no. 15 rue Delambre. This is where his career as a photographer began, and where James Joyce, Gertrude Stein, Kiki of Montparnasse, Jean Cocteau and the others filed in and posed in black and white.\nThe \"rue de la Gait\u00e9\" in Montparnasse was the site of many of the great music-hall theatres, in particular the famous \"Bobino\".\nOn their stages, using then-popular single name pseudonyms or one birth name only, Damia, Kiki, Mayol and Georgius, sang and performed to packed houses. And here too, Les Six was formed, creating music based on the ideas of Erik Satie and Jean Cocteau.\nThe poet Max Jacob said he came to Montparnasse to \"sin disgracefully\", but Marc Chagall summed it up differently when he explained why he had gone to Montparnasse: \"I aspired to see with my own eyes what I had heard of from so far away: this revolution of the eye, this rotation of colours, which spontaneously and astutely merge with one another in a flow of conceived lines. That could not be seen in my town. The sun of Art then shone only on Paris.\"\nWhile the area attracted people who came to live and work in the creative, bohemian environment, it also became home for political exiles such as Vladimir Lenin, Leon Trotsky, Porfirio Diaz, and Simon Petlyura. But, World War II forced the dispersal of the artistic society, and after the war Montparnasse never regained its splendour. Wealthy socialites like Peggy Guggenheim, an art collector who married artist Max Ernst, lived in the H\u00f4tel Lutetia and frequented the artist studios of Montparnasse, acquiring pieces that would come to be recognized as masterpieces now in the Peggy Guggenheim Museum in Venice, Italy.\nThe Mus\u00e9e du Montparnasse opened in 1998 at 21 Avenue du Maine and closed in 2015. Although operating with a tiny city grant, the museum was a non-profit operation. The Gallery of Montparnasse was one of the first to introduce abstract expressionism in France in the 1940s, and still holds contemporary art exhibitions today.\nEconomy.\nSNCF, the French rail company, has its head office in Montparnasse near the 14th arrondissement.\nPrior to the completion of the current Air France head office in Tremblay-en-France in December 1995, Air France had its headquarters in a tower located next to the Gare Montparnasse railway station in Montparnasse and in the 15th arrondissement; Air France had its headquarters in the tower for about 30 years.\nEducation.\nThe Vandamme Library (Biblioth\u00e8que Vandamme) is located in the neighbourhood.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "62910", "revid": "22041646", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62910", "title": "LaGrange", "text": ""}
{"id": "62911", "revid": "38455", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62911", "title": "Haverhill", "text": "Haverhill is the name of different places around the world:\nOther uses.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n Topics referred to by the same termThis page lists articles about distinct geographical locations with the same name. "}
{"id": "62912", "revid": "45697095", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62912", "title": "Auction", "text": "Process of offering goods or services up for bids\nAn auction is usually a process of buying and selling goods or services by offering them up for bids, taking bids, and then selling the item to the highest bidder or buying the item from the lowest bidder. Some exceptions to this definition exist and are described in the section about different types. The branch of economic theory dealing with auction types and participants' behavior in auctions is called auction theory.\nThe open ascending price auction is arguably the most common form of auction and has been used throughout history. Participants bid openly against one another, with each subsequent bid being higher than the previous bid. An auctioneer may announce prices, while bidders submit bids vocally or electronically.\nAuctions are applied for trade in diverse contexts. These contexts include antiques, paintings, rare collectibles, expensive wines, commodities, livestock, radio spectrum, used cars, real estate, online advertising, vacation packages, emission trading, and many more.\nEtymology.\nThe word \"auction\" is derived from \"auctus\", the past participle of the Latin verb \"auge\u014d\", (\"I increase\").\nHistory.\nClassical antiquity.\nAuctions have been recorded as early as 500 BC. According to Herodotus, in Babylon, auctions of women for marriage were held annually. The auctions began with the woman the auctioneer considered to be the most beautiful and progressed to the least beautiful. It was considered illegal to allow a daughter to be sold outside of the auction method. Attractive maidens were offered in a forward auction to determine the price to be paid by a swain, while unattractive maidens required a reverse auction to determine the price to be paid to a swain.\nAuctions took place in Ancient Greece, other Hellenistic societies, and also in Rome. During the Roman Empire, after a military victory, Roman soldiers would often drive a spear into the ground around which the spoils of war were left, to be auctioned off. Slaves, often captured as the \"spoils of war\", were auctioned in the Forum under the sign of the spear, with the proceeds of sale going toward the war effort.\nThe Romans also used auctions to liquidate the assets of debtors whose property had been confiscated. For example, Marcus Aurelius sold household furniture to pay off debts, the sales lasting for months. One of the most significant historical auctions was in 193 AD, when the entire Roman Empire was put on the auction block by the Praetorian Guard. On 28 March 193, the Praetorian Guard first killed emperor Pertinax, then offered the empire to the highest bidder. Didius Julianus won the auction at the price of 6,250 drachmas per guard, an act that initiated a brief civil war. Didius was beheaded two months later when Septimius Severus conquered Rome.\nFrom the end of the Roman Empire to the 18th century, auctions lost favor in Europe, while they had never been widespread in Asia. In China, the personal belongings of deceased Buddhist monks were sold at auction as early as the seventh century AD.\nModern revival.\nThe first mention of \"auction\", according to the Oxford English Dictionary, appeared in 1595. In some parts of England during the 17th and 18th centuries, auctions by candle began to be used for the sale of goods and leaseholds. In a candle auction, the end of the auction was signaled by the expiration of a candle flame, which was intended to ensure that no one could know exactly when the auction would end and make a last-second bid. Sometimes, other unpredictable events, such as a footrace, were used instead of the expiration of a candle. This type of auction was first mentioned in 1641 in the records of the House of Lords. The practice rapidly became popular, and in 1660 Samuel Pepys' diary recorded two occasions when the Admiralty sold surplus ships \"by an inch of candle\". Pepys also relates a hint from a highly successful bidder who had observed that, just before expiring, a candle-wick always flares up slightly: on seeing this, he would shout his final \u2013 and winning \u2013 bid.\nThe \"London Gazette\" began reporting on the auctioning of artwork in the coffeehouses and taverns of London in the late 17th century.\nThe first known auction house in the world was the Stockholm Auction House, Sweden (\"Stockholms Auktionsverk\"), founded by Baron Claes R\u00e5lamb in 1674. Sotheby's, currently the world's second-largest auction house, was founded in London on 11 March 1744, when Samuel Baker presided over the disposal of \"several hundred scarce and valuable\" books from the library of an acquaintance. Christie's, now the world's largest auction house, was founded by James Christie in 1766 in London and published its first auction catalog that year, although newspaper advertisements of Christie's sales dating from 1759 have been found.\nOther early auction houses that are still in operation include G\u00f6teborgs Auktionsverk (1681), Dorotheum (1707), Uppsala auktionskammare (1731), Mallams (1788), Bonhams (1793), Phillips de Pury &amp; Company (1796), Freeman's (1805) and Lyon &amp; Turnbull (1826).\nBy the end of the 18th century, auctions of art works were commonly held in taverns and coffeehouses. These auctions were held daily, and auction catalogs were printed to announce available items. In some cases, these catalogs were elaborate works of art themselves, containing considerable detail about the items being auctioned. At the time, Christie's established a reputation as a leading auction house, taking advantage of London's status as the major centre of the international art trade after the French Revolution. The Great Slave Auction took place in 1859 and is recorded as the second largest single sale of enslaved people in U.S. history \u2014 with 436 men, women and children being sold. During the American Civil War, goods seized by armies were sold at auction by the Colonel of the division. Thus, some of today's auctioneers in the U.S. carry the unofficial title of \"colonel\". Tobacco auctioneers in the southern United States in the late 19th century had a style that mixed traditions of 17th century England with chants of slaves from Africa.\nRise of the internet.\nThe development of the internet has led to a significant rise in the use of auctions, as auctioneers can solicit bids via the internet from a wide range of buyers in a much larger variety of commodities than was previously practical. \nIn the 1990s, the multi-attribute auction was invented to negotiate extensive conditions of construction and electricity contracts via auction. Also during this time, OnSale.com developed the Yankee auction as its trademark. In the early 2000s, the Brazilian auction was invented as a new type of auction to trade gas through electronic auctions for Linde plc in Brazil.\nWith the emergence of the internet, online auctions have developed, with eBay being the most typical example. For example, if someone owns a rare item, they can display the item through an online auction platform. Interested parties may place bids, with the highest bidder winning the opportunity to purchase the item. Online auctions allow more people to participate and also make traditional auction theory more complex.\nEconomic significance.\nBy increasing visibility of an item and therefore demand, auctions can make an extremely rare item more likely to sell for a higher price.\nIn 2008, the US National Auctioneers Association reported that the gross revenue of the auction industry for that year was approximately $268.4\u00a0billion, with the fastest growing sectors being agricultural, machinery, equipment, and residential real estate auctions.\nThe auctions with the largest revenue for the government are often spectrum auctions (typical revenue is estimated in billions of euros) and quota auctions. In 2019, Russia's crab quota was auctioned for \u20ac2\u00a0billion. Between 1999 and 2002, the British government auctioned off their gold reserves, raising approximately $3.5\u00a0billion.\nThe most expensive item to ever be sold in an auction is Leonardo da Vinci's \"Salvator Mundi\" in 2017 ($450.3 million).\nIn 2018, the yearly revenues of the two biggest auction houses were $5 billion (Christie's) and $4 billion (Sotheby's).\nTypes.\nAuctions come in a variety of types and categories, which are sometimes not mutually exclusive. Typification of auctions is considered to be a part of Auction theory. The economists Paul Milgrom and Robert B. Wilson were awarded the 2020 Nobel Prize for the introduction of new auction types (or formats). Auction types share features, which can be summarized into the following list.\nParticipants.\nAuctions can differ in the number and type of participants. There are two types of participants: a buyer and a seller. A buyer pays to acquire a certain good or service, while a seller offers goods or services for money or barter exchange. There can be single or multiple buyers and single or multiple sellers in an auction. If just one seller and one buyer are participating, the process is not considered to be an auction. \nThe forward auction is the most common type of auction \u2014 a seller offers item(s) for sale and expects the highest price. A reverse auction is a type of auction in which the roles of the buyer and the seller are reversed, with the primary objective to drive purchase prices downward. While ordinary auctions provide suppliers the opportunity to find the best price among interested buyers, reverse auctions and buyer-determined auctions give buyers a chance to find the lowest-price supplier. During a reverse auction, suppliers may submit multiple offers, usually as a response to competing suppliers' offers, bidding down the price of a good or service to the lowest price they are willing to receive. A reverse price auction is not necessarily 'descending-price' \u2014 the reverse Dutch auction is an ascending-price auction because forward Dutch auctions are descending. By revealing the competing bids in real-time to every participating supplier, reverse auctions promote \"information transparency\". This, coupled with the dynamic bidding process, improves the chances of reaching the fair market value of the item.\nA double auction is a combination of both forward and reverse auctions. A Walrasian auction or \"Walrasian t\u00e2tonnement\" is a double auction in which the auctioneer takes bids from both buyers and sellers in a market of multiple goods. The auctioneer progressively either raises or drops the current proposed price depending on the bids of both buyers and sellers, the auction concluding when supply and demand exactly balance. As a high price tends to dampen demand while a low price tends to increase demand, in theory there is a particular price somewhere in the middle where supply and demand will match. A Barter double auction is an auction where every participant has a demand and an offer consisting of multiple attributes and no money is involved. For the mathematical modelling of satisfaction level, Euclidean distance is used, where the offer and demand are treated as vectors.\nPrice development.\nAuctions can be categorized into three types of procedures for auctions depending on the occurrence of a price development during an auction run and its causes.\nProperties of auctioned goods.\nMultiunit auctions sell more than one identical item at a time, rather than having separate auctions for each. This type can be further classified as either a uniform price auction or a discriminatory price auction. An example for them is spectrum auctions.\nA combinatorial auction is any auction for the simultaneous sale of more than one item where bidders can place bids on an \"all-or-nothing\" basis on \"packages\" rather than just individual items. That is, a bidder can specify that they will pay for items A and B, but only if they get \"both\". In combinatorial auctions, determining the winning bidder(s) can be a complex process where even the bidder with the highest individual bid is not guaranteed to win. For example, in an auction with four items (W, X, Y and Z), if Bidder A offers $50 for items W &amp; Y, Bidder B offers $30 for items W &amp; X, Bidder C offers $5 for items X &amp; Z and Bidder D offers $30 for items Y &amp; Z, the winners will be Bidders B &amp; D while Bidder A misses out because the \"combined\" bids of Bidders B &amp; D is higher ($60) than for Bidders A and C ($55). Deferred-acceptance auction is a special case of a combinatorial auction.\nAnother special case of a combinatorial auction is the combinatorial clock auction (CCA), which combines a clock auction, during which bidders may provide their confirmations in response to the rising prices, with a subsequantial sealed bid auction, in which bidders submit sealed package bids. The auctioneer uses the final bids to compute the best value allocation and the Vickrey payments.\nGeneralized first-price auctions and Generalized second-price auctions offer slots for multiple bidders instead of making a single deal. The bidders get the slots according to the ranking of their bids. The second-price ruling is derived from the Vickrey auction and means the final deal sealing for the number one bidder is based on the second bidder's price.\nReserve price.\nA No-reserve auction (NR), also known as an \"absolute auction\", is an auction in which the item for sale will be sold regardless of price. From the seller's perspective, advertising an auction as having no reserve price can be desirable because it potentially attracts a greater number of bidders due to the possibility of a bargain. If more bidders attend the auction, a higher price might ultimately be achieved because of heightened competition from bidders. This contrasts with a \"reserve auction\", where the item for sale may not be sold if the final bid is not high enough to satisfy the seller. In practice, an auction advertised as \"absolute\" or \"no-reserve\" may nonetheless still not sell to the highest bidder on the day, for example, if the seller withdraws the item from the auction or extends the auction period indefinitely, although these practices may be restricted by law in some jurisdictions or under the terms of sale available from the auctioneer.\nA reserve auction is an auction where the item for sale may not be sold if the final bid is not high enough to satisfy the seller; that is, the seller \"reserves\" the right to accept or reject the highest bid. In these cases, a set 'reserve' price known to the auctioneer, but not necessarily to the bidders, may have been set, below which the item may not be sold. If the seller announces to the bidders the reserve price, it is a public reserve price auction. In contrast, if the seller does not announce the reserve price before the sale, it is a secret reserve price auction. However, potential bidders may be able to deduce an approximate reserve price, if one exists at all, from any estimate given in advance by the auction house. The reserve price may be \"fixed\" or \"discretionary\". In the latter case, the decision to accept a bid is deferred to the auctioneer, who may accept a bid that is marginally below it. A reserve auction is safer for the seller than a no-reserve auction as they are not required to accept a low bid, but this could result in a lower final price if less interest is generated in the sale.\nPrice of bidding.\nAn all-pay auction is an auction in which all bidders must pay their bids regardless of whether they win. The highest bidder wins the item. All-pay auctions are primarily of academic interest, and may be used to model lobbying or bribery (bids are political contributions) or competitions such as a running race. Bidding fee auction, a variation of all-pay auction, also known as a penny auction, often requires that each participant must pay a fixed price to place each bid, typically one penny (hence the name) higher than the current bid. When an auction's time period expires, the highest bidder wins the item and must pay a final bid price. Unlike in a conventional auction, the final price is typically much lower than the value of the item, but all bidders (not just the winner) will have paid for each bid placed; the winner will buy the item at a very low price (plus price of rights-to-bid used), all the losers will have paid, and the seller will typically receive significantly more than the value of the item. A senior auction is a variation on the all-pay auction, and has a defined loser in addition to the winner. The top two bidders must pay their full final bid amounts, and only the highest wins the auction. The intent is to make the high bidders bid above their upper limits. In the final rounds of bidding, when the current losing party has hit their maximum bid, they are encouraged to bid over their maximum (seen as a small loss) to avoid losing their maximum bid with no return (a very large loss). Another variation of all-pay auction, the top-up auction is primarily used for charity events. Losing bidders must pay the difference between their bid and the next lowest bid. The winning bidder pays the amount bid for the item, without top-up. In a Chinese auction, bidders make sealed bids in advance and their probability of winning grows with the relative size of their bids.\nStructure of a bid.\nIn usual auctions like the English one, bids are prices. In Dutch and Japanese auctions, the bids are confirmations. In a version of the Brazilian auction, bids are numbers of units being traded. Structure elements of a bid are called attributes. If a bid is one number like price, it is a single-attribute auction. If bids consists of multiple-attributes, it is a multi-attribute auction.\nA Yankee auction is a single-attribute multiunit auction running like a Dutch auction, where the bids are the portions of a total amount of identical units. The amount of auctioned items is firm in a Yankee auction unlike a Brazilian auction. The portions of the total amount, bidders can bid, are limited to lower numbers than the total amount. Therefore, only a portion of the total amount will be traded for the best price and the rest to the suboptimal prices.\nVisibility of bids.\nIn an English auction, all current bids are visible to all bidders and in a sealed-bid auction, bidders only get to know if their bid was the best. Best/not best auctions are sealed-bid auctions with multiple bids, where the bidders submit their prices like in English auction and get responses about the leadership of their bid. Rank auction is an extension of best/not best auction, where the bidders also see the rank of their bids. Traffic-light auction shows traffic lights to bidders as a response to their bids. These traffic lights depend on the position of the last bid in the distribution of all bids.\nBuyout option.\nA buyout auction is an auction with an additional set price (the 'buyout' price) that any bidder can accept at any time during the auction, thereby immediately ending the auction and winning the item. This means that if an item offers its buyout price at the beginning, one participant can stop all other potential participants from bidding at all, or stop the bidding process before the bid price has reached the buyout price. If no bidder chooses to utilize the buyout option before the end of bidding, the highest bidder wins and pays their bid. Buyout options can be either \"temporary\" or \"permanent\". In a temporary-buyout auction the option to buy out the auction is not available after the first bid is placed. In a permanent-buyout auction the buyout option remains available throughout the entire auction until the close of bidding. The buyout price can either remain the same throughout the entire auction, or vary throughout according to rules or simply as decided by the seller.\nWinner selection.\nThe winner selection in most auctions selects the best bid. Unique bid auctions offer a special winner selection: the winner is the bidder with the lowest unique bid. The Chinese auction selects a winner partially based on randomness.\nThe final price for the selected winner is not always conducted according to their final bid. In the case of the second-price ruling as in a Vickrey auction, the final price for the winner is based on the second bidder's price. A Proxy bid is a special case of second-price ruling used by eBay, where a predefined increment is added to the second highest bid in response to a yet higher bid.\nAuctions with more than one winner are called multi-winner auctions. Multiunit auction, Combinatorial auction, Generalized first-price auction and Generalized second-price auction are multi-winner auctions.\nCascading.\nAuctions can be cascaded, one after the other. For instance, an Amsterdam auction is a type of premium auction which begins as an English auction. Once only two bidders remain, each submits a sealed bid. The higher bidder wins, paying either the first or second price. Both finalists receive a premium: a proportion of the excess of the second price over the third price (at which English auction ended). An Anglo-Dutch auction starts as an English or Japanese auction and then continues as a Dutch auction with a reduced number of bidders. A French auction is a preliminary sealed-bid auction before the actual auction, whose reserve price it determines. A sequential auction is an auction where the bidders can participate in a sequence of auctions. A Calcutta auction is a subtype of sequential auction, where the ordering in the sequence is determined by random. A simultaneous ascending auction is an opposite of a sequential auction, where the auctions are run in parallel.\nOther features.\nThe &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Visible anchor/styles.css\" /&gt;silent auction is a variant of the English auction in which bids are written on a sheet of paper. At the predetermined end of the auction, the highest listed bidder wins the item. This auction is often used in charity events, with many items auctioned simultaneously and \"closed\" at a common finish time. The auction is \"silent\" in that there is no auctioneer selling individual items; the bidders write their bids on a bidding sheet often left on a table near the item. At charity auctions, bid sheets usually have a fixed starting amount, predetermined bid increments, and a \"guaranteed bid\" amount which works the same as a \"buy now\" amount. Other variations of this type of auction may include sealed bids. The highest bidder pays the price they submitted.\nIn private value auctions, every bidder has their own valuation of the auctioned good. A common value auction is opposite, where the valuation of the auctioned good is identical among the bidders.\nContexts.\nThe range of auctions' contexts is extremely wide and one can buy almost anything, from a house to an endowment policy and everything in between. Some of the recent developments have been the use of the Internet both as a means of disseminating information about various auctions and as a vehicle for hosting auctions themselves.\nHuman commodity auctions.\nAs already mentioned in the history section, auctions have been used to trade commodified people from the very first. Auctions have been used in slave markets throughout history until modern times in the post-Gaddafi era Libya. The word for slave auction in the Atlantic slave trade was scramble. A child auction is a Swedish and Finnish historical practice of selling children into slavery-like conditions by authorities using a descending English auction. Fattigauktion is a similar Swedish practice involving poor people being auctioned to church organizations. Trade of wives by auctions was also a common practice throughout history. For instance, in the old English custom of wife selling, a wife was divorced by selling her in a public auction for the highest bid. ISIS conducted slave auctions to sell up to 7,000 Yazidi women as reported in 2020.\nA virginity auction is the voluntary practice of individuals seeking to sell their own virginity to the highest bid. Cricket players are routinely put up for auction, whereby cricket teams can bid for their services. Indian Premier League (IPL) started annual public auctioning of cricket players in 2008 as an entertainment for mass consumption. Also, Bangladesh Premier League conducts cricket player auctions, starting in 2012.\nReal estate auctions.\nIn some countries, such as Australia, auctioning is a common method for the sale of real estate. Auctions were traditionally used as an alternative to the private sale/treaty method to sell property that, due to their unique characteristics, were difficult to determine a price for. The law does not require a vendor to disclose their reserve price prior to the auction. During the 1990s and 2000s, auctions became the primary method for the sale of real estate in the two largest cities, Melbourne and Sydney. This was largely due to the fact that in a private sale the vendor has disclosed the price that they want, and potential purchasers would attempt to low-ball the price, whereas in an auction purchasers do not know what the vendor wants, and thus need to keep lifting the price until the reserve price is reached.\nThe method has been the subject of increased controversy during the twenty-first century as house prices sky-rocketed. The rapidly rising housing market saw many homes, especially in Victoria and New South Wales, selling for significantly more than both the vendors' reserve price and the advertised price range. Subsequently, the auction systems' lack of transparency about the value of the property was brought into question, with estate agents and their vendor clients being accused of \"under-quoting\". Significant attention was given to the matter by the Australian media, with the government in Victoria eventually bowing to pressure and implementing changes to legislation in an effort to increase transparency.\nIn the UK, historically, auction houses were perceived to sell properties which may have been repossessed\u200a\u2014\u200awhere a home owner fails to make regular mortgage payments\u200a\u2014\u200aor were probate sales family home being sold by the heirs). However, more recently, selling at auction has become an alternative to a normal property sale, due to the speedy nature of the entire process.\nIn China, land auctions are under the sole control of local government officials. Because some developers may use bribes to please government officials to obtain the right to purchase the land, the central government requires that future land auctions be conducted using a spectrum auction in order to prevent the spread of corruption. Although this method cannot completely solve the problem of corruption, it is still a significant contribution to the auction.\nAuctions by authorities.\nA government auction is simply an auction held on behalf of a government body generally at a general sale. Items for sale are often surplus needed to be liquidated. Auctions ordered by estate executors enter the assets of individuals who have perhaps died intestate (those who have died without leaving a will), or in debt. In legal contexts where forced auctions occur, as when one's farm or house is sold at auction on the courthouse steps. Property seized for non-payment of property taxes, or under foreclosure, is sold in this manner. Police auctions are generally held at general auctions, although some forces use online sites including eBay, to dispose of lost and found and seized goods. Debt auctions, in which governments issue and sell debt obligations, such as bonds, to investors. The auction is usually sealed and the uniform price paid by the investors is typically the best non-winning bid. In most cases, investors can also place so-called \"non-competitive bids\", which indicates interest to purchase the debt obligation at the resulting price, whatever it may be. Some states use courts to run such auctions. In spectrum auctions conducted by the government, companies purchase licenses to use portions of the electromagnetic spectrum for communications (e.g., mobile phone networks). In certain jurisdictions, if a storage facility's tenant fails to pay rent, the contents of their locker(s) may be sold at a public auction. Several television shows focus on such auctions, including \"Storage Wars\" and \"Auction Hunters\".\nCommodity auctions.\nAuctions are used to trade commodities; for example, fish wholesale auctions. In wool auctions, wool is traded in the international market. The wine auction business offers serious collectors an opportunity to gain access to rare bottles and mature vintages, which are not typically available through retail channels. In livestock auctions, sheep, cattle, pigs and other livestock are sold. Sometimes very large numbers of stock are auctioned, such as the regular sales of 50,000 or more sheep during a day in New South Wales. In timber auctions, companies purchase licenses to log on government land. In timber allocation auctions, companies purchase timber directly from the government. In electricity auctions, large-scale generators and distributors of electricity bid on generating contracts. Produce auctions link growers to localized wholesale buyers (buyers who are interested in acquiring large quantities of locally grown produce).\nOnline auctions.\nOnline auctions are a form of E-commerce that relies on the advantages of a digital platform's ability to overcome geographical constraints, provide real-time information and reduce transaction costs, bringing greater convenience to people and allowing more people to participate as bidders, as well as being able to view a greater selection of auctions. Websites like eBay provide a potential market of millions of bidders to sellers. Established auction houses, as well as specialist internet auctions, sell many things online, from antiques and collectibles to holidays, air travel, brand new computers, and household equipment. Private electronic markets use combinatorial auction techniques to continuously sell commodities (coal, iron ore, grain, water, etc.) online to a pre-qualified group of buyers (based on price and non-price factors). Furthermore, online auctions facilitate the process for prospective bidders to discover and evaluate items by enabling searches across numerous auctions and employing filters to refine their selections.\nOn the other hand, an alternative perspective suggests that the format of online auctions could also give rise to collusive conduct and other types of market manipulation, potentially skewing the market and diminishing its efficiency. Firstly, online auctions might enable bidders to obscure their identities, such as utilizing pseudonyms or multiple accounts to maintain anonymity. This concealment could simplify collusion without detection. Secondly, online auctions might ease the implementation of collusive arrangements among bidders. The accessibility of bidding data in online auctions, for instance, allows colluding bidders to monitor each other's bids, guarantee adherence to their agreements, and penalize non-compliance. This enhanced oversight capacity strengthens the stability of collusive agreements.\nBidding strategy.\nBy the bidders.\nKatehakis and Puranam provided the first model\nfor the problem of optimal bidding for a firm that in each period procures items to meet a random demand by participating in a finite sequence of auctions. In this model an item valuation derives from the sale of the acquired items via their demand distribution, sale price, acquisition cost, salvage value and lost sales. They established monotonicity properties for the value function and the optimal dynamic bid policy. They also provided a model\nfor the case in which the buyer must acquire a fixed number of items either at a fixed buy-it-now price in the open market or by participating in a sequence of auctions. The objective of the buyer is to minimize their expected total cost for acquiring the fixed number of items.\nDuring an auction, the seller might possess more comprehensive knowledge regarding the item on offer compared to the buyer, creating an information asymmetry. This lack of information could lead the bidder to overvalue the item and consequently pay a higher price, resulting in the winner's curse. Nevertheless, bidders may also choose to employ bid shading as a strategy to circumvent this predicament. Bid shading is placing a bid which is below the bidder's actual value for the item. Such a strategy risks losing the auction but has the possibility of winning at a low price. Bid shading can also be a strategy to avoid the winner's curse. In either case, the allocation of resources may be inefficient, as the product will not ultimately be acquired by the individual who values it the most. Instead, it will go to the person who either overvalues it the most or effectively employs bid shading.\nAuction cancellation hunters bid minimal amounts on multiple auctions and expect them to be cancelled. If an auction is cancelled by the seller, they will claim for damages in the amount of the difference between the maximum bid at the time of the auction cancellation and the price of a replacement purchase of the offered item in the auction, when the market is in equilibrium, even if the seller has not sold any of the items, the shadow of bidding still exists. This is the self-protection instinct of the auction market. In order to make this transaction fairer. Auction sniping is the practice of placing a bid at the last moment of the auction. According to the analysis of auction data from eBay, in general, experienced bidders are more likely to snipe in auctions, and those who snipe in auctions are more likely to win. Jump bidding is an aggressive tactic of increasing every bid by high amounts. Calor licitantis is also known as \"auction fever\" and describes the irrational behavior of bidders at auctions. Suicide bidding is practice in reverse auctions, whereby a bidder submits a bid, which ends up in a loss for this bidder.\nCollusion.\nWhenever bidders at an auction are aware of the identity of the other bidders there is a risk that they will form a \"ring\" or \"pool\" and thus manipulate the auction result, a practice known as collusion or more specially bid-rigging. By agreeing to bid only against outsiders, never against members of the \"ring\", competition becomes weaker, which may dramatically affect the final price level. After the end of the official auction, an unofficial auction may take place among the \"ring\" members. The difference in price between the two auctions could then be split among the members. This form of a ring was used as a central plot device in the opening episode of the 1979 British television series \"The House of Caradus\", 'For Love or Money', uncovered by Helena Caradus on her return from Paris.\nIn the UK, this auction practice is illegal. It jeopardizes competition on the auction and can demotivate other bidders from participating. It robs the seller of the true value of their good and reduces the auctioneer's commission.\nBeyond explicit collusion, a tacit coordination of bidders to keep bids low is at least theoretically possible. In case of spectrum auctions, the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) experimented with precautions restricting visibility of bids, limiting the number of bids, click-box bidding, and anonymous bidding in order to prevent bidders from signalling bidding information by embedding it into digits of the bids. Actions within the auction mechanism serve as a communication channel for collusive behavior, once no other channels are legal.\nBy the auctioneer.\nChandelier or rafter bidding.\nThis is the practice, especially by high-end art auctioneers, of raising false bids at crucial times in the bidding in order to create the appearance of greater demand or to extend bidding momentum for a work on offer. To call out these nonexistent bids auctioneers might fix their gaze at a point in the auction room that is difficult for the audience to pin down. The practice is frowned upon in the industry. In the United States, chandelier bidding is not illegal. In fact, an auctioneer may bid up the price of an item to the reserve price, which is a threshold below which the consignor may refuse to sell the item. However, the auction house is required to disclose this information.\nIn the United Kingdom this practice is legal on property auctions up to but not including the reserve price, and is also known as off-the-wall bidding.\nCollusion involving auctioneer.\nA ring can also be used to increase the price of an auction lot, in which the owner of the object being auctioned may increase competition by taking part in the bidding themself, but drop out of the bidding just before the final bid. This form of a ring was used as a central plot device in an episode of the British television series \"Lovejoy\" (series 4, episode 3), in which the price of a watercolour by the (fictional) Jessie Webb is inflated so that others by the same artist could be sold for more than their purchase price. In an English auction, a dummy bid is a bid made by a dummy bidder acting in collusion with the auctioneer or vendor, designed to deceive genuine bidders into paying more. In a first-price auction, a dummy bid is an unfavourable bid designed so as not to become the winning bid. (The bidder does not want to win this auction, but they want to make sure to be invited to the next auction).\nIn Britain and many other countries, rings and other forms of bidding on one's own object are illegal. In Australia, a dummy bid or also a shill is a criminal offence, but a vendor bid or a co-owner bid below the reserve price is permitted if clearly declared as such by the auctioneer. These are all official legal terms in Australia but may have other meanings elsewhere. A co-owner is one of two or several owners (who disagree among themselves). In Sweden and many other countries, there are no legal restrictions, but it will severely hurt the reputation of an auction house that knowingly permits any other bids except genuine bids. If the reserve is not reached this should be clearly declared. In South Africa, auctioneers can use their staff or any bidder to raise the price as long as it is disclosed before the auction sale. Rael Levitt's companies \"The Auction Alliance\" controversy focused on vendor bidding and led to its downfall in 2012.\nSuggested opening bid (SOB).\nThere will usually be an estimate of what price the lot will fetch. In an ascending open auction, it is considered important to get at least a 50-percent increase in the bids from start to finish. To accomplish this, the auctioneer must start the auction by announcing a suggested opening bid (SOB) that is low enough to be immediately accepted by one of the bidders. Once there is an opening bid, there will quickly be several other, higher bids submitted. Experienced auctioneers will often select an SOB that is about 45 percent of the (lowest) estimate. Thus there is a certain margin of safety to ensure that there will indeed be a lively auction with many bids submitted. Several observations indicate that the lower the SOB, the higher the final winning bid. This is due to the increase in the number of bidders attracted by the low SOB.\nA chi-squared distribution shows many low bids but few high bids. Bids \"show up together\"; without several low bids there will not be any high bids.\nAnother approach to choosing a SOB: The auctioneer may achieve good success by asking the expected final sales price for the item, as this method suggests to the potential buyers the item's particular value. For instance, an auctioneer is about to sell a $1,000 car at a sale. Instead of asking $100, hoping to entice wide interest, the auctioneer may suggest an opening bid of $1,000; although the first bidder may begin bidding at a mere $100, the final bid may more likely approach $1,000.\nJEL classification.\nThe \"Journal of Economic Literature\" (JEL) classification code for auctions is D44.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "62913", "revid": "7098284", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62913", "title": "Lambertville", "text": "Lambertville may refer to the following places:\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n Topics referred to by the same termThis page lists articles about distinct geographical locations with the same name. "}
{"id": "62914", "revid": "50545090", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62914", "title": "Franklin", "text": "Franklin may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "62916", "revid": "46146023", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62916", "title": "Lodi", "text": "Lodi may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "62917", "revid": "125972", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62917", "title": "Mansfield (disambiguation)", "text": "Mansfield is a town in Nottinghamshire, England.\nMansfield may also refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "62918", "revid": "20585603", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62918", "title": "Marydel", "text": "Marydel is the name of two places in the United States of America (acquiring their names by being on the Maryland-Delaware border):\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n Topics referred to by the same termThis page lists articles about distinct geographical locations with the same name. "}
{"id": "62919", "revid": "8655586", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62919", "title": "Marblehead", "text": "Marblehead may refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "62920", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62920", "title": "Menlo Park", "text": "Menlo Park may refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "62921", "revid": "22041646", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62921", "title": "Middleburg", "text": "Middleburg may refer to several places:\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n Topics referred to by the same termThis page lists articles about distinct geographical locations with the same name. "}
{"id": "62922", "revid": "1175300", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62922", "title": "Millerton", "text": "Millerton may refer to the following places:\nUnited States of America\nCanada\nNew Zealand\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n Topics referred to by the same termThis page lists articles about distinct geographical locations with the same name. "}
{"id": "62923", "revid": "44082162", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62923", "title": "Morrisville", "text": "Morrisville may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n Topics referred to by the same termThis page lists articles about distinct geographical locations with the same name. "}
{"id": "62924", "revid": "40993790", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62924", "title": "Norwalk", "text": "Norwalk could refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "62925", "revid": "28501110", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62925", "title": "Rockford", "text": "Rockford or Rockfords may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "62926", "revid": "1316763663", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62926", "title": "SLR", "text": "SLR may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nOther uses.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "62927", "revid": "5415725", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62927", "title": "Muritic acid", "text": ""}
{"id": "62928", "revid": "1588193", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62928", "title": "Muriatic acid", "text": ""}
{"id": "62929", "revid": "34327716", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62929", "title": "Aqua regia", "text": "Mixture of nitric acid and hydrochloric acid in a 1:3 molar ratio\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chembox/styles.css\"/&gt;\nChemical compound\nAqua regia (; from Latin, \"regal water\" or \"royal water\") is a mixture of nitric acid and hydrochloric acid, optimally in a molar ratio of 1:3. Aqua regia is a fuming liquid. Freshly prepared aqua regia is colorless, but it turns yellow, orange, or red within seconds from the formation of nitrosyl chloride and nitrogen dioxide. It was so named by alchemists because it can dissolve noble metals, such as gold and platinum, while leaving many other metals unaffected. It has been used to process or conceal gold into the modern era.\nPreparation and decomposition.\nUpon mixing of concentrated hydrochloric acid and concentrated nitric acid, chemical reactions occur. These reactions result in the volatile products nitrosyl chloride and chlorine gas:\nas evidenced by the fuming nature and characteristic yellow color of aqua regia. As the volatile products escape from solution, aqua regia loses its potency. Nitrosyl chloride (NOCl) can further decompose into nitric oxide (NO) and elemental chlorine ():\nThis dissociation is equilibrium-limited. Therefore, in addition to nitrosyl chloride and chlorine, the fumes over aqua regia also contain nitric oxide (NO). Because nitric oxide readily reacts with atmospheric oxygen, the gases produced also contain nitrogen dioxide, (red fume):\nApplications.\nAqua regia is primarily used to produce chloroauric acid, the electrolyte in the Wohlwill process for refining the highest purity (99.999%) gold.\nAqua regia is also used in etching and in specific analytic procedures. It is also used in some laboratories to clean glassware of organic compounds and metal particles. This method is preferred among most over the more traditional chromic acid bath for cleaning NMR tubes, because no traces of paramagnetic chromium can remain to spoil spectra. While chromic acid baths are discouraged because of the high toxicity of chromium and the potential for explosions, aqua regia is itself very corrosive and has been implicated in several explosions due to mishandling.\nBecause its components react quickly, resulting in its decomposition, aqua regia quickly loses its effectiveness (yet remains a strong acid), so its components are usually only mixed immediately before use.\nChemistry.\nDissolving gold.\nAqua regia dissolves gold, although neither constituent acid will do so alone. Nitric acid is a powerful oxidizer, which will dissolve a very small quantity of gold, forming gold(III) ions (). The hydrochloric acid provides a ready supply of chloride ions (), which react with the gold ions to produce tetrachloroaurate(III) anions (), also in solution. The reaction with hydrochloric acid is an equilibrium reaction that favors formation of tetrachloroaurate(III) anions. This results in a removal of gold ions from solution and allows further oxidation of gold to take place. The gold dissolves to become chloroauric acid. In addition, gold may be dissolved by the chlorine present in aqua regia. Appropriate equations are:\n Au + 3\u00a0HNO3 + 4\u00a0HCl &lt;chem alt=\"is in a favored equilibrium with\"&gt;&lt;=\u00bb&lt;/chem&gt; [AuCl4]\u2212 + 3\u00a0NO2 + H3O+ + 2\u00a0H2O\nor\n Au + HNO3 + 4\u00a0HCl &lt;chem alt=\"is in a favored equilibrium with\"&gt;&lt;=\u00bb&lt;/chem&gt; [AuCl4]\u2212 + NO + H3O+ + H2O.\nSolid tetrachloroauric acid may be isolated by evaporating the excess aqua regia, and decomposing the residual nitric acid by repeatedly heating the solution with additional hydrochloric acid. That step reduces nitric acid (see decomposition of aqua regia). If elemental gold is desired, it may be selectively reduced with reducing agents such as sulfur dioxide, hydrazine, oxalic acid, etc. The equation for the reduction of oxidized gold () by sulfur dioxide () is the following:\nDissolving platinum.\nSimilar equations can be written for platinum. As with gold, the oxidation reaction can be written with either nitric oxide or nitrogen dioxide as the nitrogen oxide product:\n\nThe oxidized platinum ion then reacts with chloride ions resulting in the chloroplatinate ion:\nExperimental evidence reveals that the reaction of platinum with aqua regia is considerably more complex. The initial reactions produce a mixture of chloroplatinous acid () and nitrosoplatinic chloride (). The nitrosoplatinic chloride is a solid product. If full dissolution of the platinum is desired, repeated extractions of the residual solids with concentrated hydrochloric acid must be performed:\nand\nThe chloroplatinous acid can be oxidized to chloroplatinic acid by saturating the solution with molecular chlorine () while heating:\nDissolving platinum solids in aqua regia was the mode of discovery for the densest metals, iridium and osmium, both of which are found in platinum ores and are not dissolved by aqua regia, instead collecting as insoluble metallic powder (elemental Ir, Os) on the base of the vessel.\nPrecipitating dissolved platinum.\nAs a practical matter, when platinum group metals are purified through dissolution in aqua regia, gold (commonly associated with PGMs) is precipitated by treatment with iron(II) chloride. Platinum in the filtrate, as hexachloroplatinate(IV), is converted to ammonium hexachloroplatinate by the addition of ammonium chloride. This ammonium salt is extremely insoluble, and it can be filtered off. Ignition (strong heating) converts it to platinum metal:\nUnprecipitated hexachloroplatinate(IV) is reduced with elemental zinc, and a similar method is suitable for small scale recovery of platinum from laboratory residues.\nReaction with tin.\nAqua regia reacts with tin to form tin(IV) chloride, containing tin in its highest oxidation state:\nReaction with other substances.\nIt can react with iron pyrite to form Iron(III) chloride:\nHistory.\nAqua regia first appeared in the \"De inventione veritatis\" (\"On the Discovery of Truth\") by pseudo-Geber (after c.\u20091300), who produced it by adding sal ammoniac (ammonium chloride) to nitric acid. The preparation of aqua regia by directly mixing hydrochloric acid with nitric acid only became possible after the discovery in the late sixteenth century of the process by which free hydrochloric acid can be produced.\nThe third of Basil Valentine's keys (c.\u20091600) shows a dragon in the foreground and a fox eating a rooster in the background. The rooster symbolizes gold (from its association with sunrise and the sun's association with gold), and the fox represents aqua regia. The repetitive dissolving, heating, and redissolving (the rooster eating the fox eating the rooster) leads to the buildup of chlorine gas in the flask. The gold then crystallizes in the form of gold(III) chloride, whose red crystals Basil called \"the rose of our masters\" and \"the red dragon's blood\". The reaction was not reported again in the chemical literature until 1895.\nAntoine Lavoisier called aqua regia nitro-muriatic acid in 1789.\nWhen Germany invaded Denmark in World War II, Hungarian chemist George de Hevesy dissolved the gold Nobel Prizes of German physicists Max von Laue (1914) and James Franck (1925) in aqua regia to prevent the Nazis from confiscating them. The German government had prohibited Germans from accepting or keeping any Nobel Prize after jailed peace activist Carl von Ossietzky had received the Nobel Peace Prize in 1935. De Hevesy placed the resulting solution on a shelf in his laboratory at the Niels Bohr Institute. It was subsequently ignored by the Nazis who thought the jar\u2014one of perhaps hundreds on the shelving\u2014contained common chemicals. After the war, de Hevesy returned to find the solution undisturbed and precipitated the gold out of the acid. The gold was returned to the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences and the Nobel Foundation. They re-cast the medals and again presented them to Laue and Franck.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "62931", "revid": "12971673", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62931", "title": "Sonny Carter", "text": "American astronaut, chemist, and U.S. Navy officer (1947\u20131991)\nManley Lanier \"Sonny\" Carter Jr., M.D. (August 15, 1947 \u2013 April 5, 1991), (Capt, USN), was an American physician, professional soccer player, naval officer, aviator, and NASA astronaut who flew on STS-33.\nEarly life and education.\nCarter was born on August 15, 1947, to parents Manley L. Carter and Elizabeth C. Carter in Macon, Georgia, but considered Warner Robins, Georgia, to be his hometown. He graduated from Lanier High School in Macon in 1965, and during his high school years was actively involved in the Macon-based Troop 19 of the Boy Scouts of America, where he also served a term as Senior Patrol Leader, the highest leadership position for a young man in that BSA troop, and earned its highest rank of Eagle Scout.\nCarter received a Bachelor of Arts degree in Chemistry from Emory University in Atlanta in 1969, and a Doctor of Medicine degree from there in 1973. During his time at Emory, Carter was a brother in the Alpha Tau Omega fraternity. After completing Emory University School of Medicine in 1973, Carter completed internship in internal medicine at Grady Memorial Hospital in Atlanta.\nAthletic career.\nCarter played collegiate soccer and ran track while an undergraduate at Emory University. During his senior season, he was captain and most valuable player of the soccer team. In addition to his intercollegiate athletic career, Carter was an intramural wrestling champion. He played professional soccer while he attended medical school. In 1970, he signed with the Atlanta Chiefs of the North American Soccer League (NASL), for which he played three seasons.\nNavy service.\nIn 1974, Carter entered the U.S. Navy and completed flight surgeon school in Pensacola, Florida. After serving tours as a flight surgeon with the 1st and 3rd Marine Aircraft Wings, he returned to flight training at Beeville, Texas, and was designated a Naval Aviator on April 28, 1978. He was assigned the senior medical officer of the aircraft carrier , and in March 1979 completed F-4 training at VMFAT-101 in Marine Corps Air Station Yuma, Arizona. He was subsequently reassigned as a fighter pilot, flying F-4 Phantoms with Marine Fighter Attack Squadron 333 (VMFA-333) at MCAS Beaufort, South Carolina. In 1981, he completed a nine-month Mediterranean cruise aboard USS \"Forrestal\" with VMFA-115. In September 1982, he attended U.S. Navy Fighter Weapons School (TOPGUN) and then served as the 2nd Marine Aircraft Wing standardization officer and F-4 combat readiness evaluator at MCAS Cherry Point, North Carolina. He then attended the U.S. Naval Test Pilot School, graduating in June 1984.\nCarter logged 3,000 flying hours and 160 carrier landings.\nNASA career.\nSelected by NASA in May 1984, Carter became an astronaut in June 1985, qualified for assignment as a mission specialist on future Space Shuttle flight crews.\nSpace Shuttle program.\nCarter was assigned as Extra-vehicular activity (EVA) Representative for the Mission Development Branch of the Astronaut Office when selected to the crew of STS-33. The STS-33 crew launched from Kennedy Space Center, Florida, at night on November 22, 1989, aboard the Space Shuttle \"Discovery\". The mission carried Department of Defense payloads and other secondary payloads. After 79 orbits of the Earth, this five-day mission concluded on November 27, 1989, with a hard surface landing on Runway 04 at Edwards Air Force Base, California. Carter logged 120 hours in space.\nAt the time of his death in April 1991, Carter was assigned as mission specialist 3 on the crew of STS-42 \"Discovery\", the first International Microgravity Laboratory (IML-1). His place was taken by Dave Hilmers.\nDeath.\nCarter died in the April 5, 1991, crash of Atlantic Southeast Airlines Flight 2311 in Brunswick, Georgia. He was aboard the commercial airplane traveling for NASA. His wife Dana and two daughters, Olivia Elizabeth (born May 27, 1974) and Meredith Corvette (born December 3, 1976), were not on the flight. Among the others who also died in the plane crash was John Tower, a former Senator from Texas.\nCarter's death occurred on the same day as the launch of the Space Shuttle \"Atlantis\" on mission STS-37.\nOrganizations.\nCarter was a member of the Society of U.S. Naval Flight Surgeons, Sigma Delta Psi, Alpha Omega Alpha, Alpha Tau Omega, the Marine Corps Aviation Association, the Tailhook Association, and the Society of Experimental Test Pilots.\nSpecial honors.\nCarter was the Guest of Honor at the 215th Marine Corps Birthday Ball.\nLegacy.\nHaving died in the line of duty for NASA, Carter's name was added to the Space Mirror Memorial at Kennedy Space Center Visitor Complex in Merritt Island, Florida. His name was the first added after the memorial's original construction.\nAfter his death, his name was given to the Sonny Carter Training Facility Neutral Buoyancy Laboratory, NASA's underwater astronaut training facility, for which he had developed training techniques.\nIn 1989, Emory University inducted him in its Athletic Hall of Fame. The university holds The Sonny Carter Invitational each year in his honor. A plaque also honors his memory in the library of the Alpha Tau Omega fraternity house at Emory, in which he was a Brother.\nIn 1992 he was inducted into the Georgia Aviation Hall of Fame.\nSonny Carter Elementary School in Macon, Georgia, which opened in 1993, was named for Carter. The school motto is: \"To Challenge the Edge of the Universe.\"\nThe Society of United States Naval Flight Surgeons (SUSNFS) bestows an annual \"Sonny Carter Memorial Award\" to the nominee with the most significant contribution to the health, safety and welfare of the operational forces by promoting communication and teamwork amongst the aeromedical community.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "62933", "revid": "48643156", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62933", "title": "Burma Railway", "text": "WWII Japanese Thai\u2013Burma railway\nThe Burma Railway, also known as the Siam\u2013Burma Railway, Thai\u2013Burma Railway and similar names, or as the Death Railway, is a railway between Ban Pong, Thailand, and Thanbyuzayat, Burma (now Myanmar). It was built from 1940 to 1943 by abducted Southeast Asian civilians and captured Allied soldiers forced to work by the Japanese, to supply troops and weapons in the Burma campaign of World War II. It completed the rail link between Bangkok, Thailand, and Rangoon, Burma. The name used by the Imperial Japanese Government was \"Tai\u2013Men Rensetsu Tetsud\u014d\" (), which means Thailand-Burma-Link-Railway.\nAt least 250,000 Southeast Asian civilians were subjected to forced labour to ensure the construction of the Death Railway and more than 90,000 civilians died building it, as did around 12,000 Allied soldiers. The workers on the Thai side of the railway were Tamils, Malays, and fewer Chinese civilians from Malaya.\nMost of these civilians were moved to \u2018rest camps\u2019 after October 1943. They remained in these camps after the end of the war as they watched the Allied POWs being evacuated. Survivors were still living in the camps in 1947. They were British subjects who, without access to food or medical care, continued to die of malaria, dysentery and malnutrition. They had survived building the railway only to die in the \u2018rest camps\u2019.\nIn general, no compensation or reparations have been provided to the Southeast Asian laborers, and some has been provided to the Allied POWs, although the situation is complex. Japan signed a treaty and offered reparations to the Indonesian and Burmese governments, and the Allies (excluding the Soviet Union) provided some compensation to POWs and relinquished further claims from Japan in the Treaty of San Francisco. The 1951 compensation to Allied POWs was seen as lacking; one former POW was given \u00a376. The United Kingdom gave reparations to the 60,000 Allied prisoners of war (the most recent under the Blair government), but not to its colonial subjects.\nMost of the railway was dismantled shortly after the war. Only the first of the line in Thailand remained, with trains still running as far north as Nam Tok.\nHistory.\nA railway route between Burma and Thailand, crossing Three Pagodas Pass and following the valley of the Khwae Noi river in Thailand, had been surveyed by the British government of Burma as early as 1885, but the proposed course of the line \u2013 through hilly jungle terrain divided by many rivers \u2013 was considered too difficult to undertake.\nThailand was a neutral country at the onset of World War II. On 8 December 1941, Japan invaded Thailand, which quickly surrendered. Thailand was forced to accept an alliance, and was used as a staging point for the attack on Singapore.\nIn early 1942, Japanese forces invaded Burma and British forces quickly surrendered. To supply their forces in Burma, the Japanese depended upon the sea, bringing supplies and troops to Burma around the Malay Peninsula and through the Strait of Malacca and the Andaman Sea. This route was vulnerable to attack by Allied submarines, especially after the Japanese defeat at the Battle of Midway in June 1942. To avoid a hazardous sea journey around the Malay Peninsula, a railway from Bangkok to Rangoon seemed a feasible alternative. The Japanese began this project in June 1942.\nThe project aimed to connect Ban Pong in Thailand with Thanbyuzayat in Burma, linking up with existing railways at both places. Its route was through Three Pagodas Pass on the border of Thailand and Burma. of the railway were in Burma and the remaining were in Thailand. After preliminary work of airfields and infrastructure, construction of the railway began in Burma and Thailand on 16 September 1942. The projected completion date was December 1943. Much of the construction material, including tracks and sleepers, was brought from dismantled branches of Malaya's Federated Malay States Railway network and the East Indies' various rail networks.\nThe railway was completed ahead of schedule. On 17 October 1943, groups of civilians violently transported from Burma were forced to commence working south, meeting up with groups of civilians taken from Thailand who were working in a northerly direction. The two sections of the line met at kilometre 263, about south of the Three Pagodas Pass at Konkoita (nowadays: Kaeng Khoi Tha, Sangkhla Buri District, Kanchanaburi Province). A holiday was declared for 25 October, which was chosen as the ceremonial opening of the line. The Japanese staff would travel by train C56 31 from Nong Pladuk, Thailand to Thanbyuzayat, Burma. A copper spike was driven at the meeting point by commanding General Eiguma Ishida, and a memorial plaque was revealed.\nThe Japanese Army transported 500,000 tonnes of freight over the railway during the course of the war. Construction camps housing at least 1,000 workers each were established every 5\u201310 miles (8\u201317\u00a0km) of the route. Workers were moved up and down the railway line as needed. The construction camps consisted of open-sided barracks built of bamboo poles with thatched roofs. The barracks were about long with sleeping platforms raised above the ground on each side of an earthen floor. Two hundred people were housed in each barrack, giving each person a two-foot wide space in which to live and sleep. Camps were usually named after the kilometre where they were located. The worst months of the construction period were known as the \"Speedo\" (mid-spring to mid-October 1943).\nPost-war.\nWithin a year of the Second World War ending, Britain retook Burma, Malaya, Singapore and the Straits Settlements, while facing bankruptcy. On 16 January 1946, the British ordered Japanese prisoners of war to remove a four-kilometre stretch of rail between Nikki (Ni Thea) and Sonkrai. The railway link between Thailand and Burma was to be separated again in order to protect British interests in Singapore. After that, the Burma section of the railway was sequentially removed, the rails were gathered in Mawlamyine, and the roadbed was returned to the jungle.\nIn October 1946, the Thai section of the line was sold to the Government of Thailand for \u00a31,250,000 (50 million baht; ). The money was used to compensate neighbouring countries and colonies for material stolen by Japan during the construction of the railway. On 1 February 1947, two people\u2014including Momluang Kri Dechatiwong, the Thai Minister of Transport\u2014were killed on an inspection tour because the bridge near Konkoita had collapsed. After the accident, it was decided to end the line at Nam Tok and reuse the remainder to rehabilitate the line.\nAfter the war, the railway was in poor condition and needed reconstruction for use by the Royal Thai Railway system. On 24 June 1949, the portion from Kanchanaburi to Nong Pla Duk (Thai \u0e2b\u0e19\u0e2d\u0e07\u0e1b\u0e25\u0e32\u0e14\u0e38\u0e01) was finished; on the first of April 1952, the next section up to Wang Pho (Wangpo) was done. The two curved spans of the bridge which collapsed due to the British air attack were replaced by angular truss spans provided by Japan as part of their postwar reparations, thus forming the iconic bridge now seen today. Finally, on 1 July 1958, the rail line was completed to Nam Tok (Thai \u0e19\u0e49\u0e33\u0e15\u0e01, 'waterfall', referring to the nearby Sai Yok Noi Waterfall) The portion in use today is some long. The line was abandoned beyond Nam Tok Sai Yok Noi; the steel rails were salvaged for reuse in expanding the Bang Sue railway yard, reinforcing the Bangkok\u2013Ban Phachi Junction double track, rehabilitating the track from Thung Song Junction to Trang, and constructing both the Nong Pla Duk\u2013Suphan Buri and Ban Thung Pho\u2013Khiri Rat Nikhom branch lines. Parts of the abandoned route have been converted into a walking trail.\nSince the 1990s various proposals have been made to rebuild the complete railway, but as of 2021[ [update]] these plans had not been realised. Since the upper part of the Khwae valley is now flooded by the Vajiralongkorn Dam, and the surrounding terrain is mountainous, it would take extensive tunnelling to reconnect Thailand with Burma by rail.\nLabourers.\nJapanese.\nJapanese soldiers, 12,000 of them, including 800 Koreans, were employed on the railway as engineers, guards, and supervisors of the POW and civilian labourers. Although working conditions were far better for the Japanese than the POWs and civilian workers, about 1,000 (eight percent) of them died during construction. Many remember Japanese soldiers as being cruel and indifferent to the fate of Allied military prisoners and the Southeast Asian civilians. Many men in the railway workforce bore the brunt of pitiless or uncaring guards. Cruelty could take different forms, from extreme violence and torture to minor acts of physical punishment, humiliation, and neglect.\nTrafficked civilians.\nOver 180,000 Southeast Asian civilians were forcibly conscripted to work on the Death railway. Limited record keeping on the civilian populations under British occupation has led to incomplete and insufficient recording of the names and families of individuals who were trafficked. Javanese, Malayan Tamils, Burmese, Malayan Chinese, and other Southeast Asians were trafficked by the Imperial Japanese Army to work on the railway, dying in its construction. During the initial stages of the construction of the railway, Burmese and Thais were employed in their respective countries, but the number of workers recruited was insufficient. In Malaya, plantation families were forced by Japanese officers to send their children to the railway and young healthy men were often abducted and trafficked to the railway.\nIn early 1943, the Japanese advertised for workers in Malaya, Singapore, and the Dutch East Indies, promising good wages, short contracts, and housing for families. When that failed to attract sufficient workers, they resorted to more violent methods, rounding up civilians, including children and imprisoning them, especially in Malaya. Approximately 90,000 Burmese and 75,000 Malayans worked on the railroad. More than 100,000 Malayan Tamils were brought into the project and around 60,000 perished. Southeast Asian workers were used to build the Kra Isthmus Railway from Chumphon to Kra Buri, and the Sumatra or Palembang Railway from Pekanbaru to Muaro. Those left to maintain the lines after the completion of the Death Railway suffered from appalling living conditions as well as increasing Allied bombing.\nPrisoners of war.\nThe movement of captured British soldiers northward from Changi Prison in Singapore and other prison camps in Southeast Asia began in May 1942. On 23 June 1942, 600 British soldiers arrived at Camp Nong Pladuk, Thailand to build a camp to serve as a transit camp for the work camps along the railway. The first prisoners of war, 3,000 Australians, left Changi Prison in Singapore on 14 May 1942 and journeyed by sea to near Thanbyuzayat (\u101e\u1036\u1016\u103c\u1030\u1007\u101b\u1015\u103a in the Burmese language; in English 'Tin Shelter'), the northern terminus of the railway. They worked on airfields and other infrastructure initially before beginning construction of the railway in October 1942. In Thailand, 3,000 British soldiers left Changi by train in June 1942 to Ban Pong, the southern terminus of the railway. Some captured British soldiers were taken from Singapore and the Dutch East Indies as construction advanced.\nAtrocities.\nConditions during construction.\nThe records of the civilian workers have not survived due to the limitations on birth and death records kept during pre- and post-war colonisation of the region. One soldier said they \"found themselves at the bottom of a social system that was harsh, punitive, fanatical, and often deadly.\" The living and working conditions on the Burma Railway were often described as \"horrific\", with maltreatment, sickness, and starvation.\nLife in the POW camps was recorded at great risk by artists such as Jack Bridger Chalker, Philip Meninsky, John Mennie, Ashley George Old, and Ronald Searle. Human hair was often used for brushes, plant juices and blood for paint, and toilet paper as the \"canvas\". Some of their works were used as evidence in the trials of Japanese war criminals. Many are now held by the Australian War Memorial, State Library of Victoria, and the Imperial War Museum in London.\nOne of the accounts from the British military perspective was John Coast's \"Railroad of Death\", first published in 1946 and republished in a new edition in 2014. Coast's work is noted for its detail on the brutality of some Japanese and Korean guards as well as the humanity of others. It also describes the living and working conditions, together with the culture of the Thai towns and countryside that became many POWs' homes after leaving Singapore. Coast also details the camaraderie, pastimes, and humour of the soldiers in the face of adversity. Allied soldiers were often given more freedom than their civilian counterparts, to play guitar or accordion, or lead a group sing-along, or request camp comedians to tell some jokes or put on a skit.\nAfter the railway was completed, most of the British soldiers were moved to hospital and relocation camps where they could be available for maintenance crews or sent to Japan. In maintenance camps entertainment flourished, theatres of bamboo and attap (palm fronds) were built, sets, lighting, costumes and makeup devised, and an array of entertainment produced that included music halls, variety shows, cabarets, plays, and musical comedies\u00a0\u2013 even pantomimes. These activities engaged numerous soldiers as actors, singers, musicians, designers, technicians, and female impersonators.\nThe construction of the Burma Railway is counted as a war crime committed by Japan.\nDeath rates and causes.\nIn addition to malnutrition and physical abuse, malaria, cholera, dysentery and tropical ulcers were common contributing factors in the death of workers on the Burma Railway. The labourers who suffered the highest casualties were the Chinese, as well as Burmese and Indian Tamils from Malaya and Myanmar and many Javanese.\nA lower death rate among Dutch POWs and internees, relative to those from the UK and Australia, has been linked to the fact that many personnel and civilians taken prisoner in the Dutch East Indies had been born there, were long-term residents and/or had Eurasian ancestry; they tended thus to be more resistant to tropical diseases and to be better acclimatized than other Western Allied personnel.\nThe quality of medical care received by different groups of prisoners varied enormously. One factor was that many European and US doctors had little experience with tropical diseases. For example, a group of 400 Dutch prisoners, which included three doctors with extensive tropical medicine experience, suffered no deaths at all. Another group, numbering 190 US personnel, to whom \"Lieutenant\" Henri Hekking, a Dutch medical officer with experience in the tropics was assigned, suffered only nine deaths. Another cohort of 450 US personnel suffered 100 deaths.\nWeight loss among Allied officers who worked on construction was, on average, 9\u201314\u00a0kg (20\u201330\u00a0lb) less than that of enlisted personnel. Workers in more isolated areas suffered a much higher death rate than did others.\nWar crimes trials.\nAt the end of World War II, 111 Japanese military officials were tried for war crimes for their brutality during the construction of the railway. Thirty-two of them were sentenced to death. The most important trial was against the general staff. Lieutenant General Eiguma Ishida, overall commander of the Burma Railway, was sentenced to 10 years imprisonment. His subordinates Colonel Shigeo Nakamura, Colonel Tamie Ishii and Lieutenant-Colonel Shoichi Yanagita were sentenced to death. Major Sotomatsu Chida was sentenced to 10 years imprisonment. Hiroshi Abe, a first lieutenant who supervised construction of the railway at Sonkrai where 600 British prisoners out of 1,600 died of cholera and other diseases, was sentenced to death, later commuted to life in prison, as a B/C class war criminal. He served 11 years.\nFeatures of the Railway.\nBridge 277: Bridge on the River Khwae.\nA key feature of the line is Bridge 277 built over a stretch of the river then known as part of the Mae Klong River. The greater part of the Thai section of the river's route followed the valley of the Khwae Noi River (: (), 'stream, river' or 'tributary'; (), 'small'. was frequently mispronounced by the British as (), or 'buffalo' in Thai). This gave rise to the name of \"River Kwai\" amongst the British. In 1960, the portion of the Mae Klong which passes under the bridge was renamed the Khwae Yai (, 'big tributary').\nOn 26 October 1942, British prisoners of war arrived at Tamarkan to construct the bridge. Initially, 1,000 prisoners worked on the bridge, led by Colonel Philip Toosey. In February 1943, 1,000 Dutch prisoners of war were added to Tamarkan. Chinese, Malay and Tamil civilians also worked on the bridge.\nThe first wooden railroad bridge over the Khwae Yai was finished in February 1943, which was soon accompanied by a more modern ferro-concrete bridge in June 1943, with both bridges running in a NNE\u2013SSW direction across the river. The steel and concrete bridge consisted of eleven curved-truss bridge spans brought by the Japanese from Java in 1942. This is the bridge that still remains today.\nBombardments of Bridge 277.\nIn 1945 a planned US attack was cancelled due to bad weather. The two bridges were bombed on 13 February 1945 by RAF aircraft. The forced labourers repaired the bridge and by April the wooden bridge was in operation. On 3 April 1945, a USAAF Liberator attack damaged the wooden railroad bridge. Repair work continued and both bridges were operational again by the end of May. On 24 June 1945 the RAF destroyed the railroad bridges, putting the railway line out of commission for the rest of the war.\nThe railway line did not fully connect with the Burmese railroad network as no railroad bridges were built that crossed the river between Moulmein and Martaban.\nHellfire Pass.\nHellfire Pass in the Tenasserim Hills was the largest rock cutting on the railway, built in a remote area, without appropriate construction tools by Chinese, Thai, Malay, and Tamil civilian prisoners and Allied soldiers.\nCemeteries and memorials.\nIn 1946, the remains of most of the Allied military war dead were moved from former camps, burial grounds and lone graves along the rail line to official war cemeteries.\nThe mass graves of the Southeast Asian civilian dead were exhumed from along the rail line and beside former rest camps for reburial at Wat Thaworn Wararam, a Buddhist temple in Ban Tai, Thailand in the 1950s. A pagoda was erected over the burial site and plaques in both Chinese and Tamil text have been added to commemorate the dead. The names of the thousands of civilians buried at the site are unknown.\nThree cemeteries maintained by the Commonwealth War Graves Commission (CWGC) are for the Allied military personnel who died on the Burma Railway. Kanchanaburi War Cemetery, in the city of Kanchanaburi, contains the graves of 6,982 Allied military personnel comprising: 3,585 British, 1,896 Dutch, 1,362 Australians, 12 members of the British Indian Army (including British officers), 2 New Zealanders, 2 Danes and 8 Canadians.\nA memorial plaque at the Kanchanaburi cemetery lists 11 other members of the British Indian Army, these Indian officers are buried in nearby Muslim cemeteries.\nThanbyuzayat War Cemetery, at Thanbyuzayat, 65 kilometres south of Moulmein, Myanmar (Burma) has the graves of 3,617 soldiers who died on the Burmese portion of the line: 1,651 British, 1,335 Australians, 621 Dutch, 15 members of the British Indian Army (including British officers), 3 New Zealanders and 1 Canadian.\nChungkai War Cemetery, near Kanchanaburi, has a further 1,693 Allied war graves: 1,373 British, 314 Dutch and 6 members of the British Indian Army (including British officers)\nThe remains of United States armed forces personnel were repatriated. Of the 668 US personnel forced to work on the railway, 133 died. This included personnel from USS \"Houston\" and the 131st Field Artillery Regiment of the Texas Army National Guard. The Americans were called the Lost Battalion as their fate was unknown to the United States for more than two years after their capture.\nSeveral museums are dedicated to those who perished building the railway. The largest of these is at Hellfire Pass (north of the current terminus at Nam Tok), a cutting where the greatest number of people died. An Australian memorial is at Hellfire Pass. One museum is in Myanmar side Thanbyuzayat, and two other museums are in Kanchanaburi: the Thailand\u2013Burma Railway Centre, opened in January 2003, and the JEATH War Museum. There is a memorial plaque at the Kwai bridge itself, and an historic wartime steam locomotive is on display.\nA preserved section of line has been rebuilt at the National Memorial Arboretum in England.\nNotable accounts.\nAccounts of the construction include ' by William Gwee Thian Hock and an anthology of the experiences of survivors in ' by Sasidaran Sellappah. \"\" by Paul H. Kratosk and \"The Thai Resistance Movement during the Second World War\" by Eiji Murashima provide a social and economic analysis of the railway's construction and its civilian builders. The book \"Through the Valley of the Kwai\" is an autobiography of British Army captain Ernest Gordon. Flanagan's 2013 novel \"The Narrow Road to the Deep North\" centres on a group of Australian POWs and their experiences building the railway, and was awarded the 2014 Man Booker Prize. James D. Hornfischer's book \"Ship of Ghosts: The Story of the USS Houston, FDR's Legendary Lost Cruiser and the Epic Saga of Her Survivors\" depicts the construction of the railway from the point of view of the survivors of the heavy cruiser USS \"Houston\", which was sunk at the Battle of Sunda Strait in 1942.\nDeath Railway Interest Group (DRIG).\nThe Death Railway Interest Group (DRIG) is a Malaysian NGO that leads on the collection of Asian survivor accounts in Malaysia and Thailand, working to update records and presenting these at Australian and New-Zealand based humanitarian events. DRIG aims to identify at least one mass grave along the railway and build a monument to the horrors these victims went through, as well as their surviving families.\nDRIG led the development of a further memorial to the civilian labourers at Wat Tavorn Wararam, which manages the Wat Yuan Cemetery in Kanchanaburi, opened on 3 June 2023. This is in addition to the pagoda built over the remains of thousands of workers. The temple had undertaken the task of recovering the dead and burying them in the Wat Yuan Cemetery.\nCultural impact and legacy.\nIn 2016, R.AGE, the youth news and lifestyle platform of \"The Star\" (Malaysia) interviewed one of the last-known Asian survivors in \"Surviving Thailand's infamous 'Death Railway': Arumugam Kandasamy\".\nThe film \"The Railway Man\" (based on the book of the same name) gives the insight of a POW into the conditions inflicted upon the workers who built the railway. The 2001 film \"To End All Wars\" is based on the autobiography of British Army captain Ernest Gordon. The construction of the railway was the subject of a fictional award-winning 1957 film, \"The Bridge on the River Kwai\" (itself an adaptation of the French language novel \"The Bridge over the River Kwai\"); a novel, \"The Narrow Road to the Deep North\" by Richard Flanagan.\nNew Archaeological and Forensic Discoveries.\nIn 2025, a Buddhist ceremony was held for the cremation of remains from 106 Tamil laborers whose bones were discovered during a construction project near the governor's office in Kanchanaburi. These findings have shed light on forgotten mass graves and contributed to a growing grassroots effort to uncover and map lost sections of the railway and the stories of Romusha (Asian forced laborers).\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "62935", "revid": "3306290", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62935", "title": "Claus von Stauffenberg", "text": "German army officer (1907\u20131944)\n\"Oberst\" Claus Philipp Maria Justinian Schenk \"Graf\" von Stauffenberg (; 15 November 1907\u00a0\u2013 21 July 1944) was a German army officer who is best known for his failed attempt on 20 July 1944 to assassinate Adolf Hitler at the Wolf's Lair, part of Operation Valkyrie, a plan that would have seen the arrest of the Nazi leadership in the wake of Hitler's death and an earlier end to World War II.\n\"Graf\" von Stauffenberg took part in the Invasion of Poland, the 1941\u201342 invasion of the Soviet Union in Operation Barbarossa and the Tunisian campaign during the Second World War. Alongside Major Generals Henning von Tresckow and Hans Oster, he became a key figure in the German resistance to Nazism within the .\nOn 20 July 1944, Stauffenberg's assassination attempt failed, the explosive he had placed only dealing Hitler minor injuries. The conspirators were arrested, and many of them executed, including Stauffenberg on the day after the attempt. His wife Nina was also arrested, giving birth to their fifth child Konstanze while imprisoned. Their children also included Berthold, who followed in his father's footsteps as a military man, and politician Franz-Ludwig.\nFamily history.\nStauffenberg was born in Stauffenberg Castle, Jettingen, on 15 November 1907 and baptised as Claus Philipp Maria Justinian. Born into the ancient House of Stauffenberg, he was the third of four sons of Alfred Schenk \"Graf\" (Count) von Stauffenberg (1860\u20131936), the last \"Oberhofmarschall\" of the Kingdom of W\u00fcrttemberg, and his wife, Caroline \"Gr\u00e4fin\" (Countess) von \u00dcxk\u00fcll-Gyllenband (1875\u20131956), the daughter of Alfred Richard August \"Graf\" von \u00dcxk\u00fcll-Gyllenband (1838\u20131877) and Valerie von Hohenthal (1841\u20131878).\nFrom birth, Stauffenberg inherited the hereditary titles of \"Graf\" and \"Schenk\", leaving him referred to by his first name and Schenk \"Graf\" von Stauffenberg until the 1919 Weimar Constitutional Law abolished privileges of nobility\".\" His maternal ancestors included \"Generalfeldmarschall\" August \"Graf\" von Gneisenau.\nEarly life.\nStauffenberg grew up in Bavaria, where he and his brothers were members of the , a German Scout association and part of the German Youth movement. Though he and his brothers were carefully educated, and Stauffenberg was inclined towards literature, he eventually took up a military career, fitting with his family's traditional expectations. In 1926, he joined the family's traditional regiment, the Reiterregiment 17 (17th Cavalry Regiment) in Bamberg.\nAround the beginning of his time in Bamberg, Albrecht von Blumenthal introduced the three brothers to the poet Stefan George's influential circle, \"Georgekreis\", from which many notable members of the German resistance later emerged. George dedicated \"Das neue Reich\" (\"the new Empire\") in 1928, including the \"Geheimes Deutschland\" (\"secret Germany\") written in 1922, to Berthold.\nBy 1930, Stauffenberg had been commissioned as a (second lieutenant), studying modern weapons at the in Berlin, but remaining focused on the use of horses \u2013 which continued to carry out a large part of transportation duties throughout World War II\u2014in modern warfare. His regiment became part of the German 1st Light Division under General Erich Hoepner, another later member of the covert German Resistance, and the unit was among the Wehrmacht troops that moved into Sudetenland following its annexation to the Reich as per the Munich Agreement.\nEarly views on Nazism.\nThough Stauffenberg had supported the German colonization of Poland and had made extremist remarks regarding Polish Jews, he refrained from joining the Nazi Party. However, during the 1932 German presidential election, he voiced tentative support for Hitler:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The idea of the F\u00fchrer principle [...] bound together with a Volksgemeinschaft, the principle \"The community good before the individual good,\" and the fight against corruption, the fight against the spirit of the large urban cities, the racial thought (), and the will towards a new German-formed legal order appears to us healthy and auspicious.\nStauffenberg's views of Hitler were conflicted during this period. He vacillated between a strong dislike of Hitler's policies and a respect for what he perceived to be Hitler's military acumen, before becoming more disassociated with the party after The Night of the Long Knives and Kristallnacht which he saw as proof Hitler had no intentions to pursue justice. As a practising Catholic, it was noted that the growing systematic ill-treatment of Jews and suppression of religion had offended Stauffenberg's strong sense of Catholic morality and justice.\nEven though Stauffenberg joined the covert resistance movement within the Wehrmacht, like many members of the Nazi Party, he displayed a tentative opposition to parliamentary democracy.\nSecond World War.\nActivities in 1939\u201340.\nFollowing the outbreak of war in 1939, Stauffenberg and his regiment took part in the Invasion of Poland. During this time, he was a strong supporter of Poland's occupation, and the Nazi Party's colonisation, exploitation and use of Pole slave workers to bring about German prosperity. Stauffenberg himself noted, \"It is essential that we begin a systemic colonisation in Poland. But I have no fear that this will not occur\". After the Invasion, Stauffenberg's unit was reorganised into the 6th Panzer Division, and he served as an officer on its General Staff in the Battle of France, for which he was awarded the Iron Cross First Class.\nWhile his uncle, Nikolaus Graf von \u00dcxk\u00fcll-Gyllenband, together with Fritz-Dietlof von der Schulenburg, had approached Stauffenberg to join the resistance movement against the Hitler regime, it was only after the Polish campaign that Stauffenberg began to consider the offer. Peter Yorck von Wartenburg and Ulrich Schwerin von Schwanenfeld had urged him to become the adjutant of Walther von Brauchitsch, then Supreme Commander of the Army, to facilitate a coup against Hitler. Though, Stauffenberg declined at the time, reasoning that all German soldiers had pledged allegiance not to the institution of the presidency of the German , but to the person of Adolf Hitler, due to the introduced in 1934.\nOperation Barbarossa, 1941\u201342.\nDuring the quieter months of 1940 to 1941, Stauffenberg was transferred to the organisational department of the (\"Army High Command\"; OKH), which was directing the German invasion of the Soviet Union and operations on the Eastern Front. Though Stauffenberg did not engage in any coup plotting at this time, his brothers Berthold and Alexander maintained contact with anti-regime figures such as the Kreisau Circle and former commanders such as Hoepner.\nHoffman, in citing Brigadier Oskar Alfred-Berger's letters, noted Stauffenberg had commented openly on the ill-treatment of the Jews when he \"expressed outrage and shock on this subject to fellow officers in the General Staff Headquarters in Vinnitsa, Ukraine during the summer of 1942.\" When Stauffenberg's friend, Major Joachim Kuhn, was captured by the Red Army, during interrogation on 2 September 1944, Kuhn claimed that Stauffenberg had told him in August 1942 that \"They are shooting Jews in masses. These crimes must not be allowed to continue.\"\nTunisia, 1943.\nIn November 1942, the Allies landed in French North Africa whilst the 10th Panzer Division occupied Vichy France (Case Anton), consequently being transferred to fight in the Tunisian campaign, as part of the . In 1943, Stauffenberg was promoted to (lieutenant-colonel of the general staff), and was sent to Africa to join the 10th Panzer Division as its Operations Officer in the General Staff (Ia). On 19 February, Rommel launched his counter-offensive against British, American and French forces in Tunisia. The Axis commanders hoped to rapidly break through either the Sbiba or Kasserine Pass into the rear of the British First Army. The assault at Sbiba was halted, so Rommel concentrated on the Kasserine Pass where primarily the Italian 7th Bersaglieri Regiment and 131st Armoured Division Centauro had defeated the American defenders. During the fighting, Stauffenberg drove up to be with the leading tanks and troops of the 10th Panzer Division. The division, together with the 21st Panzer Division, took up defensive positions near Mezzouna on 8 April.\nOn 7 April 1943, Stauffenberg was involved in driving from one unit to another, directing their movement. Near Mezzouna, his vehicle was part of a column strafed by P-40 Kittyhawk fighter bombers of the Desert Air Force \u2013 most likely from No. 3 Squadron RAAF \u2013 and he received multiple severe wounds. Stauffenberg spent three months in a hospital in Munich, where he was treated by Ferdinand Sauerbruch. Stauffenberg lost his left eye, his right hand, and two fingers on his left hand. He jokingly remarked to friends never to have really known what to do with so many fingers when he still had all of them. For his injuries, Stauffenberg was awarded the Wound Badge in Gold on 14 April and for his courage the German Cross in Gold on 8 May.\nIn the resistance, 1943\u201344.\nFor rehabilitation, Stauffenberg was sent to his home, Schloss Lautlingen (today a museum), then still one of the Stauffenberg castles in southern Germany. The Torfels near Me\u00dfstetten Bueloch had been visited many times. Initially, he felt frustrated not to be in a position to stage a coup himself. But by the beginning of September 1943, after a somewhat slow recovery from his wounds, he was propositioned by the conspirators and was introduced to Henning von Tresckow as a staff officer to the headquarters of the (\"Replacement Army\" \u2013 charged with training soldiers to reinforce first line divisions at the front), located on the (later ) in Berlin.\nThere, one of Stauffenberg's superiors was General Friedrich Olbricht, a committed member of the resistance movement. The had a unique opportunity to launch a coup, as one of its functions was to have Operation Valkyrie in place. This was a contingency measure to let it assume control of the in the event that internal disturbances blocked communications to the military high command. The \"Valkyrie\" plan had been agreed to by Hitler but was secretly changed to sweep the rest of his regime from power in the event of his death. In 1943, Henning von Tresckow was deployed on the Eastern Front, giving Stauffenberg control of the resistance. (Tresckow never returned to Germany, as he committed suicide at Kr\u00f3lowy Most, Poland, in 1944, after learning of the plot's failure.)\nA detailed military plan was developed not only to occupy Berlin, but also to take the different headquarters of the German army and of Hitler in East Prussia by military force after the suicide assassination attempt by Axel von dem Bussche in late November 1943. Stauffenberg had von dem Bussche transmit these written orders personally to Major Kuhn once he had arrived at \"Wolfsschanze\" (Wolf's Lair) near Rastenburg, East Prussia. However, von dem Bussche had left the Wolfsschanze for the eastern front, after the meeting with Hitler was cancelled, and the attempt could not be made.\nKuhn became a prisoner of war of the Soviets after the 20 July plot. He led the Soviets to the hiding place of the documents in February 1945. In 1989, Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev presented these documents to German chancellor Dr. Helmut Kohl. The conspirators' motivations have been a matter of discussion for years in Germany since the war. Many thought the plotters wanted to kill Hitler in order to end the war and to avoid the loss of their privileges as professional officers and members of the nobility.\nOn D-Day, 6 June 1944, the Allies had landed in France. Stauffenberg, like most other German professional military officers, had absolutely no doubt that the war was lost. Only an immediate armistice could avoid more unnecessary bloodshed and further damage to Germany, its people, and other European nations. However, in late 1943, he had written out demands with which he felt the Allies had to comply in order for Germany to agree to an immediate peace. These demands included Germany retaining its 1914 eastern borders, including the Polish territories of Wielkopolska and Pozna\u0144. \nOther demands included keeping such territorial gains as Austria and the Sudetenland within the Reich, giving autonomy to Alsace-Lorraine and even expansion of the current wartime borders of Germany in the south by annexing Tyrol as far as Bozen and Meran. Non-territorial demands included such points as refusal of any occupation of Germany by the Allies, as well as refusal to hand over war criminals by demanding the right of \"nations to deal with its own criminals.\" These proposals were directed to only the Western Allies \u2013 Stauffenberg wanted Germany to retreat from only the western, southern, and northern positions, while demanding the right to continue military occupation of German territorial gains in the east.\n20 July plot.\nAs early as September 1942, Stauffenberg was considering Hans Georg Schmidt von Altenstadt, author of \"Unser Weg zum Meer\", as a replacement for Hitler.\nFrom the beginning of September 1943 until 20 July 1944, Stauffenberg was the driving force behind the plot to assassinate Hitler and take control of Germany. His resolve, organizational abilities, and radical approach put an end to inactivity caused by doubts and long discussions on whether military virtues had been made obsolete by Hitler's behaviour. With the help of his friend Henning von Tresckow, he united the conspirators and drove them into action.\n\"Graf\" von Stauffenberg was aware that, under German law, he was committing high treason. He openly told young conspirator Axel von dem Bussche in late 1943, (\"I am committing high treason with all means at my disposal...\"). He justified himself to Bussche by referring to the right under natural law () to defend millions of people's lives from the criminal aggressions of Hitler.\nOnly after the conspirator General Hellmuth Stieff on 7 July 1944 had declared himself unable to assassinate Hitler on a uniforms display at Klessheim castle near Salzburg, did Stauffenberg decide to personally kill Hitler and to run the plot in Berlin. By then, Stauffenberg had great doubts about the possibility of success. Tresckow convinced him to go on with it even if it had no chance of success at all, \"The assassination must be attempted. Even if it fails, we must take action in Berlin\", as this was the only way to prove to the world that the Hitler regime and Germany were not one and the same and that not all Germans supported the regime.\nStauffenberg's part in the original plan required him to stay at the Bendlerstra\u00dfe offices in Berlin, so he could phone regular army units all over Europe in an attempt to convince them to arrest leaders of Nazi political organisations such as the (SD) and the Gestapo. When General Hellmuth Stieff, Chief of Operation at Army High Command, who had regular access to Hitler, backtracked from his earlier commitment to assassinate Hitler, Stauffenberg was forced to take on two critical roles: kill Hitler far from Berlin and trigger the military machine in Berlin during office hours of the very same day. Beside Stieff, he was the only conspirator who had regular access to Hitler (during his briefings) by mid-1944, as well as being the only officer among the conspirators thought to have the resolve and persuasiveness to convince German military leaders to throw in with the coup once Hitler was dead. This requirement, alone, greatly increased the chance of a successful coup.\nAssassination attempt.\nAfter several unsuccessful attempts by Stauffenberg to encounter Hitler, G\u00f6ring, and Himmler at the same time, he went ahead with the attempt at the \"Wolfsschanze\" on 20 July 1944. Stauffenberg entered the briefing room carrying a briefcase containing two small bombs. The location had unexpectedly been changed from the to Albert Speer's wooden hut due to the heat on this summer's day. He left the room to arm the first bomb with specially adapted pliers. This was a difficult task for him as he had lost his right hand and had only three fingers on his left hand. A guard knocked and opened the door, urging him to hurry as the meeting was about to begin. As a result, Stauffenberg was able to arm only one of the bombs. He left the second bomb with his , Werner von Haeften, and returned to the briefing room, where he placed the briefcase under the conference table, as close as he could to Hitler. Some minutes later, he received a planned phone call. He then excused himself and left the room. After his exit, the briefcase was moved by Colonel Heinz Brandt.\nWhen the explosion tore through the hut, Stauffenberg was convinced that no one in the room could have survived. Although four people were killed and almost all survivors were injured, Hitler himself was shielded from the blast by the heavy, solid-oak conference table leg, which Colonel Brandt had placed the briefcase bomb behind, and was only slightly wounded and burned.\nStauffenberg and Haeften quickly left and drove to the nearby airfield. After his return to Berlin, Stauffenberg immediately began to motivate his friends to initiate the second phase: the military coup against the Nazi leaders. Joseph Goebbels announced by radio that Hitler had survived and later, after Hitler spoke on the state radio, the conspirators realised that the coup had failed. They were tracked to their offices and overpowered after a brief shoot-out, during which Stauffenberg was wounded in the shoulder.\nExecution.\nIn an ultimately failed attempt to save his own life, co-conspirator General Friedrich Fromm, Commander-in-Chief of the Replacement Army present in the Bendlerblock (Headquarters of the Army), charged other conspirators in an impromptu court martial and condemned the ringleaders of the conspiracy to death. Stauffenberg, his aide 1st Lieutenant Werner von Haeften, General Friedrich Olbricht and Colonel Albrecht Mertz von Quirnheim were executed before 1:00 in the morning (21 July 1944) by a makeshift firing squad in the courtyard of the Bendlerblock, which was lit by the headlights of a truck.\nStauffenberg was third in line to be executed, with Lieutenant von Haeften after. However, when it was Stauffenberg's turn, Lieutenant von Haeften placed himself between the firing squad and Stauffenberg, and received the bullets meant for Stauffenberg. When his turn came, Stauffenberg spoke his last words, (\"Long live sacred Germany!\"), or, possibly, (\"Long live secret Germany!\"), in reference to Stefan George and the anti-Nazi circle. \nFromm ordered that the executed officers (his former co-conspirators) receive an immediate burial with military honours in the Alter St.-Matth\u00e4us-Kirchhof in Berlin's Sch\u00f6neberg district. The next day, however, Stauffenberg's body was exhumed by the SS, stripped of his medals and insignia, and cremated.\nAnother central figure in the plot was Stauffenberg's eldest brother, Berthold Schenk \"Graf\" von Stauffenberg. On 10 August 1944, Berthold was tried before Judge-President Roland Freisler in the special \"People's Court\" (). This court was established by Hitler for political offences. Berthold was one of eight conspirators executed by slow strangulation at Pl\u00f6tzensee Prison, Berlin, later that day. Before he was killed, Berthold was throttled and then revived multiple times. The entire execution and multiple resuscitations were filmed for Hitler to view at his leisure.\nMore than 200 were condemned in show trials and executed. Hitler used the 20 July Plot as an excuse to eliminate anyone he feared would oppose him. The traditional military salute was replaced with the Nazi salute. Eventually, over 20,000 Germans were killed or sent to concentration camps in the purge.\nAssessment.\nOne of the few surviving members of the German resistance, Hans Bernd Gisevius, portrayed Colonel Stauffenberg, whom he had met in July 1944, as a man driven by reasons which had little to do with Christian ideals or repugnance of Nazi ideology. In his autobiographical \"Bis zum bitteren Ende\" (\"To the Bitter End\"), Gisevius wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Stauffenberg wanted to retain all the totalitarian, militaristic and socialistic elements of National Socialism (p. 504). What he had in mind was the salvation of Germany by military men who could break with corruption and maladministration, provide an orderly military government and inspire the people to make one last great effort. Reduced to a formula, he wanted the nation to remain soldierly and become socialistic (p. 503).\nStauffenberg was motivated by the impulsive passions of the disillusioned military man whose eyes had been opened by the defeat of German arms (p. 510). Stauffenberg had shifted to the rebel side only after Stalingrad (p. 512).\nThe difference between Stauffenberg, Helldorf and Schulenburg \u2013 all of them counts \u2013 was that Helldorf had come to the Nazi Movement as a primitive, I might almost say an unpolitical revolutionary. The other two had been attracted primarily by a political ideology. Therefore, it was possible for Helldorf to throw everything overboard at once: Hitler, the Party, the entire system. Stauffenberg, Schulenberg and their clique wanted to drop no more ballast than was absolutely necessary; then they would paint the ship of state a military gray and set it afloat again (p. 513\u2013514).\nHistorian Peter Hoffman questions Gisevius's evaluations based on the latter's brief acquaintance with Stauffenberg, misreporting of Stauffenberg's actions, and apparent rivalry with him:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Gisevius met Stauffenberg for the first time in Berlin on July 12, 1944, eight days before the colonel's last assassination attempt against Hitler. ... In view of Gisevius's own record as a transmitter of historical information for which he had displayed strong personal feelings, and in light of what is known about both Gisevius's alleged sources and Stauffenberg himself, Gisevius's account is at best questionable hearsay.\nGisevius disliked Stauffenberg. He sensed that this dynamic leader would be an obstacle to his own far-reaching ambitions and intrigues. In his book he mocked Stauffenberg as a presumptuous and ignorant amateur. ... Stauffenberg must have been informed of Gisevius's background and it cannot have inspired his confidence. Gisevius was understandably upset by Stauffenberg's attitude toward him. ... Stauffenberg seemed to regard him merely as an incidental source of background information.\nBritish historian Richard J. Evans, in his books on the Third Reich, covered various aspects of Stauffenberg's beliefs and philosophy. He wrote an article originally published in \"S\u00fcddeutsche Zeitung\", 23 January 2009, entitled \"Why did Stauffenberg plant the bomb?\" which states, \"Was it because Hitler was losing the war? Was it to put an end to the mass murder of the Jews? Or was it to save Germany's honour? The overwhelming support, toleration, or silent acquiescence\" from the people of his country for Hitler, which was also being heavily censored and constantly fed propaganda, meant any action must be swift and successful. Evans writes, \"Had Stauffenberg's bomb succeeded in killing Hitler, it is unlikely that the military coup planned to follow it would have moved the leading conspirators smoothly into power\".\nHowever, Karl Heinz Bohrer, a cultural critic, literary scholar, and publisher, criticized Evans' views in an article originally published in the \"S\u00fcddeutsche Zeitung\", 30 January 2010. Although agreeing that Evans is historically correct in much of his writing, Bohrer feels that Evans twists time lines and misrepresents certain aspects. He wrote of Evans, \"In the course of his problematic argument he walks into two traps: 1. by contesting Stauffenberg's \"moral motivation\"; 2. by contesting Stauffenberg's suitability as role model.\" He further writes, \"If then, as Evans notes with initial objectivity, Stauffenberg had a strong moral imperative \u2013 whether this stemmed from an aristocratic code of honour, Catholic doctrine or Romantic poetry \u2013 then this also underpinned his initial affinity for National Socialism which Stauffenberg misinterpreted as 'spiritual renewal'\".\nIn 1980, the West German government established a memorial for the failed anti-Nazi resistance movement in a part of the Bendlerblock, the remainder of which currently houses the Berlin offices of the German Ministry of Defense (whose main offices remain in Bonn). The was renamed the , and the Bendlerblock now houses the Memorial to the German Resistance, a permanent exhibition with more than 5,000 photographs and documents showing the various resistance organisations at work during the Hitler era. The courtyard where the officers were shot on 21 July 1944 is now a memorial site, with a plaque commemorating the events and a bronze figure of a young man with his hands symbolically bound which resembles \"Graf\" von Stauffenberg.\nFamily.\nStauffenberg married Elisabeth Magdalena 'Nina' \"Freiin\" von Lerchenfeld on 26 September 1933 in Bamberg. Born into the House of Lerchenfeld, part of the old Bavarian nobility, she was a third cousin of Prince Philip, Duke of Edinburgh, consort of Queen Elizabeth II. They had five children: Berthold, Heimeran, Franz-Ludwig, Valerie, and Konstanze, who was born in Frankfurt on the Oder seven months after Stauffenberg's execution. Stauffenberg lived with his family in Berlin-Wannsee. Berthold, Heimeran, Franz-Ludwig, Valerie and Kostanze, who were not told of their father's deed, were placed in a foster home for the remainder of the war and were forced to use new surnames, as Stauffenberg was considered taboo.\nNina died at the age of 92 on 2 April 2006 at Kirchlauter near Bamberg and was buried there on 8 April. Berthold Schenk \"Graf\" von Stauffenberg went on to become a \"Generalmajor\" in West Germany's post-war . Franz-Ludwig became a member of both the German and European parliaments, representing the Christian Social Union in Bavaria. In 2008, her youngest daughter, Konstanze Alexandra Ruth Maria von Schulthess-Rechberg (b. 1945), wrote a best-selling book about her mother, \"Nina Schenk Gr\u00e4fin von Stauffenberg\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;He let things come to him, and then he made up his mind ... one of his characteristics was that he really enjoyed playing the devil's advocate. Conservatives were convinced that he was a ferocious Nazi, and ferocious Nazis were convinced he was an unreconstructed conservative. He was neither.\nLegacy.\nAfter the war, a United States intelligence officer, Ernie Blake, who was involved in interrogation of Nazi officers, went on to establish a ski area in Taos, New Mexico. He named a ski run on the West Basin Ridge \"Stauffenberg\", after \"Graf\" von Stauffenberg (as well as three other runs after the names of other German officers who took part in the assassination attempt: Oster, von Tresckow, and Fabian).\nIn film and television.\nDramas with portrayals of \"Graf\" von Stauffenberg include: \"The Night of the Generals\" (1967; G\u00e9rard Buhr); the Russian film series \"Liberation\" \"(\u041e\u0441\u0432\u043e\u0431\u043e\u0436\u0434\u0435\u043d\u0438\u0435)\", released in 1970 and 1971, directed by Yuri Ozerov and with East German actors, with Alfred Struwe played Stauffenberg, the third film, Part 2 (Direction of the Main Blow), depicts the plot; \"War and Remembrance\" (1988, Sky du Mont); \"The Plot to Kill Hitler\" (1990, Brad Davis);\" Stauffenberg\" (2004, Sebastian Koch); and \"Valkyrie\" (2008, Tom Cruise).\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "62936", "revid": "21442196", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62936", "title": "Perejil Island", "text": "Uninhabited islet near Morocco\nPerejil Island, also known as Parsley Island, is a small, uninhabited rocky islet located off the coast of Morocco. It is administered by Spain as one of the \"plazas de soberan\u00eda\", and its sovereignty is disputed by Morocco. It was the subject of an armed incident between the two countries in 2002.\nName.\nThe name \"Isla de Perejil\" literally means \"Parsley Island\" in Spanish. Its original Berber name is Tura, meaning \"empty\". It is sometimes referred to in Arabic as \"Jazirat al-Ma'danus\" (), which is a translation of \"Parsley Island\".\nIn Moroccan historical references, it is only known as \"Tura\". In his speech to the Moroccan people commemorating the \"Throne Day\" on 30 July 2002, the King of Morocco used the name \"Tura\" exclusively, when he mentioned the armed incident with Spain over the island.\nGeography.\nThe island lies off the coast of Morocco, from the border of the territory of the Spanish city of Ceuta, to Ceuta itself and from mainland Spain. The island is about in size, with an area of 15 ha or . It has a maximum height of above sea level.\nHistory.\nV. B\u00e9rnard identified Perejil with the mythical island of Ogygia where one of the daughters of Atlas, Calypso, detained Odysseus for seven years, according to the myth.\nIn 1415, Portugal, along with the reconquest of Ceuta (Part of the old Hispania Tangeriana), took possession of the nearby islet from the Marinid Sultanate, a predecessor to the current state of Morocco. In 1580, Portugal came under the sovereignty of Philip I of Portugal, who was also King of Spain, creating an Iberian Union under one king, without unifying the countries. When the Union split in 1640, Ceuta remained under Spanish sovereignty.\nSpain-Morocco disputes.\nThe islet's sovereignty is disputed by Morocco and Spain. Local Moroccan shepherds used it for grazing livestock, but the vast majority of Spaniards and Moroccans had not heard of the islet until 11 July 2002, when a group of Moroccan soldiers set up a base on the islet. The Moroccan government said that they set foot on the island in order to monitor illegal immigration, a justification the Spanish government rejected as there had been little co-operation on the matter at the time (a repeated source of complaint from Spain). After protests from the Spanish government, led by Prime Minister Jos\u00e9 Mar\u00eda Aznar, Morocco replaced the soldiers with cadets from the Moroccan Navy, who then installed a fixed base on the island. This further angered the Spanish government and both countries restated their claims to the islet. \nOn the morning of 18 July 2002, Spain launched Operation Romeo-Sierra, a military attempt to take over the island. The operation was successful, and within hours the Spanish had taken control of the island and custody of the Moroccan naval cadets, who had not resisted the Spanish commando attack force, Grupo de Operaciones Especiales III. The operation was launched in conjunction with the Spanish Navy and Spanish Air Force. The Spanish transferred the captured Moroccans by helicopter to the headquarters of the Guardia Civil in Ceuta, who then transported the cadets to the Moroccan border. Over the course of the day, the Spanish Legion replaced the commandos and remained on the island until Morocco, after mediation by the United States, led by Colin Powell, agreed to return to the status quo ante which existed prior to the Moroccan occupation of the island. The islet is now deserted.\nSovereignty.\nPerejil Island has no permanent human population. Goats are pastured there, and the Moroccan government expressed worries that smugglers and terrorists, in addition to illegal immigrants, were using the island. The island is well monitored from both sides in order to maintain the status quo that leaves it deserted and virtually a no man's land.\nMorocco wants to control the Spanish cities Ceuta and Melilla along with several small rocks and islets off the coast of Morocco. The crisis over Perejil Island was seen by the Spanish government as a way for Morocco to test the waters in regard to Spain's will to defend Ceuta and Melilla.\nMigration.\nIn June 2014, Spain requested that the Moroccan forces enter the island to expel sub-Saharan migrants.\nPopular culture.\nThe international incident is recounted in a 2016 film, \"La Isla\", which is largely based on the facts of the dispute.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "62948", "revid": "635492", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62948", "title": "Count Dooku", "text": "Fictional character in Star Wars\nCount Dooku, also known as Darth Tyranus, is a fictional character in the \"Star Wars\" franchise. He was introduced in the prequel film trilogy, first appearing in ' (2002) and then returning in ' (2005). He is portrayed by Christopher Lee in both films, and is voiced by Corey Burton in most of the video games and animated productions in which he appears. The animated productions include the series ' (2003\u20132005), ' (2008\u20132014; 2020), and \"Tales of the Jedi\" (2022). Lee voices Dooku in the 2008 . Dooku also appears in novels and comics.\nDooku is the Count of Serenno, his home planet. He is also a former Jedi Master who was trained by Yoda. He becomes disillusioned with the Galactic Senate and the Jedi Order due to the former's corruption and the latter's complicity, and eventually turns to the dark side of the Force. He becomes an apprentice of the Sith Lord Darth Sidious, and plays a pivotal role in his master's rise to power. Dooku leads the Confederacy of Independent Systems throughout the Clone Wars, all the while engineering the creation of the Republic's clone army. Although he hopes to eventually overthrow Sidious, Dooku is ultimately betrayed by his master, who arranges his death at the hands of Anakin Skywalker.\nAppearances.\nFilms.\n\"Attack of the Clones\".\nCount Dooku was introduced in \"Attack of the Clones\" (2002) as a former Jedi Master who had left the Jedi Order after losing faith in it and the Galactic Republic it served. He became the leader of the Confederacy of Independent Systems, a confederation of planetary systems rebelling against the Republic. Dooku believes that the Republic is corrupt and imposes excessive taxation, that its politicians are more interested in maintaining the bureaucracy and enriching themselves than in properly representing their people, as well as believing that they are more focused on the Republic-centric Core Worlds and neglecting the others.\nDooku recruits the bounty hunter Jango Fett to assassinate Senator Padm\u00e9 Amidala on Coruscant, but the attempt is foiled by her Jedi protectors. Dooku captures the Jedi Knight Obi-Wan Kenobi on Geonosis, and tells him that thousands of senators are under the influence of a Sith Lord named Darth Sidious. Dooku asserts that he is attempting to save the Republic, and tries to convince Obi-Wan to join him even offering to have him released and that his capture is a big misunderstanding. When Padm\u00e9 and Anakin Skywalker arrive on Geonosis to rescue Obi-Wan, Dooku captures them as well and sentences all three to death.\nA Jedi strike team eventually arrives to rescue the trio, and are soon joined by the Republic's new clone army, resulting in a large battle between the Republic and Separatist forces. Dooku tries to flee, but Obi-Wan and Anakin follow him and engage him in a lightsaber duel. Dooku subdues Anakin with Force lightning, wounds Obi-Wan, then cuts off Anakin's arm. Dooku's former master Yoda then arrives and the two duel. Unable to match Yoda's prowess, Dooku distracts him by using the Force to dislodge a large pillar and send it falling toward Anakin and Obi-Wan. While Yoda is saving the two injured Jedi, Dooku escapes the planet. He brings the designs for the Death Star to his master Darth Sidious, informing him that the war has begun and that their plan is working.\n\"Revenge of the Sith\".\n\"Revenge of the Sith\" (2005) takes place three years after \"Attack of the Clones\". Dooku and the Separatist commander General Grievous have kidnapped Supreme Chancellor Palpatine\u2014Sidious's alter ego\u2014as part of a plan orchestrated by Palpatine to lure Anakin to the dark side of the Force. Unknown to Dooku, Sidious desired Anakin to replace him as his Sith apprentice due to how powerful he was, and as such, intended for Anakin to kill Dooku in order to lure him to the dark side. Anakin and Obi-Wan board Grievous's ship and confront Dooku, who knocks Obi-Wan unconscious. Anakin then overpowers Dooku and severs his hands. Palpatine then betrays his apprentice by ordering Anakin to kill him, much to Dooku's horror. Despite Anakin's reluctance as killing an unarmed prisoner is not the Jedi way, Palpatine's urging leads to Anakin killing and decapitating the helpless Count.\nIn a deleted scene, Dooku claims that he arranged for Tusken Raiders to kidnap and kill Anakin's mother, as seen in \"Attack of the Clones\".\n\"The Clone Wars\".\nIn the 2008 animated film \"\", which takes place after the events of \"Attack of the Clones\", Dooku plots to bring Jabba the Hutt into the folds of the Confederacy. He orchestrates the kidnapping of Jabba's son Rotta by Jabba's uncle Ziro. When Jabba requests Jedi assistance to rescue his son, Dooku plans to frame the Jedi for the kidnapping. Dooku duels Anakin for the first time since their encounter in \"Attack of the Clones\". The duel ends in a draw, and Anakin and his apprentice Ahsoka Tano eventually foil Dooku's plan.\nTelevision.\n\"The Clone Wars\" (2008\u20132014).\nIn the 2008 animated series \"\", set between \"Attack of the Clones\" and \"Revenge of the Sith\", Dooku is the political leader of the Separatists, and the main antagonist. In addition to sending Grievous and Ventress on missions to antagonize the Republic, he works with the terrorist group Death Watch to give the Republic a reason to send a military presence to Mandalore, which would play in his favor. The plan falls through when Duchess Satine Kryze of Mandalore urges the Galactic Senate to hold off a military force.\nIn the third season, Dooku is forced to eliminate his apprentice Ventress to prove his loyalty to Darth Sidious. Ventress survives, however, and works with Mother Talzin to kill Dooku by giving him Savage Opress as a replacement apprentice. During a confrontation between Dooku and Ventress, Savage turns on both. In the fourth season, Dooku defeats Anakin in three separate lightsaber duels, and despite having some of his plans foiled, he gets his revenge on Ventress by having General Grievous order the systematic genocide of the Nightsisters. In the fifth season, Dooku plays minor roles via hologram in guiding King Rash of Onderon and Grievous taking over Florrum.\nIn the sixth season, Dooku finds out the clone trooper Tup executed Order 66 prematurely due to a malfunction in his inhibitor chip, which he and Sidious had instilled in the Clones from the start in order to compel the Clone Troopers to turn against the Jedi at the right time. Not wanting the Jedi to discover his and Sidious's plans, he works behind the scenes to stop the Republic's investigation. He then manipulates the Banking Clan and its representative Rush Clovis into putting all their resources in the hands of the Sith, bringing war to the planet Scipio. Later, the Jedi find a lightsaber belonging to deceased Jedi Master Sifo-Dyas\u2014whom Dooku betrayed and murdered years earlier\u2014and start an investigation. Sidious forces Dooku to clean up their trail. Dooku confronts Anakin and Obi-Wan on Oba Diah, revealing his alter-ego Darth Tyranus to the Jedi, and they realize that it was he who created the clone army. Some further investigation by Yoda prompts Dooku and Sidious to perform a Sith ritual in an unsuccessful attempt to break the Jedi Master; in a vision experienced by Yoda, Dooku fights Anakin, who swiftly defeats and executes him, in a manner very similar to his eventual demise.\nCount Dooku does not directly appear in the seventh season. However, as the events of \"Revenge of the Sith\" are concurrent with the season's final arc, Ahsoka Tano is informed of his demise at Anakin's hands by Obi-Wan, who tells her that it is important to capture Maul, being the only way the Jedi can discover the true identity of Darth Sidious after Dooku's death.\n\"Tales of the Jedi\" (2022).\nA younger Count Dooku serves as one of the two protagonists of animated miniseries \"Tales of the Jedi\", voiced once again by Corey Burton. He is the focus of the second, third, and fourth episodes, which depict his life as a Jedi, his increasing dissatisfaction with the corruption in the Jedi Order and the Senate, and his eventual fall to the Dark Side. The miniseries also focuses on Dooku's friendship with his padawan Qui-Gon Jinn, with original actor Liam Neeson returning to voice the character in the episode set concurrently to \"\".\nNovels.\n\"Dark Disciple\" (2015).\nAn unfinished sixth season arc of \"The Clone Wars\" was adapted into the 2015 novel \"Dark Disciple\" by Christie Golden. In the story, Dooku commands a genocidal attack on the planet Mahranee, leading the Jedi Council to send Master Quinlan Vos on a mission to assassinate Dooku. Vos partners with Dooku's former apprentice Asajj Ventress for the mission. The two confront Dooku on the planet Raxus Secundus, where Dooku was being awarded at a ceremony, but are no match for the Sith Lord, who captures Vos and forces Ventress to flee. Dooku takes Vos to Serenno, where he tortures him, eventually turning him to the dark side. Sometime later, the Jedi Council liberates Vos with the assistance of Ventress. However, upon deducing that he has turned to the dark side, the Council sends him to face Dooku again as a test of loyalty, with Obi-Wan Kenobi and Anakin Skywalker tailing him. Vos defeats Dooku, but spares his life and instead demands Dooku to lead him to Darth Sidious. Obi-Wan and Anakin arrest them both. Vos and Dooku escape aboard Ventress's ship, killing two Jedi and many clone troopers in the process. They are shot down and crash-land on Christophsis, where they seek refuge in a Separatist tower, which is soon under attack by Jedi and Republic forces. Dooku attempts to kill Vos with Force lightning, but Ventress sacrifices her life and saves Vos. After killing Ventress, Dooku escapes the planet.\n\"Dooku: Jedi Lost\" (2017).\nIn the audiobook \"\" by Cavan Scott, Dooku meets his sister Jenza, brother Ramil, and father Count Gora, when he visits his homeworld of Serenno as a Jedi Initiate. Dooku begins corresponding with Jenza, keeping their communications a secret for years. The audiobook also details several adventures Dooku has with his best friend, Sifo-Dyas, and Dyas's Jedi Master, Lene Kostana. During one mission, Dooku sees visions of many different futures through the Force, which shake him to the core. Eventually, Dooku becomes a Jedi Knight, trains two Padawans (one being Qui-Gon) to knighthood, and joins the Jedi Council, hoping to bring about real change in the Republic. However, after he saves his homeworld of Serenno from invaders, he decides to remain to help his planet rebuild, leaving the Jedi Order and becoming Count Dooku of Serenno.\n\"Thrawn: Alliances\" (2018).\nIn \"\", Dooku is mentioned by Duke Solha and Padm\u00e9 Amidala while they fight at Mokivj. Solha establishes that the Count had dispatched him and his siblings to Mokivj to produce cortosis B2 super battle droids for the Clone Wars.\n\"Master &amp; Apprentice\" (2019).\nThe novel \"Master &amp; Apprentice\" by Claudia Gray recounts several adventures from Qui-Gon Jinn's apprenticeship under Dooku, as well as Dooku's obsession with Jedi prophecies and seeming use of Force lightning during a mission. The novel also reveals that Dooku had one other apprentice before Qui-Gon, Rael Averross.\n\"Star Wars Legends\".\nFollowing the acquisition of Lucasfilm by The Walt Disney Company in 2012, most of the licensed \"Star Wars\" novels and comics produced between 1977 and 2014 were rebranded as \"Star Wars Legends\" and declared non-canon to the franchise. The \"Legends\" works comprise a separate narrative universe.\nComics.\nIn the \"\" series, set during the Clone Wars, Dooku trains multiple Dark Jedi apprentices, most of whom he uses as minions. His apprentices include Ventress, Tol Skorr and renegade Jedi Quinlan Vos. Vos initially intended to infiltrate the Separatists as a spy for the Jedi Council but instead nearly falls to the dark side.\nNovels.\nIn Jude Watson's \"Legacy of the Jedi\", Dooku appears in Parts 1, 2, and 4, and is mentioned in Part 3. In Part 1, he is first tempted by the dark side of the Force as a child when his best friend and fellow Padawan Lorian Nod steals an ancient Sith Holocron from the Jedi Archives. When Nod is caught, Nod lies and says that the theft was Dooku's idea. However, Dooku manages to convince the Jedi Council of the truth, and Nod is then expelled from the Jedi Order. It is later implied that Dooku himself steals the Holocron because he is intrigued by the Sith's open embrace of power. In Part 2, set 13 years later, he is a Jedi Knight, and takes Qui-Gon Jinn as his Padawan apprentice. He encounters Nod while defending a Senator from space pirates, and defeats him in combat, almost executing him. However, Qui-Gon convinces him to spare Nod's life, and he and Dooku turn Nod over to the authorities. In Part 3, set 32 years later, Qui-Gon, now a Jedi Knight, remarks that he has not seen Dooku in years, noting that their relationship was never friendly. Finally in Part 4, set in the midst of the Clone Wars, Dooku, now a Sith, kills Nod after his former friend refuses to join the Separatists.\nIn Sean Stewart's \"\", Dooku attempts to trap Yoda by offering to negotiate an end to the Clone Wars. Dooku attempts unsuccessfully to sway Yoda to his cause, while Yoda nearly convinces Dooku to return to the Jedi Order. When Anakin and Obi-Wan appear unexpectedly, Dooku believes that Yoda was trying to set him up to be captured, and renounces his former master once and for all. In the novel, it is also revealed that Dooku always resented his parents for \"giving him away\" to the Jedi Order.\nIn James Luceno's \"Labyrinth of Evil\", Dooku engineers Grievous's transformation into a cyborg and trains him in lightsaber combat. He then schemes with Sidious to invade Coruscant in what he believes to be a plot to kill Obi-Wan and initiate Anakin into the Sith.\nMatthew Stover's expands upon Dooku's character; it portrays him as an evil man who sees others as mere objects to be used and discarded, and who despises the galaxy's non-human species and plans to exterminate and enslave them once in power. It also explains that Dooku believes that Palpatine's staged kidnapping is part of a plan to kill Obi-Wan and turn Anakin to the dark side. In this scenario, once the Republic becomes the Galactic Empire, Dooku and Palpatine will rule the galaxy together, while Anakin will command a \"Sith Army\" formed from the remains of the Jedi. The novelization depicts Dooku's death scene from his point of view after realizing that Sidious has betrayed and used him. In his final moments, he realizes that Palpatine used him as a means to engineer the war and as a placeholder for Anakin, whom he intended to be his apprentice all along. He ultimately realizes that everything he has done has been all for nothing, before being ruthlessly executed by Skywalker.\n\"Clone Wars\" (2003\u20132005).\nDuring the 2003 animated micro-series \"\", Count Dooku leads the Separatists from behind the scenes, taking the dark assassin Asajj Ventress as his apprentice while training General Grievous in lightsaber combat. In the final episode, he plays a part in Grievous's attack on Coruscant and kidnapping Palpatine, setting the stage for \"Revenge of the Sith\".\nToys.\nA number of toys based on Count Dooku have been produced, including the Lego set \"Lego Star Wars: Duel on Geonosis\" which recreates the duel between Yoda and Dooku portrayed in \"Attack of the Clones\", and a Hasbro Count Dooku lightsaber.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "62949", "revid": "35126782", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62949", "title": "Darth Tyranus", "text": ""}
{"id": "62950", "revid": "10202399", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62950", "title": "Ternary numeral system", "text": "Base-3 numeral system\nA ternary numeral system (also called base 3 or trinary) has three as its base. Analogous to a bit, a ternary digit is a trit (trinary digit). One trit is equivalent to log2\u00a03 (about 1.58496) bits of information.\nAlthough \"ternary\" most often refers to a system in which the three digits are all non\u2013negative numbers; specifically 0, 1, and 2, the adjective also lends its name to the balanced ternary system; comprising the digits \u22121, 0 and +1, used in comparison logic and ternary computers.\nComparison to other bases.\nRepresentations of integer numbers in ternary do not get uncomfortably lengthy as quickly as in binary. For example, decimal 365(10) or senary (6) corresponds to binary (2) (nine bits) and to ternary (3) (six digits). However, they are still far less compact than the corresponding representations in bases such as decimal \u2013 see below for a compact way to codify ternary using nonary (base\u00a09) and septemvigesimal (base\u00a027).\nAs for rational numbers, ternary offers a convenient way to represent as same as senary (as opposed to its cumbersome representation as an infinite string of recurring digits in decimal); but a major drawback is that, in turn, ternary does not offer a finite representation for (nor for , , etc.), because 2 is not a prime factor of the base; as with base two, one-tenth (decimal, senary ) is not representable exactly (that would need e.g. decimal); nor is one-sixth (senary , decimal ).\nSum of the digits in ternary as opposed to binary.\nThe value of a binary number with \"n\" bits that are all 1 is 2\"n\"\u00a0\u2212\u00a01.\nSimilarly, for a number \"N\"(\"b\", \"d\") with base \"b\" and \"d\" digits, all of which are the maximal digit value \"b\"\u00a0\u2212\u00a01, we can write:\n \"N\"(\"b\", \"d\") = (\"b\"\u00a0\u2212\u00a01)\"b\"\"d\"\u22121 + (\"b\"\u00a0\u2212\u00a01)\"b\"\"d\"\u22122 + \u2026 + (\"b\"\u00a0\u2212\u00a01)\"b\"1 + (\"b\"\u00a0\u2212\u00a01)\"b\"0,\n \"N\"(\"b\", \"d\") = (\"b\"\u00a0\u2212\u00a01)(\"b\"\"d\"\u22121 + \"b\"\"d\"\u22122 + \u2026 + \"b\"1 + 1),\n \"N\"(\"b\", \"d\") = (\"b\"\u00a0\u2212\u00a01)\"M\".\n \"bM\" = \"b\"\"d\" + \"b\"\"d\"\u22121 + \u2026 + \"b\"2 + \"b\"1 and\n \u2212\"M\" = \u2212\"b\"\"d\"\u22121\u00a0\u2212\u00a0\"b\"\"d\"\u22122\u00a0\u2212\u00a0...\u00a0\u2212\u00a0b1\u00a0\u2212\u00a01, so\n \"bM\"\u00a0\u2212\u00a0\"M\" = \"b\"\"d\"\u00a0\u2212\u00a01, or\n \"M\" = .\nThen\n \"N\"(\"b\", \"d\") = (\"b\"\u00a0\u2212\u00a01)\"M\",\n \"N\"(\"b\", \"d\") = ,\n \"N\"(\"b\", \"d\") = \"b\"\"d\"\u00a0\u2212\u00a01.\nFor a three-digit ternary number, \"N\"(3, 3) = 33\u00a0\u2212\u00a01 = 26 = 2 \u00d7 32 + 2 \u00d7 31 + 2 \u00d7 30 = 18 + 6 + 2.\nCompact ternary representation: base 9 and 27.\nNonary (base 9, each digit is two ternary digits) or septemvigesimal (base 27, each digit is three ternary digits) can be used for compact representation of ternary, similar to how octal and hexadecimal systems are used in place of binary.\nPractical usage.\nIn certain analog logic, the state of the circuit is often expressed ternary. This is most commonly seen in CMOS circuits, and also in transistor\u2013transistor logic with totem-pole output. The output is said to either be low (grounded), high, or open (high-\"Z\"). In this configuration the output of the circuit is actually not connected to any voltage reference at all. Where the signal is usually grounded to a certain reference, or at a certain voltage level, the state is said to be high impedance because it is open and serves its own reference. Thus, the actual voltage level is sometimes unpredictable.\nA rare \"ternary point\" in common use is for defensive statistics in American baseball (usually just for pitchers), to denote fractional parts of an inning. Since the team on offense is allowed three outs, each out is considered one third of a defensive inning and is denoted as .1. For example, if a player pitched all of the 4th, 5th and 6th innings, plus achieving 2 outs in the 7th inning, his innings pitched column for that game would be listed as 3.2, the equivalent of &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;3+2\u20443 (which is sometimes used as an alternative by some record keepers). In this usage, only the fractional part of the number is written in ternary form.\nTernary numbers can be used to convey self-similar structures like the Sierpinski triangle or the Cantor set conveniently. Additionally, it turns out that the ternary representation is useful for defining the Cantor set and related point sets, because of the way the Cantor set is constructed. The Cantor set consists of the points from 0 to 1 that have a ternary expression that does not contain any instance of the digit 1. Any terminating expansion in the ternary system is equivalent to the expression that is identical up to the term preceding the last non-zero term followed by the term one less than the last non-zero term of the first expression, followed by an infinite tail of twos. For example: 0.1020 is equivalent to 0.1012222... because the expansions are the same until the \"two\" of the first expression, the two was decremented in the second expansion, and trailing zeros were replaced with trailing twos in the second expression.\nTernary is the integer base with the lowest radix economy, followed closely by binary and quaternary. This is due to its proximity to the mathematical constant \"e\". It has been used for some computing systems because of this efficiency. It is also used to represent three-option \"trees\", such as phone menu systems, which allow a simple path to any branch.\nA form of redundant binary representation called a binary signed-digit number system, a form of signed-digit representation, is sometimes used in low-level software and hardware to accomplish fast addition of integers because it can eliminate carries.\nBinary-coded ternary.\nSimulation of ternary computers using binary computers, or interfacing between ternary and binary computers, can involve use of binary-coded ternary (BCT) numbers, with two or three bits used to encode each trit. BCT encoding is analogous to binary-coded decimal (BCD) encoding. If the trit values 0, 1 and 2 are encoded 00, 01 and 10, conversion in either direction between binary-coded ternary and binary can be done in logarithmic time. A library of C code supporting BCT arithmetic is available.\nTryte.\nSome ternary computers such as the Setun defined a tryte to be six trits or approximately 9.5 bits (holding more information than the \"de facto\" binary byte)."}
{"id": "62951", "revid": "1292918707", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62951", "title": "Pope Adeodatus I", "text": "Head of the Catholic Church from 615 to 618\nPope Adeodatus I (570 \u2013 8 November 618), also called Deodatus I or Deusdedit, was the bishop of Rome from 19 October 615 to his death on 8 November 618. He was the first priest to be elected pope since John II in 533. The first use of lead seals or \"bullae\" on papal documents is attributed to him. His feast day is 8 November.\nBiography.\nAdeodatus was born in Rome, the son of a subdeacon named Stephanus or Stephen. He served as a priest for 40 years before his election and was the first priest to be elected pope since John II in 533.\nPontificate.\nAlmost nothing is known about Adeodatus I's pontificate. It represents the second wave of opposition to Gregory the Great's papal reforms, the first being the pontificate of Sabinian. He reversed the practice of his predecessor, Boniface IV, of filling the papal administrative ranks with monks by recalling the clergy to such positions and by ordaining some 14 priests, the first ordinations in Rome since Gregory's pontificate. According to tradition, Adeodatus was the first pope to use lead seals (\"bullae\") on papal documents, which in time came to be called \"papal bulls\". One \"bulla\" dating from his reign is still preserved, the obverse of which represents the Good Shepherd in the midst of His sheep, with the letters Alpha and Omega underneath, while the reverse bears the inscription: Deusdedit Pap\u00e6.\nIn August 618, an earthquake struck Rome, followed by an outbreak of scabies. Adeodatus died 8 November 618, and was eventually succeeded by Boniface V. His feast day is 8 November. He is also a saint in the Eastern Orthodox Church as one of the pre-Schism \"Orthodox Popes of Rome\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "62952", "revid": "50001244", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62952", "title": "Qui-Gon Jinn", "text": "Fictional character in the Star Wars universe\nQui-Gon Jinn () is a fictional character in the \"Star Wars\" franchise. He was introduced as a Jedi Master in the prequel film ' (1999), and is portrayed by Liam Neeson. He appears in the series \"Tales of the Jedi\", and is featured as a Force spirit in the animated series ' (2008) and the live-action miniseries \"Obi-Wan Kenobi\" (2022). Qui-Gon also appears in novels, comics and video games.\nIn \"The Phantom Menace\", Qui-Gon and his apprentice Obi-Wan Kenobi are tasked with protecting Padm\u00e9 Amidala, the queen of Naboo. On the planet Tatooine, they encounter a young slave named Anakin Skywalker, whom Qui-Gon believes is the \"Chosen One\" destined to bring balance to the Force. When Qui-Gon is fatally wounded in a lightsaber duel against Darth Maul, he asks Obi-Wan to train Anakin. The 2005 film \"\" reveals that Qui-Gon learned how to become a Force spirit after death, an ability which he later taught to Obi-Wan and Yoda.\nCreation.\nGeorge Lucas created the \"Star Wars\" franchise, and wrote and directed \"The Phantom Menace\". He created the character Qui-Gon Jinn for the film. Although Qui-Gon is the master of Obi-Wan Kenobi and is older than him, Lucas had considered making Qui-Gon the younger Jedi. Lucas described the character as independent and \"always testing the rules\". He said Qui-Gon refuses to \"go along with the program\".\nLucas originally envisioned an American actor in the role of Qui-Gon, but ultimately cast the Northern Irish actor Liam Neeson. He described Neeson as a \"master actor, who the other actors will look up to, who has got the qualities of strength that the character demands\". Neeson described Qui-Gon as wise, confident, philosophical and very skilled in martial arts. He said the Jedi Master has \"a magical quality that enables him to see into the future. He's not really a rebel, but he has his own code.\"\nQui-Gon Jinn's name is derived from the Chinese word \"qigong\" (simplified Chinese: \u6c14\u529f; traditional Chinese: \u6c23\u529f), and the Arabic word \"jinn\" (\u062c\u0650\u0646\u0651). Qigong is a system of breathing and exercise designed to support physical and mental health, while a jinn is a type of spirit found in Arabian mythology. \"Qui-Gon Jinn\" can be translated as \"Guardian Spirit of the Living Force.\" \"Jinn\" also resembles the Chinese word for power, \"jin\" (\u52c1), and the martial arts concept \"fa jin\", which is the explosive release of internal strength or power.\nAppearances.\nPrequel trilogy.\nQui-Gon is introduced in the first film of the prequel trilogy, \"\" (1999). He is portrayed by Liam Neeson. Qui-Gon and his Jedi apprentice Obi-Wan Kenobi are sent to Naboo to resolve a conflict involving the Trade Federation, a business conglomerate that has blockaded the planet for political leverage. When the two Jedi arrive, the Federation attempts to assassinate them. Qui-Gon and Obi-Wan retreat to Naboo, rescue its besieged queen, Padm\u00e9 Amidala, then leave for Coruscant, the galactic capital. During the journey, they land on Tatooine to repair their ship. Qui-Gon encounters a nine-year-old slave boy named Anakin Skywalker, whose potential with the Force is the highest ever detected. The Jedi Master becomes intrigued when Anakin's mother tells him that the boy had no father. Believing that Anakin could be the \"Chosen One\" of Jedi prophecy destined to bring balance to the Force, Qui-Gon secures the boy's freedom and decides to bring him before the Jedi Council on Coruscant. Before leaving Tatooine, Qui-Gon duels with a mysterious warrior dressed in black.\nOn Coruscant, Qui-Gon asks the Council to allow Anakin to be trained as a Jedi. Master Yoda senses fear in the boy, and the Council denies the request. Undaunted, Qui-Gon vows that he will train Anakin himself. Padm\u00e9, Qui-Gon and Obi-Wan return to Naboo, where they once again encounter the dark warrior, who reveals himself to be the Sith Lord Darth Maul. During a ferocious lightsaber battle, Maul fatally wounds Qui-Gon. After defeating Maul, Obi-Wan promises to train Anakin for Qui-Gon before he dies. \nIn the second film, \"Attack of the Clones\" (2002), Neeson provides the voice of Qui-Gon. When Anakin is slaughtering the Tusken Raiders on Tatooine, the Jedi Master's voice can be heard. Near the end of the third film, \"Revenge of the Sith\" (2005), Yoda reveals to Obi-Wan that he has been communicating with the spirit of Qui-Gon.\n\"The Rise of Skywalker\".\nNeeson provides the voice of Qui-Gon in \"The Rise of Skywalker\" (2019). After Rey collapses during her confrontation with the somehow resurrected Darth Sidious, she hears the voices of various deceased Jedi, including Qui-Gon. The Jedi give her the strength to continue the battle.\nTelevision.\nQui-Gon is voiced by Neeson in the animated series \"\" (2008\u20132014; 2020). In season three, he informs Obi-Wan and Anakin about three beings who share his belief that Anakin is the Chosen One. These beings are known as the Father (the unifying Force manifestation), the Daughter (the light side incarnation) and the Son (the dark side embodiment). In the sixth season of the series, Qui-Gon's disembodied voice instructs Yoda to learn the secret of Force immortality.\nQui-Gon returns in the 2022 miniseries \"Tales of the Jedi\". An older version of the character is voiced by Liam Neeson, while a younger version is voiced by Neeson's son, Miche\u00e1l Richardson. In the second episode, the young Qui-Gon serves as Padawan to Count Dooku, and helps to investigate a mysterious kidnapping on an impoverished planet. When Qui-Gon stops Dooku from losing his temper and killing a corrupt senator, Dooku commends him for his wisdom. In the fourth episode of the series, Jedi Master Qui-Gon and Dooku discuss the Jedi Council's refusal to believe that Darth Maul is a Sith Lord. After Qui-Gon's death, a grieving Dooku remembers how, as a boy, Qui-Gon was fascinated with the tree in the Jedi Temple.\nThroughout the 2022 miniseries \"Obi-Wan Kenobi\", Kenobi tries unsuccessfully to reach out to Qui-Gon's Force spirit. In the final episode, Qui-Gon, played by Neeson, finally appears to Obi-Wan.\nNovels.\nThe 2019 novel \"Master and Apprentice\" features Qui-Gon and Obi-Wan.\n\"Star Wars Legends\".\nFollowing the acquisition of Lucasfilm by The Walt Disney Company in 2012, most of the licensed \"Star Wars\" novels and comics produced between 1977 and 2014 were rebranded as \"Star Wars Legends\" and declared non-canon to the franchise. The \"Legends\" works comprise a separate narrative universe.\nNovels.\nQui-Gon's life prior to \"The Phantom Menace\" is detailed in the \"\" series. In \"The Rising Force\", Yoda encourages the Jedi Knight to take a new Padawan learner. Qui-Gon's previous apprentice, Xanatos, had turned to the dark side of the Force. Qui-Gon observes a lightsaber tournament among a group of the Temple's older students, which includes the twelve-year-old Obi-Wan. He takes note of Obi-Wan's skills, but refuses to train him due to his uncontrolled anger. On a mission to Bandomeer, Qui-Gon again encounters Obi-Wan, who is being sent to the planet to begin life as an agricultural laborer. During the journey, Qui-Gon and Obi-Wan defend a group of Arcona from the criminal organization Offworld Corporation. When they arrive on Bandomeer, Qui-Gon receives a letter from Xanatos.\nIn \"The Dark Rival\", it is revealed that Xanatos is now the leader of Offworld. Qui-Gon meets his former apprentice to negotiate an agreement between Offworld and Bandomeer, but ends up dueling with Xanatos instead. Qui-Gon and Obi-Wan end Offworld's business on Bandomeer, but Xanatos escapes. During the encounter with Xanatos, Qui-Gon realizes Obi-Wan's potential and accepts him as his Padawan. In \"The Captive Temple\", Xanatos nearly assassinates Yoda, but Qui-Gon and Obi-Wan thwart his plans. When they chase Xanatos back to his homeworld in \"The Day of Reckoning\", the fallen Jedi refuses to surrender and commits suicide.\nIn \"Legacy of the Jedi\", an apprentice Qui-Gon accompanies his master Dooku on a diplomatic assignment. Their ship is infiltrated by space pirates led by the rogue Jedi Lorian Nod, a former friend of Dooku's. The two battle and Dooku is overcome by anger, but Qui-Gon prevents his master from violating the Jedi Code by committing cold-blooded murder. Years later, Qui-Gon and Obi-Wan encounter Nod again and imprison him for his crimes. In \"Secrets of the Jedi\", Qui-Gon and Obi-Wan embark on a mission with the Jedi Master Adi Gallia and her Padawan Siri Tachi. Qui-Gon and Adi become separated from Obi-Wan and Siri, which leads to the discovery of romantic feelings between the two apprentices. Sensing these feelings in Obi-Wan, Qui-Gon shares the story of his relationship with Tahl, a female Jedi whose murder nearly pushed Qui-Gon to the dark side.\n\"Cloak of Deception\" is set a year before \"The Phantom Menace\". Qui-Gon and Obi-Wan fight a terrorist organization called the Nebula Front, which is secretly following the orders of Darth Sidious. At the Trade Federation conference on Eriadu, the two Jedi successfully defend Chancellor Valorum but cannot prevent the Neimoidian takeover of the Federation.\nComics.\nIn the comic series \"\", Qui-Gon and other Jedi fight in the Stark Hyperspace War. Qui-Gon saves the life of Nute Gunray, the future Trade Federation viceroy.\nOther appearances.\nQui-Gon appears in the video games ', ', ', ', multiple \"Lego Star Wars\" games, and \"\" via downloadable content. A bird version of Qui-Gon, called \"Quail-Gon\", is playable in \"Angry Birds Star Wars II\".\nReception.\nIn his review of \"The Phantom Menace\", Colin Kennedy of \"Empire\" said that Neeson \"manfully carrie[s] the action on his shoulders\" throughout the film. He felt that Qui-Gon's final words to Obi-Wan\u2014\"Promise me you will train the boy\"\u2014provide the film with its only emotional weight. Owen Gleiberman of \"Entertainment Weekly\" wrote that Neeson \"holds \"The Phantom Menace\" together\". He said that Qui-Gon is \"commanding\", and gives the film \"its only hints of emotional dynamism\". For his portrayal of Qui-Gon, Neeson was nominated for the 2000 Saturn Award for Best Actor.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "62953", "revid": "9813438", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62953", "title": "Rebirth (breathwork)", "text": ""}
{"id": "62954", "revid": "1063872", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62954", "title": "Pope Agapitus I", "text": ""}
{"id": "62981", "revid": "176858", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62981", "title": "Pope Antheros", "text": ""}
{"id": "62982", "revid": "50994119", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62982", "title": "Gulf of Tonkin incident", "text": "1964 naval confrontation between North Vietnam and the United States\nThe Gulf of Tonkin incident () refers to a naval confrontation in the Gulf of Tonkin off the coast of North Vietnam, which led to the United States engaging more directly in the Vietnam War. On 2 August 1964 there was a clash between a destroyer of the United States Navy that was collecting signals intelligence close to North Vietnamese waters, and three North Vietnamese naval vessels. On the night of 4 August, two US destroyers reported they were attacked by North Vietnamese vessels and that they were returning fire. Later investigation revealed that the 4 August attack did not happen; no North Vietnamese vessels had been present. Shortly after the events, the National Security Agency, an agency of the US Defense Department, deliberately skewed intelligence to create the impression that an attack had been carried out.\nDuring the night of 30-31 July, South Vietnamese commandos raided North Vietnamese radar and military installations on the islands of Hon Me and Hon Ngu in the Gulf of Tonkin. The destroyer was patrolling the area, but unaware of these raids, withdrew after observing North Vietnamese torpedo boats sent to chase South Vietnamese boats, but it returned to the area on August 1. On 2 August, the Maddox commanded by Commander Herbert L. Ogier, while performing a signals intelligence patrol as part of DESOTO operations, near one of the islands that had been raided, was approached by three North Vietnamese Navy torpedo boats of the 135th Torpedo Squadron. \"Maddox\" fired warning shots and the North Vietnamese boats attacked with torpedoes and machine gun fire. In the ensuing engagement, one US aircraft (which had been launched from aircraft carrier ) was damaged, three North Vietnamese torpedo boats were damaged, and four North Vietnamese sailors were killed, with six more wounded. There were no US casualties. \"Maddox\" was \"unscathed except for a single bullet hole from a [North] Vietnamese machine gun round\".The \"Maddox\u2019s\" nickname was Sinbad. \nOn 3 August, destroyer joined \"Maddox\" and the two destroyers continued the DESOTO mission. On the evening of 4 August, the ships opened fire on radar returns that had been preceded by communications intercepts, which US forces claimed meant an attack was imminent. The commodore of the \"Maddox\" task force, Captain John Herrick, reported that the ships were being attacked by North Vietnamese boats when, in fact, there were no North Vietnamese boats in the area. While Herrick soon reported doubts regarding the task force's initial perceptions of the attack, the Johnson administration relied on the wrongly interpreted National Security Agency communications intercepts to conclude that the attack was real.\nWhile doubts regarding the perceived second attack have been expressed since 1964, it was not until years later that it was shown conclusively never to have happened. In the 2003 documentary \"The Fog of War\", the former United States secretary of defense, Robert S. McNamara, admitted that there was no attack on 4 August. In 1995, McNamara met with former North Vietnamese Army General V\u00f5 Nguy\u00ean Gi\u00e1p to ask what happened on 4 August 1964. \"Absolutely nothing\", Gi\u00e1p replied. Gi\u00e1p confirmed that the attack had been imaginary. In 2005, an internal National Security Agency historical study was declassified; it concluded that \"Maddox\" had engaged the North Vietnamese Navy on 2 August, but that the incident of 4 August was based on bad naval intelligence and misrepresentations of North Vietnamese communications. The official US government claim is that it was based mostly on erroneously interpreted communications intercepts.\nThe outcome of the incident was the passage by US Congress of the Gulf of Tonkin Resolution, which granted US president Lyndon B. Johnson the authority to assist any Southeast Asian country whose government was considered to be jeopardized by communist aggression. The resolution served as Johnson's legal justification for deploying US conventional forces to South Vietnam and the commencement of open warfare against North Vietnam in early 1965.\nBackground.\nThe Geneva Conference in 1954 was intended to settle outstanding issues following the end of hostilities between France and the Viet Minh at the end of the First Indochina War. Neither the United States nor the State of Vietnam signed anything at the 1954 Geneva Conference. The accords, which were signed by other participants including the Viet Minh, mandated a temporary ceasefire line, which separated southern and northern Vietnam to be governed by the State of Vietnam and the Viet Minh respectively. The accords called for a general election by July 1956 to create a unified Vietnamese state. The accords allowed free movement of the population between the north and south for three hundred days. They also forbade the political interference of other countries in the area, the creation of new governments without the stipulated elections, and foreign military presence. By 1961, South Vietnamese President Ngo Dinh Diem faced significant discontent among some quarters of the southern population, including some Buddhists who were opposed to the rule of Diem's Catholic supporters. Viet Minh political cadres, who were legally campaigning for the promised elections between 1955 and 1957, were suppressed by the government. In March 1956, the North Vietnamese leadership approved tentative measures to revive the southern insurgency in December 1956. A communist-led uprising began against Diem's government in April 1957. The North Vietnamese Communist Party approved a \"people's war\" on the South at a session in January 1959, and on 28 July, North Vietnamese forces invaded Laos to maintain and upgrade the Ho Chi Minh trail, in support of insurgents in the south. The rebellion, headed by the National Front for the Liberation of South Vietnam (NLF, or Viet Cong) under the direction of North Vietnam, had intensified by 1961. About 40,000 communist soldiers infiltrated the south from 1961 to 1963.\nThe Gulf of Tonkin Incident occurred during the first year of the Johnson administration. While U.S. President John F. Kennedy had originally supported the policy of sending military advisers to Diem, he had begun to alter his thinking by September 1963, because of what he perceived to be the ineptitude of the Saigon government and its inability and unwillingness to make needed reforms (which led to a U.S.-supported coup which resulted in the death of Diem). Shortly before Kennedy was assassinated in November 1963, he had begun a limited withdrawal of 1,000 U.S. forces before the end of 1963. Johnson's views were likewise complex, but he had supported military escalation as a means of challenging what was perceived to be the Soviet Union's expansionist policies. The Cold War policy of containment was to be applied to prevent the fall of Southeast Asia to communism under the precepts of the domino theory. After Kennedy's assassination, Johnson ordered in more U.S. forces to support the Saigon government, beginning a protracted United States presence in Southeast Asia.\nA highly classified program of covert actions against North Vietnam, known as Operation Plan 34-Alpha, in conjunction with the DESOTO operations, had begun under the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) in 1961. In 1964, the program was transferred to the Defense Department and conducted by the Military Assistance Command, Vietnam Studies and Observations Group (MACV-SOG). For the maritime portion of the covert operation, a set of fast patrol boats had been purchased quietly from Norway and sent to South Vietnam. In 1963, three young Norwegian skippers traveled on a mission in South Vietnam. They were recruited for the job by the Norwegian intelligence officer Alf Martens Meyer. Martens Meyer, who was head of department at the military intelligence staff, operated on behalf of U.S. intelligence. The three skippers did not know who Meyer really was when they agreed to a job that involved them in sabotage missions against North Vietnam.\nAlthough the boats were crewed by South Vietnamese naval personnel, approval for each mission conducted under the plan came directly from Admiral U.S. Grant Sharp Jr., CINCPAC in Honolulu, who received his orders from the White House. After the coastal attacks began, Hanoi, the capital of North Vietnam, lodged a complaint with the International Control Commission (ICC), which had been established in 1954 to oversee the terms of the Geneva Accords, but the U.S. denied any involvement. Four years later, Secretary McNamara admitted to Congress that the U.S. ships had in fact been cooperating in the South Vietnamese attacks against North Vietnam. \nIn 1962, the U.S. Navy began an electronic warfare support measures (intelligence gathering) program, conducted by destroyer patrols in the western Pacific, with the cover name DESOTO. The first missions in the Tonkin Gulf began in February 1964. While intelligence collected by DESOTO missions could be used by OPLAN-34A planners and commanders, they were separate programs not known to coordinate mission planning except to warn DESOTO patrols to stay clear of 34A operational areas.\nOn July 29, 1964, the night before it launched actions against North Vietnamese facilities on H\u00f2n M\u00ea and H\u00f2n Ng\u01b0 islands, the MACV-SOG had launched a covert long-term agent team into North Vietnam, which was promptly captured. On 1 and 2 August, flights of CIA-sponsored Laotian fighter-bombers (piloted by Thai mercenaries) attacked border outposts well within southwestern North Vietnam. According to Edwin Mo\u00efse, the Hanoi government (which, unlike the U.S. government, had to give permission at the highest levels for the conduct of such missions) probably assumed that they were all a coordinated effort to escalate military actions against North Vietnam.\nIncident.\nDaniel Ellsberg, who was on duty in the Pentagon the night of 4 August, receiving messages from , reported that she was on a DESOTO mission near Northern Vietnamese territorial waters. On 31 July 1964, \"Maddox\" had begun her mission in the Gulf of Tonkin. \"Maddox\" was under orders not to approach closer than eight miles (13\u00a0km) from North Vietnam's coast and four miles (6\u00a0km) from Hon Nieu island. When a MACV-SOG commando raid was being carried out against Hon Nieu, the ship was away from the attacked area.\nFirst attack.\nIn July 1964, \"the situation along North Vietnam's territorial waters had reached a near boil\", because of South Vietnamese commando raids and airborne operations that inserted intelligence teams into North Vietnam, as well as North Vietnam's military response to these operations. On the night of July 30, 1964, South Vietnamese commandos attacked a North Vietnamese radar station on H\u00f2n M\u00ea island. According to Hanyok, \"it would be attacks on these islands, especially H\u00f2n M\u00ea, by South Vietnamese commandos, along with the proximity of the \"Maddox\", that would set off the confrontation\", although the \"Maddox\" did not participate in the commando attacks. In this context, on July 31, \"Maddox\" began patrols of the North Vietnamese coast to collect intelligence, coming within a few miles of H\u00f2n M\u00ea island. A U.S. aircraft carrier, the USS \"Ticonderoga\", was also stationed nearby.\nBy 1 August, North Vietnamese patrol boats were tracking \"Maddox\", and several intercepted communications indicated that they were preparing to attack. \"Maddox\" retreated, but the next day, \"Maddox\", which had a top speed of 28 knots, resumed her routine patrol, and three North Vietnamese P-4 torpedo boats with a top speed of 50 knots began to follow \"Maddox\". The boats were from Squadron 135, commanded by Le Duy Khoai, with the boats commanded by brothers Van Bot, Van Tu, and Van Gian. Intercepted communications indicated that the vessels intended to attack \"Maddox\". As the ships approached from the southwest, \"Maddox\" changed course from northeasterly to southeasterly and increased speed to 25 knots.\nAs the torpedo boats neared, \"Maddox\" fired three warning shots. The North Vietnamese boats then attacked, and \"Maddox\" radioed she was under attack from the three boats, closing to within , while located away from the North Vietnamese coast. \"Maddox\" stated she had evaded a torpedo attack and opened fire with its five-inch (127\u00a0mm) guns, forcing the torpedo boats away. Two of the torpedo boats had come as close as and released one torpedo each, but neither one was effective, coming no closer than about after \"Maddox\" evaded them. Another P-4 received a direct hit from a five-inch shell from \"Maddox\"; its torpedo malfunctioned at launch. Four USN F-8 Crusader jets launched from \"Ticonderoga\" and 15 minutes after \"Maddox\" had fired her initial warning shots, attacked the retiring P-4s, claiming one was sunk and one heavily damaged. \"Maddox\" suffered only minor damage from a single 14.5\u00a0mm bullet from a P-4's KPV heavy machine gun into her superstructure. Retiring to South Vietnamese waters, \"Maddox\" was joined by the destroyer .\nThe original account from the \"Pentagon Papers\" has been revised in light of a 2001 internal NSA historical study, which states: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;At 1500G, Captain Herrick (commander of \"Maddox\") ordered Ogier's gun crews to open fire if the boats approached within ten thousand yards. At about 1505G, \"Maddox\" fired three rounds to warn off the communist [North Vietnamese] boats. This initial action was never reported by the Johnson administration, which insisted that the Vietnamese boats fired first.\n\"Maddox\", when confronted, was approaching H\u00f2n M\u00ea Island, three to four nautical miles (nmi) (6 to 7\u00a0km) inside the limit claimed by North Vietnam. This territorial limit was unrecognized by the United States. After the skirmish, Johnson ordered \"Maddox\" and \"Turner Joy\" to stage daylight runs into North Vietnamese waters, testing the limit and North Vietnamese resolve. These runs into North Vietnamese territorial waters coincided with South Vietnamese coastal raids and were interpreted as coordinated operations by the North, which officially acknowledged the engagements of August.\nOthers, such as Admiral Sharp, maintained that U.S. actions did not provoke the incident. He claimed that the North Vietnamese had tracked \"Maddox\" along the coast by radar and were thus aware that the destroyer had not actually attacked North Vietnam and that Hanoi (or the local commander) had ordered its craft to engage \"Maddox\" anyway. North Vietnamese general Ph\u00f9ng Th\u1ebf T\u00e0i later claimed that \"Maddox\" had been tracked since 31 July and that she had attacked fishing boats on August 2 forcing the North Vietnamese Navy to \"fight back\".\nSharp also noted that orders given to \"Maddox\" to stay off the North Vietnamese coast put the ship in international waters, as North Vietnam claimed only a limit as its territory (or off of its off-shore islands). In addition, many nations had previously carried out similar missions all over the world, and the destroyer had earlier conducted an intelligence-gathering mission in similar circumstances without incident.\nSharp's claims, however, included some factually incorrect statements. North Vietnam did not adhere to an 8-kilometer (5\u00a0mi) limit for its territorial waters; instead it adhered to a limit claimed by French Indochina in 1936. Moreover it officially claimed a 12\u00a0nmi limit, which is practically identical to the old 20\u00a0km French claim, after the incidents of August, in September 1964. The North Vietnamese stance is that they always considered a 12 nautical mile limit, consistent with the positions regarding the law of the sea of both the Soviet Union and China, their main allies.\nSecond alleged attack.\nOn 4 August, another DESOTO patrol off the North Vietnamese coast was launched by \"Maddox\" and \"Turner Joy\", to \"show the flag\" after the first incident. This time their orders indicated that the ships were to close to no less than from the coast of North Vietnam. During an evening of rough weather and heavy seas, the destroyers received radar, sonar, and radio signals that they believed signaled another attack by the North Vietnamese navy. For some two hours (from about 21:40 to about 23:35, local time) the ships fired on radar targets and maneuvered vigorously amid electronic and visual reports of enemies. Despite the Navy's claim that two attacking torpedo boats had been sunk, there was no wreckage, bodies of dead North Vietnamese sailors, or other physical evidence present at the scene of the alleged engagement.\nAt 01:27 local time (13:27 Washington time), Herrick sent a cable in which he acknowledged that the second attack may not have happened and that there may actually have been no Vietnamese craft in the area: \"Review of action makes many reported contacts and torpedoes fired appear doubtful. Freak weather effects on radar and overeager sonarmen may have accounted for many reports. No actual visual sightings by \"Maddox\". Suggest complete evaluation before any further action taken.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n...And ultimately it was concluded that almost certainly the [4 August] attack had occurred. But even at the time there was some recognition of a margin of error, so we thought it highly probable but not entirely certain. And because it was highly probable\u2014and because even if it hadn't occurred, there was strong feeling we should have responded to the first attack, which we were positive had occurred\u2014President Johnson decided to respond to the second [attack]. I think it is now clear [the second attack] did not occur...\n \u2013Defense Secretary Robert McNamara, 1996\nOne hour later, Herrick sent another cable, stating, \"Entire action leaves many doubts except for apparent ambush at beginning. Suggest thorough reconnaissance in daylight by aircraft. In response to requests for confirmation, at around 16:00 Washington time, Herrick cabled, \"Details of action present a confusing picture although certain that the original ambush was bona fide.\" It is likely that McNamara did not inform either the president or Admiral U. S. Grant Sharp Jr. about Herrick's misgivings or Herrick's recommendation for further investigation. At 18:00 Washington time (05:00 in the Gulf of Tonkin), Herrick cabled yet again, this time stating, \"the first boat to close the \"Maddox\" probably launched a torpedo at the \"Maddox\" which was heard but not seen. All subsequent \"Maddox\" torpedo reports are doubtful in that it is suspected that sonarman was hearing the ship's own propeller beat\" [\"sic\"].\nIn the face of growing uncertainties over the course of the day regarding whether the attack had occurred, the Johnson administration ended up basing its conclusion mostly on communications intercepts erroneously assessed to be North Vietnamese preparations to carry out an attack and a North Vietnamese after action report. Later analysis showed those communications to have concerned the recovery of torpedo boats damaged in the 2 August attack and North Vietnamese observations of (but not participation in) the 4 August U.S. actions.\nUnited States' response.\nJohnson's speech to the American people.\nShortly before midnight, on 4 August, Johnson interrupted national television to make an announcement in which he described an attack by North Vietnamese vessels on two U.S. Navy warships, \"Maddox\" and \"Turner Joy\", and requested authority to undertake a military response. Johnson's speech repeated the theme that \"dramatized Hanoi/H\u1ed3 Ch\u00ed Minh as the aggressor and which put the United States into a more acceptable defensive posture. Johnson also referred to the attacks as having taken place \"on the high seas\", suggesting that they had occurred in international waters.\nHe emphasized commitment to both the American people, and the South Vietnamese government. He also reminded Americans that there was no desire for war. \"A close scrutiny of Johnson's public statements ... reveals no mention of preparations for overt warfare and no indication of the nature and extent of covert land and air measures that already were operational.\" Johnson's statements were short to \"minimize the U.S. role in the conflict; a clear inconsistency existed between Johnson's actions and his public discourse.\nWithin thirty minutes of the incident, Johnson had decided on retaliatory attacks (dubbed \"Operation Pierce Arrow\"). That same day he used the \"hot line\" to Moscow, and assured the Soviets he had no intent in opening a broader war in Vietnam. Early on 5 August, Johnson publicly ordered retaliatory measures stating, \"The determination of all Americans to carry out our full commitment to the people and to the government of South Vietnam will be redoubled by this outrage.\" One hour and forty minutes after his speech, aircraft launched from U.S. carriers reached North Vietnamese targets. On 5 August, at 10:40, these planes bombed four torpedo boat bases and an oil-storage facility in Vinh.\nReaction from Congress.\nWhile Johnson's final resolution was being drafted, U.S. Senator Wayne Morse attempted to hold a fundraiser to raise awareness about possible faulty records of the incident involving \"Maddox\". Morse supposedly received a call from an informant who has remained anonymous urging Morse to investigate official logbooks of \"Maddox\". These logs were not available before Johnson's resolution was presented to Congress. After urging Congress that they should be wary of Johnson's coming attempt to convince Congress of his resolution, Morse failed to gain enough cooperation and support from his colleagues to mount any sort of movement to stop it. Immediately after the resolution was read and presented to Congress, Morse began to fight it. He contended in speeches to Congress that the actions taken by the United States were actions outside the constitution and were \"acts of war rather than acts of defense.\" Morse's efforts were not immediately met with support, largely because he revealed no sources and was working with very limited information. It was not until after the United States became more involved in the war that his claim began to gain support throughout the United States government.\nDistortion of the event.\nThe U.S. government was still seeking evidence on the night of 4 August when Johnson gave his address to the American public on the incident; messages recorded that day indicate that neither Johnson nor McNamara was certain of an attack. Various news sources, including \"Time\", \"Life\" and \"Newsweek\", published articles throughout August on the Tonkin Gulf incident. \"Time\" reported: \"Through the darkness, from the West and south ... intruders boldly sped ... at least six of them ... they opened fire on the destroyers with automatic weapons, this time from as close as 2,000 yards. \"Time\" stated that there was \"no doubt in Sharp's mind that the U.S. would now have to answer this attack\", and that there was no debate or confusion within the administration regarding the incident.\"\nThe use of the set of incidents as a pretext for escalation of U.S. involvement followed the issuance of public threats against North Vietnam, as well as calls from American politicians in favor of escalating the war. On 4 May 1964, Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs William Bundy had called for the U.S. to \"drive the communists out of South Vietnam\", even if that meant attacking both North Vietnam and communist China. Even so, the Johnson administration in the second half of 1964 focused on convincing the American public that there was no chance of war between the United States and North Vietnam.\nNorth Vietnam's General Gi\u00e1p suggested that the DESOTO patrol had been sent into the gulf to provoke North Vietnam into giving the U.S. an excuse for escalation of the war. Various government officials and men aboard \"Maddox\" have suggested similar theories. U.S. Undersecretary of State George Ball told a British journalist after the war that \"at that time ... many people ... were looking for any excuse to initiate bombing\". George Ball stated that the mission of the destroyer warship involved in the Gulf of Tonkin incident \"was primarily for provocation.\"\nAccording to Ray McGovern, CIA analyst from 1963 to 1990, the CIA, \"not to mention President Lyndon Johnson, Defense Secretary Robert McNamara and National Security Adviser McGeorge Bundy all knew full well that the evidence of any armed attack [...] was highly dubious... During the summer of 1964, President Johnson and the Joint Chiefs of Staff were eager to widen the war in Vietnam. They stepped up sabotage and hit-and-run attacks on the coast of North Vietnam.\" \"Maddox\", carrying electronic spying gear, was to collect signals intelligence from the North Vietnamese coast, and the coastal attacks were seen as a helpful way to get the North Vietnamese to turn on their coastal radars. For this purpose, it was authorized to approach the coast as close as 13 kilometers (8\u00a0mi) and the offshore islands as close as four; the latter had already been subjected to shelling from the sea.\nIn his book, \"Body of Secrets\", James Bamford, who spent three years in the United States Navy as an intelligence analyst, writes that the primary purpose of the \"Maddox\" \"was to act as a seagoing provocateur\u2014to poke its sharp gray bow and the American flag as close to the belly of North Vietnam as possible, in effect shoving its five-inch cannons up the nose of the communist navy. ... The \"Maddox'\" mission was made even more provocative by being timed to coincide with commando raids, creating the impression that the Maddox was directing those missions ...\" Thus, the North Vietnamese had every reason to believe that \"Maddox\" was involved in these actions.\nAssistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs John McNaughton suggested in September 1964 that the U.S. prepared to take actions to provoke a North Vietnamese military reaction, including plans to use DESOTO patrols. William Bundy's paper dated 8 September 1964, suggested more DESOTO patrols as well.\nConsequences.\nBy early afternoon of 4 August, Washington time, Herrick had reported to the Commander in Chief Pacific in Honolulu that \"freak weather effects\" on the ship's radar had made such an attack questionable. In fact, Herrick stated in a message sent at 1:27\u00a0pm Washington time that no North Vietnamese patrol boats had actually been sighted. Herrick proposed a \"complete evaluation before any further action taken.\nMcNamara later testified that he had read the message after his return to the Pentagon that afternoon. But he did not immediately call Johnson to tell him that the whole premise of his decision at lunch to approve McNamara's recommendation for retaliatory air strikes against North Vietnam was highly questionable. Johnson had fended off proposals from McNamara and other advisers for a policy of bombing North Vietnam on four occasions since becoming president.\nAlthough \"Maddox\" had been involved in providing intelligence support for South Vietnamese attacks at H\u00f2n M\u00ea and H\u00f2n Ng\u01b0, Johnson denied, in his testimony before Congress, that the U.S. Navy had supported South Vietnamese military operations in the Gulf. He thus characterized the attack as \"unprovoked\" since the ship had been in international waters. As a result of his testimony, on 7 August, Congress passed a joint resolution (H.J. RES 1145), titled the Southeast Asia Resolution, which granted Johnson the authority to conduct military operations in Southeast Asia without the benefit of a declaration of war. The resolution gave Johnson approval \"to take all necessary steps, including the use of armed force, to assist any member or protocol state of the Southeast Asia Collective Defense Treaty requesting assistance in defense of its freedom.\"\nThe Gulf of Tonkin Incident also had impacts in China, where it increased perceptions among Chinese Communist Party leadership that the United States would eventually invade China. This triggered greater support among leadership for Mao Zedong's Third Front Construction campaign to develop heavy industry and defense industry in China's interior where it would be more protected in the event of foreign invasion.\nLater statements about the incident.\nJohnson commented privately: \"For all I know, our navy was shooting at whales out there.\"\nIn 1967, former naval officer John White wrote a letter to the editor of the \"New Haven (CT) Register\". He asserts \"I maintain that President Johnson, Secretary McNamara and the Joint Chiefs of Staff gave false information to Congress in their report about US destroyers being attacked in the Gulf of Tonkin.\" White continued his whistleblowing activities in the 1968 documentary \"In the Year of the Pig\".\nIn 1981, Captain Herrick and journalist Robert Scheer re-examined Herrick's ship's log and determined that the first torpedo report from August 4, which Herrick had maintained had occurred\u2014the \"apparent ambush\"\u2014was in fact unfounded. Although information obtained well after the fact supported Captain Herrick's statements about the inaccuracy of the later torpedo reports as well as the 1981 Herrick and Scheer conclusion about the inaccuracy of the first, indicating that there was no North Vietnamese attack that night, at the time U.S. authorities and all of the \"Maddox\"'s crew stated that they were convinced that an attack had taken place. As a result, planes from the aircraft carriers \"Ticonderoga\" and were sent to hit North Vietnamese torpedo boat bases and fuel facilities during Operation Pierce Arrow.\nSquadron Commander James Stockdale was one of the U.S. pilots flying overhead during the second alleged attack. Stockdale writes in his 1984 book \"Love and War\": \"[I] had the best seat in the house to watch that event, and our destroyers were just shooting at phantom targets\u2014there were no PT boats there ... There was nothing there but black water and American fire power.\" Stockdale at one point recounts seeing \"Turner Joy\" pointing her guns at \"Maddox\". Stockdale said his superiors ordered him to keep quiet about this. After he was captured, this knowledge became a heavy burden. He later said he was concerned that his captors would eventually force him to reveal what he knew about the second incident.\nIn 1995, retired Vietnamese defense minister, V\u00f5 Nguy\u00ean Gi\u00e1p, meeting with former Secretary McNamara, denied that Vietnamese gunboats had attacked American destroyers on 4 August, while admitting to the attack on 2 August. A taped conversation of a meeting several weeks after passage of the Gulf of Tonkin Resolution was released in 2001, revealing that McNamara expressed doubts to Johnson that the attack had even occurred.\nIn the fall of 1999, retired Senior CIA Engineering Executive S. Eugene Poteat wrote that he was asked in early August 1964 to determine if the radar operator's report showed a real torpedo boat attack or an imagined one. He asked for further details on time, weather and surface conditions. No further details were forthcoming. In the end he concluded that there were no torpedo boats on the night in question, and that the White House was interested only in confirmation of an attack, not that there was no such attack.\nIn 2014, as the incident's 50th anniversary approached, John White wrote \"The Gulf of Tonkin Events\u2014Fifty Years Later: A Footnote to the History of the Vietnam War\". In the foreword, he notes \"Among the many books written on the Vietnamese war, half a dozen note a 1967 letter to the editor of a Connecticut newspaper which was instrumental in pressuring the Johnson administration to tell the truth about how the war started. The letter was mine.\" The story discusses Lt. White reading Admiral Stockdale's \"In Love and War\" in the mid 1980s, then contacting Stockdale who connected White with Joseph Schaperjahn, chief sonarman on \"Turner Joy\". Schaperjahn confirmed White's assertions that \"Maddox\"'s sonar reports were faulty and the Johnson administration knew it prior to going to Congress to request support for the Gulf of Tonkin Resolution. White's book explains the difference between lies of commission and lies of omission. Johnson was guilty of willful lies of omission. White was featured in the August 2014 issue of \"Connecticut Magazine\".\nNSA report.\nIn October 2005, \"The New York Times\" reported that Robert J. Hanyok, a historian for the NSA, concluded that the NSA distorted intelligence reports passed to policy makers regarding the 4 August incident. The NSA historian said agency staff deliberately skewed the evidence to make it appear that an attack had occurred. Hanyok's conclusions were initially published in the Winter 2000/Spring 2001 Edition of \"Cryptologic Quarterly\" about five years before the \"Times\" article. According to intelligence officials, the view of government historians that Hanyok's report should become public was rebuffed by policy makers concerned that comparisons might be made to intelligence used to justify the Iraq War (Operation Iraqi Freedom) which commenced in 2003. But within weeks, NSA did release a moderately sanitized version of Hanyok's study.\nReviewing the NSA's archives, Hanyok concluded that the 4 August incident began at Phu Bai, where intelligence analysts mistakenly believed the destroyers would soon be attacked. This would have been communicated back to the NSA along with evidence supporting such a conclusion, but in fact the evidence did not do that. Hanyok attributed this to the deference that the NSA would have likely given to the analysts who were closer to the event. As the evening progressed, further signals intelligence (SIGINT) did not support any such ambush, but the NSA personnel were apparently so convinced of an attack that they ignored the 90% of SIGINT that did not support that conclusion, and that was also excluded from any reports they produced for the consumption by the president.\nOn 30 November 2005, the NSA released a first installment of previously classified information regarding the Gulf of Tonkin incident, including a moderately sanitized version of Hanyok's article. The Hanyok article states that intelligence information was presented to the Johnson administration \"in such a manner as to preclude responsible decision makers in the Johnson administration from having the complete and objective narrative of events.\" Instead, \"only information that supported the claim that the communists had attacked the two destroyers was given to Johnson administration officials.\"\nWith regard to why this happened, Hanyok writes:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;As much as anything else, it was an awareness that Johnson would brook no uncertainty that could undermine his position. Faced with this attitude, Ray Cline was quoted as saying \"...\u00a0we knew it was bum dope that we were getting from Seventh Fleet, but we were told only to give facts with no elaboration on the nature of the evidence. Everyone knew how volatile LBJ was. He did not like to deal with uncertainties.\"\nHanyok included his study of Tonkin Gulf as one chapter in an overall history of NSA involvement and American SIGINT, in the Indochina Wars. A moderately sanitized version of the overall history was released in January 2008 by the National Security Agency and published by the Federation of American Scientists.\nReferences.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "62983", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62983", "title": "Medicago", "text": "Genus of flowering plants in the bean family Fabaceae\nMedicago is a genus of flowering plants, commonly known as medick or burclover, in the legume family (Fabaceae). It contains at least 87 species and is distributed mainly around the Mediterranean Basin, and extending across temperate Eurasia and sub-Saharan Africa. The best-known member of the genus is alfalfa (\"M. sativa\"), an important forage crop, and the genus name is based on the Latin name for that plant, , from Median (grass). Most members of the genus are low, creeping herbs, resembling clover, but with burs (hence the common name). However, alfalfa grows to a height of 1 meter, and tree medick (\"M. arborea\") is a shrub. Members of the genus are known to produce bioactive compounds such as medicarpin (a flavonoid) and medicagenic acid (a triterpenoid saponin). Chromosome numbers in \"Medicago\" range from 2\"n\" = 14 to 48.\nThe species \"Medicago truncatula\" is a model legume due to its relatively small stature, small genome (450\u2013500 Mbp), short generation time (about 3 months), and ability to reproduce both by outcrossing and selfing.\nComprehensive descriptions of the genus are Lesin\u0161 and Lesin\u0161 1979 and Small and Jomphe 1989. Major collections are SARDI (Australia), USDA-GRIN (United States), ICARDA (Syria), and INRA (France).\nEvolution.\n\"Medicago\" diverged from \"Glycine\" (soybean) about 53\u201355 million years ago (in the early Eocene), from \"Lotus\" (deervetch) 49\u201351 million years ago (also in the Eocene), and from \"Trigonella\" 10\u201322 million years ago (in the Miocene).\nEcological interactions with other organisms.\nSymbiosis with nitrogen-fixing rhizobia.\nB\u00e9na \"et al.\" (2005) constructed a molecular phylogeny of 23 \"Sinorhizobium\" strains and tested the symbiotic ability of six strains with 35 \"Medicago\" species. Comparison of these phylogenies indicates many transitions in the compatibility of the association over evolutionary time. Furthermore, they propose that the geographical distribution of strains limits the distribution of particular \"Medicago\" species.\nAgricultural uses.\nAgronomic research has been conducted on species of the Medicago genus. Other than alfalfa, several of the prostrate members of the family (such as \"Medicago lupulina\" and \"Medicago truncatula\") have been used as forage crops. Select species in the Medicago genus naturally develop spiney pods during the reproductive phase of growth (such as \"Medicago intertexta\" and \"Medicago polymorpha\"). Despite having high levels of agronomic performance, these are typically viewed as undesirable in sheep based farming systems due to their ability to become lodged in wool, reducing fleece value. Breeding efforts in the 1990's have yielded spineless varieties of \"burr medic\", providing valuable production amongst farming systems in low rainfall (&lt;300mm annual), free draining, alkaline soils.\nInsect herbivores.\n\"Medicago\" species are used as food plants by the larvae of some Lepidoptera species including the common swift, flame, latticed heath, lime-speck pug, nutmeg, setaceous Hebrew character, and turnip moths and case-bearers of the genus \"Coleophora\", including \"C. frischella\" (recorded on \"M. sativa\") and \"C. fuscociliella\" (feeds exclusively on \"Medicago\" spp.).\nSpecies.\nThis list is compiled from:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSpecies names with uncertain taxonomic status.\nThe status of the following species is unresolved:\nRecent molecular phylogenic analyses of \"Medicago\" indicate that the sections and subsections defined by Small &amp; Jomphe, as outlined above, are generally polyphyletic. However, with minor revisions sections and subsections could be rendered monophyletic.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "62984", "revid": "39088972", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62984", "title": "Nun", "text": "Member of a religious community of women\nA nun is a woman who vows to dedicate her life to religious service and contemplation, typically living under vows of poverty, chastity, and obedience in the enclosure of a monastery or convent. The term is often used interchangeably with religious sisters who do take simple vows but live an active vocation of prayer and charitable work in the wider society.\nIn Christianity, nuns are found in the Catholic, Oriental Orthodox, Eastern Orthodox, Lutheran, and Anglican and some Presbyterian traditions, as well as other Christian denominations. In the Buddhist tradition, female monastics are known as Bhikkhuni, and take several additional vows compared to male monastics (bhikkhus). Nuns are most common in Mahayana Buddhism, but have more recently become more prevalent in other traditions.\nChristianity.\nCatholicism.\nIn the Catholic tradition, there are many religious institutes of nuns and sisters (the female equivalent of male monks or friars), each with its own charism or special character. Traditionally, nuns are members of enclosed religious orders and take solemn religious vows, while sisters do not live in the papal enclosure and formerly took vows called \"simple vows\".\nAs monastics, nuns living within an enclosure historically commit to recitation of the full Divine Office throughout the day in church, usually in a solemn manner. They were formerly distinguished within the monastic community as \"choir nuns\", as opposed to lay sisters who performed upkeep of the monastery or errands outside the cloister. This last task is still often entrusted to women, called \"externs\", who live in the monastery, but outside the enclosure. They were usually either oblates or members of the associated Third Order, often wearing a different habit or the standard woman's attire of the period.\nMembership and vows.\nIn general, when a woman enters a religious order or monastery she first undergoes a period of testing life for six months to two years called a postulancy. If she, and the order, determine that she may have a vocation to the life, she receives the habit of the order (usually with some modification, normally a white veil instead of black, to distinguish her from professed members) and undertakes the novitiate, a period (that lasts one to two years) of living the life of the religious institute without yet taking vows. Upon completion of this period she may take her initial, temporary vows. Temporary vows last one to three years, typically, and will be professed for not less than three years and not more than six. Finally, she will petition to make her \"perpetual profession\", taking permanent, solemn vows.\nIn the branches of the Benedictine tradition, (Benedictines, Cistercians, Camaldolese, and Trappists, among others) nuns take vows of stability (that is, to remain a member of a single monastic community), obedience (to an abbess or prioress), and conversion of life (which includes poverty and celibacy). In other traditions, such as the Poor Clares (the Franciscan Order) and the Dominican nuns, they take the threefold vows of poverty, chastity and obedience. These are known as the 'evangelical counsels' as opposed to 'monastic vows' proper. Most orders of nuns not listed here follow one of these two patterns, with some Orders taking an additional vow related to the specific work or character of their Order (for example, to undertake a certain style of devotion, praying for a specific intention or purpose).\nCloistered nuns (Carmelites, for example) observe \"papal enclosure\" rules, and their nunneries typically have walls separating the nuns from the outside world. The nuns rarely leave (except for medical necessity or occasionally for purposes related to their contemplative life) though they may receive visitors in specially built parlors, often with either a grille or half-wall separating the nuns from visitors. They are usually self-sufficient, earning money by selling jams, candies or baked goods by mail order, or by making liturgical items (such as vestments, candles, or hosts to be consecrated at Mass for Holy Communion).\nThey often undertake contemplative ministries \u2013 that is, a community of nuns is often associated with prayer for some particular good or supporting the missions of another order by prayer (for instance, the Dominican nuns of Corpus Christi Monastery in the Bronx, New York, pray in support of the priests of the Archdiocese of New York). Yet religious sisters can also perform this form of ministry, e.g., the Maryknoll Missionary Sisters have small houses of contemplative sisters, some in mission locations, who pray for the work of the priests, brothers, and other sisters of their congregation, and since Vatican II have added retreat work and spiritual guidance to their apostolate; the Sister Disciples of the Divine Master are also cloistered sisters who receive visitors and pray in support of their sister congregation, the Daughters of St. Paul in their media ministry.\nLeadership.\nA canoness is a nun who corresponds to the male equivalent of canon, usually following the Rule of St. Augustine. The origin and rules of monastic life are common to both. As with the canons, differences in the observance of rule gave rise to two types: the canoness regular, taking the traditional religious vows, and the secular canoness, who did not take vows and thus remained free to own property and leave to marry, should they choose. This was primarily a way of leading a pious life for the women of aristocratic families and generally disappeared in the modern age, except for the modern Lutheran convents of Germany.\nA nun who is elected to head her religious house is termed an abbess if the house is an abbey, a prioress if it is a monastery, or more generically may be referred to as \"Mother Superior\" and styled \"Reverend Mother\". The distinction between abbey and monastery has to do with the terms used by a particular order or by the level of independence of the religious house. Technically, a convent is any home of a community of sisters \u2013 or, indeed, of priests and brothers, though this term is rarely used in the United States. The term \"monastery\" is often used by The Benedictine family to speak of the buildings and \"convent\" when referring to the community. Neither is gender specific. 'Convent' is often used of the houses of certain other institutes.\nThe traditional dress for women in religious communities consists of a tunic, which is tied around the waist with a cloth or leather belt. Over the tunic some nuns wear a scapular which is a garment of long wide piece of woolen cloth worn over the shoulders with an opening for the head. Some wear a white wimple and a veil, the most significant and ancient aspect of the habit. Some orders \u2013 such as the Dominicans \u2013 wear a large rosary on their belt. Benedictine abbesses wear a cross or crucifix on a chain around their neck.\nAfter the Second Vatican Council, many religious institutes chose in their own regulations to no longer wear the traditional habit and did away with choosing a religious name. Catholic Church canon law states: \"Religious are to wear the habit of the institute, made according to the norm of proper law, as a sign of their consecration and as a witness of poverty.\"\nDistinction between a nun and a religious sister.\nAlthough usage has varied throughout church history, typically \"nun\" (Latin: \"monialis\") is used for women who have taken \"solemn\" vows, and \"sister\" (Latin: \"soror\") is used for women who have taken \"simple\" vows (that is, vows other than solemn vows).\nDuring the first millennium, nearly all religious communities of men and women were dedicated to prayer and contemplation. These monasteries were built in remote locations or were separated from the world by means of a precinct wall. The mendicant orders, founded in the 13th century, combined a life of prayer and dedication to God with active works of preaching, hearing confessions, and service to the poor, and members of these orders are known as friars rather than monks. At that time, and into the 17th century, Church custom did not allow women to leave the cloister if they had taken religious vows. Female members of the mendicant orders (Dominican, Augustinian and Carmelite nuns and Poor Clares) continued to observe the same enclosed life as members of the monastic orders.\nOriginally, the vows taken by profession in any religious institute approved by the Holy See were classified as solemn. This was declared by Pope Boniface VIII (1235\u20131303). The situation changed in the 16th century. In 1521, two years after the Fourth Lateran Council had forbidden the establishment of new religious institutes, Pope Leo X established a religious Rule with simple vows for those tertiaries attached to existing communities who undertook to live a formal religious life. In 1566 and 1568, Pope Pius V rejected this class of congregation, but they continued to exist and even increased in number. After at first being merely tolerated, they afterwards obtained approval. Finally in the 20th century, Pope Leo XIII recognized as religious all men and women who took simple vows. Their lives were oriented not to the ancient monastic way of life, but more to social service and to evangelization, both in Europe and in mission areas. Their number had increased dramatically in the upheavals brought by the French Revolution and subsequent Napoleonic invasions of other Catholic countries, depriving thousands of religious of the income that their communities held because of inheritances and forcing them to find a new way of living the religious life. But members of these new associations were not recognized as \"religious\" until Pope Leo XIII's Constitution \"Conditae a Christo\" of 8 December 1900.\nThe 1917 Code of Canon Law reserved the term \"nun\" (Latin: \"monialis\") for religious women who took solemn vows or who, while being allowed in some places to take simple vows, belonged to institutes whose vows were normally solemn. It used the word \"sister\" (Latin: \"soror\") exclusively for members of institutes for women that it classified as \"congregations\"; and for \"nuns\" and \"sisters\" jointly it used the Latin word \"religiosae\" (women religious). The same religious order could include both \"nuns\" and \"sisters\", if some members took solemn vows and others simple vows.\nThe new legal code of the Catholic Church which was adopted in 1983, however, remained silent on this matter. Whereas previously the code distinguished between orders and congregations, the code now refers simply to religious institutes.\nSince the code of 1983, the Vatican has addressed the renewal of the contemplative life of nuns. It produced the letter \"Verbi Sponsa\" in 1999, the apostolic constitution in 2016, and the instruction \"Cor Orans\" in 2018 \"which replaced the 1999 document \"Verbi Sponsa\" and attempted to bring forward the ideas regarding contemplative life born during the Second Vatican Council\".\nUnited States.\nNuns and sisters played a major role in American religion, education, nursing and social work since the early 19th century. In Catholic Europe, convents were heavily endowed over the centuries, and were sponsored by the aristocracy. There were very few rich American Catholics, and no aristocrats. Religious orders were founded by entrepreneurial women who saw a need and an opportunity, and were staffed by devout women from poor families. The numbers grew rapidly, from 900 sisters in 15 communities in 1840, 50,000 in 170 orders in 1900, and 135,000 in 300 different orders by 1930. Starting in 1820, the sisters always outnumbered the priests and brothers. Their numbers peaked in 1965 at 180,000 then plunged to 56,000 in 2010. Many women left their orders, and few new members were added. Since the Second Vatican Council the sisters have directed their ministries more to the poor, working more directly among them and with them.\nCanada.\nNuns have played an important role in Canada, especially in heavily Catholic Quebec. Outside the home, Canadian women had few domains which they controlled. An important exception came with Catholic nuns, especially in Qu\u00e9bec. Stimulated by the influence in France, the popular religiosity of the Counter Reformation, new orders for women began appearing in the seventeenth century. In the next three centuries women opened dozens of independent religious orders, funded in part by dowries provided by the parents of young nuns. The orders specialized in charitable works, including hospitals, orphanages, homes for unwed mothers, and schools.\nEarly modern Spain.\nPrior to women becoming nuns during early modern Spain, aspired nuns underwent a process. The process was ensured by the Council of Trent, which King Philip II (1556\u20131598) adopted within Spain. King Phillip II acquired the aid of the Hieronymite order to ensure that monasteries abided by the decrees of the Council of Trent. This changed the way in which nuns would live. One edict of the Council of Trent was that female monasteries be enclosed in order to limit nuns' relationship with the secular world. Enclosure of monasteries during this time was associated with chastity. Another decree issued by the Council of Trent was that religious devotion be \"true and voluntary\". A male clergy member would ask the aspiring nuns if whether or not their vocation was \"true and voluntary\" in order to ensure no enforced conversion.\nTo be considered as a nun, one must have the economic means to afford the convent dowry. During this time convent dowries were affordable, compared to secular marriages between a man and a woman. Typically during early modern Spain many nuns were from elite families who had the means to afford the convent dowry and \"maintenance allowances\", which were annual fees. Monasteries were economically supported through convent dowries. Convent dowries could be waived if the aspiring nun had an artistic ability benefiting the monastery.\nOnce an aspiring nun has entered the convent and has the economic means to afford the dowry, she undergoes the process of apprenticeship known as the novitiate period. The novitiate period typically lasts 1\u20132 years, and during this time the aspiring nun lives the life of a nun without taking the official vows. As she lives in the convent she is closely monitored by the other women in the community to determine if her vocation is genuine. This would be officially determined by a vote from the choir nuns. If the aspiring nun passes the scrutiny of the women of the religious community, she then can make her solemn vows. Prior to making the vows, the family of the nun is expected to pay the convent dowry. Nuns were also expected to renounce their inheritance and property rights.\nReligious class distinctions:\nEastern Orthodox.\nIn the Eastern Orthodox Church there is no distinction between a monastery for women and one for men. In Greek, Russian, and other languages of primarily Christian Orthodox nations, both domiciles are called \"monasteries\" and the ascetics who live therein are \"monastics\". In English, however, it is acceptable to use the terms \"nun\" and \"convent\" for clarity and convenience. The term for an abbess is the feminine form of abbot (\"hegumen\") \u2013 Greek: \u1f21\u03b3\u03bf\u03c5\u03bc\u03ad\u03bd\u03b7 (\"hegumeni\"); (\"igumanija\"); Russian: \u0438\u0433\u0443\u043c\u0435\u043d\u0438\u044f (\"igumenia\"). Orthodox monastics do not have distinct \"orders\" as in Western Christianity. Orthodox monks and nuns lead identical spiritual lives. There may be slight differences in the way a monastery functions internally but these are simply differences in style (Gr. \"typica\") dependent on the abbess or abbot. The abbess is the spiritual leader of the convent and her authority is absolute (no priest, bishop, or even patriarch can override an abbess within the walls of her monastery). Abbots and Abbesses rank in authority equal to bishops in many ways and were included in ecumenical councils. Orthodox monasteries are usually associated with a local synod of bishops by jurisdiction, but are otherwise self-governing. Abbesses hear confessions (but do not absolve) and dispense blessings on their charges, though they still require the services of a presbyter (i.e., a priest) to celebrate the Divine Liturgy and perform other priestly functions, such as the absolution of a penitent.\nIn general, Orthodox monastics have little or no contact with the outside world, especially family. The pious family whose child decides to enter the monastic profession understands that their child will become \"dead to the world\" and therefore be unavailable for social visits.\nThere are a number of different levels that the nun passes through in her profession:\nProtestantism.\nAfter the Protestant Reformation, some monasteries in Lutheran lands (such as Amelungsborn Abbey near Negenborn and Loccum Abbey in Rehburg-Loccum) and convents (such as Ebstorf Abbey near the town of Uelzen and Bursfelde Abbey in Bursfelde) adopted the Lutheran Christian faith. Other convents, especially those in Reformed areas, closed after the Reformation, with some sisters deciding to marry.\nA modern resurgence of the early Christian Deaconess office for women began in Germany in the 1840s and spread through Scandinavia, Britain and the United States, with some elements of the religious life, such as simple vows, and a daily obligation of prayer. Lutherans were especially active, and within both Lutheranism and Anglicanism some Deaconesses formed religious communities, with community living, and the option of life vows in religion. The modern movement reached a zenith about 1910, then slowly declined as secularization undercut religiosity in Europe, and the professionalization of nursing and social work offered better career opportunities for young women. A small movement still exists, and its legacy is seen in the names of numerous hospitals.\nThe example of the Deaconess communities eventually led to the establishment of religious communities of monks and nuns within some Protestant traditions, particularly those influenced by the more liturgical Protestant reformers (such as Martin Luther) rather than the more extreme reformers (such as John Calvin). This has allowed for communities of nuns (or, in some cases, mixed communities of nuns and monks) to be re-established in some Protestant traditions. Many of these are within the episcopal Lutheran tradition and the closeness of Lutheranism with Anglicanism in its belief and practice has led to local arrangements of inter-Communion between the two traditions, such as the Porvoo Communion.\nEvangelical Lutheranism.\nThere are a plethora of religious orders within the Lutheran Churches, such as the Communit\u00e4t Casteller Ring, Daughters of Mary, and Order of Lutheran Franciscans. Many are located in Europe.\nThe Evangelical Sisterhood of Mary, an order of Lutheran nuns, is present throughout the world. It has a presence in the Holy Land and its activities include operating a guesthouse for Holocaust survivors in Jerusalem.\nAnglicanism.\nReligious communities throughout England were destroyed by King Henry VIII when he separated the Church of England from papal authority during the English Reformation (see Dissolution of the Monasteries). Monasteries and convents were deprived of their lands and possessions, and monastics were forced to either live a secular life on a pension or flee the country. Many Catholic nuns went to France.\nAnglican religious orders are organizations of laity or clergy in the Anglican Communion who live under a common rule. The term \"religious orders\" is distinguished from Holy Orders (the sacrament of ordination which bishops, priests, and deacons receive), though many communities do have ordained members.\nThe structure and function of religious orders in Anglicanism roughly parallels that which exists in Catholicism. Religious communities are divided into orders proper, in which members take solemn vows and congregations, whose members take simple vows.\nWith the rise of the Oxford Movement in Anglicanism in the early 19th century came interest in the revival of \"religious life\" in England. Between 1841 and 1855, several religious orders for nuns were founded, among them the Community of St. Mary at Wantage and the Society of Saint Margaret at East Grinstead.\nIn the United States and Canada, the founding of Anglican religious orders of nuns began in 1845 with the Sisterhood of the Holy Communion (now defunct) in New York.\nWhilst there is no single central authority for all religious orders, and many member churches of the Anglican Communion have their own internal structures for recognising and regulating religious orders, some central functions are performed by the Anglican Religious Communities Department at Church House, Westminster, the headquarters of the Church of England's Church Commissioners, General Synod, Archbishops' Council, and National Society. This department publishes the biennial \"Anglican Religious Life\", a world directory of religious orders, and also maintains an official Anglican Communion website for religious orders. \"Anglican Religious Life\" defines four categories of community.\nIn the United States (only), there is a clear distinction between \"orders\" and \"communities\", as the Episcopal Church has its own two-fold definition of \"religious orders\" (equivalent to the first two groups above) and \"Christian communities\" (equivalent to the third group above). The \"Anglican Religious Life\" directory affirms this, stating \"This distinction in not used in other parts of the Anglican Communion where 'communities' is also used for those who take traditional vows.\"\nIn some Anglican orders, there are sisters who have been ordained and can celebrate the Eucharist.\nPresbyterian.\nThe Emmanuel Sisterhood in Cameroon, Africa, is part of the Presbyterian Church in Cameroon (PCC).\nMethodism.\nThe Saint Brigid of Kildare Benedictine Monastery is a United Methodist double monastery with both monks and nuns.\nBuddhism.\nAll Buddhist traditions have nuns, although their status is different among Buddhist countries. The Buddha is reported to have allowed women into the \"sangha\" only with great reluctance, predicting that the move would lead to Buddhism's collapse after 500 years, rather than the 1,000 years it would have enjoyed otherwise. (This prophecy occurs only once in the Canon and is the only prophecy involving time in the Canon, leading some to suspect that it is a late addition.) Fully ordained Buddhist nuns (\"bhikkhunis\") have more \"Patimokkha\" rules than the monks (\"bhikkhus\"). The important vows are the same, however.\nAs with monks, there is quite a lot of variation in nuns' dress and social conventions between Buddhist cultures in Asia. Chinese nuns possess the full \"bhikkuni\" ordination, Tibetan nuns do not. In Theravada countries it is generally believed that the full ordination lineage of \"bhikkunis\" died out, though in many places they wear the \"saffron\" colored robes, observing only ten precepts like novices.\nThailand.\nIn Thailand, a country which never had a tradition of fully ordained nuns (\"bhikkhuni\"), there developed a separate order of non-ordained female renunciates called \"mae chi\". However, some of them have played an important role in dhamma-practitioners' community. There are in Thai Forest Tradition foremost nuns such as Mae Ji Kaew Sianglam, the founder of the Nunnery of Baan Huai Saai, who is believed by some to be enlightened as well as Upasika Kee Nanayon. At the beginning of the 21st century, some Buddhist women in Thailand have started to introduce the \"bhikkhuni sangha\" in their country as well, even if public acceptance is still lacking. Dhammananda Bhikkhuni, formerly the successful academic scholar Dr. Chatsumarn Kabilsingh, established a controversial monastery for the training of Buddhist nuns in Thailand.\nTaiwan.\nThe relatively active roles of Taiwanese nuns were noted by some studies. Researcher Charles Brewer Jones estimates that from 1951 to 1999, when the Buddhist Association of the ROC organized public ordination, female applicants outnumbered males by about three to one. He adds:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;All my informants in the areas of Taipei and Sanhsia considered nuns at least as respectable as monks, or even more so. [...] In contrast, however, Shiu-kuen Tsung found in Taipei county that female clergy were viewed with some suspicion by society. She reports that while outsiders did not necessarily regard their vocation as unworthy of respect, they still tended to view the nuns as social misfits.\nWei-yi Cheng studied the Luminary (Hsiang Kuang \u9999\u5149) order in southern Taiwan. Cheng reviewed earlier studies which suggest that Taiwan's Zhaijiao tradition has a history of more female participation, and that the economic growth and loosening of family restriction have allowed more women to become nuns. Based on studies of the Luminary order, Cheng concluded that the monastic order in Taiwan was still young and gave nuns more room for development, and more mobile believers helped the order.\nTibet.\nThe August 2007 International Congress on Buddhist Women's Role in the Sangha, with the support of the XIVth Dalai Lama, reinstated the Gelongma (Dharmaguptaka vinaya bhikkhuni) lineage, having been lost, in India and Tibet, for centuries. Gelongma ordination requires the presence of ten fully ordained people keeping exactly the same vows. Because ten nuns are required to ordain a new one, the effort to establish the Dharmaguptaka bhikkhu tradition has taken a long time.\nIt is permissible for a Tibetan nun to receive bhikkhuni ordination from another living tradition, e.g., in Vietnam. Based on this, Western nuns ordained in Tibetan tradition, like Thubten Chodron, took full ordination in another tradition.\nThe ordination of monks and nuns in Tibetan Buddhism distinguishes three stages: rabjung-ma, getsh\u00fcl-ma and gelong-ma. The clothes of the nuns in Tibet are basically the same as those of monks, but there are differences between novice and \"gelong\" robes.\nJapan.\nHokke-ji in 747 was established by Empress Consort Fujiwara Asukabehime (later Empress Dowager K\u014dmy\u014d). It took charge of provincial convents, performed ceremonies for the protection of the state, and became the site of pilgrimages. Aristocratic Japanese women often became Buddhist nuns in the premodern period. Originally it was thought they could not gain salvation because of the Five Hindrances, which said women could not attain Buddhahood until they changed into men. However, in 1249, 12 women received full ordination as priests.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "62987", "revid": "19014806", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62987", "title": "Edwin Meese", "text": "75th United States Attorney General (born 1931)\nEdwin Meese III (born December 2, 1931) is an American attorney, law professor, author and member of the Republican Party who served in Ronald Reagan's gubernatorial administration (1967\u20131974), the Reagan presidential transition team (1980\u201381), and the Reagan administration (1981\u20131985). Following the 1980 presidential election, Reagan considered him for the White House Chief of Staff position, but James Baker was chosen instead. Meese was eventually appointed and confirmed as the 75th United States Attorney General (1985\u20131988), a position he held until resigning in 1988 amidst the Wedtech scandal.\nMeese currently serves as a member of the board of trustees for The Heritage Foundation, a Washington, D.C.\u2013based think tank. He was also a distinguished visiting fellow at the Hoover Institution at Stanford University. He is a member of the national advisory board of the Center for Urban Renewal and Education and a member of the board of directors of the Federalist Society. He has served on the board of Cornerstone closed-end funds.\nEarly life and education.\nMeese was born on December 2, 1931, in Oakland, California, the eldest of four sons born to Leone (n\u00e9e Feldman) and Edwin Meese, Jr. He was raised in a practicing Lutheran family, of German descent. His father was an Oakland city government official, president of the Zion Lutheran Church, and served 24 years in the non-partisan office of Treasurer of Alameda County.\nAt age 10, Meese published along with his brothers a mimeographed neighborhood newspaper, the \"Weekly Herald\", and used the proceeds to buy a war bond. The young Meese also rode a bicycle on a paper route and worked in a drugstore. At Oakland High School, Meese was involved in the Junior State of America and led his high school debate team to statewide championships. He was valedictorian of Oakland High School's class of 1949.\nTwo weeks prior to graduation, Meese was accepted to Yale University and granted a scholarship. At Yale, Meese served as president of the Yale Political Union, chairman of the Conservative Party, chairman of the Yale Debate Association, and a member of the secret society Spade and Grave. Meese made the dean's list, and graduated with a B.A. in political science in 1953.\nMilitary service.\nAt Yale, Meese was a member of ROTC. Upon graduating in 1953, he obtained a commission in the U.S. Army as a Second Lieutenant. He spent 24 months at Fort Sill near Lawton, Oklahoma. Meese worked in logistics, conducting installation and operations of the 240 mm howitzer M1. Meese completed active duty in 1956 and continued in the U.S. Army Reserve, specializing in military intelligence. Meese retired from the Army Reserve as a colonel in 1984.\nCareer.\nMeese returned to California, where he obtained a law degree from UC Berkeley School of Law in 1958 and was a state Moot Court champion. \nHe accepted a position with the district attorney's office of Alameda County, California as a law clerk. While there, he worked under district attorney J. Frank Coakley and future district attorney Delwen Lowell Jensen. Jensen received a LEAA grant to develop DALITE (District Attorney's Automated Legal Information System), a case management software program, like PROMIS (Prosecutor's Management Information System), developed by Inslaw. Meese prosecuted felony cases while maintaining a private practice on nights and weekends, where he focused on civil law. During this service, he first drew the attention of Republican State Senator Donald L. Grunsky, who would later recommend him to governor-elect Ronald Reagan.\nIn 1959, he married his high school sweetheart Ursula Herrick, daughter of Oakland's postmaster. Ursula would be subpoenaed in 1988 by independent counsel to investigate whether her salary with a non-profit health charity was a quid pro quo for a building lease that the Justice Department had entered, despite the building having been cited for faulty air filtration.\nCalifornia governor's office.\nMeese joined Ronald Reagan's gubernatorial staff in 1967 as legal affairs secretary, serving in that role for a year, until 1968. In 1969, he became Governor Reagan's executive assistant and chief of staff, and served in that capacity until 1974. Despite his later well-known reputation of being fond of Reagan, Meese was initially reluctant to accept the appointment. \"I was not particularly interested\", he later said of the position.\nMeese was known for his ability to explain complex ideas to Reagan in a way that often mirrored Reagan's own speaking style and mannerisms, leading Reagan biographer Lou Cannon to describe him as \"Reagan's geographer\".\nAfter being named Reagan's chief of staff, Meese convinced his predecessor's deputy, Mike Deaver, to stay on with him, beginning a partnership that would last more than two decades. For his role in Reagan's office, Meese earned reluctant praise from across the aisle. Bob Moretti, a Democrat and former Democratic Speaker of the Assembly, said, \"Were I in the governor's seat, I would want someone like [Ed Meese] on my side.\"\nBerkeley protests.\nAs Reagan's chief of staff, Meese was instrumental in the decision to crack down on student protesters at People's Park in Berkeley, California, on May 15, 1969. Meese was widely criticized for escalating the official response to the People's Park protest, during which law enforcement officers killed one student, on his way to class, who was not a protester and injured hundreds of others, including bystanders. Meese advised Reagan to declare a state of emergency in Berkeley, contrary to the recommendation of the Berkeley City Council. That resulted in a two-week occupation of People's Park by National Guard troops.\nThe first governor to turn to Meese for advice on riot control was Democrat Edmund (Pat) Brown, who first telephoned Meese seeking advice on how to best handle the situation. \"I told him,\" Meese said, \"that the people in that building should be arrested and taken out of there. I told him that if they were allowed to stay, there would be another mob scene, even bigger, the next day.\" Meese and Deputy District Attorney Lowell Jensen later served as co-counsels in the trial of Berkeley demonstrators. Meese was recognized as one of five \"Outstanding Young Men of California\" by the California Junior Chamber of Commerce for his role in countering the Berkeley demonstrators. Meese's role in quelling the riots at UC Berkeley has been identified by critics and supporters as an example of a conservative law-enforcement philosophy at work.\nIndustry and academia.\nFrom January 1975 to May 1976, in Chula Vista, San Diego County, California, Meese served as vice president for administration of Rohr Industries, manufacturer of railcars for the San Francisco Bay Area Bay Area Rapid Transit. He left Rohr to enter private law practice in San Diego County, California.\nAfter receiving a grant from the Sarah Scaife Foundation, Meese developed what he called \"a plan for a law school center for criminal justice policy and management\". The plan was accepted by the University of San Diego, a private Catholic school. From the fall of 1977 to January 1981, Meese served as professor of law at the university, where he also directed the Center for Criminal Justice Policy and Management. During the same time, Meese served as vice chairman of California's Organized Crime Control Commission and participated in the California Bar Association's criminal law section.\nReagan presidency.\nPresidential campaign and transition.\nFollowing the Iowa caucuses, Meese joined the 1980 Reagan presidential campaign full-time as chief of staff in charge of day-to-day campaign operations and senior issues adviser. After the 1980 election, Meese headed Reagan's transition effort.\nAt the advice of Meese, Reagan secretly allowed his campaign to establish a transition office to avoid difficulties similar to those faced by the Nixon administration in its transition following the 1969 election. \"Ed had an uncanny ability to look down the road,\" said Pen James, Assistant to the President for Presidential Personnel. Meese's presidential transition team employed more than 1,000 individuals, with 311 being paid in federal funds, 331 working for a \"token\" $1, and the rest serving as volunteers. When accounting for inflation, the Reagan transition team spent slightly less money than the Carter transition team, $1.75 million versus $1.78 million.\nCounselor to the President.\nOn November 17, 1980, Meese and James Baker held a meeting to divide their list of White House responsibilities, since both saw the potential for future conflict because of their positions being somewhat similar in nature. The one-page memorandum listed Meese's responsibilities as:\nMeese became Counselor to the President, who appointed him as a member of both his Cabinet and the National Security Council from 1981 to 1985. On Monday, September 14, 1981, Meese chaired the first White House discussion of what would become Reagan's Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI), the missile defense program.\nMeese served as a liaison to the conservative evangelical community, arranging for meetings between social conservative leaders and the president. Meese was lauded by social conservatives for his address to the Congress on the Bible in March 1982, when he said, \"Someone has estimated that throughout the course of history man has adopted over four billion laws. It seems to me, with all that effort, we haven't improved one iota on the Ten Commandments.\"\nNear the end of Reagan's presidency, Meese's involvement in the Iran\u2013Contra affair as a counselor and friend to Reagan was scrutinized by the independent counsel for Iran/Contra Matters, which stated in its official report that Meese's knowledge of the 1985 HAWK transaction \"raised serious legal questions\".\nMeese was considered a powerful and influential figure in the White House. Former Reagan advisor and journalist David Gergen said, \"He's a tremendously influential and highly valued adviser to the President who advises on issues all across the board. He's one of the men who has known [the President] so long and so well he's become almost an alter ego of Ronald Reagan.\"\nComments on hunger in America.\nMeese created a storm of controversy in December 1983 after his responses to questions about hunger in America. In response to a question about balancing spending cuts against the need to feed hungry children, he said that he had seen no \"authoritative\" evidence that children in America were going hungry and that some of the allegations \"are purely political.\" When asked about soup kitchens, he said that \"some people are going to soup kitchens voluntarily... I know we've had considerable information that people go to soup kitchens because the food is free and that that's easier than paying for it.\" \nDemocratic leaders and social welfare activists called his comments \"disgraceful,\" \"an outrage,\" \"unkind,\" \"mean-spirited,\" and \"absolutely ridiculous\". Tip O'Neill, the Speaker of the House of Representatives, compared Meese to Ebenezer Scrooge. \nShortly after, Meese offered a tongue-in-cheek defense of Scrooge, saying that he \"had his faults, but he wasn't unfair to anyone\" and that he suffered from \"a bad press\".\nAttorney General.\nReagan nominated Meese to be William French Smith's successor as U.S. Attorney General on January 23, 1984. For more than a year, Democrats repeatedly charged Meese with unethical conduct to bar his confirmation as attorney general, including a report by Archibald Cox to the Senate, which alleged that Meese had a \"lack of ethical sensitivity\" and \"blindness to abuse of position\".\nMeese was finally confirmed by a vote of 63\u201331, with more opposition than any other Attorney General nominee had received since the 1920s. He began serving as Attorney General in February 1985.\nIn 1985, Meese received \"Government Executive\" magazine's annual award for excellence in management for his service in this role.\nBechtel scandal.\nIn the mid-1980s, there was a federal investigation into Meese's connections and alleged financial improprieties related to his efforts to help the Bechtel Corporation build a pipeline in Iraq. The pipeline was to extend from Iraq to Jordan and was negotiated by Meese, Shimon Peres, Bruce Rappaport, Robert C. McFarlane, and others. A report by special prosecutor James C. McKay cleared Meese of criminal wrongdoing but criticized him for ethical lapses, especially regarding bribes to Israel not to attack an Iraqi oil pipeline that benefited associates of Meese.\nIran-Contra scandal.\nIn the late-1980s, Meese was investigated for his role in covering up the Iran-Contra affair to limit damage to Reagan. Although evidence supporting this accusation came to light, Meese was ultimately not charged with any obstruction.\nWedtech scandal.\nIn February 1987, James C. McKay was named independent counsel in the Wedtech case. The investigation centered on actions Meese took that benefited him and his longtime friend and former lawyer, E. Robert Wallach. McKay looked into Meese's involvement, while Attorney General, in negotiations involving the company Wedtech. (E. Robert Wallach worked as a lobbyist for the company and sought help from Meese on Wedtech contract matters.)\nMcKay never prosecuted or sought indictment of Meese, but in his official report, which is still confidential, he was highly critical of Meese's ethics and urged further investigation of Meese's role in that scandal and others such as Meese's efforts to help Bechtel Corporation. Meese described it as a \"full vindication\". While Meese was never convicted of any wrongdoing, he resigned in 1988 when the independent counsel delivered the report on Wedtech.\nPrior to his resignation, several top Justice Department officials resigned in protest of what they and others viewed as improper acts by the Attorney General.\nReagan publicly voiced support for Meese in his role as Attorney General, during a press conference: \"If Ed Meese is not a good man, there are no good men.\" That was in response to questions about his actions at the Justice Department.\nMeese Report.\nOn May 21, 1984, Reagan announced his intention to appoint the Attorney General to study the effect of pornography on society. The Meese Report, convened in the spring of 1985 and published its findings in July 1986. The Meese Report advised that pornography was in varying degrees harmful. Following the release of the report, guidelines of the Meese-led Department of Justice were modified to enable the government to file multiple cases in various jurisdictions at the same time which eroded some of the markets for pornography.\nDrug control policy.\nAs Attorney General, Meese chaired the National Drug Policy Board, which coordinated with Nancy Reagan's \"Just Say No,\" national anti-drug educational campaign. One of Meese's innovations was to seek the cooperation of drug-producing countries.\n\"One of our most effective weapons against drug traffickers,\" Meese wrote in his autobiography, \"was to confiscate the assets of their criminal activity, such as expensive autos, yachts, businesses and homes... To make this technique even more effective, we shared the proceeds with cooperating local law enforcement agencies to enhance their drug-fighting activities.\"\nSupreme Court views.\nIn 1985, Meese delivered a speech calling for a \"jurisprudence of original intent\" and criticizing the Supreme Court for straying from the original intention of the U.S. Constitution. Justices William J. Brennan and John Paul Stevens disagreed with Meese publicly later that year. The dispute foreshadowed the contentious Robert Bork hearings of 1987.\nMeese was known for his opposition to the Miranda Warning ruling by the Supreme Court, which required a suspect's rights to be read to him before he is questioned by authorities.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;U.S News &amp; World Report: You criticize the Miranda ruling, which gives suspects the right to have a lawyer present before police questioning. Shouldn't people, who may be innocent, have such protection?&lt;br&gt;\nMeese: Suspects who are innocent of a crime should. But the thing is, you don't have many suspects who are innocent of a crime. That's contradictory. If a person is innocent of a crime, then he is not a suspect.\nIraq Study Group.\nIn May 2006, Meese was named a member of the bipartisan Iraq Study Group by the group co-chairmen, James Baker III and Lee H. Hamilton. The Iraq Study Group was commissioned to assess and report on the contemporary status of the Iraq War. Meese co-authored the group's final December 2006 report.\nFellowships and honors.\nIn 1982, Meese was elected as a fellow of the National Academy of Public Administration. Meese serves on the boards of several institutions. Meese has held the Ronald Reagan Chair in Public Policy at The Heritage Foundation since 1988, when he joined the think tank. It is the only policy chair in the United States officially named for the 40th president. He is also chairman of Heritage's Center for Legal and Judicial Studies, founded in 2001 to advance conservative views about the Constitution, legal principles and their impact on public policy.\nMeese is currently the second vice chairman of Landmark Legal Foundation, a conservative non-profit legal group. He serves as an adjunct fellow at the Discovery Institute and is a member of the board of directors of the Junior State of America Meese is also on the board of directors of the Capital Research Center, a conservative think tank devoted to the research of non-profit groups.\nMeese served on the executive committee (1994) and as president (1996) of the Council for National Policy (CNP), and he was co-chairman of the Constitution Project's bipartisan Sentencing Committee.\nMeese served two terms as a member of the board of visitors of George Mason University from 1996 to 2004. From 1998 to 2004, he served as rector (chairman) of the board.\nFor his lifetime of service and leadership, Meese was named the first-ever Honorary Reagan Fellow at Eureka College in Eureka, Illinois at a ceremony in Washington, D.C. in 2008. Recognizing Meese as a model for young people, the honor was given on behalf of the Reagan Fellows program President Ronald Reagan, established at his own alma mater in 1982. Meese is a charter member of the Ronald W. Reagan Society of Eureka College and was a featured speaker at the \"Reagan and the Midwest\" academic conference held on the college's campus to launch the Reagan Centennial in 2011.\nIn 2017, Meese became a veteran companion of the Military Order of Foreign Wars.\nMeese serves as a member of the board of directors of the Mercatus Center, a non-profit market-oriented research, education, and outreach think tank located on George Mason University's Arlington campus.\nThe Republican National Lawyers Association annually bestows the \"Edwin Meese Award\" to a notable Republican attorney or official. Previous recipients have included Lindsey Graham, John Ashcroft, Don McGahn, C. Boyden Gray, and Michael Mukasey.\nOn October 8, 2019, U.S. president Donald Trump awarded Meese the Presidential Medal of Freedom, the highest civilian honor in the United States. Former Meese chief of staff Mark Levin paid tribute to him at the ceremony.\nBooks and film.\nMeese has authored or co-authored a number of books on government, judiciary and civics, including:\nEdwin Meese has been a subject of many TV documentaries. Documentaries in which he personally appears include:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "62988", "revid": "13008", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62988", "title": "Pope Deusdedit", "text": ""}
{"id": "62989", "revid": "1169106", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62989", "title": "John the Divine", "text": ""}
{"id": "62996", "revid": "20483999", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62996", "title": "Theophylline", "text": "Drug used to treat respiratory diseases\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Infobox drug/styles.css\"/&gt;\nTheophylline, also known as 1,3-dimethylxanthine, is a drug that inhibits phosphodiesterase and blocks adenosine receptors. It is used to treat chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) and asthma. Its pharmacology is similar to other methylxanthine drugs (e.g., theobromine and caffeine). Trace amounts of theophylline are naturally present in tea, coffee, chocolate, yerba mate, guarana, and kola nut.\nMedical uses.\nThe main actions of theophylline involve:\nThe main therapeutic uses of theophylline are for treating:\nPerformance enhancement in sports.\nTheophylline and other methylxanthines are often used for their performance-enhancing effects in sports, as these drugs increase alertness, bronchodilation, and increase the rate and force of heart contraction. There is conflicting information about the value of theophylline and other methylxanthines as prophylaxis against exercise-induced asthma.\nAdverse effects.\nThe use of theophylline is complicated by its interaction with various drugs and by the fact that it has a narrow therapeutic window (&lt;20 mcg/mL). Its use must be monitored by direct measurement of serum theophylline levels to avoid toxicity. It can also cause nausea, diarrhea, increase in heart rate, abnormal heart rhythms, and CNS excitation (headaches, insomnia, irritability, dizziness, and lightheadedness). Seizures can also occur in severe cases of toxicity, and are considered to be a neurological emergency.\nInteractions.\nIts toxicity is increased by erythromycin, cimetidine, and fluoroquinolones, such as ciprofloxacin. Some lipid-based formulations of theophylline can result in toxic theophylline levels when taken with fatty meals, an effect called dose dumping, but this does not occur with most formulations of theophylline. Theophylline toxicity can be treated with beta blockers. In addition to seizures, tachyarrhythmias are a major concern. Theophylline should not be used in combination with the SSRI fluvoxamine.\nPharmacology.\nPharmacodynamics.\nLike other methylated xanthine derivatives, theophylline is a competitive nonselective phosphodiesterase inhibitor which increases intracellular levels of cAMP and cGMP, activates PKA, inhibits TNF-alpha and inhibits leukotriene synthesis, and reduces inflammation and innate immunity. Theophylline also acts as a nonselective adenosine receptor antagonist, antagonizing A1, A2, and A3 receptors almost equally, which explains many of its cardiac effects. Theophylline activates histone deacetylases.\nPharmacokinetics.\nDistribution.\nTheophylline is distributed in the extracellular fluid, in the placenta, in the mother's milk and in the central nervous system. The volume of distribution is 0.5 L/kg. The protein binding is 40%.\nMetabolism.\nTheophylline is metabolized extensively in the liver. It undergoes \"N\"-demethylation via cytochrome P450 1A2. It is metabolized by parallel first order and Michaelis-Menten pathways. Metabolism may become saturated (non-linear), even within the therapeutic range. Small dose increases may result in disproportionately large increases in serum concentration. Methylation to caffeine is also important in the infant population. Smokers and people with hepatic (liver) impairment metabolize it differently. Cigarette and marijuana smoking induces metabolism of theophylline, increasing the drug's metabolic clearance.\nExcretion.\nTheophylline is excreted unchanged in the urine (up to 10%). Clearance of the drug is increased in children (age 1 to 12), teenagers (12 to 16), adult smokers, elderly smokers, as well as in cystic fibrosis, and hyperthyroidism. Clearance of the drug is decreased in these conditions: elderly, acute congestive heart failure, cirrhosis, hypothyroidism and febrile viral illnesses.\nThe elimination half-life varies: 30 hours for premature neonates, 24 hours for neonates, 3.5 hours for children ages 1 to 9, 8 hours for adult non-smokers, 5 hours for adult smokers, 24 hours for those with hepatic impairment, 12 hours for those with congestive heart failure NYHA class I-II, 24 hours for those with congestive heart failure NYHA class III-IV, 12 hours for the elderly.\nSpectroscopy.\nUV-visible.\nTheophylline is soluble in 0.1N NaOH and absorbs maximally at 277\u00a0nm with an extinction coefficient of 10,200 (cm\u22121 M\u22121).\nProton NMR.\nThe characteristic signals, distinguishing theophylline from related methylxanthines, are approximately 3.23\u03b4 and 3.41\u03b4, corresponding to the unique methylation possessed by theophylline. The remaining proton signal, at 8.01\u03b4, corresponds to the proton on the imidazole ring, not transferred between the nitrogen. The transferred proton between the nitrogen is a variable proton and only exhibits a signal under certain conditions.\n13C-NMR.\nThe unique methylation of theophylline corresponds to the following signals: 27.7\u03b4 and 29.9\u03b4. The remaining signals correspond to carbons characteristic of the xanthine backbone.\nNatural occurrences.\nTheophylline is naturally found in cocoa beans. Amounts as high as 3.7\u00a0mg/g have been reported in Criollo cocoa beans.\nTrace amounts of theophylline are also found in brewed tea, although brewed tea provides only about 1\u00a0mg/L, which is significantly less than a therapeutic dose.\nTrace amounts of theophylline are also found in guarana (\"Paullinia cupana\") and in kola nuts.\nHistory.\nTheophylline was first extracted from tea leaves and chemically identified around 1888 by the German biologist Albrecht Kossel. Seven years later, a chemical synthesis starting with 1,3-dimethyluric acid was described by Emil Fischer and Lorenz Ach. The Traube purine synthesis, an alternative method to synthesize theophylline, was introduced in 1900 by another German scientist, Wilhelm Traube. Theophylline's first clinical use came in 1902 as a diuretic. It took an additional 20 years until it was first reported as an asthma treatment. The drug was prescribed in a syrup up to the 1970s as Theostat 20 and Theostat 80, and by the early 1980s in a tablet form called Quibron. \nEtymology.\nThe name 'theophylline' derives from \"Thea\"\u2014the former genus name for tea + Ancient Greek \u03c6\u03cd\u03bb\u03bb\u03bf\u03bd (ph\u00fallon, \"leaf\") + -ine.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "63001", "revid": "30292728", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63001", "title": "Pope Mark", "text": "Head of the Catholic Church in 336\nPope Mark () was the bishop of Rome from 18 January to his death on 7 October 336.\nLittle is known of Mark's early life. According to the \"Liber Pontificalis\", he was a Roman, and his father's name was Priscus. Mark succeeded Sylvester I as pope on 18 January 336.\nSome evidence suggests that the early lists of bishops and martyrs known as the \"Depositio episcoporum\" and \"Depositio martyrum\" were begun during his pontificate. According to the \"Liber Pontificalis\", Pope Mark issued a constitution investing the bishop of Ostia with a pallium and confirming his power to consecrate newly elected popes. Likewise according to the \"Liber Pontificalis\", Pope Mark is credited with the foundation of the Basilica of San Marco, a basilica in Rome, and a cemetery church over the Catacomb of Balbina, just outside the city on lands obtained as a donation from Emperor Constantine.\nMark died of natural causes on 7 October and was buried in the catacomb of Balbina. In 1048, his remains were removed to the town of Velletri, and in 1145 were relocated to the Basilica of San Marco in Rome, where they are kept in an urn under the altar. His feast day is celebrated on 7 October. He is particularly venerated at the Abbadia San Salvatore at Monte Amiata.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "63004", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63004", "title": "James Earl Carter", "text": ""}
{"id": "63005", "revid": "25128593", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63005", "title": "Pope Simplicius", "text": "Head of the Catholic Church from 468 to 483\nPope Simplicius (died 2 or 10 March 483) was the bishop of Rome from 468 to his death on 10 March 483. He combated the Eutychian heresy, ended the practice of consecrating bishops only in December, and sought to offset the effects of Germanic invasions.\nElection.\nSimplicius was born in Tivoli, Italy, the son of a citizen named Castinus. After a vacancy of 10 days following the death of Pope Hilarius, Simplicius was consecrated on 25 February 468.\nPontificate.\nSimplicius defended the decisions of the Council of Chalcedon against the Eutychian heresy. When the Eutychians rose up in Antioch and installed Petrus Mongus, Simplicius made repeated complaints for action to Basiliscus and Leo I, emperors of the Eastern Roman Empire, for the restoration of the Catholic bishop; he did the same when Petrus Fullo usurped the seat of the patriarch of Alexandria. He rehabilitated Patriarch Timotheos Solofaciolus. In 478, Simplicius held a synod in Rome, which pronounced anathemas against eastern heretical bishops Peter Fullo, John of Apamea, and Paul of Ephesus. Simplicius worked to maintain the authority of Rome in the West. He named Zeno, Bishop of Hispalis (Seville) as Papal Vicar in Spain.\nIn 482, Bishop Gregory of Modena was consecrated a bishop against his will by Archbishop Joannes I of Ravenna. This brought the archbishop a sharp rebuke from Pope Simplicius.\nAccording to the Carolingian liturgist Amalarius of Metz, Pope Simplicius was the first pope to carry out consecrations at any other time than in December before Christmas. He began to confer holy orders in February as well.\nSimplicius is credited with the construction of a church named Santa Bibiana, in memory of the virgin and martyr St. Bibiana. He also dedicated the Church of San Stefano Rotondo on the Celian Hill, the church of S. Andrea near S. Maria Maggiore, and a church dedicated to Saint Lawrence in the Campo Verano. He labored to help the people of Italy against the marauding raids of barbarian invaders. He saw the Heruliian mercenaries revolt, depose Romulus Augustulus, the last emperor of the Western Roman Empire, and proclaim Odoacer king of Italy in 476. Odoacer made few changes in the administration in Rome, leaving the city firmly in the hands of its bishop, Simplicius.\nDeath and aftermath.\nHe was buried in the Basilica of St. Peter on 2 March 483. Rome was without a pope for six days. Since 1971, St. Simplicius's feast day is celebrated on 10 March in the General Roman Calendar of the Catholic Church.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "63006", "revid": "25128593", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63006", "title": "Pope Felix III", "text": "Head of the Catholic Church from 483 to 492\nPope Felix III (died 1 March 492) was the bishop of Rome from 13 March 483 to his death on 1 March 492. His repudiation of the \"Henotikon\" is considered the beginning of the Acacian schism. He is commemorated on March 1.\nFamily.\nFelix was born into a Roman senatorial family \u2013 possibly the son of a priest. He was married and widowed before he was elected as pope. He fathered two children, and through his son Gordianus (a priest) was thought to be great-great-grandfather to Pope Gregory I, and possibly related to Pope Agapetus I.\nIt was also said that Felix appeared as an apparition to another of his descendants, his great-granddaughter Trasilla (an aunt of Pope Gregory I), and asked her to enter Heaven, and \"on the eve of Christmas Trasilla died, seeing Jesus Christ beckoning\".\nEutychian heresy.\nEutyches was an archimandrite at Constantinople. In his opposition to Nestorianism he seemed to have taken the opposite view to extremes.\nIn an effort to defuse controversy regarding the teachings of Eutyches, in 482 Emperor Zeno, at the suggestion of Patriarch Acacius of Constantinople, had issued an edict known as the Henoticon. The edict was intended as a bond of reconciliation between Catholics and Eutychians, but it caused greater conflicts than ever, and split the Church of the East into three or four parties. The Henotikon endorsed the condemnations of Eutyches and Nestorius made at Chalcedon and explicitly approved the twelve anathemas of Cyril of Alexandria, but in attempting to appease both sides of the dispute, avoided any definitive statement on whether Christ had one or two natures.\nFelix's first act was to repudiate the Henoticon. He also addressed a letter of remonstrance to Acacius. The latter proved refractory and sentence of deposition was passed against Acacius.\nAs Catholics spurned Zeno's edict, the emperor had driven the patriarchs of Antioch and Alexandria from their sees. Peter the Fuller deposed Martyrius of Antioch and assumed the See of Antioch in 470. Peter Mongus took the See of Alexandria. In his first synod, Felix excommunicated Peter the Fuller. In 484, Felix also excommunicated Peter Mongus, an act that brought about a schism between East and West that was not healed until 519.\nAftermath of the Vandals.\nIn North Africa, conquered by the fervently Arian Vandals, persecution by king Genseric and his son and successor Huneric had driven many Catholic Romans into exile. When Huneric died, the persecutions were eased, and many of those who through fear had been rebaptized as Arians desired to return to the Church. However, the Vandals remained resolutely Arian. The Catholics appealed to Felix, who convened a synod in 487 and sent a letter to the bishops of Africa, expounding the conditions under which the unwilling apostates were to be taken back.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "63007", "revid": "38104346", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63007", "title": "20 July plot", "text": "1944 attempted assassination of Adolf Hitler\nThe 20 July plot, sometimes referred to as Operation Valkyrie, was a failed attempt to assassinate Adolf Hitler, the chancellor of Germany, and overthrow the Nazi regime on 20 July 1944. The plotters were part of the German resistance, mainly composed of \"Wehrmacht\" officers. The leader of the conspiracy, Claus von Stauffenberg, tried to kill Hitler by detonating an explosive hidden in a briefcase. However, due to the location of the bomb at the time of detonation, the blast only dealt Hitler minor injuries. The planners' subsequent coup attempt also failed and resulted in a purge of the \"Wehrmacht\".\nAs early as 1938, German military officers had plotted to overthrow Hitler, but indecisive leadership and the pace of global events stymied action. Plotters gained a sense of urgency in 1943 after Germany lost the Battle of Stalingrad and Soviet forces began to push towards Germany. Under the leadership of Stauffenberg, plotters tried to assassinate Hitler at least five times in 1943 and 1944. With the Nazi secret police, the \"Gestapo\", closing in on the plotters, a final attempt was organised in July 1944. Stauffenberg personally took a briefcase containing a block of plastic explosive to a conference in the Wolf's Lair. The explosives were armed and placed next to Hitler, but it appears they were moved unwittingly at the last moment behind a table leg by Heinz Brandt, inadvertently saving Hitler's life. When the bomb detonated, it killed Brandt and two others, while the rest of the room's occupants were injured, one of whom, Rudolf Schmundt, later died from his injuries. Hitler's trousers were singed by the blast, and he suffered a perforated eardrum and conjunctivitis, but was otherwise unharmed.\nThe plotters, unaware of their failure, then attempted a \"coup d'\u00e9tat\". A few hours after the blast, the conspiracy used \"Wehrmacht\" units to take control of several cities, including Berlin, right after giving them disinformation on the intention of the orders they were given. This part of the coup d'\u00e9tat attempt is referred to by the name \"Operation Valkyrie\", which also has become associated with the entire event. Within hours, the Nazi regime had reasserted its control of Germany. A few members of the conspiracy, including Stauffenberg, were executed by firing squad the same night. In the months after the coup d'\u00e9tat attempt, the \"Gestapo\" arrested more than 7,000 people, 4,980 of whom were executed. Roughly 200 conspirators were executed.\nThe apparent aim of the coup d'\u00e9tat attempt was to wrest political control of Germany and its armed forces from the Nazi Party (including the \"Schutzstaffel\") and to make peace with the Western Allies as soon as possible. The details of the conspirators' peace initiatives remain unknown, but they would have included unrealistic demands for the confirmation of Germany's extensive annexations of European territory.\nBackground.\nSince 1938 there had been groups plotting an overthrow of some kind within the German Army and in the German Military Intelligence Organization. Early leaders of these plots included Major General Hans Oster, the deputy head of the Military Intelligence Office; Colonel General Ludwig Beck, a former Chief of Staff of the German Army High Command (OKH); and Field Marshal Erwin von Witzleben, a former commander of the German 1st Army and the former Commander-in-Chief of the German Army Command in the West. They soon established contacts with several prominent civilians, including Carl Goerdeler, the former mayor of Leipzig, and Helmuth James von Moltke, the great-grandnephew of Moltke the Elder, hero of the Franco-Prussian War.\nGroups of military plotters exchanged ideas with civilian, political, and intellectual resistance groups in the Kreisauer Kreis (which met at the von Moltke estate in Kreisau) and in other secret circles. Moltke was against killing Hitler; instead, he wanted him placed on trial. Moltke said, \"we are all amateurs and would only bungle it\". Moltke also believed killing Hitler would be hypocritical: Hitler and National Socialism had turned wrongdoing into a system, something which the resistance should avoid.\nPlans to stage an overthrow and prevent Hitler from launching a new world war were developed in 1938 and 1939, but were aborted because of the indecision of Army General Franz Halder and Field Marshal Walther von Brauchitsch, and the failure of the Western powers to oppose Hitler's aggression until 1939.\nIn 1942 a new conspiratorial group formed, led by Colonel Henning von Tresckow, a member of Field Marshal Fedor von Bock's staff, who commanded Army Group Centre in Operation Barbarossa. Tresckow systematically recruited oppositionists into the Group's staff, making it the nerve centre of the army resistance. Little could be done against Hitler as he was heavily guarded, and none of the plotters could get near enough to him.\nDuring 1942, Oster and Tresckow nevertheless succeeded in rebuilding an effective resistance network. Their most important recruit was General Friedrich Olbricht, head of the General Army Office headquarters at the Bendlerblock in central Berlin, who controlled an independent system of communications to reserve units throughout Germany. Linking this asset to Tresckow's resistance group in Army Group Centre created a viable coup apparatus.\nIn late 1942 Tresckow and Olbricht formulated a plan to assassinate Hitler and stage an overthrow during Hitler's visit to the headquarters of Army Group Centre at Smolensk in March 1943, by placing a bomb on his plane (Operation Spark). The bomb failed to detonate, and a second attempt a week later with Hitler at an exhibition of captured Soviet weaponry in Berlin also failed. These failures demoralised the conspirators. During 1943 Tresckow tried without success to recruit senior army field commanders such as Field Marshal Erich von Manstein and Field Marshal Gerd von Rundstedt, to support a seizure of power. Tresckow, in particular, worked on his Commander-in-Chief of Army Group Centre, Field Marshal G\u00fcnther von Kluge, to persuade him to move against Hitler and at times succeeded in gaining his consent, only to find him indecisive at the last minute. However, despite their refusals, none of the Field Marshals reported their treasonous activities to the Gestapo or Hitler.\nMotivation and goals.\nOpposition to Hitler and to Nazi policies.\nWhile the primary goal of the plotters was to remove Hitler from power, they did so for various reasons. The majority of the group behind the 20 July plot were conservative nationalists\u2014idealists, but not necessarily of a democratic stripe. Martin Borschat portrays their motivations as a matter of aristocratic resentment, writing that the plot was mainly carried out by conservative elites who were initially integrated by the Nazi government but during the war lost their influence and were concerned about regaining it. However, at least in Stauffenberg's case, the conviction that Nazi Germany's atrocities against civilians and prisoners of war were a dishonour to the nation and its military was likely a major motivating factor. Historian Judith Michel assesses the circle around the 20 July Group as a diverse and heterogeneous group that included liberal democrats, conservatives, social democrats, authoritarian aristocrats, and even communists. The common goal was to overthrow Hitler's regime and bring the war to a swift end. There is evidence of the plot encompassing a broad spectrum of plotters which included communists. That April, before the attempted coup, Stauffenberg agreed to cooperate with the Operational Leadership of the KPD (Communist Party of Germany) remaining in Germany. Contacts were established through the Social Democrats Adolf Reichwein and Julius Leber.\nTerritorial demands.\nAmong demands initially countenanced by the plotters for issue towards the Allies were such points as re-establishment of Germany's 1914 boundaries with Belgium, France and Poland and no reparations. Like most of the rest of German resistance, the 20 July plotters believed in the idea of Greater Germany and as a condition for peace demanded that the western allies recognise as a minimum the incorporation of Austria, Alsace-Lorraine, Sudetenland, and the annexation of Polish-inhabited territories that Germany ceded to Poland after 1918, with the restoration of some of the overseas colonies. They believed that Europe should be controlled under German hegemony.\nThe overall goals towards Poland were mixed within the plotters. Most of the plotters found it desirable to restore the old German borders of 1914, while others pointed out that the demands were unrealistic, and amendments had to be made. Some like Friedrich-Werner Graf von der Schulenburg even wanted all of Poland annexed to Germany.\nTo Poland, which was fighting against Nazi Germany with both its army and government in exile, the territorial demands and traditional nationalistic visions of resistance were not much different from the racist policies of Hitler. Stauffenberg, as one of the leaders of the plot, stated five years before the coup in 1939 during the Poland campaign: \"It is essential that we begin a systemic colonisation in Poland. But I have no fear that this will not occur.\"\nPolitical vision of post-Hitler Germany.\nMany members of the plot had helped the Nazis to gain power and shared revisionist foreign policy goals pursued by Hitler, and even at the time of the plot were anti-democratic, hoping to replace Hitler with a conservative-authoritarian government involving aristocratic rule. They opposed popular legitimation or mass participation in governance of the state.\nPolitical program.\nThe political program of the planned government was outlined in a draft for a government policy statement, consisting of twelve points:\nPlanning a coup.\nVon Stauffenberg joins.\nBy mid-1943 the tide of war was turning decisively against Germany. The army plotters and their civilian allies became convinced that Hitler should be assassinated, so that a government acceptable to the western Allies could be formed, and a separate peace negotiated in time to prevent a Soviet invasion of Germany. In August 1943 Tresckow met, for the first time, a young staff officer named Lieutenant Colonel Claus von Stauffenberg. Severely wounded in North Africa, Stauffenberg was a political conservative and zealous German nationalist.\nFrom early 1942, he had come to share two basic convictions with many military officers: that Germany was being led to disaster and that Hitler's removal from power was necessary. After the Battle of Stalingrad in December 1942, despite his religious scruples, he concluded that the F\u00fchrer's assassination was a lesser moral evil than Hitler's remaining in power. Stauffenberg brought a new tone of decisiveness to the ranks of the resistance movement. When Tresckow was assigned to the Eastern Front, Stauffenberg took charge of planning and executing the assassination attempt.\nNew plan.\nOlbricht now put forward a new strategy for staging a coup against Hitler. The Replacement Army (\"Ersatzheer\") had an operational plan called Operation Valkyrie, which was to be used in the event that the disruption caused by the Allied bombing of German cities would cause a breakdown in law and order, or an uprising by the millions of forced labourers from occupied countries now being used in German factories. Olbricht suggested that this plan could be used to mobilise the Reserve Army for the purpose of the coup.\nIn August and September 1943, Tresckow drafted the \"revised\" Valkyrie plan and new supplementary orders. A secret declaration began with these words: \"The F\u00fchrer Adolf Hitler is dead! A treacherous group of party leaders has attempted to exploit the situation by attacking our embattled soldiers from the rear in order to seize power for themselves.\" Detailed instructions were written for occupation of government ministries in Berlin, Heinrich Himmler's headquarters in East Prussia, radio stations and telephone offices, and other Nazi apparatus through military districts, and concentration camps.\nPreviously, it was believed that Stauffenberg was mainly responsible for the Valkyrie plan, but documents recovered by the Soviet Union after the war and released in 2007 suggest that the plan was developed by Tresckow by late 1943. All written information was handled by Tresckow's wife, Erika, and by Margarethe von Oven, his secretary. Both women wore gloves to avoid leaving fingerprints. On at least two other occasions Tresckow had tried to assassinate the F\u00fchrer. The first plan was to shoot him during dinner at the army base camp, but this plan was aborted because it was widely believed that Hitler wore a bullet-proof vest. The conspirators also considered poisoning him, but this was not possible because his food was specially prepared and tasted. They concluded that a time bomb was the only option.\nOperation Valkyrie could only be put into effect by Hitler himself, or by General Friedrich Fromm, commander of the Reserve Army, so the latter had to be either won over to the conspiracy or in some way neutralised if the plan was to succeed.\nPrevious failed attempts.\nDuring 1943 and early 1944 von Tresckow and von Stauffenberg organised at least five attempts to get one of the military conspirators near enough to Hitler, for long enough to kill him with hand grenades, bombs, or a revolver:\nAs the war situation deteriorated, Hitler no longer appeared in public and rarely visited Berlin. He spent most of his time at his headquarters at the near Rastenburg in East Prussia, with occasional breaks at his Bavarian mountain retreat Obersalzberg near Berchtesgaden. In both places, he was heavily guarded and rarely saw people he did not know or trust. Himmler and the \"Gestapo\" were increasingly suspicious of plots against Hitler and rightly suspected the officers of the General Staff, which was indeed the source of many conspiracies against him.\nPreparations.\nBy mid-1944 the \"Gestapo\" was closing in on the conspirators. When Stauffenberg sent Tresckow a message through Lieutenant Heinrich Graf von Lehndorff-Steinort asking whether there was any reason for trying to assassinate Hitler given that no political purpose would be served, Tresckow's response was: \"The assassination must be attempted, \"co\u00fbte que co\u00fbte\" [whatever the cost]. Even if it fails, we must take action in Berlin\u200a\u2060,\u2060 \u2060for the practical purpose no longer matters; what matters now is that the German resistance movement must take the plunge before the eyes of the world and of history. Compared to that, nothing else matters.\"\nHimmler had at least one conversation with a known oppositionist when, in August 1943, the Prussian Finance Minister Johannes Popitz, who was involved in Goerdeler's network, came to see him and offered him the support of the opposition if he would make a move to displace Hitler and secure a negotiated end to the war. Himmler himself tried in April 1945 to form a separate peace with the allies in order to remain in some sort of power, but it was rejected as the allies continued to demand unconditional surrender. \nPopitz was not alone in seeing Himmler as a potential ally. General von Bock advised Tresckow to seek his support, but there is no evidence that he did so. Goerdeler was apparently also in indirect contact with Himmler via a mutual acquaintance, Carl Langbehn. Wilhelm Canaris's biographer Heinz H\u00f6hne suggests that Canaris and Himmler were working together to bring about a change of regime, but this remains speculation.\nCountdown to Stauffenberg's attempt.\nFirst week of July.\nOn Saturday 1 July 1944 Stauffenberg was appointed Chief of Staff to General Friedrich Fromm at the Reserve Army headquarters on Bendlerstra\u00dfe in central Berlin. This position enabled Stauffenberg to attend Hitler's military conferences, either at the \"Wolfsschanze\" in East Prussia or at Berchtesgaden, and would thus give him an opportunity, perhaps the last that would present itself, to kill Hitler with a bomb or a pistol. Meanwhile, new key allies had been gained. These included General Carl-Heinrich von St\u00fclpnagel, the German military commander in France, who would take control in Paris when Hitler was killed, and it was hoped, negotiate an immediate armistice with the invading Allied armies.\nAborted attempts.\nThe plot was now fully prepared. On 7 July 1944 General Helmuth Stieff was to kill Hitler at a display of new uniforms at Klessheim castle near Salzburg. However, Stieff felt unable to kill Hitler. Stauffenberg now decided to do both, assassinate Hitler and to manage the plot in Berlin.\nOn 14 July Stauffenberg attended Hitler's conferences carrying a bomb in his briefcase, but because the conspirators had decided that Himmler and Hermann G\u00f6ring should be killed simultaneously if the planned mobilisation of Operation Valkyrie was to have a chance to succeed, he held back at the last minute because Himmler was not present. In fact, it was unusual for Himmler to attend military conferences.\nBy 15 July, when Stauffenberg again flew to the , this condition had been dropped. The plan was for Stauffenberg to plant the briefcase with the bomb in Hitler's conference room with a timer running, excuse himself from the meeting, wait for the explosion, then fly back to Berlin and join the other plotters at the Bendlerblock. Operation Valkyrie would be mobilised, the Reserve Army would take control of Germany and the other Nazi leaders would be arrested. Beck would be appointed provisional head of state, Goerdeler would be chancellor, and Witzleben would be commander-in-chief of the armed forces.\nAgain on 15 July, the attempt was called off at the last minute. Himmler and G\u00f6ring were present, but Hitler was called out of the room at the last moment. Stauffenberg was able to intercept the bomb and prevent its discovery.\n20 July 1944.\nOperation Valkyrie.\nOn 18 July rumours reached Stauffenberg that the \"Gestapo\" had knowledge of the conspiracy and that he might be arrested at any time\u2014this was apparently not true, but there was a sense that the net was closing in and that the next opportunity to kill Hitler must be taken because there might not be another. On the morning of Thursday 20 July Stauffenberg flew back to the \"Wolfsschanze\" for another military conference at which Hitler would be present, once again with a bomb in his briefcase.\nAt around 12:30\u00a0pm as the conference began, Stauffenberg asked to use a washroom in Wilhelm Keitel's office, saying that he had to change his shirt, which indeed was soaked through with sweat, it being a very hot day. There, assisted by von Haeften, he used pliers to crush the end of a pencil detonator inserted into a block of plastic explosive wrapped in brown paper, that was prepared by Wessel von Freytag-Loringhoven. The pencil detonator consisted of a thin copper tube containing cupric chloride that would take about ten minutes to silently eat through wire holding back the firing pin from the percussion cap. It was slow going due to war wounds that had cost Stauffenberg an eye, his right hand, and two fingers on his left hand. Interrupted by a guard knocking on the door advising him that the meeting was about to begin, he was not able to prime the second bomb, which he gave to his aide-de-camp, Werner von Haeften.\nStauffenberg placed the single primed bomb inside his briefcase and, with the unwitting assistance of Major Ernst John von Freyend, entered the conference room containing Hitler and 20 officers, positioning the briefcase under the table near Hitler. After a few minutes, Stauffenberg received a planned telephone call and left the room. It is presumed that Colonel Heinz Brandt, who was standing next to Hitler, used his foot to move the briefcase aside by pushing it behind the leg of the conference table, thus unintentionally deflecting the blast from Hitler but causing the loss of one of his legs and his own demise when the bomb detonated.\nAt 12:42 the bomb detonated, demolishing the conference room and killing a stenographer instantly. More than 20 people in the room were injured with three officers later dying. Hitler survived, as did everyone else who was shielded from the blast by the conference table leg. His trousers were singed and tattered, and he suffered from a perforated eardrum (as did most of the other 24 people in the room), as well as from conjunctivitis in his right eye. Hitler's personal physician, Theodor Morell, administered penicillin which had been taken from captured Allied soldiers for treatment; Morell had previously observed the death of Reinhard Heydrich from sepsis in an assassination two years earlier.\nEscape from the Wolf's Lair and flight to Berlin.\nStauffenberg was seen leaving the conference building by Kurt Salterberg, a soldier on guard duty who did not consider this out of the ordinary as attendees sometimes left to collect documents. He then saw a \"massive\" cloud of smoke, wood splinters and paper and men being hurled through a window and door. Stauffenberg, upon witnessing the explosion and smoke, assumed that Hitler was dead. He then climbed into a staff car with his aide Werner von Haeften and managed to bluff his way past three checkpoints to exit the complex. Haeften then tossed the second (unprimed) bomb into the forest as they made a dash for Rastenburg airfield, reaching it before it could be realised that Stauffenberg could be responsible for the explosion. At first it was thought that the explosion had been the result of an aerial bombing, but when it was confirmed that no warplanes had flown over and Stauffenberg was absent, the theory of an assassination attempt gained strength. By 13:00 he was airborne in a Heinkel He 111 arranged by General Eduard Wagner.\nBy the time Stauffenberg's aircraft reached Berlin about 16:00, General Erich Fellgiebel, an officer at the who was in on the plot, had phoned the Bendlerblock and told the plotters that Hitler had survived the explosion. As a result, the plot to mobilise Operation Valkyrie would have no chance of succeeding once the officers of the Reserve Army knew that Hitler was alive. There was more confusion when Stauffenberg's aircraft landed and he phoned from the airport to say that Hitler was in fact dead. The Bendlerblock plotters did not know whom to believe.\nFinally, at 16:00 Olbricht issued the orders for Operation Valkyrie to be mobilised. The vacillating General Fromm, however, phoned Field Marshal Wilhelm Keitel at the Wolf's Lair and was assured that Hitler was alive. Keitel demanded to know Stauffenberg's whereabouts. This told Fromm that the plot had been traced to his headquarters and that he was in mortal danger. Fromm replied that he thought Stauffenberg was with Hitler.\nMeanwhile, General Carl-Heinrich von St\u00fclpnagel, military governor of occupied France, managed to disarm the SD and SS and captured most of their leadership. He travelled to Field Marshal G\u00fcnther von Kluge's headquarters and asked him to contact the Allies, only to be informed that Hitler was alive. At 16:40 Stauffenberg and Haeften arrived at the Bendlerblock. Fromm, presumably to protect himself, changed sides and attempted to have Stauffenberg arrested. Olbricht and Stauffenberg restrained him at gunpoint and Olbricht then appointed General Erich Hoepner to take over his duties.\nBy this time Himmler had taken charge of the situation and had issued orders countermanding Olbricht's mobilisation of Operation Valkyrie. In many places the coup was going ahead, led by officers who believed that Hitler was dead. City Commandant, and conspirator, Lieutenant General Paul von Hase ordered the , under the command of Major Otto Ernst Remer, to secure the Wilhelmstra\u00dfe and arrest Propaganda Minister Joseph Goebbels. In Vienna, Prague, and many other places troops occupied Nazi Party offices and arrested Gauleiters and SS officers.\nFailure of the coup.\nAt around 18:10, the commander of Military District III (Berlin), General Joachim von Kortzfleisch, was summoned to the Bendlerblock; he angrily refused Olbricht's orders, kept shouting \"the F\u00fchrer is alive\", was arrested, and held under guard. General Karl Freiherr von Th\u00fcngen was appointed in his place but proved to be of almost no help. General Fritz Lindemann, who was supposed to make a proclamation to the German people over the radio, failed to appear and as he held the only copy, Beck had to work on a new one.\nAt 19:00 Hitler was sufficiently recovered to make phone calls. He called Goebbels at the Propaganda Ministry. Goebbels arranged for Hitler to speak to Major Otto Ernst Remer, commander of the troops surrounding the Ministry. After assuring him that he was still alive, Hitler ordered Remer to regain control of the situation in Berlin and capture the conspirators alive. Major Remer ordered his troops to surround and seal off the Bendlerblock, but not to enter the buildings. At 20:00 a furious Witzleben arrived at the Bendlerblock and had a bitter argument with Stauffenberg, who was still insisting that the coup could go ahead. Witzleben left shortly afterwards. At around this time the planned seizure of power in Paris was aborted when Field Marshal G\u00fcnther von Kluge, who had recently been appointed commander-in-chief in the West, learnt that Hitler was alive.\nAs Remer regained control of the city and word spread that Hitler was still alive, the less resolute members of the conspiracy in Berlin began to change sides. Fromm was freed from his room and fighting broke out in the Bendlerblock between officers supporting and opposing the coup; Stauffenberg was wounded after a shootout. As the fighting was still ongoing, Remer and his forces arrived at the Bendlerblock and the conspirators were overwhelmed and arrested; by 23:00 Fromm and Remer had regained control of the building.\nPerhaps hoping that a show of zealous loyalty would save him, Fromm convened an \"impromptu\" court martial consisting of himself, and sentenced Olbricht, Stauffenberg, Haeften and another officer, Colonel Albrecht Mertz von Quirnheim, to death, while putting Beck under arrest; Beck, realising the situation was hopeless, asked for a pistol and shot himself\u2014the first of many attempted suicides in the coming days. At first Beck only seriously wounded himself\u2014he was then shot in the neck and killed by soldiers. Despite protests from Remer (who had been ordered by Hitler to arrest the conspirators), at 00:10 on 21 July the four officers were executed in the courtyard outside, possibly to prevent them from revealing Fromm's involvement. Others would have been executed as well, but at 00:30 \"Waffen-SS\" personnel led by SS-\"Obersturmbannf\u00fchrer\" Otto Skorzeny arrived and further executions were forbidden.\nAftermath.\nOver the following weeks, Himmler's \"Gestapo\", driven by a furious Hitler, rounded up nearly everyone who had the remotest connection with the plot. The discovery of letters and diaries in the homes and offices of those arrested revealed the plots of 1938, 1939, and 1943, and this led to further rounds of arrests, including that of Colonel General Franz Halder, who finished the war in a concentration camp. Under Himmler's new (blood guilt) laws, many relatives of the principal plotters were also arrested in the immediate aftermath of the failed plot.\n\"Sippenhaft\" was proposed and introduced by Himmler and remained in effect until the end of the war. Its distribution was aimed at creating fears among Wehrmacht members for their families in the event of an attempted betrayal. At first, the practice was not regulated and was carried out chaotically, which was due to Himmler\u2019s refusal to \u201cestablish specific rules regarding clan guardianship\u201d, however, on 5 February 1945 Keitel\u2019s order was issued, according to which the family of a serviceman who committed high treason was subjected to repression up to and including the death penalty. Presumably, the \"Sippenhaft\" regulation was introduced to tighten control over the military and keep them in the army during the final period of the war.\nParticularly noteworthy in considering this issue is the scientific publication of Robert Loeffel. In his study, Loeffel came to the conclusion that \"Sippenhaft\", as part of state terror at the end of the war, was a means of intimidation within Nazi Germany, when in reality this practice was not always applied, and most of the terror was adopted only after 20 July. This was due to its duality: terror was implemented only in quantities necessary to maintain a level of fear among the population that would not lead them to go over to the side of resistance.\nMore than 7,000 people were arrested and 4,980 were executed. Not all of them were connected with the plot, since the \"Gestapo\" used the occasion to settle scores with many other people suspected of opposition sympathies. Alfons Heck, a former Hitler Youth member and later a historian, describes the reaction many Germans felt to the punishments of the conspirators:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;When I heard that German officers had tried to kill Adolf Hitler ... I was enraged. I fully concurred with the sentences imposed on them, strangling I felt was too good for them; this was the time, precisely, when we were at a very ... precarious military situation. And the only man who could possibly stave off disaster ... was Adolf Hitler. That opinion was shared by many Germans, Germans who did not adore Hitler, who did not belong to the [Nazi] Party.Allied radio stations also speculated on who the possible remaining suspects could be, many of whom were eventually implicated in the plot.\nVery few of the plotters tried to escape or to deny their guilt when arrested. Those who survived interrogation were given perfunctory trials before the People's Court, a kangaroo court that always decided in favour of the prosecution. The court's president, Roland Freisler, was a fanatical Nazi seen shouting furiously and insulting the accused in the trial, which was filmed for propaganda purposes. The plotters were stripped of their uniforms and given old, shabby clothing to humiliate them for the cameras. The officers involved in the plot were \"tried\" before the Court of Military Honour, a drumhead court-martial that merely considered the evidence furnished to it by the \"Gestapo\" before expelling the accused from the Army in disgrace and handing them over to the People's Court.\nThe first trials were held on 7 and 8 August 1944. Hitler had ordered that those found guilty should be \"hanged like cattle\". Many people took their own lives prior to either their trial or their execution, including Kluge, who was accused of having knowledge of the plot beforehand and not revealing it to Hitler. St\u00fclpnagel tried to commit suicide, but survived and was hanged.\nTresckow killed himself the day after the failed plot by use of a hand grenade in no man's land between Soviet and German lines. Adjutant General Fabian von Schlabrendorff recalled Tresckow saying the following before his death:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The whole world will vilify us now, but I am still totally convinced that we did the right thing. Hitler is the archenemy not only of Germany but of the world. When, in few hours' time, I go before God to account for what I have done and left undone, I know I will be able to justify what I did in the struggle against Hitler. None of us can bewail his own death; those who consented to join our circle put on the robe of Nessus. A human being's moral integrity begins when he is prepared to sacrifice his life for his convictions.\nFromm's attempt to win favour by executing Stauffenberg and others on the night of 20 July had merely exposed his own previous lack of action and apparent failure to report the plot. Having been arrested on 21 July, Fromm was later convicted and sentenced to death by the People's Court. Despite his knowledge of the conspiracy, his formal sentence charged him with poor performance in his duties. He was executed in Brandenburg an der Havel. Hitler personally commuted his death sentence from hanging to the \"more honourable\" firing squad. Erwin Planck, the son of the physicist Max Planck, was executed for his involvement.\nA report of SS-\"Obergruppenf\u00fchrer\" Ernst Kaltenbrunner to Hitler dated 29 November 1944 on the background of the plot states that the Pope was somehow a conspirator, specifically naming Eugenio Pacelli, Pope Pius XII, as being a party in the attempt. Evidence indicates that the 20 July plotters Colonel Wessel von Freytag-Loringhoven, Colonel Erwin von Lahousen, and Admiral Wilhelm Canaris were involved in the foiling of Hitler's alleged plot to kidnap or murder Pope Pius XII in 1943, when Canaris reported the plot to Italian counterintelligence officer General Cesare Am\u00e8, who passed on the information.\nA member of the SA convicted of participating in the plot was SA-\"Obergruppenf\u00fchrer\" Wolf-Heinrich Graf von Helldorf, who was the Police Chief of Berlin and had been in contact with members of the resistance since before the war. Collaborating closely with SS-\"Gruppenf\u00fchrer\" Arthur Nebe, he was supposed to direct all police forces in Berlin to stand down and not interfere in the military actions to seize the government. However, his actions on 20 July had minimal influence on the events. For his involvement in the conspiracy, he was later arrested, convicted of treason and executed.\nAfter 3 February 1945, when Freisler was killed in an American air raid, there were no more formal trials, but as late as April, with the war weeks away from its end, Canaris' diary was found, and many more people were implicated. Hans Von Dohnanyi was accused of being the \"spiritual leader\" of the conspiracy to assassinate Hitler, and executed on 6 April 1945. Dietrich Bonhoeffer, whom Von Dohnanyi had recruited into the Abwehr, was executed 9 April 1945 along with Canaris, Oster, and four others. Executions continued and ramped up into the last days of the war, as the Nazis were determined to take down as many of their enemies with them as they possibly could. \nHitler took his survival to be a \"divine moment in history\", and commissioned a special decoration to be made for each person wounded or killed in the blast. The result was the Wound Badge of 20 July 1944. The badges were struck in three values: gold, silver, and black. (The colours denoted the severity of the wounds received by each recipient.) A total of 100 badges were manufactured, and 47 are believed to have actually been awarded. Each badge was accompanied by an ornate award document personally signed by Hitler. The badges themselves bore a facsimile of his signature, making them among the rarest decorations to have been awarded by Nazi Germany.\nFor his role in stopping the coup Major Remer was promoted to colonel and ended the war as a Major General. After the war he co-founded the Socialist Reich Party and remained a prominent neo-Nazi and advocate of Holocaust denial until his death in 1997.\nMajor Philipp von Boeselager, the German officer who provided the plastic explosives used in the bomb, escaped detection and survived the war. He was the second-to-last survivor of those involved in the plot and died on 1 May 2008, aged 90. The last survivor of the 20 July Plot was \"Oberleutnant\" Ewald-Heinrich von Kleist-Schmenzin, the thwarted plotter of just a few months before. He died on 8 March 2013, aged 90.\nAs a result of the failed coup, every member of the \"Wehrmacht\" was required to reswear his loyalty oath, by name, to Hitler and on 24 July 1944 the military salute was replaced throughout the armed forces with the Hitler Salute in which the arm was outstretched and the salutation was given.\nPlanned government.\nThe conspirators had earlier designated positions in secret to form a government that would take office after the assassination of Hitler were it to prove successful. Because of the plot's failure, such a government never rose to power and most of its members were executed.\nThe following were intended for these roles as at July 1944:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nIt was planned to include one Austrian politician (probably Heinrich Glei\u00dfner or Karl Seitz) as minister without portfolio to keep Austria in the Reich.\nAlbert Speer was listed in several notes of the conspirators as a possible Minister of Armaments; however, most of these notes stated Speer should not be approached until after Hitler was dead and one conjectural government chart had a question mark beside Speer's name. This (in addition to Speer being one of Hitler's closest and most trusted friends) most likely saved Speer from arrest by the SS.\nWilhelm, Crown Prince of Germany, was also under suspicion as he was touted to be head of state after Hitler. He was placed under the supervision of the \"Gestapo\" and his home in the Cecilienhof at Potsdam watched.\nErwin Rommel's involvement.\nThe extent of Generalfeldmarschall Erwin Rommel's involvement in the military's resistance against Hitler or the 20 July plot is difficult to ascertain, as most of the leaders who were directly involved did not survive and limited documentation on the conspirators' plans and preparations exists. Historians' opinions on this matter vary greatly. According to Peter Hoffmann, he had turned into Hitler's resolute opponent and in the end supported the coup (though not the assassination itself). He was even the natural leader of the opposition in France to some extent, considering the fact he had drawn many military and political personnel into his orbit in preparation of a \"Western solution\". Ralf Georg Reuth thinks that the conspirators perhaps mistook Rommel's ambiguous attitude for approval of the assassination. In this regard, it should be remembered that the conspirators normally did not explicitly mention the assassination. Rommel for his part was in fact both very naive and very attached to Hitler (who was the personification of National Socialism, which had provided Rommel with a great career). Thus even if Caesar von Hofacker\u2014personal advisor to St\u00fclpnagel\u2014 had mentioned a violent upheaval in Berlin, Rommel would perhaps not have interpreted it as an assassination. Thus, Rommel's participation remains ambiguous and the perception of it largely has its source in the subsequent events (especially Rommel's forced suicide) and the accounts by surviving participants.\nAccording to a post-war account by Karl Str\u00f6lin, the of Stuttgart at that time, he and two other conspirators, Alexander von Falkenhausen and Carl Heinrich von St\u00fclpnagel began efforts to bring Rommel into the anti-Hitler conspiracy in early 1944. On 15 April 1944 Rommel's new chief of staff, Hans Speidel, arrived in Normandy and reintroduced Rommel to St\u00fclpnagel. Speidel had previously been connected to Carl Goerdeler, the civilian leader of the resistance, but not to the plotters led by Stauffenberg, and only came to the attention of Stauffenberg due to his appointment to Rommel's headquarters. The conspirators felt they needed the support of a field marshal on active duty. Witzleben was a field marshal, but had not been on active duty since 1942. The conspirators gave instructions to Speidel to bring Rommel into their circle.\nSpeidel met with the former foreign minister Konstantin von Neurath and Str\u00f6lin on 27 May in Germany, ostensibly at Rommel's request, although the latter was not present. Neurath and Str\u00f6lin suggested opening immediate surrender negotiations in the West, and, according to Speidel, Rommel agreed to further discussions and preparations. Around the same timeframe, however, the plotters in Berlin were not aware that Rommel had reportedly decided to take part in the conspiracy. On 16 May, they informed Allen Dulles, through whom they hoped to negotiate with the Western Allies, that Rommel could not be counted on for support. Three days before the assassination attempt, on 17 July, Rommel's staff car was strafed by an Allied aircraft in France; he was hospitalised with major injuries and incapacitated on 20 July.\nRommel opposed assassinating Hitler. After the war, his widow maintained that he believed an assassination attempt would spark a civil war. According to the journalist and author William L. Shirer, Rommel knew about the conspiracy and advocated that Hitler be arrested and placed on trial. The historian Ian Becket argues that \"there is no credible evidence that Rommel had more than limited and superficial knowledge of the plot\" and concludes that he would not have acted to aid the plotters in the aftermath of the attempt on 20 July, while the historian Ralf Georg Reuth contends that \"there was no indication of any active participation of Rommel in the conspiracy.\" The historian Richard J. Evans concluded that he knew of a plot, but was not involved.\nWhat is not debated are the results of the failed bomb plot of 20 July. Many conspirators were arrested and the dragnet expanded to thousands. Consequently, it did not take long for Rommel to come under suspicion. He was primarily implicated through his connection to Kluge. Rommel's name also came up in confessions made under torture by St\u00fclpnagel and Hofacker, and was included in Goerdeler's papers on a list of potential supporters. Hofacker confessed that Rommel had agreed to demand for Hitler to step down, and if he refused, Rommel would join the other conspirators in deposing Hitler. Rommel was also planned to become a member of the post-Hitler government in papers drawn up by Goerdeler.\nHitler knew it would cause a major scandal on the home front to have the popular Rommel publicly branded as a traitor. With this in mind, he opted to give Rommel the option of suicide via cyanide or a public trial by Freisler's People's Court. Rommel was well aware that being hauled before the People's Court was tantamount to a death sentence. He also knew that if he chose to stand trial, his family would have been severely punished even before the all-but-certain conviction and execution. With this in mind, he committed suicide on 14 October 1944. He was buried with full military honours and his family was spared from persecution; his cause of death did not come to light until after the war.\nCriticism.\nInvolvement in war crimes and atrocities.\nInvolvement of the plotters in war crimes and atrocities has been studied by historians such as Christian Gerlach. Gerlach proved that plotters such as Tresckow and Gersdorff were aware of mass murder happening in the East from at least 1941. He writes: \"Especially with reference to the murder of the Jews, [it is said that] 'the SS' had deceived the officers by killing in secret, filing incomplete reports or none at all; if general staff officers protested, the SS threatened them.\" Gerlach concludes: \"This is, of course, nonsense.\"\nTresckow also \"signed orders for the deportation of thousands of orphaned children for forced labor in the Reich\"\u2014the so-called . Such actions led historians to question the motives of the plotters, which seemed more concerned with the military situation than with Nazi atrocities and German war crimes. However some others assert that, in such actions, Tresckow had to act out of principle to continue with his coup plans.\nGerlach pointed out that the plotters had \"selective moral criteria\" and while they were concerned about Jews being exterminated in the Holocaust, they were far less disturbed about mass murder of civilians in the East. To Gerlach, the primary motivation of the plotters was to ensure German victory in the war or at least prevent defeat. Gerlach's arguments were later supported by the historian Hans Mommsen, who stated that the plotters were interested above all in military victory. However, Gerlach's arguments were also criticised by some scholars, among them Peter Hoffmann from McGill University and Klaus Jochen Arnold from the Konrad-Adenauer-Stiftung. While acknowledging that Tresckow and other 20 July conspirators had been involved in war crimes, Arnold writes that Gerlach's argument is oversimplified. In 2011 Danny Orbach, a Harvard University-based historian, wrote that Gerlach's reading of the sources is highly skewed, and, at times, diametrically opposed to what they actually say. In one case, according to Orbach, Gerlach had falsely paraphrased the memoir of the resistance fighter Colonel Rudolf Christoph Freiherr von Gersdorff, and in another case, quoted misleadingly from an SS document.\nCommemoration and collective memory.\nA 1951 survey by the Allensbach Institute revealed that \"Only a third of respondents had a positive opinion about the men and women who had tried unsuccessfully to overthrow the Nazi regime.\"\nThe \"first official memorial service for the resistance fighters of 20 July\" was held on the tenth anniversary in 1954. In his speech at the event, Theodor Heuss, the first President of the Federal Republic of Germany, said that \"harsh words\" were necessary, and that \"There have been cases of refusal to carry out orders that have achieved historic greatness.\" After this speech, public opinion in Germany began to shift.\nNonetheless, a 1956 proposal to name a school after Claus Schenk Graf von Stauffenberg was opposed by a majority of citizens, and, according to Deutsche Welle (in 2014):\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;East Germany's communist leadership had ignored the assassination attempt for decades, mainly because the conservative and aristocratic conspirators around Stauffenberg did not match the socialist ideal.\nThe first all-German commemoration of the event did not take place until 1990. In 2013 the last surviving member of the plot, Ewald-Heinrich von Kleist-Schmenzin, died in Munich. As of 2014[ [update]], the resistance fighters are generally considered heroes in Germany, according to \"Deutsche Welle\".\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "63008", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63008", "title": "Pope Symmachus", "text": "Head of the Catholic Church from 498 to 514\nPope Symmachus (died 19 July 514) was the bishop of Rome from 22 November 498 to his death on 19 July 514. His tenure was marked by a serious schism over who was elected pope by a majority of the Roman clergy.\nEarly life.\nHe was born on the Mediterranean island of Sardinia (then under Vandal rule), the son of Fortunatus; Jeffrey Richards notes that he was born a pagan, and \"perhaps the rankest outsider\" of all the Ostrogothic popes, most of whom were members of aristocratic families. Symmachus was baptised in Rome, where he became archdeacon of the Roman Church under Pope Anastasius II (496\u2013498).\nPapacy.\nSymmachus was elected pope on 22 November 498 in the Constantinian basilica (Saint John Lateran). The archpriest of Santa Prassede, Laurentius, was elected pope on the same day at the Basilica of Saint Mary (presumably Saint Mary Major) by a dissenting faction with Byzantine sympathies, who were supported by Eastern Roman Emperor Anastasius. Both factions agreed to allow the Gothic King Theodoric the Great to arbitrate. He ruled that the one who was elected first and whose supporters were the most numerous should be recognized as pope. This was a purely political decision. An investigation favored Symmachus and his election was recognized as proper. However, an early document known as the \"Laurentian Fragment\" claims that Symmachus obtained the decision by paying bribes, while deacon Magnus Felix Ennodius of Milan later wrote that 400 \"solidi\" were distributed amongst influential personages, whom it would be indiscreet to name.\nRoman Synod I.\nSymmachus proceeded to call a synod, to be held at Rome on 1 March 499, which was attended by 72 bishops and all of the Roman clergy. Laurentius attended this synod. Afterwards he was assigned the diocesis of Nuceria in Campania. According to the account in the \"Liber Pontificalis\", Symmachus bestowed the See on Laurentius \"guided by sympathy\", but the \"Laurentian Fragment\" states that Laurentius \"was severely threatened and cajoled, and forcibly despatched\" to Nuceria (now Nocera Inferiore, in the Province of Salerno). The synod also ordained that any cleric who sought to gain votes for a successor to the papacy during the lifetime of the pope, or who called conferences and held consultations for that purpose, should be deposed and excommunicated.\nAriminum Synod II.\nIn 501, the Senator Rufius Postumius Festus, a supporter of Laurentius, accused Symmachus of various crimes. The initial charge was that Symmachus celebrated Easter on the wrong date. The king Theodoric summoned him to Ariminum to respond to the charge. The pope arrived only to discover a number of other charges, including unchastity and the misuse of church property, would also be brought against him. Symmachus panicked, fleeing from Ariminum in the middle of the night with only one companion. His flight proved to be a miscalculation, as it was regarded as an admission of guilt. Laurentius was brought back to Rome by his supporters, but a sizeable group of the clergy, including most of the senior clerics, withdrew from communion with him. A visiting bishop, Peter of Altinum, was appointed by Theodoric to celebrate Easter 502 and assume the administration of the See, pending the decision of a synod to be convened following Easter.\nPresided over by the other Italian metropolitans, Peter II of Ravenna, Laurentius of Milan, and Marcellianus of Aquileia, the synod opened in the Basilica of Santa Maria (Maggiore). It proved tumultuous. The session quickly deadlocked over the presence of a visiting bishop, Peter of Altina, who had been sent by Theoderic as Apostolic Visitor, at the request of Senators Festus and Probinus, the opponents of Symmachus. Symmachus argued that the presence of a visiting bishop implied the See of Rome was vacant, and the See could only be vacant if he were guilty\u2014which meant the case had already been decided before the evidence could be heard. Although the majority of the assembled bishops agreed with this, the Apostolic Visitor could not be made to withdraw without Theodoric's permission; this was not forthcoming. In response to this deadlock, rioting by the citizens of Rome increased, causing a number of bishops to flee Rome and the rest to petition Theodoric to move the synod to Ravenna.\nRoman Synod III.\nKing Theodoric refused their request to move the synod, ordering them instead to reconvene on 1 September. On 27 August the King wrote to the bishops that he was sending two of the \"Majores Domus nostrae\", Gudila and Bedeulphus, to see to it that the synod assembled in safety and without fear. Upon reconvening, matters were no less acrimonious. First the accusers introduced a document which included a clause stating that the king already knew Symmachus was guilty, and thus the synod should assume guilt, hear the evidence, then pass sentence. More momentous was an attack by a mob on Pope Symmachus' party as he set out to make his appearance at the Synod: many of his supporters were injured and several\u2014including the priests Gordianus and Dignissimus\u2014killed. Symmachus retreated to St. Peter's and refused to come out, despite the urgings of deputations from the synod. The \"Life of Symmachus\", however, presents these killings as part of the street-fighting between the supporters of Senators Festus and Probinus on the one side, and Senator Faustus on the other. The attacks were directed particularly against clerics, including Dignissimus, a priest of San Pietro in Vincoli, and Gordianus, a priest of Santi Giovanni e Paolo, though the rhetoric of the passage extends the violence to anyone who was a supporter of Symmachus, man or woman, cleric or layperson. It was unsafe for a cleric to walk about in Rome at night.\nPalmaris Synod IV.\nAt this point, the synod petitioned king Theodoric once again, asking permission to dissolve the meeting and return home. Theodoric replied, in a letter dated 1 October, that they must see the matter to a conclusion. So the bishops assembled once again on 23 October 502 at a place known as Palma, and after reviewing the events of the previous two sessions decided that since the pope was the successor of Peter the Apostle, they could not pass judgment on him, and left the matter to God to decide. All who had abandoned communion with him were urged to reconcile with him, and that any clergy who celebrated mass in Rome without his consent in the future should be punished as a schismatic. The resolutions were signed by 76 bishops, led by Laurentius of Milan and Peter of Ravenna.\nEnd of papacy.\nDespite the outcome of the synod, Laurentius returned to Rome, and for the next four years, according to the \"Laurentian Fragment\", he held its churches and ruled as pope with the support of the senator Festus. The struggle between the two factions was carried out on two fronts. One was through mob violence committed by supporters of each religious camp, and it is vividly described in the \"Liber Pontificalis\". The other was through diplomacy, which produced a sheaf of forged documents, the so-called \"Symmachian forgeries\", of judgments in ecclesiastical law to support Symmachus' claim that as pope he could not be called to account. The forgeries are speculated to have emerged during the Roman Synod III and served to provide the conclusion provided at Palmaris. A more productive achievement on the diplomatic front was to convince king Theodoric to intervene, conducted chiefly by two non-Roman supporters, the Milanese deacon Ennodius and the exiled deacon Dioscorus. At last Theodoric withdrew his support of Laurentius in 506, instructing Festus to hand over the Roman churches to Symmachus.\nIn 513, Caesarius, bishop of Arles, visited Symmachus while being detained in Italy. This meeting led to Caesarius' receiving a \"pallium\". Based on this introduction, Caesarius later wrote to Symmachus for help with establishing his authority, which Symmachus eagerly gave, according to William Klingshirn, \"to gather outside support for his primacy.\"\nPope Symmachus provided money and clothing to the Catholic bishops of Africa and Sardinia who had been exiled by the rulers of the Arian Vandals. He also ransomed prisoners from upper Italy, and gave them gifts of aid.\nDespite Laurentius being classed as an antipope, it is his portrait that continues to hang in the papal gallery in the Church of St. Paul's, not that of Symmachus.\nDeath.\nSymmachus died on 19 July 514, and was buried in St. Peter's Basilica. He had ruled for fifteen years, seven months, and twenty-seven days.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "63009", "revid": "80797", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63009", "title": "Strong clubs", "text": ""}
{"id": "63010", "revid": "25128593", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63010", "title": "Pope Hormisdas", "text": "Head of the Catholic Church from 514 to 523\nPope Hormisdas (; c. 450 \u2013 6 August 523) was the bishop of Rome from 20 July 514 to his death on 6 August 523. His papacy was dominated by the Acacian schism, started in 484 by Acacius of Constantinople's efforts to placate the non-Chalcedonians. His efforts to resolve this schism were successful, and on 28 March 519, the reunion between Constantinople and Rome was ratified in the cathedral of Constantinople before a large crowd.\nFamily and early career.\nHormisdas was born in Frusino in the moribund era of the Western Roman Empire. His Persian name was probably given in honour of an exiled Persian noble, Hormizd, \"celebrated in the Roman martyrology (8 August) but not so honoured in the East.\" The names of his father and son suggest he had an otherwise \"straightforward Italian pedigree.\" However, according to \"Iranica\" he was probably related to Hormizd.\nBefore becoming a deacon, Hormisdas was married and had a son, Silverius, who later became pope. During the Laurentian schism, Hormisdas was one of the most prominent clerical partisans of Pope Symmachus. He was notary at the synod held at St. Peter's in 502. Two letters of Magnus Felix Ennodius, bishop of Pavia, survive addressed to him, written when the latter tried to regain horses and money he had lent the Pope.\nPontificate.\nUnlike that of his predecessor Symmachus, the election of Hormisdas lacked any notable controversies. Upon becoming pope, one of Hormisdas' first actions was to remove the last vestiges of the schism in Rome, receiving back into the Church those adherents of the Laurentian party who had not already been reconciled. \"The schism had lingered on largely out of personal hatred to Symmachus,\" writes Jeffrey Richards, \"something with which Hormisdas was apparently not tainted.\"\nThe account of his tenure in the \"Liber Pontificalis\", as well as the overwhelming bulk of his surviving correspondence, is dominated by efforts to restore communion between the Sees of Rome and Constantinople caused by the Acacian schism. This schism occurred over the \"Henoticon\" of Emperor Zeno, which was also accepted by his Miaphysite successor Anastasius.\nThe emperor Anastasius took the first steps to resolve this schism pressured by Vitalian, the commander of the imperial cavalry, who, in opposition to the Henoticon, led Thracia, Scythia Minor, and Mysia to revolt, and marched with an army of Huns and Bulgarians to the gates of Constantinople. Richards points out that there would bound to be some tentative efforts from Constantinople, \"if only because there was a new man on the throne of St. Peter. Relations between Symmachus and the emperor Anastasius had been virtually non-existent\".\nAnastasius wrote to Hormisdas on 28 December 514, inviting him to a synod that would be held 1 July of the following year. A second, less courteous invitation, dated 12 January 515, was also sent by Anastasius to the pope, which reached Rome before the first. On 4 April Hormisdas answered, expressing his delight at the prospect of peace, but at the same time defending the position of his predecessors and welcoming a synod, but believing it unnecessary. The bearers of the emperor's first letter at last reached Rome on 14 May. The pope guardedly carried on negotiations, convened a synod at Rome and wrote to the emperor on 8 July to announce the departure of an embassy for Constantinople. Meanwhile, the two hundred bishops who had assembled on 1 July at Heraclea separated without accomplishing anything.\nThe pope's embassy to the imperial court consisted of two bishops, Ennodius of Pavia and Fortunatus of Catina, the priest Venantius, the deacon Vitalis, and the notary Hilarius. According to Rev. J. Barmby, Hormisdas made several demands: (1) The emperor should publicly announce his acceptance of the Council of Chalcedon and the letters of Pope Leo; (2) the Eastern bishops should make a similar public declaration, and in addition anathematize Nestorius, Eutyches, Dioscorus, Aelurus, Peter Mongus, Peter the Fuller, and Acacius, with all their followers; (3) everyone exiled in this dispute should be recalled and their cases reserved for the judgment of the Apostolic See; (4) those exiles who had been in communion with Rome and professed Catholicism should first be recalled; and (5) bishops accused of having persecuted the Orthodox should be sent to Rome to be judged. \"Thus the emperor proposed a free discussion in council; the pope required the unqualified acceptance of orthodoxy, and submission to himself as head of Christendom, before he would treat at all.\"\nAn imperial embassy of two high civil officials came to Rome bringing one letter dated 16 July 516 for the pope, and one dated 28 July for the Roman Senate; the aim of the latter was to convince the senators to take a stand against Hormisdas. However both the Senate, as well as King Theodoric, stayed loyal to the pope. Meanwhile, Hormisdas reported to Avitus of Vienne that an additional number of Balkan bishops had entered into relations with Rome, and Bishop John of Nicopolis, who was also the archbishop of Epirus, had broken communion with Constantinople and resumed it with Rome.\nA second papal embassy consisting of Ennodius and Bishop Peregrinus of Misenum was as unsuccessful as the first. Anastasius even attempted to bribe the legates, but was unsuccessful. Secure now that Vitalian had been defeated outside Constantinople, forced into hiding, and his supporters executed, Anastasius announced on 11 July 517 that he was breaking off the negotiations. But less than a year later the emperor died; the \"Liber Pontificalis\" claims he was struck dead by a thunderbolt. His successor, the Catholic Justin I, immediately reversed Anastasius' policies. All the demands of Pope Hormisdas were granted: the name of the condemned Patriarch Acacius as well as the names of the Emperors Anastasius and Zeno were stricken from the church diptychs, and the Patriarch John II accepted the formula of Hormisdas. Some maintain that he did so with some qualifications. This argument is based on the following quote:\"I declare that the see of apostle Peter and the see of this imperial city are one.\"\nHowever, the East continued to disregard papal demands by not condemning Acacius. On 28 March 519, in the cathedral of Constantinople in the presence of a great throng of people, the end of the schism was concluded in a solemn ceremony.\nHormisdas died in AD 523 and was buried in Old St. Peter's Basilica; his tomb was destroyed during the construction of the new basilica.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
