{"id": "68823", "revid": "1319937002", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68823", "title": "Zedekiah", "text": "Biblical figure; last monarch of the Kingdom of Judah\nZedekiah ( ; born Mattaniah; c. 618 BC \u2013 after 586 BC) was the twentieth and final King of Judah before the destruction of Jerusalem by Nebuchadnezzar II of Babylon.\nAfter the siege of Jerusalem in 597 BC, Nebuchadnezzar II deposed king Jeconiah and installed his uncle Mattaniah instead, changing his name to Zedekiah (). The prophet Jeremiah was his counselor, yet he did not heed the prophet and his epitaph is \"he did evil in the sight of the Lord\" (; ).\nWilliam F. Albright dates the start of Zedekiah's reign to 598 BC, while Edwin R. Thiele gives the start in 597 BC. On that reckoning, Zedekiah was born in c. 617 BC or 618 BC, being twenty-one on becoming king. Zedekiah's reign ended with the siege and fall of Jerusalem to Nebuchadnezzar II, which has been dated to 587 or 586 BC.\nBackground.\nThe defeat of the Neo-Assyrian Empire in 612 BC at the Battle of Nineveh by the Neo-Babylonian Empire caused upheavals that led to the destruction of the Kingdom of Judah. Egypt, concerned about the new threat posed by the Babylonians, moved northward to support Assyria. It set on the march in 608 BC, moving through Judah. King Josiah attempted to block the Egyptian forces and fell mortally wounded in battle at Megiddo. Josiah's younger son Jehoahaz was chosen to succeed his father on the throne. Three months later the Egyptian pharaoh Necho II, returning from the north, deposed Jehoahaz in favor of his older brother, Jehoiakim. Jehoahaz was taken back to Egypt as a captive.\nAfter the Babylonians defeated the Egyptians at the Battle of Carchemish in 605 BC, Nebuchadnezzar II besieged Jerusalem. Jehoiakim changed allegiances to avoid the destruction of Jerusalem. He paid tribute from the treasury, some artifacts from the temple, and some of the royal family and nobility were taken as hostages. The subsequent failure of the Babylonian invasion into Egypt undermined Babylonian control of the area, and after three years, Jehoiakim switched allegiance back to the Egyptians and ceased paying the tribute to Babylon. Because of this, Nebuchadnezzar II invaded Judah again in 599 BC, and again laid siege to Jerusalem. In 598 BC, Jehoiakim died during the siege and was succeeded by his son Jeconiah (also known as Jehoiachin). Jerusalem fell within three months. Jeconiah was deposed by Nebuchadnezzar, who installed Zedekiah, Jeconiah's uncle, in his place.\nLife and reign.\nAccording to the Hebrew Bible, Zedekiah was twenty-one years old when he was made king of Judah by Nebuchadnezzar II in 597 BC. This is in agreement with a Babylonian chronicle, which states,The seventh year: In the month Kislev the king of Akkad mustered his army and marched to Hattu. He encamped against the city of Judah and on the second day of the month Adar he captured the city [and] seized [its] king. A king of his own choice he appointed in the city [and] taking the vast tribute he brought it into Babylon.\nThe kingdom was at that time a tributary to Nebuchadnezzar II. Despite the strong remonstrances of Jeremiah, Baruch ben Neriah and other family and advisors\u2014and ignoring the example of his older brother Jehoiakim\u2014Zedekiah entered into an alliance with Pharaoh Hophra of Egypt and revolted against Babylon. Nebuchadnezzar responded by invading Judah (). Nebuchadnezzar began a siege of Jerusalem in December 589 BC. During this siege \"every worst woe befell the city, which drank the cup of God's fury to the dregs\" (; , ).\nAfter laying siege to the city for about thirty months, Nebuchadnezzar finally succeeded in capturing Jerusalem in 586 BC. Zedekiah and his followers attempted to escape, making their way out of the city, but were captured on the plains of Jericho and taken to Riblah. There, Zedekiah saw his sons put to death. Then his eyes were put out and he was loaded with chains and carried captive to Babylon (; ; ; ; ; ), where he remained a prisoner until he died.\nAfter the fall of Jerusalem, Nebuchadnezzar sent Nebuzaradan to destroy the city. It was plundered and razed to the ground, and Solomon's Temple was destroyed. Only a small number of vinedressers and husbandmen were permitted to remain in the land ().The sages also explain Proverbs 24:30 as follows: I passed by the field of a lazy man, This is Ahaz. And the vineyard of a senseless man, this is Manashe. And behold, it was all overgrown with thorns, this is Amon. And its surface was covered with Nettle, this is Jehoiakim. And its stone wall was broken down, this is a reference to Zedekiah, in whose days the temple was destroyed.\nIn the Book of Jeremiah.\nZedekiah's first appearance in the Book of Jeremiah is in Jeremiah 21, where he sends Pashhur, the son of Malchiah, and the priest Zephaniah, son of Maaseiah, to the prophet Jeremiah to ask God why Nebuchadnezzar had declared war against Judah; they suspected that God was going to make Nebuchadnezzar withdraw from besieging them. Jeremiah responds to Pashhur and Zephaniah and tells them that God declares what will happen if Zedekiah does not surrender to Nebuchadnezzar \u2014 his people will die by the sword, pestilence, and famine, but if he surrenders they will survive. In Jeremiah 22, Jeremiah advises Zedekiah to act with justice and righteousness and warns him what will happen if he does not obey God's word. (, ) In Jeremiah 24, God shows Jeremiah a vision of two baskets of figs placed before a temple, one filled with good, ripe figs, and the other filled with bad figs. God compares Zedekiah and his officials to the bad figs and states that they will be destroyed by sword, famine, and pestilence. Jeremiah had previously advised Zedekiah at the beginning of his reign to submit to Babylon and to not listen to false prophets like Hananiah who prophesied that he would not have to serve Babylon. ()\nIn Zedekiah's tenth year, he imprisons Jeremiah in his palace because Jeremiah had prophesied that Jerusalem would be captured by Nebuchadnezzar. Subsequently, Jeremiah prophesies that Zedekiah will die in peace and have a traditional funeral like the kings before him, but he will be captured by Babylon. Later, Zedekiah made a covenant with his people to free all Hebrew slaves, but they were re-enslaved by their captors. God speaks through Jeremiah and notes that Zedekiah did what was right by freeing the Hebrew slaves, but he broke his own covenant by allowing them to be re-enslaved. () Zedekiah sends Jehucal, the son of Shelemiah, and Zephaniah the priest to ask Jeremiah to pray for them when Apries's army had threatened the Babylonians enough to retreat from sieging Jerusalem. Jeremiah once again responds that the Babylonians will come back and capture the city. \nPreviously, when Jeremiah had been imprisoned in the house of Jonathan the secretary in suspicion that he was defecting to the Babylonians, Zedekiah secretly questioned him and asked if there was any word from God, to which Jeremiah responded that there was, that Zedekiah will be captured by Nebuchadnezzar. Jeremiah pleads that he will die if he is sent back to Jonathan's house so Zedekiah transferred him to the court of the guard and ordered that a loaf of bread be given to him daily. Zedekiah refuses his officials' pleas to execute Jeremiah for his prophecies and instead lets them do what they want with Jeremiah, that is throwing him into a cistern belonging to Zedekiah's son Malchiah. Ebed-melech, a servant, heard this and went to Zedekiah (who was at the Benjamin Gate) to tell him that Jeremiah would die if he wasn't saved from the pit. Zedekiah commanded Ebed-melech to take thirty-men to lift Jeremiah from the cistern. Jeremiah then warns Zedekiah again that he shall be spared if he obeys God and surrenders to Babylon, but if he doesn't Jerusalem will be destroyed and he will not escape from Nebuchadnezzar.\nAftermath.\nUpon the fall of Jerusalem, the former Kingdom of Judah was absorbed into the Neo-Babylonian Empire and reorganized to become Yehud province. Nebuchadnezzar transferred the administrative center from Jerusalem to Mizpah and appointed Gedaliah ben A\u1e25ikam as governor of the province, under the watchful eye of a Babylonian guard (, ).\nOn hearing this news, all the Jews in Moab, Ammon, Edom, and Aram-Damascus returned to Judah (). However, the subsequent assassination of Gedaliah led most of the population of Judah to flee to Egypt for safety (, ) In Egypt, they settled in Migdol, Tahpanhes, Noph, and Pathros. ().\nChronological dispute.\nThe Babylonian Chronicles give 2 Adar (16 March), 597 BC, as the date that Nebuchadnezzar captured Jerusalem. At that time, Nebuchadnezzar deposed King Jeconiah and installed Zedekiah\u2014Jeconiah's uncle\u2014in his place. Zedekiah's installation as king by Nebuchadnezzar can therefore be firmly dated to the early spring of 597 BC.\nHistorically there has been considerable controversy over the date when Jerusalem was captured the second time and Zedekiah's reign came to an end. There is no dispute about the month: it was the summer month of Tammuz (Jeremiah 52:6). The problem has been to determine the year. It was noted above that Albright preferred 587 BC and Thiele advocated 586 BC, and this division among scholars has persisted until the present time. If Zedekiah's years are by accession counting, whereby the year he came to the throne was considered his \"zero\" year and his first full year in office, 597/596, was counted as year one, Zedekiah's eleventh year, the year the city fell, would be 587/586. Since Judean regnal years were measured from Tishrei in the fall, this would place the end of his reign and the capture of the city in the summer of 586 BC. Accession counting was the rule for most, but not all, of the kings of Judah, whereas \"non-accession\" counting was the rule for most, but not all, of the kings of Israel.\nThe publication of the Babylonian Chronicles in 1956 yielded evidence that the years of Zedekiah were measured in a non-accession sense. According to this method, 598/597 BC\u2014the year Zedekiah was installed by Nebuchadnezzar according to Judah's Tishrei-based calendar\u2014is considered to be \"year one\" of Zedekiah's reign. Therefore, the fall of Jerusalem in his eleventh year would have been in year 588/587 BC, i.e. in the summer of 587 BC.\nThe Babylonian Chronicles allow the fairly precise dating of the capture of Jeconiah and the start of Zedekiah's reign, and they also give the accession year of Nebuchadnezzar's successor Amel-Marduk (Evil Merodach) as 562/561 BC, which was the 37th year of Jeconiah's captivity according to 2 Kings 25:27. These Babylonian records related to Jeconiah's reign are consistent with the fall of the city in 587 but not in 586, thus supporting Albright's date. Nevertheless, scholars who assume that Zedekiah's reign should be calculated by accession reckoning continue to adhere to the 586 date.\nBook of Mormon.\nAccording to the Book of Mormon, a religious text in the Latter Day Saint movement, Zedekiah had a son named Mulek, who escaped death and traveled across the ocean to the Americas, where he founded the Mulekite nation. The Mulekites later merged with another Israelite splinter group\u2014the Nephites\u2014to form one nation, which retained the Nephite name.\nGenealogical note.\nZedekiah (whose name at birth was Mattaniah) was the third of Josiah's four sons. His three brothers were Eliakim (born c. 634 BCE), Shallum (born c. 633 BCE), and Johanan. Hamutal\u2014the daughter of Jeremiah of Libnah\u2014was mother to Mattaniah and his older brother Shallum, while Zebidah\u2014the niece of Pedaiah\u2014was mother to Eliakim. Zedekiah had multiple wives, sons, and daughters, but only one son is named in the Bible, Malchiah. \nShallum succeeded Josiah as king of Judah, under the name Jehoahaz. Shallum was succeeded by Eliakim, under the name Jehoiakim. Jehoiakim was succeeded by his own son Jeconiah. \nNebuchadnezzar II deposed Jeconiah and installed his uncle Mattaniah on the throne, under the name Zedekiah. Zedekiah was the last king of Judah before the kingdom was conquered by Babylon and the people exiled.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "68824", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68824", "title": "Fox Hunting", "text": ""}
{"id": "68825", "revid": "41719756", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68825", "title": "Zeboim (Hebrew Bible)", "text": "One of a cluster of five biblical cities\nZeboim is the name in English of two or three places in the Bible:"}
{"id": "68826", "revid": "51065017", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68826", "title": "List of Irish people", "text": "This is a list of notable Irish people, who were born on the island of Ireland, in either the Republic of Ireland or Northern Ireland, and have lived there for most of their lives. Also included on the list are people who were not born in Ireland, but have been raised as Irish, have lived there for most of their lives or in regards to the Republic of Ireland, have adopted Irish citizenship (e.g., Daniel Day-Lewis). The names are sorted by surname.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThis article includes . &lt;br&gt; If an [ internal link] incorrectly led you here, you may wish to change the link to point directly to the intended article."}
{"id": "68827", "revid": "39191556", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68827", "title": "Zebah and Zalmunna", "text": "Kings mentioned in the Hebrew Bible\nZebah ( \"Ze\u1e07a\u1e25\", \"sacrifice\", Zebee in the Brenton Septuagint Translation and the Douai-Rheims Bible) and Zalmunna (\u05e6\u05b7\u05dc\u05b0\u05de\u05bb\u05e0\u05b8\u05bc\u05e2 \"\u1e62almunn\u0101\u2018\", \"shade denied\" or \"Salm protects\" Salmana in the Brenton Septuagint Translation and the Douai-Rheims Bible) were the two kings who led the vast host of the Midianites who invaded the land of Israel, and over whom Gideon gained a great and decisive victory (Judges 8). Zebah and Zalmunna had succeeded in escaping across the Jordan River with a remnant of the Midianite host, but were overtaken at Karkor, probably in the Hauran, and routed by Gideon. The kings were taken alive and brought back across the Jordan; and confessing that they had personally taken part in the killing of Gideon's brothers, they were put to death.\nTheir demise is remembered and invoked in :\n\"Deal with them as with Midian ... yes, all their princes like Zebah and Zalmunna\".\nSee also 1 Samuel 12:11 and Isaiah 10:26.\nReferences.\nGeneral references.\n\u00a0This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain:\u00a0\n\u00a0This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain:\u00a0"}
{"id": "68831", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68831", "title": "Zebadiah", "text": ""}
{"id": "68832", "revid": "7131173", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68832", "title": "Norman Conquest", "text": "11th-century invasion of England\nThe Norman Conquest of England (or the Conquest) was an 11th-century invasion by an army made up of thousands of Norman, French, Flemish, and Breton troops, all led by the Duke of Normandy, later styled William the Conqueror.\nWilliam's claim to the English throne derived from his familial relationship with the childless Anglo-Saxon king Edward the Confessor, who may have encouraged William's hopes for the throne. Edward died in January 1066 and was succeeded by his brother-in-law Harold Godwinson. The Norwegian king Harald Hardrada invaded northern England in September 1066 and was victorious at the Battle of Fulford on 20 September, but Godwinson's army defeated and killed Hardrada at the Battle of Stamford Bridge on 25 September. Three days later on 28 September, William's invasion force of thousands of men and hundreds of ships landed at Pevensey in Sussex in southern England. Harold marched south to oppose him, leaving a significant portion of his army in the north. Harold's army confronted William's invaders on 14 October at the Battle of Hastings. William's force defeated Harold, who was killed in the engagement, and William became king.\nAlthough William's main rivals were gone, he still faced rebellions over the following years and was not secure on the English throne until after 1072. The lands of the resisting English elite were confiscated; some of the elite fled into exile. To control his new kingdom, William granted lands to his followers and built castles commanding military strong points throughout the land. Under his authority, the Domesday Book, a manuscript record of the \"Great Survey\" of much of England and parts of Wales, was completed by 1086. Other effects of the conquest included the court and government, the introduction of a dialect of French as the language of the elites, and changes in the composition of the upper classes, as William enfeoffed lands to be held directly from the king. More gradual changes affected the agricultural classes and village life: the main change appears to have been the formal elimination of slavery, which may or may not have been linked to the invasion. There was little alteration in the structure of government, as the new Norman administrators took over many of the forms of Anglo-Saxon government.\nOrigins.\nIn 911, the Carolingian French ruler Charles the Simple allowed a group of Vikings under their leader Rollo to settle in Normandy as part of the Treaty of Saint-Clair-sur-Epte. In exchange for the land, the Norsemen under Rollo were expected to provide protection along the coast against further Viking invaders. Their settlement proved successful, and the Vikings in the region became known as the \"Northmen\" from which \"Normandy\" and \"Normans\" are derived. The Normans quickly adopted the indigenous culture as they became assimilated by the French, renouncing paganism and converting to Christianity. They adopted the Old French language of their new home and added features from their own Old Norse language, transforming it into the Norman language. They intermarried with the local population and used the territory granted to them as a base to extend the frontiers of the duchy westward, annexing territory including the Bessin, the Cotentin Peninsula and Avranches.\nIn 1002, English king \u00c6thelred the Unready married Emma of Normandy, the sister of Richard II, Duke of Normandy. Their son Edward the Confessor, who spent many years in exile in Normandy, succeeded to the English throne in 1042. This led to the establishment of a powerful Norman interest in English politics, as Edward drew heavily on his former hosts for support, bringing in Norman courtiers, soldiers, and clerics and appointing them to positions of power, particularly in the Church. Childless and embroiled in conflict with the formidable Godwin, Earl of Wessex, and his sons, Edward may also have encouraged William of Normandy's ambitions for the English throne.\nWhen King Edward died at the beginning of 1066, the lack of a clear heir led to a disputed succession in which several contenders laid claim to the throne of England. Edward's immediate successor was the Earl of Wessex, Harold Godwinson, the richest and most powerful of the English aristocrats. Harold was elected king by the Witenagemot of England and crowned by the Archbishop of York, Ealdred, although Norman propaganda claimed the ceremony was performed by Stigand, the uncanonically elected Archbishop of Canterbury. Harold was immediately challenged by two powerful neighbouring rulers. William claimed that he had been promised the throne by King Edward and that Harold had sworn agreement to this; King Harald III of Norway, commonly known as Harald Hardrada, also contested the succession. His claim to the throne was based on an agreement between his predecessor, Magnus the Good, and the earlier English king Harthacnut, whereby if either died without an heir, the other would inherit both England and Norway. William and Harald at once set about assembling troops and ships to invade England.\nTostig's raids and the Norwegian invasion.\nIn early 1066, Harold's exiled brother, Tostig Godwinson, raided southeastern England with a fleet he had recruited in Flanders, later joined by other ships from Orkney. Threatened by Harold's fleet, Tostig moved north and raided in East Anglia and Lincolnshire, but he was driven back to his ships by the brothers Edwin, Earl of Mercia, and Morcar, Earl of Northumbria. Deserted by most of his followers, Tostig withdrew to Scotland, where he spent the summer recruiting fresh forces. King Harold spent the summer on the south coast with a large army and fleet waiting for William to invade, but the bulk of his forces were militia who needed to harvest their crops, so on 8 September Harold dismissed them.\nHardrada invaded northern England in early September, leading a fleet of more than 300 ships carrying perhaps 15,000 men. Harald's army was further augmented by the forces of Tostig, who threw his support behind the Norwegian king's bid for the throne. Advancing on York, the Norwegians defeated a northern English army under Edwin and Morcar on 20 September at the Battle of Fulford. The two earls had rushed to engage the Norwegian forces before Harold could arrive from the south. Although Harold Godwinson had married Edwin and Morcar's sister Ealdgyth, the two earls may have distrusted Harold and feared that the king would replace Morcar with Tostig. The result was that their forces were devastated and unable to participate in the rest of the campaigns of 1066, although the two earls survived the battle.\nHardrada moved on to York, which surrendered to him. After taking hostages from the leading men of the city, on 24 September the Norwegians moved east to the village of Stamford Bridge. King Harold probably learned of the Norwegian invasion in mid-September and rushed north, gathering forces as he went. The royal forces probably took nine days to cover the distance from London to York, averaging almost per day. At dawn on 25 September Harold's forces reached York, where he learned the location of the Norwegians. The English then marched on the invaders and took them by surprise, defeating them in the Battle of Stamford Bridge. Harald of Norway and Tostig were killed, and the Norwegians suffered such horrific losses that only 24 of the original 300 ships were required to carry away the survivors. The English victory was costly, however, as Harold's army was left in a battered and weakened state, and far from the English Channel.\nNorman invasion.\nNorman preparations and forces.\nWilliam assembled a large invasion fleet and an army gathered from Normandy and all over France, including large contingents from Brittany and Flanders. He mustered his forces at Saint-Valery-sur-Somme and was ready to cross the English Channel by about 12 August. The exact numbers and composition of William's force are unknown. A contemporary document claims that William had 726 ships, but this may be an inflated figure. Figures given by contemporary writers are highly exaggerated, varying from 14,000 to 150,000 men. Modern historians have offered a range of estimates for the size of William's forces: 7000\u20138000 men, 1000\u20132000 of them cavalry; 10,000\u201312,000 men; 10,000 men, 3000 of them cavalry; or 7500 men. The army would have consisted of a mix of cavalry, infantry, and archers or crossbowmen, with about equal numbers of cavalry and archers and the foot soldiers equal in number to the other two types combined. Although later lists of companions of William the Conqueror are extant, most are padded with extra names; only about 35 individuals can be reliably claimed to have been with William at Hastings.\nThough contemporary historian William of Poitiers states that William obtained Pope Alexander II's consent for the invasion, signified by a papal banner, along with diplomatic support from other European rulers, these claims should be treated with caution and were probably made to strengthen William's claims to legitimacy. Although Alexander did give papal approval to the conquest after it succeeded, no other source claims papal support before the invasion. William's army assembled during the summer while an invasion fleet in Normandy was constructed. Although the army and fleet were ready by early August, adverse winds kept the ships in Normandy until late September. There were probably other reasons for William's delay, including intelligence reports from England revealing that Harold's forces were deployed along the coast. William would have preferred to delay the invasion until he could make an unopposed landing.\nLanding and Harold's march south.\nThe Normans crossed to England a few days after Harold's victory over the Norwegians at Stamford Bridge on 25 September, following the dispersal of Harold's naval force. They landed at Pevensey in Sussex on 28 September and erected a wooden castle at Hastings, from which they raided the surrounding area. This ensured supplies for the army, and as Harold and his family held many of the lands in the area, it weakened William's opponent and made him more likely to attack to put an end to the raiding.\nAfter defeating Tostig and Harald Hardrada in the north, Harold left much of his force there, including Morcar and Edwin, and marched the rest of his army south to deal with the threatened Norman invasion. It is unclear when Harold learned of William's landing, but it was probably while he was travelling south. Harold stopped in London for about a week before reaching Hastings, so it is likely that he took a second week to march south, averaging about per day, for the nearly to London. Although Harold attempted to surprise the Normans, William's scouts reported the English arrival to the duke. The events preceding the battle remain obscure, with contradictory accounts in the sources, but all agree that William led his army from his castle and advanced towards the enemy. Harold had taken up a defensive position at the top of Senlac Hill (present-day Battle, East Sussex), about from William's castle at Hastings.\nContemporary sources do not give reliable data on the size and composition of Harold's army, although two Norman sources give figures of 1.2\u00a0million or 400,000 men. Recent historians have suggested figures of between 5000 and 13,000 for Harold's army at Hastings, but most agree on a range of between 7000 and 8000 English troops. These men would have comprised a mix of the \"fyrd\" (militia mainly composed of foot soldiers) and the \"housecarls\" (nobleman's personal troops), who usually also fought on foot. The main difference between the two types was in their armour; the \"housecarls\" used better protecting armour than the \"fyrd\". The English army does not appear to have had many archers, although some were present. The identities of few of the Englishmen at Hastings are known; the most important were Harold's brothers Gyrth and Leofwine. About 18 other named individuals can reasonably be assumed to have fought with Harold at Hastings, including two other relatives.\nBattle of Hastings.\nThe battle began at about 9\u00a0am on 14 October 1066 and lasted all day, but while a broad outline is known, the events are obscured by contradictory accounts in the sources. Although the numbers on each side were probably about equal, William had both cavalry and infantry, including many archers, while Harold had only foot soldiers and few archers. The English soldiers formed up as a shield wall along the ridge, and were at first so effective that William's army was thrown back with heavy casualties. Some of William's Breton troops panicked and fled, and some of the English troops appear to have pursued the fleeing Bretons. Norman cavalry then attacked and killed the pursuing troops. While the Bretons were fleeing, rumours swept the Norman forces that William had been killed, but William rallied his troops. Twice more the Normans made feigned withdrawals, tempting the English into pursuit and allowing the Norman cavalry to attack them repeatedly. \nThe available sources are more confused about events in the afternoon, but it appears that the decisive event was the death of Harold, about which different stories are told. William of Jumieges claims that Harold was killed by William. The Bayeux Tapestry has been claimed to show Harold's death by an arrow to the eye, but this may be a later reworking of the tapestry to conform to 12th-century stories that Harold had died from an arrow wound to the head. Other sources state that no one knew how Harold died because the press of battle was so tight around the king that the soldiers could not see who struck the fatal blow. William of Poitiers gives no details about Harold's death.\nAftermath.\nThe day after the battle, Harold's body was identified, either by his armour or marks on his body. The bodies of the English dead, which included some of Harold's brothers and his \"housecarls\", were left on the battlefield, although some were removed by relatives later. Gytha, Harold's mother, offered William the weight of her son's body in gold for its custody, but her offer was refused. William ordered that Harold's body be thrown into the sea, but whether that took place is unclear. Another story relates that Harold was buried at the top of a cliff. Waltham Abbey, which had been founded by Harold, later claimed that his body had been buried there secretly. Later legends claimed that Harold did not die at Hastings but escaped and became a hermit at Chester.\nAfter his victory at Hastings, William expected to receive the submission of the surviving English leaders, but instead Edgar \u00c6theling was proclaimed king by the Witenagemot, with the support of Earls Edwin and Morcar, Stigand, the Archbishop of Canterbury, and Ealdred, the Archbishop of York. William therefore advanced, marching around the coast of Kent to London. He defeated an English force that attacked him at Southwark, but being unable to storm London Bridge, he sought to reach the capital by a more circuitous route.\nWilliam moved up the Thames valley to cross the river at Wallingford, Berkshire; while there he received the submission of Stigand. He then travelled north-east along the Chilterns, before advancing towards London from the north-west, fighting further engagements against forces from the city. Having failed to muster an effective military response, Edgar's leading supporters lost their nerve, and the English leaders surrendered to William at Berkhamsted, Hertfordshire. William was acclaimed King of England and crowned by Ealdred on 25 December 1066, in Westminster Abbey. King William attempted to conciliate the remaining English nobility by confirming Morcar, Edwin, and Waltheof, Earl of Northumbria, in their lands as well as giving some land to Edgar \u00c6theling. William remained in England until March 1067, when he returned to Normandy with English prisoners, including Stigand, Morcar, Edwin, Edgar \u00c6theling, and Waltheof.\nEnglish resistance.\nFirst rebellions.\nDespite the submission of the English nobles, resistance continued for several years. William left control of England in the hands of his half-brother Odo and one of his closest supporters, William fitzOsbern. In 1067 rebels in Kent launched an unsuccessful attack on Dover Castle in combination with Eustace II of Boulogne. The Shropshire landowner Eadric the Wild, in alliance with the Welsh rulers of Gwynedd and Powys, raised a revolt in western Mercia, fighting Norman forces based in Hereford. These events forced William to return to England at the end of 1067. In 1068 William besieged rebels in Exeter, including Harold's mother Gytha, and after suffering heavy losses managed to negotiate the town's surrender. In May, William's wife Matilda was crowned queen at Westminster, an important symbol of William's growing international stature. Later in the year Edwin and Morcar raised a revolt in Mercia with Welsh assistance, while Gospatric, the newly appointed Earl of Northumbria, led a rising in Northumbria, which had not yet been occupied by the Normans. These rebellions rapidly collapsed as William moved against them, building castles and installing garrisons as he had already done in the south. Edwin and Morcar again submitted, while Gospatric fled to Scotland, as did Edgar the \u00c6theling and his family, who may have been involved in these revolts. Meanwhile, Harold's sons, who had taken refuge in Ireland, raided Somerset, Devon and Cornwall from the sea.\nRevolts of 1069.\nEarly in 1069 the newly installed Norman Earl of Northumbria, Robert de Comines, and several hundred soldiers accompanying him were massacred at Durham. The Northumbrian rebellion was joined by Edgar, Gospatric, Siward Barn and other rebels who had taken refuge in Scotland. The castellan of York, Robert fitzRichard, was defeated and killed, and the rebels besieged the Norman castle at York. William hurried north with an army, defeated the rebels outside York and pursued them into the city, massacring the inhabitants and bringing the revolt to an end. He built a second castle at York, strengthened Norman forces in Northumbria and then returned south. A subsequent local uprising was crushed by the garrison of York. Harold's sons launched a second raid from Ireland and were defeated at the Battle of Northam in Devon by Norman forces under Count Brian, a son of Eudes, Count of Penthi\u00e8vre. In August or September 1069 a large fleet sent by Sweyn II of Denmark arrived off the coast of England, sparking a new wave of rebellions across the country. After abortive raids in the south, the Danes joined forces with a new Northumbrian uprising, which was also joined by Edgar, Gospatric and the other exiles from Scotland as well as Waltheof. The combined Danish and English forces defeated the Norman garrison at York, seized the castles and took control of Northumbria, although a raid into Lincolnshire led by Edgar was defeated by the Norman garrison of Lincoln.\nAt the same time resistance flared up again in western Mercia, where the forces of Eadric the Wild, together with his Welsh allies and rebel forces from Cheshire and Shropshire, attacked the castle at Shrewsbury. In the southwest, rebels from Devon and Cornwall attacked the Norman garrison at Exeter but were repulsed by the defenders and scattered by a Norman relief force under Count Brian. Rebels from Dorset, Somerset and neighbouring areas besieged Montacute Castle but were defeated by a Norman army gathered from London, Winchester and Salisbury under Geoffrey of Coutances. Meanwhile, William attacked the Danes who had moored for the winter south of the Humber in Lincolnshire and drove them back to the north bank. Leaving Robert of Mortain in charge of Lincolnshire, he turned west and defeated the Mercian rebels in battle at Stafford. When the Danes attempted to return to Lincolnshire, the Norman forces drove them back across the Humber. William advanced into Northumbria, defeating an attempt to block his crossing of the swollen River Aire at Pontefract. The Danes fled at his approach, and he occupied York. He bought off the Danes, who agreed to leave England in the spring, and during the winter of 1069\u201370 his forces systematically devastated Northumbria in the Harrying of the North, subduing all resistance. As a symbol of his renewed authority over the north, William ceremonially wore his crown at York on Christmas Day 1069.\nIn early 1070, having secured the submission of Waltheof and Gospatric, and driven Edgar and his remaining supporters back to Scotland, William returned to Mercia, where he based himself at Chester and crushed all remaining resistance in the area before returning to the south. Papal legates arrived and at Easter re-crowned William, which would have symbolically reasserted his right to the kingdom. William also oversaw a purge of prelates from the Church, most notably Stigand, who was deposed from Canterbury. The papal legates also imposed penances on William and those of his supporters who had taken part in Hastings and the subsequent campaigns. The see of York had become vacant following the death of Ealdred in September 1069. Both sees were filled by men loyal to William: Lanfranc, abbot of William's foundation at Caen, received Canterbury while Thomas of Bayeux, one of William's chaplains, was installed at York. Some other bishoprics and abbeys received new bishops and abbots, and William confiscated some of the wealth of the English monasteries which had served as repositories for the assets of the native nobles.\nDanish troubles.\nIn 1070 Sweyn II arrived to take personal command of his fleet and renounced the earlier agreement to withdraw, sending troops into the Fens to join forces with English rebels led by Hereward the Wake, at that time based on the Isle of Ely. Sweyn accepted a payment of danegeld from William and returned home. After the departure of the Danes, the Fenland rebels remained at large, protected by the marshes, and early in 1071 there was a final outbreak of rebel activity in the area. Edwin and Morcar again turned against William, and although Edwin was quickly betrayed and killed, Morcar reached Ely, where he and Hereward were joined by exiled rebels who had sailed from Scotland. William arrived with an army and a fleet to finish off this last pocket of resistance. After some costly failures, the Normans managed to construct a pontoon to reach the Isle of Ely, defeated the rebels at the bridgehead and stormed the island, marking the effective end of English resistance. Morcar was imprisoned for the rest of his life; Hereward was pardoned and had his lands returned to him.\nLast resistance.\nWilliam faced difficulties in his continental possessions in 1071, but in 1072 he returned to England and marched north to confront King Malcolm III of Scotland. This campaign, which included a land army supported by a fleet, resulted in the Treaty of Abernethy in which Malcolm expelled Edgar the \u00c6theling from Scotland and agreed to some degree of subordination to William. The status of this subordination was unclear\u00a0\u2013 the treaty merely stated that Malcolm became William's man. Whether this meant only for Cumbria and Lothian or for the whole Scottish kingdom was left ambiguous.\nIn 1075, during William's absence, Ralph de Gael, the Earl of Norfolk, and Roger de Breteuil the Earl of Hereford, conspired to overthrow him in the Revolt of the Earls. The reason for the rebellion is unclear, but it was launched at the wedding of Ralph to a relative of Roger's, held at Exning. Earl Waltheof, despite being one of William's favourites, was also involved, and some Breton lords were ready to offer support. Ralph also requested Danish aid. William remained in Normandy while his men in England subdued the revolt. Roger was unable to leave his stronghold in Herefordshire because of efforts by Wulfstan, the Bishop of Worcester, and \u00c6thelwig, the Abbot of Evesham. Ralph was bottled up in Norwich Castle by the combined efforts of Odo of Bayeux, Geoffrey of Coutances, Richard fitzGilbert, and William de Warenne. Norwich was besieged and surrendered, and Ralph went into exile. Meanwhile, Sweyn II's brother Cnut arrived in England with a fleet of 200 ships, but he was too late as Norwich had already surrendered. The Danes then raided along the coast before returning home. William did not return to England until later in 1075, to deal with the Danish threat and the aftermath of the rebellion, celebrating Christmas at Winchester. Roger and Waltheof were kept in prison where Waltheof was executed in May 1076. By that time William had returned to the continent, where Ralph was continuing the rebellion from Brittany.\nControl of England.\nOnce England had been conquered, the Normans faced many challenges in maintaining control. They were few in number compared to the native English population; including those from other parts of France, historians estimate the number of Norman landholders at around 8000. William's followers expected and received lands and titles in return for their service in the invasion, but William claimed ultimate possession of the land in England over which his armies had given him \"de facto\" control, and asserted the right to dispose of it as he saw fit. Henceforth, all land was \"held\" directly from the king in feudal tenure in return for military service. A Norman lord typically had properties scattered piecemeal throughout England and Normandy, and not in a single geographic block.\nTo find the lands to compensate his Norman followers, William initially confiscated the estates of all the English lords who had fought and died with Harold and redistributed part of their lands. These confiscations led to revolts, which resulted in more confiscations, a cycle that continued for five years after the Battle of Hastings. To put down and prevent further rebellions the Normans constructed castles and fortifications in unprecedented numbers, initially mostly on the motte-and-bailey pattern. Historian Robert Liddiard remarks that \"to glance at the urban landscape of Norwich, Durham or Lincoln is to be forcibly reminded of the impact of the Norman invasion\". William and his barons also exercised tighter control over inheritance of property by widows and daughters, often forcing marriages to Normans.\nA measure of William's success in taking control is that, from 1072 until the Capetian conquest of Normandy in 1204, William and his successors were largely absentee rulers. For example, after 1072, William spent more than 75 per cent of his time in France rather than England. While he needed to be personally present in Normandy to defend the realm from foreign invasion and put down internal revolts, he set up royal administrative structures that enabled him to rule England from a distance.\nConsequences.\nElite replacement.\nA direct consequence of the invasion was the almost total elimination of the old English aristocracy and the loss of English control over the Catholic Church in England. William systematically dispossessed English landowners and conferred their property on his continental followers. The Domesday Book of 1086 meticulously documents the impact of this colossal programme of expropriation, revealing that by that time only about 5 per cent of land in England south of the Tees was left in English hands. Even this tiny residue was further diminished in the decades that followed, the elimination of native landholding being most complete in southern parts of the country.\nNatives were also removed from high governmental and ecclesiastical offices. After 1075 all earldoms were held by Normans, and Englishmen were only occasionally appointed as sheriffs. Likewise in the Church, senior English office-holders were either expelled from their positions or kept in place for their lifetimes and replaced by foreigners when they died. After the death of Wulfstan in 1095, no bishopric was held by any Englishman, and English abbots became uncommon, especially in the larger monasteries.\nEnglish emigration.\nFollowing the conquest, many Anglo-Saxons, including groups of nobles, fled the country for Scotland, Ireland, or Scandinavia. Members of King Harold Godwinson's family sought refuge in Ireland and used their bases in that country for unsuccessful invasions of England. The largest single exodus occurred in the 1070s, when a group of Anglo-Saxons in a fleet of 235 ships sailed for the Byzantine Empire. The empire became a popular destination for many English nobles and soldiers, as the Byzantines were in need of mercenaries. The English became the predominant element in the elite Varangian Guard, until then a largely Scandinavian unit, from which the emperor's bodyguard was drawn. Some of the English migrants were settled in Byzantine frontier regions on the Black Sea coast and established towns with names such as New London and New York.\nGovernmental systems.\nBefore the Normans arrived, Anglo-Saxon governmental systems were more sophisticated than their counterparts in Normandy. All of England was divided into administrative units called shires, with subdivisions; the royal court was the centre of government, and a justice system based on local and regional tribunals existed to secure the rights of free men. Shires were run by officials known as shire reeves or sheriffs. Most medieval governments were always on the move, holding court wherever the weather and food or other matters were best at the moment; England had a permanent treasury at Winchester before William's conquest. One major reason for the strength of the English monarchy was the wealth of the kingdom, built on the English system of taxation that included a land tax, or the geld. English coinage was also superior to most of the other currencies in use in northwestern Europe, and the ability to mint coins was a royal monopoly. The English kings had also developed the system of issuing writs to their officials, in addition to the normal medieval practice of issuing charters. Writs were either instructions to an official or group of officials, or notifications of royal actions such as appointments to office or a grant of some sort.\nThis sophisticated medieval form of government was handed over to the Normans and was the foundation of further developments. They kept the framework of government but made changes in the personnel, although at first the new king attempted to keep some natives in office. By the end of William's reign, most of the officials of government and the royal household were Normans. The language of official documents also changed, from Old English to Latin. The forest laws were introduced, leading to the setting aside of large sections of England as royal forest. The Domesday survey was an administrative catalogue of the landholdings of the kingdom, and was unique to medieval Europe. It was divided into sections based on the shires, and listed all the landholdings of each tenant-in-chief of the king as well as who had held the land before the conquest.\nLanguage.\nOne of the most obvious effects of the conquest was the introduction of Anglo-Norman, a northern dialect of Old French with limited Nordic influences, as the language of the ruling classes in England, displacing Old English. Norman French words entered the English language, and a further sign of the shift was the usage of names common in France instead of Anglo-Saxon names. Male names such as William, Robert, and Richard soon became common; female names changed more slowly. The Norman invasion had little impact on placenames, which had changed significantly after earlier Scandinavian invasions. It is not known precisely how much English the Norman invaders learned, nor how much the knowledge of Norman French spread among the lower classes, but the demands of trade and basic communication probably meant that at least some of the Normans and native English were bilingual. Nevertheless, William the Conqueror never developed a working knowledge of English and for centuries afterwards English was not well understood by the nobility.\nImmigration and intermarriage.\nAn estimated 8000 Normans and other continentals settled in England as a result of the conquest, although exact figures cannot be established. Some of these new residents intermarried with the native English, but the extent of this practice in the years immediately after Hastings is unclear. Several marriages are attested between Norman men and English women during the years before 1100, but such marriages were uncommon. Most Normans continued to contract marriages with other Normans or other continental families rather than with the English. Within a century of the invasion, intermarriage between the native English and the Norman immigrants had become common. By the early 1160s, Ailred of Rievaulx was writing that intermarriage was common in all levels of society.\nSociety.\nThe impact of the conquest on the lower levels of English society is difficult to assess. The major change was the elimination of slavery in England, which had disappeared by the middle of the 12th century. There were about 28,000 slaves listed in the Domesday Book in 1086, fewer than had been enumerated for 1066. In some places, such as Essex, the decline in slaves was 20 per cent for the 20 years. The main reasons for the decline in slaveholding appear to have been the disapproval of the Church and the cost of supporting slaves who, unlike serfs, had to be maintained entirely by their owners. The practice of slavery was not outlawed, and the \"Leges Henrici Primi\" from the reign of King Henry I continue to mention slaveholding as legal.\nMany of the free peasants of Anglo-Saxon society appear to have lost status and become indistinguishable from the non-free serfs. Whether this change was due entirely to the conquest is unclear, but the invasion and its after-effects probably accelerated a process already underway. The spread of towns and increase in nucleated settlements in the countryside, rather than scattered farms, was probably accelerated by the coming of the Normans to England. The lifestyle of the peasantry probably did not greatly change in the decades after 1066. Although earlier historians argued that women became less free and lost rights with the conquest, current scholarship has mostly rejected this view. Little is known about women other than those in the landholding class, so no conclusions can be drawn about peasant women's status after 1066. Noblewomen appear to have continued to influence political life mainly through their kinship relationships. Both before and after 1066 aristocratic women could own land, and some women continued to have the ability to dispose of their property as they wished.\nHistoriography.\nDebate over the conquest started almost immediately. The \"Anglo-Saxon Chronicle\", when discussing the death of William the Conqueror, denounced him and the conquest in verse, but the king's obituary notice from William of Poitiers, a Frenchman, was full of praise. Historians since then have argued over the facts of the matter and how to interpret them, with little agreement. The theory or myth of the \"Norman yoke\" arose in the 17th century, the idea that Anglo-Saxon society had been freer and more equal than the society that emerged after the conquest. This theory owes more to the period in which it was developed than to historical facts, but it continues to be used to the present day in both political and popular thought.\nIn the 20th and 21st centuries, historians have focused less on the rightness or wrongness of the conquest itself, instead concentrating on the effects of the invasion. Some, such as Richard Southern, have seen the conquest as a critical turning point in history. Southern stated that \"no country in Europe, between the rise of the barbarian kingdoms and the 20th century, has undergone so radical a change in so short a time as England experienced after 1066\". Other historians, such as H. G. Richardson and G. O. Sayles, believe that the transformation was less radical. In more general terms, Singman has called the conquest \"the last echo of the national migrations that characterized the early Middle Ages\". The debate over the impact of the conquest depends on how change after 1066 is measured. If Anglo-Saxon England was already evolving before the invasion, with the introduction of feudalism, castles or other changes in society, then the conquest, while important, did not represent radical reform. But the change was dramatic if measured by the elimination of the English nobility or the loss of Old English as a literary language. Nationalistic arguments have been made on both sides of the debate, with the Normans cast as either the persecutors of the English or the rescuers of the country from a decadent Anglo-Saxon nobility.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "68833", "revid": "1314498159", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68833", "title": "Iteration", "text": "Repetition of a process\nIteration means repeating a process to generate a (possibly unbounded) sequence of outcomes. Each repetition of the process is a single iteration, and the outcome of each iteration is the starting point of the next iteration. \nIn mathematics and computer science, iteration (along with the related technique of recursion) is a standard element of algorithms.\nMathematics.\nIn mathematics, iteration may refer to the process of iterating a function, i.e. applying a function repeatedly, using the output from one iteration as the input to the next. Iteration of apparently simple functions can produce complex behaviors and difficult problems \u2013 for examples, see the Collatz conjecture and juggler sequences.\nAnother use of iteration in mathematics is in iterative methods which are used to produce approximate numerical solutions to certain mathematical problems. Newton's method is an example of an iterative method. Manual calculation of a number's square root is a common use and a well-known example.\nComputing.\nIn computing, iteration is a technique that marks out of a block of statements within a computer program for a defined number of repetitions. That block of statements is said to be \"iterated\". A computer programmer might also refer to that block of statements as \"an\" \"iteration\".\nImplementations.\nLoops constitute the most common language constructs for performing iterations. The following pseudocode \"iterates\" three times the line of code between begin &amp; end through a \"for loop\", and uses the values of \"i\" as increments.\na := 0\nbegin\nend;\nIt is permissible, and often necessary, to use values from other parts of the program outside the bracketed block of statements, to perform the desired function.\nIterators constitute alternative language constructs to loops, which ensure consistent iterations over specific data structures. They can eventually save time and effort in later coding attempts. In particular, an iterator allows one to repeat the same kind of operation at each node of such a data structure, often in some pre-defined order.\nIteratees are purely functional language constructs, which accept or reject data during the iterations.\nRelation with recursion.\nRecursions and iterations have different algorithmic definitions, even though they can generate identical results. The primary difference is that recursion can be a solution without prior knowledge as to how many times the action must repeat, while a successful iteration requires that foreknowledge. \nSome types of programming languages, known as functional programming languages, are designed such that they do not set up a block of statements for explicit repetition, as with the \"for\" loop. Instead, those programming languages exclusively use recursion. Rather than call out a block of code to repeate a pre-defined number of times, the executing code block instead \"divides\" the work into a number of separate pieces, after which the code block executes itself on each individual piece. Each piece of work is divided repeatedly until the \"amount\" of work is as small as possible, at which point the algorithm does that work very quickly. The algorithm then \"reverses\" and reassembles the pieces into a complete whole.\nThe classic example of recursion is in list-sorting algorithms, such as merge sort. The merge sort recursive algorithm first repeatedly divides the list into consecutive pairs. Each pair is then ordered, then each consecutive pair of pairs, and so forth until the elements of the list are in the desired order.\nThe code below is an example of a recursive algorithm in the Scheme programming language that outputs the same result as the pseudocode under the previous heading. \n (if (&lt;= i 3)\n (iterate (+ i 1) (+ a i))\n (display a)))\nEducation.\nIn some schools of pedagogy, iterations are used to describe the process of teaching or guiding students to repeat experiments, assessments, or projects, until more accurate results are found, or the student has mastered the technical skill. This idea is found in the old adage, \"Practice makes perfect.\" In particular, \"iterative\" is defined as the \"process of learning and development that involves cyclical inquiry, enabling multiple opportunities for people to revisit ideas and critically reflect on their implication.\"\nUnlike computing and math, educational iterations are not predetermined; instead, the task is repeated until success according to some external criteria (often a test) is achieved.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "68835", "revid": "26074453", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68835", "title": "Manat", "text": "Manat may refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "68836", "revid": "10773111", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68836", "title": "Tampere", "text": "Third-most populous city in Finland\nTampere is a city in Finland and the regional capital of Pirkanmaa. It is in the Finnish Lakeland. Tampere's population is about , while the metropolitan area has a population of about . It is Finland's most populous municipality and the second most populous urban area in the country after the Helsinki metropolitan area.\nTampere is the most populous inland city in the Nordic countries. The urban area has a population of about 340,000. Tampere is considered the most important urban, economic and cultural centre in the whole of inland Finland.\nTampere and its surroundings are part of the historic province of Satakunta, but the area belonged to the province of H\u00e4me (Tavastia) from 1831 to 1997 and it has often been considered part of that province. For example, in \"Uusi tietosanakirja\", published in the 1960s, the Tampere subregion is presented as part of the then province of Tavastia.\nBetween 1775 and 1870, Tammerkoski rapids formed the border between the former province of H\u00e4me and the province of Turku and Pori. The city of Tampere was on the western side of the rapids, but the eastern bank was attached to the city in 1877.\nAround the 1950s, Tampere and its surroundings began to establish themselves as a separate province known as Pirkanmaa. Tampere became the centre of Pirkanmaa, and \"Tammermaa\" was also used several times in the province's early days, for example in the \"Suomi-k\u00e4sikirja\" published in 1968.\nTampere is wedged between two lakes, Lake N\u00e4sij\u00e4rvi and Lake Pyh\u00e4j\u00e4rvi, with an difference in water level, and the rapids that connect them, Tammerkoski, have been an important source of power throughout history, most recently for generating electricity. Tampere is known as the \"Manchester of the North\" because of its past as a centre of Finnish industry, which has given rise to its Finnish nickname \"Manse\" and terms such as \"Manserock\". Tampere has also been officially declared the \"Sauna Capital of the World\" because it has the most public saunas in the world.\nHelsinki is about south of Tampere and can be reached by Pendolino high-speed train in 1 hour 31 minutes and by car in two hours. The distance to Turku, Finland's third most populous urban area, is about the same. The Tampere\u2013Pirkkala Airport is the eighth busiest airport in Finland, with more than 230,000 passengers using it in 2017. Tampere is also an important transit route for three Finnish highways: Highway 3 (E12), Highway 9 (E63) and Highway 12. The Tampere light rail had two lines when it started operating in 2021.\nTampere is often rated as the most popular city in Finland. The development of Tampere and its metropolitan area has continued into the 21st century, largely because Tampere is one of Finland's most attractive cities. In 2023, Tampere won the first prize at the Smart City World Congress in Barcelona, competing in the category of enabling technologies, while also receiving recognition for the use of technological solutions for the benefit of residents and businesses.\nEtymology.\nAlthough the name Tampere derives from the Tammerkoski rapids (both the city and the rapids are called Tammerfors in Swedish), the origin and meaning of the \"Tammer-\" part of the name has been the subject of much debate. Linguist \u00c1nte Aikio accepts the \"straightforward\" etymology of Rahkonen and Heikkil\u00e4 in Proto-Samic \"*T\u00ebmp\u00ebl(k\u014d\u0161k\u00eb)\", \"*t\u00ebmp\u00ebl\" meaning \"deep, slow part of a stream\" and \"*k\u014d\u0161k\u00eb\" \"rapids\" (related to the Finnish \"koski\"), which has become the most accepted explanation in academia, according to the Institute for the Languages of Finland. Other theories are that it comes from the Swedish word \"damber\", meaning milldam or that it comes from the ancient Scandinavian words \"\u00feambr\" (\"fat-bellied\") and \"\u00feambion\" (\"swollen belly\"), possibly referring to the rapids' shape. Another suggestion links the name to the Swedish word \"Kvatemberdagar\", or more colloquially \"Tamperdagar\", which refers to the Ember Days of the Western Christian liturgical calendar. The Finnish word for oak, \"tammi\", has also been suggested, although Tampere is outside the natural range of the European oak.\nHeraldry.\nTampere's first coat of arms was designed by Arvid von Cederwald in 1838, while the current coat of arms, created in 1960, was designed by Olof Eriksson. Changing the coat of arms was controversial, and even after the change there were occasional calls for the old coat of arms to be restored. The new coat of arms was also described in letters to the editor as Soviet-style because of its colours.\nThe blazon of the old coat of arms has either not survived or was never made, but the current coat of arms has been described as follows: \"In the red field, a corrugated counter-bar, above which is accompanied by a piled hammer, and below a caduceus; all gold\". Its colours are the same as in the coat of arms of Pirkanmaa. The hammer, which looks like the first letter of the city's name, T, symbolises Tampere's early industry, the caduceus its commercial activities, and the wavy counter-bar the Tammerkoski rapids that divide Tampere's industrial and commercial areas.\nThe city received its first seal in 1803, depicting the city's buildings of the time and Tammerkoski.\nHistory.\nEarly history.\nThe earliest known permanent settlements around Tammerkoski were established in the 7th century, when settlers from the west of the region began to farm land in Takahuhti, an area largely inhabited by the Tavastian tribes. The population remained small for many centuries. By the 16th century, the villages of Messukyl\u00e4 and Takahuhti had become the area's largest settlements. Other nearby villages were Laiskola, Pyynikk\u00e4l\u00e4 and Hatanp\u00e4\u00e4. There had been a marketplace in the Pispala area for centuries, where the bourgeoisie from Turku in particular traded. In 1638, Governor-General Per Brahe the Younger ordered that two markets be held in Tammerkoski every year, the autumn market on St Peter's Day in August and the winter one on Matias's Day in February. In 1708 the market was moved from the outskirts of Tammerkoski to Harju, and in 1758 from there to Pispala.16 The first industries in the Pirkanmaa region in the 17th century were mainly watermills and sawmills. In the 18th century other industries began to develop, as several small ironworks, the Tammerkoski distillery, and the Otavala spinning school were established.\nFounding and industrialization.\nBefore the founding of the city of Tampere, the neighbouring parish of Pirkkala (from which the current region of Pirkanmaa takes its name) was the most administratively important parish in the area throughout the Middle Ages. This changed in the 18th century when Erik Edner, a Finnish pastor, proposed the establishment of a town on the banks of the Tammerkoski rapids in 1771\u20131772; it was officially founded as a market town in 1775 by Gustav III of Sweden, and on 1 October 1779, Tampere was granted full town rights. At that time it was rather small, founded on the lands of the Tammerkoski manor, and its inhabitants were mainly farmers. As farming was forbidden within the city limits, the inhabitants began to rely on other means of earning a living, mainly trade and crafts. In 1809, when Finland became a Grand Duchy of Finland, Tampere still had less than a thousand inhabitants.\nIn the 19th century, Tampere grew into an important market town and industrial centre; its industrialisation was greatly influenced by the Finlayson textile factory, founded in 1820 by the Scottish industrialist James Finlayson. By 1850, the factory employed around 2000 people, while the city's population had grown to 4000. Other notable industrial establishments that followed Finlayson's success in the 1800s were the Tampella blast furnace, machine factory and flax mill, the Frenckell paper mill and the Tampere broadcloth factory. Tampere's population grew rapidly at the end of the 19th century, from around 7,000 in 1870 to 36,000 in 1900. At the beginning of the 20th century, Tampere was a city of workers and women, with a third of the population being factory workers and more than half women. At the same time, the area of the city increased almost sevenfold and impressive apartment blocks were built in the centre of Tampere between modest wooden houses. The stone houses gave Tampere a modern look. The construction of the sewerage and water supply networks and the introduction of electric lighting were further steps towards modernisation; Tampere was the first Nordic city to introduce electric lighting for general use in 1882. The railway connection to Tampere from the extension of the Helsinki-H\u00e4meenlinna line (now part of the Main Line) via Toijala was opened to the public on 22 June 1876.\u200a173\nThe world-famous Nokia Corporation, a multinational telecommunications company, also had its beginnings in the Tammerkoski area; the company's history dates back to 1865, when Finnish-Swedish mining engineer Fredrik Idestam established a pulp mill on the banks of the rapids, and a second pulp mill was opened in 1868 near the neighbouring town of Nokia, where there were better hydroelectric resources.\nGeopolitical significance.\nTampere was the centre of many important political events in the early 20th century, such as the 1905 conference of the Russian Social Democratic Labour Party (RSDLP), led by Vladimir Lenin, held in the Tampere Workers' Hall during their flight from Russia, where it was decided, among other things, to launch an armed insurrection that eventually led to the October 1917 revolution in the Russian Empire. Also, on 1 November 1905, during the General Strike, the famous \"Red Declaration\" was proclaimed in Keskustori.\nAfter Finland gained its full independence, Tampere played an important role in the 1918 Civil War, being one of the most strategically important places for the Finnish Socialist Workers' Republic (FSWR) during the Finnish Civil War (28 January - 15 May 1918); the city was the most important industrial city in Finland at the beginning of the 20th century, with a huge working population. Tampere was a Red stronghold during the war, commanded by Hugo Salmela. White forces led by General Mannerheim captured the city after the Battle of Tampere, taking about 10,000 Red prisoners on 6 April 1918.\nDuring the Winter War, Tampere was bombed several times by the Soviet Union. The reason for the bombing of Tampere was that the city was an important railway junction and was also home to the State Aircraft Factory and the Tampella Factory, which produced ammunition and weapons, including grenade launchers. The most devastating bombing took place on 2 March 1940, when nine people were killed and 30 wounded. In addition, ten buildings were destroyed and 30 damaged that day.\nPostwar period and modern day.\nThe dominant force in Tampere's municipal politics after the Second World War was the Brothers-in-Arms Axis (\"aseveliakseli\"), which consisted mainly of the National Coalition Party and the Social Democrats. While the Centre Party was the largest political force in the Finnish countryside, it had no practical relevance in Tampere.\nAfter the Second World War, Tampere was enlarged by the incorporation of some neighbouring areas. Messukyl\u00e4 was incorporated in 1947, Lielahti in 1950, Aitolahti in 1966 and Teisko in 1972. Already in 1937 the most part of modern western Tampere, including Pispala, was annexed to the city from North Pirkkala (today Nokia). Tampere passed the 100,000 population mark in 1950. Tampere was long known for its textile and metal industries, but these were largely replaced by information technology and telecommunications in the 1990s. The Hermia technology centre in Hervanta is home to many companies in these fields. Yleisradio began broadcasting its second television channel, Yle TV2, from Ristim\u00e4ki, Tampere, in 1965, making Finland the first of the Nordic countries to receive a second television channel, after Sweden's SVT2 began broadcasting four years later. Tampere became a university city when the Social University moved from Helsinki to Tampere in 1960, becoming the University of Tampere in 1966. In 1979, the Tampere-Pirkkala airport was opened from the centre of Tampere on the Pirkkala side of the city.\nAt the turn of the 1990s, Tampere's industry underwent a major structural change, as the production of Tampella and Tampere's textile industry in particular was heavily focused on bilateral trade with the Soviet Union, but when the Soviet Union collapsed in 1991, the companies lost their main customers. As a result of the sudden change and the depression of the early 1990s, Finlayson and Suomen Trikoo had to scale down their operations drastically. Tampella went bankrupt. But although the change left a huge amount of vacant industrial space in the city centre, in the early 2000s it was gradually put to other uses, and today's Tampere cityscape is mainly characterised by strong IT companies, most notably Nokia's Tampere R&amp;D units.\nGeography.\nTampere is part of the Pirkanmaa region and is surrounded by the municipalities of Kangasala, Lemp\u00e4\u00e4l\u00e4, Nokia, Orivesi, Pirkkala, Ruovesi and Yl\u00f6j\u00e4rvi. Tampere has 180 lakes larger than , and freshwater bodies cover 24% of its area. The lakes formed as separate basins from Lake Ancylus about 7500\u20138000 years ago. Tampere's northernmost point is in the Vankavesi Fjard of Teisko, the southernmost at the eastern end of Lake Hervanta, the easternmost at the northeast corner of Lake Paalij\u00e4rvi of Teisko, and the westernmost at the southeast corner of Lake Haukij\u00e4rvi near the borders of Yl\u00f6j\u00e4rvi and Nokia. The city centre is surrounded by three lakes, N\u00e4sij\u00e4rvi, Pyh\u00e4j\u00e4rvi, and the much smaller Iidesj\u00e4rvi. The Tampere region lies in the basin of the Kokem\u00e4ki River, which flows into the Bothnian Sea through Pori, the capital of the Satakunta region. Tampere's bedrock consists of mica schist and migmatite, and its building stone deposits are diverse: in addition to the traditional granite, there is an abundance of quartz diorite, tonalite, mica schist and mica gneiss. One of Tampere's most striking geographic features is the Pyynikki Ridge (\"Pyynikinharju\"), a large esker formed from moraine during the Weichselian glaciation. It rises above sea level and is said to be the largest gravel esker in the world. It is also part of Salpausselk\u00e4, a long ridge system left over from the Ice Age.\nThe centre of Tampere (\"Keskusta\") and the districts of Pyynikki, Yl\u00e4-Pispala and Ala-Pispala lie on the isthmus between Lakes Pyh\u00e4j\u00e4rvi and N\u00e4sij\u00e4rvi. The city's location on the edge of the Tammerkoski Rapids between two long waterways was one of the main reasons for its foundation in the 1770s. The streets of central Tampere form a typical grid pattern. On the western edge of the city centre is a north\u2013south park road, H\u00e4meenpuisto (\"H\u00e4me Park\" or \"Tavastia Park\"), which runs from the shore of Lake Pyh\u00e4j\u00e4rvi near Lake N\u00e4sij\u00e4rvi. The wide H\u00e4meenkatu road runs east\u2013west from Tampere Central Station to H\u00e4meenpuisto and crosses Tammerkoski along the H\u00e4meensilta bridge. Also along H\u00e4meenkatu is the longest street in the city centre, Satakunnankatu, which runs from Rautatienkatu to Amuri and crosses Tammerkoski via the Satakunnansilta bridge. Tampere's central square is located on the western bank of Tammerkoski, near H\u00e4meensilta. The traffic centre of Tampere is the junction of Itsen\u00e4isyydenkatu, Teiskontie, Sammonkatu, Kalevanpuisto park road and the Kaleva and Liisankallio districts.\nNeighbourhoods and other subdivisions.\nThe city of Tampere is divided into seven statistical areas, each of which includes the many districts and their suburbs. There are 111 statistical areas in Tampere, but the statistical areas created for Tampere's statistics do not fully correspond to the division of Tampere's districts or to the way residents perceive the districts. For example, the districts of Amuri, Kytt\u00e4l\u00e4 and Tammela are divided into two parts in accordance with the official district division, and Liisankallio and Kalevanrinne are often considered to belong to the district of Kaleva.\nClimate.\nTampere has a humid continental climate \"Dfb\" with clearly defined four seasons. The climate of Tampere-Pirkkala Airport, which is located away from the city centre, borders on the subarctic climate zone (K\u00f6ppen climate classification \"Dfc\"). Winters are cold and the average temperature from December to February is below and it can reach to . Summers are cool to warm. The average snow cover lasts 4\u20135\u00a0months from late November to early April. Given the high latitude and inland location, winters are on average quite mild for the latitude, as is the average annual temperature.\nTemperature records of Tampere.\nTemperature records of Tampere and the near-by Tampere\u2013Pirkkala Airport:\nTemperature Records of Tampere\nHighest temperatures at the Tampere\u2013Pirkkala Airport by month since 1980:\nLowest temperatures in Pirkanmaa:\nLowest temperatures at the Tampere\u2013Pirkkala Airport by month since 1980:\nCityscape.\nRevival and nationalism.\nTampere has buildings from many architectural periods. The Old Stone Church of Messukyl\u00e4 is the only example of medieval architecture. Neoclassicism from the early 19th century is represented by the Old Church of Tampere and its bell tower. The Gothic Revival buildings in Tampere that evolved from Neoclassicism are the New Church of Messukyl\u00e4 and the Alexander Church, while the Renaissance Revival buildings are Hatanp\u00e4\u00e4 Manor, Tampere City Hall, Ruuskanen House and N\u00e4silinna. Romantic nationalism can be seen in the Commerce house, the Tirkkonen House, the Palander House, the Tampere Cathedral, the Tampere Central Fire Station and the Tampere National Bank building. The use of red brick as a building material in the industrial buildings along Tammerkoski, such as the Finlayson and Tampella factories, has left a strong imaginary mark on the city.\nFunctionalism and modernism.\nThe Post-Art Nouveau was largely Nordic, with the Laikku House of Culture, the Hotel Tammer, the Tuulensuu House and the Viinikka Church built in Tampere. After Functionalism became the dominant style in the 1930s, Tampere Central Station, Tempo House, a bus station and Kauppi Hospital were built in Tampere. There is no single accepted term for the post-war style, but the main representatives of the reconstruction period are the Bank of Finland building, the Amurinlinna building and the Pyynikki swimming pool. The rationalist buildings of the modernist period are represented by the University of Tampere, Tampere Central Hospital, Sampola, the School of Economics, Ratina Stadium and Kaleva Church. The modernist buildings include the Metso Main Library, the Hervanta Operations Centre, the Tampere Hall, the university extension and the Nokia office building in Hatanp\u00e4\u00e4.\nThe centre of Tampere and its western parts have been developed in a more modern direction since the 2010s, and the city aims to have the centre in its future form by the 2030s. In particular, plans have been drawn up for the area around the central railway station in the form of the \"Tampere Deck\" project, which includes a new multi-purpose arena and high-rise buildings in the area. A light rail network has also recently been built in the city centre. Artificial island projects are planned on the shores of the lakes, which would create new residential areas for several thousand people. The projects are estimated to cost several billion euros.\nEconomy.\nThe Tampere region, Pirkanmaa, which includes outlying municipalities, has around 509,000 residents, 244,000 employed people, and a turnover of 28\u00a0billion euros as of 2014[ [update]].\nAccording to the Tampere International Business Office, the area is strong in mechanical engineering and automation, information and communication technologies, and health and biotechnology, as well as pulp and paper industry education. Unemployment rate was 9.2% in September 2023. 70% of the areas jobs are in the service sector. Less than 20% are in the manufacturing sector. 34.5% of employed people live outside the Tampere municipality and commute to Tampere for work. Meanwhile, 15.6% of Tampere's residents work outside Tampere.\nIn 2014 the largest employers were Kesko, Pirkanmaan Osuuskauppa, Alma Media and Posti Group. Tampere is headquarters for Bronto Skylift, an aerial rescue and aerial work platform manufacturer.\nAccording to a study carried out by the TAK Research, the total impact of tourism in the Tampere region in 2022 was more than 562 million euros. Tourism also brought 4,805 person-years to the region. Tampere's biggest single attraction is the S\u00e4rk\u00e4nniemi amusement park, which had about 552 000 visitors in 2023. In addition, in 2023, 1,4 million overnight stays were made in Tampere hotels and 300 000 in other commercial accommodations. The number exceeded the previous record year 2022 by seven percent. Tampere is Finland's second most popular city in terms of hotel stays. Leisure tourism accounted for 865 000 overnight stays and occupational tourism for 551 000. Income from accommodations was 116,9 million euros in 2023 (up 7,2 million from 2022).\nTampere's financial result in 2023 was EUR 55.3 million. The result was heavily affected by one-off payments . In the city's economy, the largest revenues come from taxes and government contributions. In 2023, the city received 477,8 million euros in municipal tax revenue. In addition, 98 million euros came from corporate taxes and 105,3 million euros from property taxes. Increase in municipal tax revenue was 6,9 percent, the highest amount among big cities. Government contributions were 58,3 million. Due to the health and social services reform, the statements of municipal and corporation tax revenue or state contributions are not comparable with previous years.\nTampere municipal tax rate in 2024 is 7,6%.\nEnergy.\nIn 2013, Tampereen Energiantuotanto, which is part of the Tampereen Energia (formerly \"Tampereen S\u00e4hk\u00f6laitos Group\"), generated 1,254 GWh of electricity and 2,184 GWh of district heating. The two units of the Naistenlahti power station accounted for about 65% of the total electricity production and the Lielahti power station for about 30%. The Naistenlahti and Lielahti units accounted for 57% and 23% of district heating production, respectively. The ten heating centres in Tampere accounted for 21%.44\nIn 2023, the share of renewable energy in the district heating production was around 80%. The goal was to end the use of peat completely during that year. Hydropower, wood and nuclear power were used as well as mixed waste, of which 50% is considered renewable.44 Emissions from energy production have decreased in the 21st century due to the growth of renewable forms of production and the modernisation of the Naistenlahti power plant. In 2013, about 669,000 tonnes of carbon dioxide and 297 tonnes of sulphur dioxide were emitted.\nWater and waste management.\n75% of Tampere's domestic water is surface water and 25% groundwater. 58% of the water is diverted to economic use and 13% to industrial use. In addition to Tampere, Tampereen Vesi manages water in Pirkkala. Almost all surface water comes from Lake Roine. In addition, Tampereen Vesi has three surface water plants in Lake N\u00e4sij\u00e4rvi and five groundwater intakes. Tampereen Vesi is responsible for 96% of wastewater from Tampere, Kangasala, Pirkkala and Yl\u00f6j\u00e4rvi. In 2023, a total of 33 million cubic meters of wastewater was treated in Tampere. The Viinikanlahti treatment plant treats more than 75% of wastewater.85\nThe new central treatment plant in Sulkavuori will open in 2025. It is a joint project of Tampere, Kangasala, Pirkkala, Yl\u00f6j\u00e4rvi, Lemp\u00e4\u00e4l\u00e4 and Vesilahti, with a treatment capacity of 100 000 cubic metres of wastewater per day.\nPirkanmaan J\u00e4tehuolto handles waste management in Tampere. It has waste treatment facilities in Nokia's Lake Koukkuj\u00e4rvi and Tampere's Lake Tarastenj\u00e4rvi.92\nDemographics.\nPopulation.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe city of Tampere has inhabitants, making it the most populous municipality in Finland and the tenth in the Nordics. The Tampere region, with people, is the second largest after the Helsinki metropolitan area. Tampere is home to 5% of Finland's population. 12% of the population has a foreign background, which is above the national average. However, it is lower than in the major Finnish cities of Helsinki, Espoo, Vantaa or Turku.\nThe demographic structure of Tampere shows that the city is a very popular place to study, as the number of young adults is significantly higher than in other municipalities in the region. At the end of 2012, the old-age dependency ratio was 45. 19.2% of the population was over the age of 64 in 2024.13 Just over half of the population is female, as in the country as a whole. The population is fairly well educated, with two-thirds of those over 15 having completed post-primary education.\nAt the end of 2018, there were a total of 140,039 dwellings in Tampere, of which 127,639 were permanently occupied and 12,400 were not permanently occupied. Of these, 74% were apartment buildings, 14% were detached houses, 10% were terraced houses, and 2% were other residential buildings. Between 2002 and 2020, more than 40,000 new dwellings will be completed in Tampere. Living space has been growing for a long time, although after 2008 growth came to a virtual standstill. The average living space at the end of 2012 was about 36.8 m2 per inhabitant, compared with about 19.2 m2 in 1970 and about 31.8 m2 in 1990. The average dwelling had about 1.8 inhabitants in 2012.13\nFor more than ten years, Tampere has been one of the most migratory municipalities, as more than 1,930 new residents moved to Tampere in January\u2013September 2021. Nokia, Kangasala and Lemp\u00e4\u00e4l\u00e4, which are among Tampere's neighbouring municipalities, have also been identified as the most migratory municipalities, rising to the list of the 20 most attractive municipalities. Even during the COVID-19 pandemic, Tampere has become Finland's most attractive area for internal migration, as Tampere gained the most migration gains in 2020.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Bar chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nLanguages.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Pie chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nTampere is the largest monolingual Finnish-speaking municipality. As of 2024[ [update]], the majority of the population, persons (), spoke Finnish as their first language. In addition, the number of Swedish speakers was persons () of the population. This is the second largest number of Swedish speakers in monolingual Finnish-speaking municipalities after Kaarina. Kaarina and Tampere are also the only monolingual Finnish-speaking municipalities with a separate Swedish-speaking community. Swedish speakers made up more than 6% of Tampere's population in 1900 and less than 2% in 1950.\nForeign languages were spoken by of the population. As English and Swedish are compulsory school subjects, functional bilingualism or trilingualism acquired through language studies is not uncommon.\nAt least 160 different languages are spoken in Tampere. The most widely spoken foreign languages are Russian (1.5%), Arabic (1.0%), Persian (0.9%), English (0.9%), Chinese (0.4%), Vietnamese (0.4%), Ukrainian (0.4%) and Estonian (0.4%).\nImmigration.\nAs of 2024[ [update]], there were 29,841 people with a foreign background living in Tampere, or 12% of the population. There were 28,352 residents who were born abroad, or 11% of the population. The number of foreign citizens in Tampere was 19,576. Most foreign-born citizens came from the former Soviet Union, Afghanistan, Sweden, Iraq, India, China, Russia, Iran, Estonia, Vietnam, Philippines and Estonia.\nThe proportion of immigrants in Tampere's population is slightly above the national average. Tampere attracts more migration from within Finland than directly from abroad. Nevertheless, the city's new residents are increasingly of foreign origin. This will increase the proportion of foreign residents in the coming years.\nUrban areas.\nIn 2019, out of the total population of 238,140, 231,648 people lived in urban areas and 3,132 in sparsely populated areas, while the coordinates of 3,360 people were unknown. This made Tampere's degree of urbanization 98.7%. The urban population in the municipality was divided between three statistical urban areas as follows:\nReligion.\nIn 2023, the Evangelical Lutheran Church was the largest religious group with 56.4% of the population of Tampere. Other religious groups accounted for 3.3% of the population. 40.3% of the population had no religious affiliation.\nEducation.\nThe comprehensive education is given mainly in Finnish but the city has special bilingual groups where students study in Finnish and a second language (English, French or German). Furthermore, there is a private Swedish-speaking school in the Kaakinmaa district (Swedish Svenska samskolan i Tammerfors) that covers all levels of education from preschool to high school.\nThere are three institutions of higher education in the Tampere area totaling 40,000 students: the university and two polytechnic institutions (). Tampere University (TUNI) has over 20,000 students and two campuses, one in the Kalevanharju district, close to the city centre, and one in Hervanta, in the southern part of the city. The institution was formed in 2019 as a result of the merge of University of Tampere (UTA) and Tampere University of Technology (TUT). TUNI is also the major shareholder of the Tampere University of Applied Sciences (\"Tampereen ammattikorkeakoulu\", TAMK), a polytechnic with about 10,000 students. The Police University College, the polytechnic institution serving all of Finland in its field of specialization, is also in Tampere.\nTampere University Hospital (\"Tampereen yliopistollinen sairaala\", TAYS) in the Kauppi district, one of the main hospitals in Finland, is affiliated with Tampere University. It is a teaching hospital with 34 medical specializations.\nThe Nurmi district in the northern part of city also houses the Tampere Christian School (\"Tampereen kristillinen koulu\"), which operates on a co-Christian basis and is maintained by the Adventist Church of Finland, offering free basic education based on Christian basic values and outlook on life for all grades of primary school.\nArts and culture.\nTampere is known for its active cultural life. Some of Finland's most popular writers, such as V\u00e4in\u00f6 Linna, Kalle P\u00e4\u00e4talo, and Hannu Salama, hail from Tampere. They are known particularly for depicting the lives of working-class people, thanks to their backgrounds as members of the working class. Also from such a background was the poet Lauri Viita of the Pispala district, which was also Salama's original home. On 1 October, Tampere celebrates Tampere Day (), which hosts a variety of public events.\nMedia.\nTampere is a strong \"media city.\" The television center in Tohloppi and Ristim\u00e4ki districts has had a nationwide Yle TV2 television channel since the 1970s, and Finnish radio, for example, began in Tampere when Arvi Hauvonen founded the first broadcasting station in 1923. Yle TV2 has its roots in Tamvisio, which was transferred to Yleisradio (YLE, Finnish National Broadcasting Company) in 1964. \"Kakkoskanava\" (\"Channel 2\") has been a major influence in Tampere, and several well-known television programs and series have been shot in the city, such as TV comedies \"Tankki t\u00e4yteen\", \"Reinikainen\" and \"Kummeli\". There's also a play park in central Tampere named after the channel's most famous children's programme, \"Pikku Kakkonen\".\nToday, Yle operates as a tenant in its old premises, which in 2013 was transformed into a hub for visual media production companies and training institutes called Mediapolis.\nThe Ruutu+ streaming service's popular crime drama television series \"Lakeside Murders\" (), based on the \"Koskinen\" book series by Seppo Jokinen, is also produced and filmed in Tampere.\nThe Tampere Film Festival, an annual international short film event, is held every March. Tampere has also served as a filming location for international film productions, most notably the 1993 British comedy film \"The Big Freeze\" and the 2022 American sci-fi film \"Dual\".\nIn 2014, \"Aamulehti\", which was published in Tampere and was founded in 1881, was the third largest newspaper in Finland in terms of circulation, after \"Helsingin Sanomat\" and \"Ilta-Sanomat\". The circulation of the magazine was 98 408 (2016). In addition, a free city newspaper \"Tamperelainen\" (literally translated \"Tamperean\", meaning person who live in Tampere) will be published in the city. In November 2016, the \"Tamperelainen\" was awarded the second best city newspaper in Finland.\nThe city is also known as the home of the popular Hydraulic Press Channel on YouTube, which originates from a machine shop owned by Lauri Vuohensilta.\nIndependent video game developer Colossal Order, known for the hit city-building game ', is based in Tampere. ' also features the city's geography as an in-game map for those who pre-ordered the game.\nFood.\nA local food speciality is \"mustamakkara\", which resembles the black pudding of northern England and blood sausages around Europe. It is a black sausage made by mixing pork, pig's blood and crushed rye and flour and is stuffed into the intestines of an animal. It is commonly eaten with lingonberry sauce. Especially Tammelantori square in the district of Tammela is known for its \"mustamakkara\" kiosks, as well as Laukontori in center.\nA newer Tampere tradition are \"munkki\", fresh sugary doughnuts that are sold in several caf\u00e9s around Tampere, but most traditionally in Pyynikki observation tower.\nOne of the specialties of Tampere's local barbecue dishes include the peremech (p\u00e4r\u00e4m\u00e4ts in Finnish), based on traditional Tatar food. It is a pie reminiscent of Karelian pasty with seasoned ground meat inside.\nIn the 1980s, in addition to \"mustamakkara\" and barley bread, the old parish dish of Tampere was also called a potato soup, home-made small beer (\"kotikalja\"), a sweetened lingonberry porridge and a sweetened potato casserole (\"Imelletty perunalaatikko\").\nSince 1991, the two-day fish market event (\"Tampereen kalamarkkinat\") in Laukontori attracts as many as 80,000\u2013100,000 visitors in year, and is held both in the spring on \"vappu\" and in the autumn on Tampere Day.\nMusic.\nTampere is home to the Tampere Philharmonic Orchestra (\"Tampere Filharmonia\"), one of only two full-sized symphony orchestras in Finland; the other is in Helsinki. The orchestra's home venue is the Tampere Hall, and its concerts include classical, popular, and film music. Tampere Music Festivals organises three international music events: The Tampere Jazz Happening each November, and in alternate years The Tampere Vocal Music Festival and the Tampere Biennale. Professional education in many fields of classical music, including performing arts, pedagogic arts, and composition, is provided by Tampere University of Applied Sciences and Tampere Conservatoire.\n\"&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Visible anchor/styles.css\" /&gt;Manserock\" became a general term for rock music from Tampere, which was essentially rock music with Finnish lyrics. Manserock was especially popular during the 1970s and 1980s, and its most popular artists include Juice Leskinen, Veltto Virtanen, Kaseva, Popeda, and Eppu Normaali. In 1977, Poko Rekords, the first record company in Tampere, was founded.\nIn the 2010s, there has been a lot of popular musical activity in Tampere, particularly in the fields of rock and heavy/black metal; one of the most important metal music events in Tampere is the Sauna Open Air Metal Festival. Some of the most popular bands based in Tampere include Negative, Uniklubi, and Lovex. Tampere also has an active electronic music scene. Tampere hosts an annual World of Tango Festival (\"Maailmantango\"), which is one of the most significant tango events in Finland next to the Tangomarkkinat of Sein\u00e4joki.\nTheatre.\nTampere has a lengthy tradition of theater, with established institutions such as Tampereen Ty\u00f6v\u00e4en Teatteri, Tampereen Teatteri, and Pyynikin Kes\u00e4teatteri, which is an open-air theatre with the oldest revolving auditorium in Europe. The longest-running directors of the Tampereen Teatteri include Heikki Vihinen and Rauli Lehtonen, and the Tampereen Ty\u00f6v\u00e4en Teatteri had Kosti Elo, Eino Salmelainen and Esko Roine. The Tampere Theatre Festival (\"Tampereen teatterikes\u00e4\") is an international theatre festival held in the city each August. Tampere also has the Tampere Opera, founded in 1946.\nTampere's other professional theaters are Teatteri Siperia; restaurant theater Teatteripalatsi; Teatteri Telakka, known for its artistic experiments; Ahaa Teatteri, which specializes in children's and young people's plays; puppet theater Teatteri Mukamas, and Tanssiteatteri MD, specializes in contemporary dance performances. In addition, there are also three cinemas in Tampere: two Finnkino's theaters, Cine Atlas and Plevna, and private Arthouse Cinema Niagara, which serves as the main venue for the Cinemadrome Festival, which presents horror, action, sci-fi, trash, and other cult films. Local cinemas also included the historic Imatra, formerly located in the Kytt\u00e4l\u00e4 district, which was completely destroyed on a fire in the midst of a 1924 film \"Wages of Virtue\" on 23 October 1927, killing 21 people.\nReligious activities.\nAs in most of Finland, most Tampere citizens belong to the Evangelical Lutheran Church of Finland. One Lutheran church in Tampere is Finlayson Church in the district by the same name. Tampere also has a variety of other religious services spanning from traditional to charismatic. There are also some English speaking services, such as the Tampere English Service, an international community affiliated with the Tampere Pentecostal Church (\"Tampereen helluntaiseurakunta\"). English services of the International Congregation of Christ the King (ICCK) are organized by the Anglican Church in Finland and the Lutheran Parishes of Tampere. The Catholic parish of the Holy Cross also offers services in Finnish, Polish and English. Other churches may also have English speaking ministries. Tampere is the center of a LDS stake (diocese). Other churches in Tampere are the Baptist Church, the Evangelical Free Church, the Evangelical Lutheran Mission Diocese of Finland, the Finnish Orthodox Church and the Nokia Revival.\nThere was an organized Jewish community until 1981. Though a few Jews remain in Tampere, organized communal life ended at that time.\nThere are three registered Muslim communities in Tampere. The biggest is Tampere Islam Society, with over 1500 members.\nCity rivalry with Turku.\nTampere ostensibly has a long-standing mutual feud with the city of Turku, the first capital of Finland, and they tend to compete for the title of being the \"second grand city of Finland\" after Helsinki. This rivalry is largely expressed in jokes in one city about the other; prominent targets are the traditional Tampere food, \"mustamakkara\", the state of the Aura River in Turku, and the regional accents. Tampere is well known as a food destination because of its food culture. Since 1997, students at Tampere have made annual excursions to Turku to jump on the market square, doing their part to undo the post-glacial rebound and push the city back into the Baltic Sea.\nMain sights.\nOne of the main tourist attractions is the S\u00e4rk\u00e4nniemi amusement park, which includes the landmark N\u00e4sinneula tower, topped by a revolving restaurant. In addition to these, it used to house an aquarium. Other sites of interest are Tampere Cathedral, Tampere City Hall, Tampere Central Library \"Metso\" (\"Capercaillie\"), Kaleva Church (both designed by Reima Pietil\u00e4), the Tampere Hall for conferences and concerts, the Tampere Market Hall (along H\u00e4meenkatu) and historical Pyynikki observation tower.\nTampere has at least seven hotels, the most noteworthy of which are Hotel Tammer, Hotel Ilves, and Hotel Torni, the tallest hotel building in Finland. The Holiday Club Tampere spa is also located in the Lapinniemi district on the shores of Lake N\u00e4sij\u00e4rvi. There are also many significant shopping centers in the city center of Tampere and its suburbs; the most notable shopping centers are Ratina, Koskikeskus, DUO, Like, and Tullintori.\nTampere is also home to one of the last museums in the world dedicated to Vladimir Lenin. The museum is housed in the Tampere Workers' Hall (along Hallituskatu) where during a subsequent Bolshevik conference in the city, Lenin met Joseph Stalin for the first time. Lenin moved to Tampere in August 1905, but eventually fled for Sweden in November 1907 when being pursued by the Russian Okhrana. Lenin did not return to any part of the Russian Empire until ten years later, when he heard of the start of the Russian Revolution of 1917. Tampere Lenin-museum closed on 3 November 2024 and reopened under the name Nootti (Note) in February 2025.\nThere are many museums and galleries, including:\nPispala.\nPispala is a ridge between the two lakes. It is divided into Yl\u00e4-Pispala (\"Upper Pispala\") and Ala-Pispala (\"Lower Pispala\"). It's the highest gravel ridge in the world, raising above Lake Pyh\u00e4j\u00e4rvi and around above sea level. It housed the majority of industrial labour in the late 19th and early 20th century, when it was part of Suur-Pirkkala and its successor Pohjois-Pirkkala. It was a free area to be built upon by the working-class people working in Tampere factories. It joined Tampere in 1937. It is now a residential area undergoing significant redevelopment and together with neighbouring Pyynikki forms an important historical area of Tampere.\nEvents.\nConcerts.\nRatina Stadium of Tampere, in the district by the same name, has served as the venue for many of the most significant concerts, most notably in connection with the \"Endless Forms Most Beautiful World Tour\" in 2015 by the band Nightwish. Other noteworthy tours from other bands held at Ratina Stadium include Iron Maiden (\"Somewhere Back in Time World Tour\", 2008), Bruce Springsteen (\"Working on a Dream Tour\", 2009), AC/DC (\"Black Ice World Tour\", 2010), Red Hot Chili Peppers (\"I'm with You World Tour\", 2012), Bon Jovi (\"Because We Can World Tour\", 2013), Robbie Williams (\"The Heavy Entertainment Show Tour\", 2017) and Rammstein (\"Rammstein Stadium Tour\", 2019).\nTammerfest, Tampere's urban rock festival, is held every July. The Blockfest, which also takes place in Tampere in the summer, is the largest hip hop event in the Nordic countries.\nSport.\nIce hockey.\nTampere's sporting scene is mainly driven by ice hockey. The first Finnish ice hockey match was played in Tampere, on the ice of Pyh\u00e4j\u00e4rvi. Tampere is nicknamed the hometown of Finnish ice hockey. Three exceptional ice hockey teams come from Tampere: Tappara, Ilves and Koovee. Especially both Tappara and Ilves have had a great impact on Finnish ice hockey culture and are among the most successful teams in Finland; of these, Ilves was the first Tampere-based hockey team to win the 1935-1936 Finnish championship. The Finnish ice hockey museum, and the first ice hockey arena to be built in Finland, the Hakamets\u00e4 arena, are both located in Tampere. Construction of a new main ice hockey arena, Tampere Deck Arena, began in 2018, and was first opened to the public on 3 December 2021, although the official opening date was on 15 December. The name of the new arena was supposed to be \"UROS LIVE\", but due to the financial difficulties of the sponsor behind it, the name was abandoned. After that, Nokia Corporation was chosen as the new sponsor on 19 November 2021, and the arena was renamed \"Nokia Arena\". The arena served as one of the host cities for the 2022 IIHF World Championship and the 2023 IIHF World Championship.\nFootball.\nLike ice hockey, football is also a popular sport in Tampere. Ilves, the professional football club of Tampere, alone has over 4,000 players in its football teams, while Tampere boasts over 100 (mostly junior) football teams.\nTampere hosted some of the football preliminaries for the 1952 Summer Olympics.\nBasketball.\nBasketball is another popular sport in Tampere; the city has three basketball teams with big junior activity and one of them, Tampereen Pyrint\u00f6, plays on the highest level (Korisliiga) both with men's and women's team. Men's team was the Finnish Champion in 2010, 2011, and 2014.\nTampere was a co-host of the EuroBasket 1967, and the Nokia Arena will host the EuroBasket 2025 as one of the host cities.\nBatting sports.\nManse PP is the city's pes\u00e4pallo team, the only remaining team in the men's Superpesis to be based within a major city, and who won the league in 2021, as well as the women's league in 2017.\nTampere also has a baseball and softball club, the Tampere Tigers, which plays in the top division of Finnish baseball.\nAmerican football.\nTampere Saints is the American football club in the city, that won division 2 in 2015 and plays in the Maple League (division 1) in summer 2017.\nSpeedway.\nMotorcycle speedway has been held in Tampere at several venues. The Etel\u00e4puisto beach embankment hosted speedway from 1953 to 1988 and was an important venue for competitions, hosting the Nordic Final as part of the qualifying for the Speedway World Championship and the Scandinavian round of the Speedway World Team Cup. In addition, it hosted the final of the Finnish Individual Speedway Championship. When it closed the speedway moved to the Kaanaa track, out of the city to the village of Velaatta by Teisko Airfield. More recently the Ratina Stadium held various speedway meetings from 1995 to 2015, including the Speedway Grand Prix of Finland in 2014 and 2015.\nGymnastics.\nTampere has long tradition in various fields of gymnastics. Finnish Gymnastics Federation office is located in Kauppi Sports Centre. Local clubs include Tampereen Voimistelijat, Elixiria Sport, Rantaperki\u00f6n Isku, TTNV. Ikuri Gymnatics centre is the main training location. Large competitions are organized in Tampere Fair Centre. Gymnaestrada Finland was held in Tampere in 2022.\nOther sports.\nIn addition to all of the above, volleyball, wrestling and boxing are also among Tampere's best-known sports.\nThe city also hosted two canoe sprint world championships, in 1973 and 1983. In 1977, Tampere hosted the World Rowing Junior Championships and in 1995 the Senior World Rowing Championships. Recently, Tampere was the host of the 10th European Youth Olympic Festival on 17\u201325 July 2009 and the 2010 World Ringette Championships on 1\u20136 November at Hakamets\u00e4 arena.\nTampere hosted the 2023 European Masters Games from 26 June to 9 July.\nTransport.\nRoads.\nTo the south of Tampere, there is the Tampere Ring Road, which is important for car traffic and which is part of Finnish highways number 3 (on the west side) and number 9 (on the east side). The main stretch of the ring road sees over 50,000 vehicles per day, and, according to the ELY Centre of Pirkanmaa, the western part of the ring road is the busiest road in Finland, if highway and ring road connections in the Helsinki metropolitan area are excluded. There are also plans for another ring road project that would run from Pirkkala to Tampere's Hervanta and possibly in the future to Kangasala. Teiskontie, which runs east of the city center, is part of Highway 12 in the direction of Lahti. This highway also runs through the center of Tampere under the name Paasikiven\u2013Kekkosentie, below the downtown as the Tampere Tunnel, which is the longest road tunnel built in Finland for car traffic.\nRail.\nTampere is an important railroad hub in Finland and there are direct railroad connections to, for example, Helsinki, Turku and the Port of Turku, Oulu, Jyv\u00e4skyl\u00e4, and Pori. Every day about 150 trains with an annual total of 8 million passengers arrive and depart in the Tampere Central Railway Station, which is located in the city center. There are also frequent bus connections to destinations around Finland.\nAviation.\nTampere is served by Tampere\u2013Pirkkala Airport, located in neighboring municipality Pirkkala some southwest of the city, and it replaced the former H\u00e4rm\u00e4l\u00e4 Airport, which was closed in 1979. The current airport is connected to the city centre of Tampere by bus route 103, and to that of Pirkkala by bus route 39.\nSea transport.\nIn 2015, the Port of Tampere, the charter port area carrying passengers on the shores of Lake N\u00e4sij\u00e4rvi and Lake Pyh\u00e4j\u00e4rvi, was the busiest inland waterway in Finland in terms of the number of passengers (71,750). A partial explanation for the high number of passengers can be found in the summer traffic to the Viikinsaari island in Lake Pyh\u00e4j\u00e4rvi, where people travel for an excursion or various cultural events such as watching a summer theater. Domestic passenger and connecting vessel traffic was only busier in the Finnish sea area in the Helsinki Metropolitan Area, between mainland Finland and \u00c5land in the Archipelago Sea.\nUrban transport.\nThe public transport network in Tampere currently consists of a bus network and two lines of city's light rail, operating from 9 August 2021. The Tampere Bus Station, designed by Jaakko Laaksovirta and Bertel Str\u00f6mmer, representing functionalist architecture, was completed in 1938, being the largest bus station in the Nordic countries at the time, and between 1948 and 1976, the city also had an extensive trolleybus network, which was also the largest trolleybus system in Finland. As of 2017, commuter rail service on the railroad lines connecting Tampere to the neighbouring towns of Nokia and Lemp\u00e4\u00e4l\u00e4 is being established.\nIn the 2010s, Tampere has made efforts to invest in the smooth running of cycling and walkability. Thanks to it, the city was awarded the title of \"Cycling Municipality of the Year\" in 2013. According to a survey conducted in 2015, the attractiveness of both cycling and walking had increased during 2014 and 2015. In any case, during the 21st century, the growth of bicycle traffic has been clearly faster than the growth of the city's population, and the number of cycles has increased by an average of about 2% per year.\nDistances to other cities.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nGovernment.\nIn 2007, Tampere switched to a new model of government. Since then, a mayor and four deputy mayors have been chosen for a period of four years by the city council. The mayor also becomes the seat of the city council for the duration of the tenure.\nTampere was the first Finnish municipality to be elected mayor. The mayor has no official relationship with the municipality; they serve as chair of the city board and direct the municipality's activities. The mayor's duties are defined in the city government's bylaws. Because the mayor and deputy mayors are trustees, they can be removed by the council if they lose the majority trust.\nFor the first two years, Timo P. Nieminen, representing the National Coalition Party from 2007 to 2012, served as mayor. In 2013, Anna-Kaisa Ikonen of the same party was elected mayor. As of 1 June 2017, the number of deputy mayors decreased from four to three. Lauri Lyly (SDP) was elected Mayor of the City of Tampere for the period 2017\u20132021 at the City Council meeting on 12 June 2017.\nInternational relations.\nTampere is twinned with:\nTampere has two additional \"friendship cities\":\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "68837", "revid": "43283345", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68837", "title": "Zareth-shahar", "text": "Place mentioned in the Hebrew Bible\n\u00a0This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain:\u00a0\nZareth-shahar, Zereth-shahar, or Zereth Shahar is a place in the Hebrew Bible mentioned only once, in Joshua 13:19. It is identified as being \"in the mount of the valley\" (KJV), in a passage which delineates the borders of the tribe of Reuben apportioned by Moses (Joshua 13:15-23). Its name means \"the splendor of the dawn.\" Its exact location is unknown.\nIt may be Zarat, near the mouth of the Wady Zerka Main, on the eastern shore of the Dead Sea, some south of the Callirrhoe, in the territory of the Tribe of Reuben. Little remains of this town. \"A few broken basaltic columns and pieces of wall about 200 yards back from the shore, and a ruined fort rather nearer the sea, about the middle of the coast line of the plain, are all that are left\" (Henry Baker Tristram's \"Land of Moab\").\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "68839", "revid": "35751661", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68839", "title": "Actors' Equity Association", "text": "American labor union for theater performers\nThe Actors' Equity Association (AEA), commonly called Actors' Equity or simply Equity, is an American labor union representing those who work in live theatrical performance. Performers appearing in live stage productions without a book or through-storyline (vaudeville, cabarets, circuses) may be represented by the American Guild of Variety Artists (AGVA). The AEA works to negotiate quality living conditions, livable wages, and benefits for performers and stage managers. A theater or production that is not produced and performed by AEA members may be called \"non-Equity\".\nBackground.\nLeading up to the Actors' and Producers' strike of 1929, Hollywood and California in general had a series of workers' equality battles that directly influenced the film industry. The films \"The Passaic Textile Strike\" (1926), \"The Miners' Strike\" (1928) and \"The Gastonia Textile Strike\" (1929) gave audience and producers insight into the effect and accomplishments of labor unions and striking. These films were set apart by being current documentaries, not merely melodramas produced for glamor.\nIn 1896, the first Actors Union Charter was recognized by the American Federation of Labor as an attempt to create a minimum wage for actors being exploited. It was not until January 13, 1913, that the Union Charter failed. It later reemerged as the Actors Equity Association, with more than 111 actors and Francis Wilson as its founding board president.\nHistory.\nAt a meeting held at the Pabst Grand Circle Hotel in New York City, on May 26, 1913, Actors' Equity was founded by 112 professional theater actors, who established its constitution and elected Francis Wilson as president.\nLeading up to the association's establishment, a handful of influential actors\u2014known as The Players\u2014held secret organizational meetings at Edwin Booth's The Players at its Gramercy Park mansion. A bronze plaque commemorates the room in which The Players met to establish Actors' Equity. Members included Frank Gillmore, who was the executive secretary of Actors' Equity from 1918 to 1929 and president from 1929 to 1937.\nActors' Equity joined the American Federation of Labor in 1919, and called a strike seeking recognition as a labor union. The strike ended the dominance of the Producing Managers' Association, including theater owners and producers like Abe Erlanger and his partner, Mark Klaw. The strike increased membership from under 3,000 to approximately 14,000. The Chorus Equity Association, which merged with Actors' Equity in 1955, was founded during the strike.\nEquity represented directors and choreographers until 1959, when they broke away and formed their own union.\n1929 nationwide actors and producers strike threat.\n&lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;/includeonly&gt;\n&lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;/includeonly&gt; \nThe Actors Equality Strike was a series of walkouts that started in 1927 in local theaters in Los Angeles and quickly grew to the motion picture stage. During the nationwide walkouts, the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences started issuing contracts to freelance film actors, which led Hollywood's actors and actresses to fear the loss of their jobs. The theater strikes combined with freelance contracts fueled the need for actors and stagehands to strike for better working conditions and pay.\nFrank Gillmore, the head and treasurer of the Actor's Equity Association, understood that he would need multiple unions across the country to make a change not only in proper representation and pay, but in actors' ability to negotiate any contract a studio would put out worldwide. On July 20, 1929, the AEA gained its first victory, which gave producers and actors a leg to stand on in their battle for equality. Over 30 days (up to August 20, 1929), Gillmore fought to give the AEA the ability to represent all actors, producers, radio personality, vaudeville performers, and agents in the country. This would also give all power and representation to one organization in order to create a more organized equality strike.\nStarting on June 5, 1929, Gillmore attended several meetings in New York with the heads of Broadway. After the meeting, he notified the AEA that appearances in sound and talking motion pictures had been suspended until the outcome of the meetings with the international Studio Crafts Union.\nDue to the negotiations and the suspension of contracts through the AEA, studios were desperate for actors to speed up production, which had dropped significantly. \"The New York Times\" wrote, \"It was pointed out that while the Equality regulations were in effect, about 2000 motion picture contracts, involving salaries said to amount to $500,000 were offered to actors in New York.\" Any actor who entered into a contract not approved by the AEA would be banished from the union and have to reapply for admission after negotiations were finished.\nBy December 1929, the AEA was negotiating terms to reset the movie stage under better conditions, but this was the least of its problems. In late December, groups of theater owners and non-represented producers filed lawsuits to claim damages from the AEA's contract holdout. \"The plaintiffs not only seek a temporary injunction against the defendants, pending trial on an order to show cause why a permanent injunction should not be granted, but also ask damages of $100,000.\"\nEffects of strike.\nThe AEA allowed small numbers of contracts to be negotiated over the next few years. In 1933, the Screen Actors Guild was created and took the AEA's place as the main representative for movie actors and producers. This allowed the AEA to focus on live productions, such as theatrical performances, while the Screen Actors Guild focused on movie production and non-scripted live performances, such as minstrel, vaudeville, and live radio shows.\nCauses.\nIn the 1940s, the AEA stood against segregation. When actors were losing jobs through 1950s McCarthyism and the Hollywood blacklist, the AEA refused to participate. Although its constitution guaranteed its members the right to refuse to work alongside Communists, or a member of a Communist front organization, the AEA did not ban any members. At a 1997 ceremony commemorating the blacklist's 50th anniversary, Richard Masur, then president of the Screen Actors Guild, apologized for its participation in the ban, saying: \"Only our sister union, Actors' Equity Association, had the courage to stand behind its members and help them continue their creative lives in the theater. For that, we honor Actors' Equity tonight.\"\nIn the 1960s, the AEA played a role in gaining public funding for the arts, including the founding of the National Endowment for the Arts (NEA).\nThe AEA fought the destruction of historic Broadway theaters. It played a major role in the recognition of the impact the AIDS epidemic on the world of theater, co-founding Broadway Cares/Equity Fights AIDS.\nOn October 30, 2025, the AEA initiated a labor strike against Trey Parker and Matt Stone's Casa Bonita restaurant in Lakewood, Colorado, where 57 AEA member employees have served as entertainers, after demanding better wages and safer working conditions.\nJoining.\nIn 2021, Actor's Equity introduced an \"Open Access\" membership policy, whereby \"any theatre worker who can demonstrate they have worked professionally as an actor or stage manager within Equity's geographical jurisdiction\" may join the union. This opened eligibility to the union to theatre workers who had not previously worked for Equity employers. Theatre workers need to provide a copy of their contract and proof of pay. This policy was made permanent in 2023, superseding previous methods for earning eligibility to join Equity such as the Equity Membership Candidate (EMC) program.\nAsides from Open Access, theatre workers may join Equity by being employed under an Equity contract, or by being a member of one of Equity's sister performing arts unions, the \"Four A's\": SAG-AFTRA, AGMA, AGVA or GIAA. Such applicants must have been a member of said sister union for at least one year, be a member in good standing of that union, have worked as a performer under the union's jurisdiction on a principal or \"under-five\" contract or at least three days of extra (\"background\") work, and must have completed non-union theatrical work.\nContracts.\nThe AEA has several different types of contract, with different rules associated with them. Each contract type deals with a specific type of theater venue or production type. These include, but are not limited to: Council of Resident Stock Theatres (CORST), Guest Artist, Letters of Agreement (LoA), League of Resident Theatres (LoRT) Small Professional Theatres (SPT), and Theatre for Young Audiences (TYA).\nAEA actors and stage managers are not allowed to work in non-Equity houses or on any productions in which an Equity Agreement has not been signed anywhere within the AEA's jurisdiction.\nEquity waiver plan.\nThe Equity Waiver Plan, originally implemented in 1972, was designed to support small theaters in Los Angeles by allowing non-union actors to perform in venues with 99 seats or fewer, offering lower pay scales and flexible production terms. Initially, actors were paid between $5 and $14 per performance, with productions exceeding 80 performances required to transition to a union contract. The plan fueled the growth of small theaters and spurred artistic achievement in the region. However, by 2000, AEA shifted the focus from box office earnings to theater size to determine payments for the first 12 weeks of a production. A 2014 survey revealed dissatisfaction among members, with many feeling the plan favored producers over actors. Despite these criticisms, the plan helped many small theaters evolve into midsize operations paying higher wages.\nPresidents.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Sister-inline/styles.css\"/&gt; Media related to at Wikimedia Commons"}
{"id": "68840", "revid": "19708575", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68840", "title": "Union", "text": "Union commonly refers to:\nUnion may also refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "68841", "revid": "43283345", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68841", "title": "Zaretan", "text": "City mentioned in the Hebrew Bible\nZaretan or Zarethan (), also known as Zeredathah, is a city mentioned in the Hebrew Bible as near the location where the Hebrews crossed the Jordan (). In the books of Joshua (, KJV \"Zaretan\") and 1 Kings ( KJV \"Zartanah\", \"Zarthan\"), it is called Zarethan, but in 2 Chronicles it is called Zeredathah (, KJV).\nZaredathah stood in the Jordan Valley. Nelson Glueck looked for it on the east bank of the river, proposing Tell es-Sa'idiyeh, but some more recent authors place it on the west bank, one theory identifying it with Tell el-Mazar, also spelled Mezar, in Wadi Far'a. Tell el-Mezar is at the site called in Arabic Qerawa, known from antiquity by the name Korea(i) (\u03ba\u03bf\u03c1\u03b5\u03b1[\u03b9]) or Koreous (K\u03bf\u03c1\u03b5\u03bf\u03c5\u03c2) and located at the foot of Mount Sartabe.\nAccording to Hebrew Bible, the bronze castings for the Solomon's Temple were made in the clay grounds between Sukkot and Zaretan.\nThe old identification of the site of the miracle of the Israelites' crossing of the Jordan with the waters stopping their flow at the \"city of Adam beside Zaretan\" was, according to the Easton's Bible Dictionary (1893 and 1897), presumed to be near Succoth, where the Jabbok flows into the Jordan, about 30 miles upstream from the Israelite camp. There the priests stepped into the water, which then \"stood and rose upon an heap\", thus creating a 30-mile stretch of dry riverbed for the tribes to use for crossing over to the Promised Land (; compare ).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBible verses.\n\u00a0This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain:\u00a0"}
{"id": "68845", "revid": "4770293", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68845", "title": "Amadeus I, Count of Savoy", "text": "Count of the House of Savoy (c. 1016\u2013c. 1051)\nAmadeus I (c. 1016 \u2013 c. 1051), nicknamed of the Tail or la Coda (Latin , \"tailed\"), was an early count of the House of Savoy. He was probably the eldest son of Humbert I. His nickname derives from an anecdote, preserved only in a thirteenth-century manuscript, that when he met the Emperor Henry III at Verona in 1046, he refused to enter the emperor's chambers without his large train of knights, his \"tail\".\nAmadeus is first attested in a document of 8 April 1022, when, along with his younger brother Burchard, bishop of Aosta, he witnessed a donation of Lambert, bishop of Langres, to his father. Probably sometime after this and before 1030, Amadeus, Burchard, and a third brother, Otto, joined their father in witnessing a donation made by one Aymon de Pierrefort to the Abbey of Cluny. In a further two undated charters of probably about the same period, Amadeus together with his brothers Otto and Aymon and his father made donations to the Abbey of Cluny and the church of Saint-Maurice at Matassine (Le Bourget-du-Lac). Amadeus and his father also witnessed another donation, made by several noblemen, to the Abbey of Savigny.\nThe first record of Amadeus's marriage and use of the title count comes from a single document dated 22 October 1030. On that date, at Grenoble, the count and his wife, Adelaide, of unknown family, gave the church of Matassine to Cluny. The act was witnessed by one Humbert and his wife Ausilia\u2014who were perhaps Amadeus's father and mother\u2014and also by his brother Otto and by the king and queen of Burgundy, Rudolf III and Ermengarda. Although the document of 1030 does not demonstrate that Amadeus and his father both held the rank of count simultaneously, Humbert's diploma of 1040 for the Diocese of Aosta was confirmed by his eldest son bearing the title count. On 21 January 1042 Amadeus, Otto and Aymon confirmed another diploma of their father, favouring the church of Saint-Chaffre. On 10 June, Count Amadeus, Count Humbert and Otto donated the church of Echelles to the church of Saint-Laurence in Grenoble. There is no notice of Amadeus's activities for the following decade, and his last action was recorded on 10 December 1051. In this document, he is called \"Count of Belley\" (\"comes Bellicensium\"), but it is almost certainly the same Count Amadeus as the son of Humbert I.\nAccording to fourteenth-century sources, Amadeus died shortly after 1051 and was buried in Saint-Jean-de-Maurienne. His son Humbert had predeceased him, but he left behind a son, Aymon, who became Bishop of Belley. He may have had a daughter who married into the family of the Counts of Geneva. He was succeeded by his brother Otto in the countship.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "68846", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68846", "title": "Zaphnath-paaneah", "text": ""}
{"id": "68848", "revid": "2156210", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68848", "title": "Zadok (disambiguation)", "text": "Zadok was a high priest of the Israelites in Jerusalem during the reigns of David and Solomon.\nZadok may also refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "68849", "revid": "1313516410", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68849", "title": "Zechariah, father of John the Baptist", "text": "Father of John the Baptist\nZechariah was a Jewish priest mentioned in the New Testament and the Quran, and venerated in Christianity and Islam. In the Bible, he is the father of John the Baptist, a priest of the sons of Aaron in the Gospel of Luke (Luke 1:67\u201379), and the husband of Elizabeth who is a relative of the Virgin Mary (Luke 1:36).\nIn the Quran, his story mentioned in initial verse of surah Maryam (chapter Mary).\nBiblical account.\nAccording to the Gospel of Luke, during the reign of king Herod, there was a priest named Zechariah, of the course of Abia, whose wife Elizabeth was also of the priestly family of Aaron. The evangelist states that both the parents were righteous before God, since they were \"blameless\" in observing the commandments and ordinances of the Lord. When the events related in Luke began, their marriage was still childless, because Elizabeth was \"barren\", and they were both \"well advanced in years\" ().\nThe duties at the temple in Jerusalem alternated between each of the family lines that had descended from those appointed by King David (). Luke states that during the week when it was the duty of Zechariah's family line to serve at \"the temple of the Lord\", the lot for performing the incense offering had fallen to Zechariah ().\nThe Gospel of Luke states that while Zechariah ministered at the altar of incense, an angel of the Lord appeared and announced to him that his wife would give birth to a son, whom he was to name John, and that this son would be the forerunner of the Lord (). Citing their advanced age, Zechariah asked with disbelief for a sign whereby he would know the truth of this prophecy. In reply, the angel identified himself as Gabriel, sent especially by God to make this announcement, and added that because of Zechariah's doubt he would be struck dumb and \"not able to speak, until the day that these things shall be performed\". Consequently, when he went out to the waiting worshippers in the temple's outer courts, he was unable to speak the customary blessing (). The time this occurred, according to theologian Adam C. English, \"is September 24, based on computations from the Jewish calendar in accordance with Leviticus 23 regarding the Day of Atonement.\"After returning to his house in \"Hebron, in the hill \"country\" of Judah\", his wife Elizabeth conceived. After Elizabeth completed her fifth month of pregnancy, her relative Mary was visited by the same angel, Gabriel. While still a virgin, Gabriel said to her, \"Do not be afraid, Mary; you have found favor with God. You will conceive and give birth to a son, and you are to call him Jesus. 'How will this be,' Mary asked the angel, 'since I am a virgin?' The angel answered, 'The Holy Spirit will come on you, and the power of the Most High will overshadow you. So the holy one to be born will be called the Son of God.'\" Joseph, to whom Mary was betrothed, found out that she was pregnant, was at first perplexed at the obviously disturbing news. Because he \"was faithful to the law, and yet did not want to expose her to public disgrace, he had in mind to divorce her quietly. But after he had considered this, an angel of the Lord appeared to him in a dream and said, 'Joseph son of David, do not be afraid to take Mary home as your wife, because what is conceived in her is from the Holy Spirit. She will give birth to a son, and you are to give him the name Jesus, because he will save his people from their sins.' Matthew 24: When Joseph woke up, he did what the angel of the Lord had commanded him and took Mary home as his wife.\"\nMary then traveled to visit her relative Elizabeth, having been told by the angel that Elizabeth was in her sixth month of pregnancy. Mary remained about three months before she returned to her own house (;).\nElizabeth gave birth, and on the eighth day, when their son was to be circumcised according to the commandment, her neighbours and relatives assumed that he was to be named after his father. Elizabeth, however, insisted that his name was to be John; so the family then questioned her husband. As soon as Zechariah had written on a writing table: \"His name is John\", he regained the power of speech, and blessed \"the Lord God of Israel\" with a prophecy known as the \"Benedictus\" or \"Song of Zechariah\" ().\nThe child grew up and \"waxed strong in spirit\", but remained in the deserts of Jud\u00e6a until he assumed the ministry that was to earn him the name \"John the Baptist\" (; ; ).\nOther Christian traditions.\nIdentification with Zechariah from Matthew.\nOrigen suggested that the Zechariah mentioned in as having been killed between the temple and the altar may be the father of John the Baptist.\nDeath.\nThe Gospel of James, a 2nd-century apocryphal work, recounts that, at the time of the massacre of the Innocents, when King Herod ordered the slaughter of all males under the age of two in an attempt to prevent the prophesied Messiah from coming to Israel, Zechariah refused to divulge the whereabouts of his son (who was in hiding), and he was therefore murdered by Herod's soldiers. This account is also present in subsequent Eastern Orthodox tradition.\nCommemoration.\nThe Catholic Church commemorates him as a saint, along with Elizabeth, on September 23 as it is believed that his temple duty before John the Baptist's conception took place on the Day of Atonement. He is also venerated as a prophet in the Calendar of Saints of the Lutheran Church on 5 September. The Armenian Apostolic Church venerates him on September 5th as well, along with his wife Elizabeth. The Eastern Orthodox Church also celebrates the feast day of Zechariah on September 5, together with Elizabeth, who is considered a matriarch. Zechariah and Elizabeth are invoked in several prayers during the Orthodox Mystery of Crowning (Sacrament of Marriage), as the priest blesses the newly married couple, saying \"Thou who didst... accept Zechariah and Elizabeth, and didst make their offspring the Forerunner...\" and \"...bless them, O Lord our God, as Thou didst Zechariah and Elizabeth...\". In the Greek Orthodox calendar, Zechariah and Elizabeth are also commemorated on June 24.\nRelics veneration.\nSan Zaccaria, Venice claims to house the relics of Zechariah, entombed alongside those of Athanasius of Alexandria. Armenians believe that the Gandzasar monastery in Nagorno-Karabakh contains his relics; however, his relics were also kept in the Hagia Sophia of Constantinople, where they were brought by the \"praefectus urbi\" Ursus on 4 September, 415.\nHis relics uncovering is commemorated by Greek Orthodox Church on 11 February, and on 1 December occurs commemoration of his, James and Simeon relics translation in 351, and 25 May is commemoration of their relics discover also in 351.\nTomb venerated in Byzantine period.\nIn 2003, a 4th-century inscription on the so-called Tomb of Absalom, a 1st-century monument in Jerusalem, was deciphered as, \"This is the tomb of Zachariah, the martyr, the holy priest, the father of John.\" This suggests to some scholars that it is the burial place of Zechariah the father of John the Baptist. Professor Gideon Foerster at the Hebrew University states that the inscription tallies with a 6th-century Christian text by a pilgrim named Theodosius which states that Zechariah was buried with Simon the Elder and James the brother of Jesus, and believes that both are authentic. Zias and Puech suggest the inscription may refer to another 'Zekariah' mentioned by Josephus and the Talmud who was martyred in the time of Vespasian. They also suggest the inscription casts doubt on the tomb being Absalom's. Although it was referred to as such in the 1st century, Absalom had lived centuries earlier.\nIn Islam.\nZechariah is also a prophet in Islam, and is mentioned in the Qur'an as the father of \"Ya\u1e25y\u0101\" (John the Baptist). Zechariah is also believed by some Muslims to have been a martyr. An old tradition narrates that Zechariah was sawn in half, in a death which resembles that attributed to Isaiah in \"Lives of the Prophets\".\nUnification Church.\nUnificationist theologian Young Oon Kim wrote, and some members of the Unification movement believe, that Zechariah was the father of Jesus, based on the work of Leslie Weatherhead, an English Christian theologian in the liberal Protestant tradition.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "68851", "revid": "11308236", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68851", "title": "The State of the Art", "text": "1989 novella by Iain M. Banks\nThe State of the Art was initially a novella by Scottish writer Iain M. Banks, first published in 1989, and then a short story collection first published in the UK by Orbit in 1991. The collection includes SF, both Culture and non-Culture, as well as non-SF works originally published under his other byline \"Iain Banks\".\nEditions.\nA US edition of the collection was published in 2004 by Night Shade Books, in hardback () and limited editions (). The limited edition contains work by Banks not found in the UK version. A Trade Paperback edition was printed in Canada in 2007 by Night Shade Books, () It contains the additional text 'A Few Notes on the Culture'.\nAdaptations.\n\"Piece\" was adapted by Craig Warner for BBC Radio 5 and broadcast on 6 June 1991. It was directed by John York. The cast included:\n\"The State of the Art\" was adapted by Paul Cornell for the Afternoon Play slot on BBC Radio 4 and broadcast on 5 March 2009. The adaptation was directed by Nadia Molinari and the main cast was:\nIn late 2009 it was announced that the story \"A Gift From the Culture\" was in the early stages of being adapted for the cinema by Dominic Murphy, the director of \"White Lightnin\"'.\nReception.\nIn 1990 Mike Christie reviewed the novella for \"Foundation\". Christie called it a \"rare success\" in the genre of utopian fiction, successfully merging the styles of political utopia and \"high-tech sf\". He praises Banks for showing a cast of believable, imperfect characters, who in turn make his utopia - the world of \"The Culture\" - more realistic.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n (paperback )."}
{"id": "68852", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68852", "title": "Otto, Count of Savoy", "text": "Count of Savoy (c. 1023\u20131057/1060)\nOtto (; ; c. 1023 \u2013 1057/1060) was count of Savoy from around 1051 until his death. Through marriage to Adelaide, the heiress of Ulric Manfred II, he also administered the march of Susa from around 1046 until his death.\nFamily.\nHe was a younger son of Humbert the White-Handed and his wife, Ancilla of Lenzburg. Through Humbert's service to the German emperors, the family was granted the counties of Maurienne, Aosta and Sapaudia (Savoy), all at the expense of local bishops or archbishops. Otto inherited the family's realms after the death of his brother Amadeus c. 1051.\nIn 1046, he married Adelaide, heiress of the march of Susa and county of Turin. They had:\nRule.\nThrough his marriage to Adelaide, Otto obtained extensive possessions in northern Italy. Thereafter, the House of Savoy concentrated its expansion efforts towards Italy instead of north of the Alps as it had done before. Savoy's lands occupied much of modern Savoy and Piedmont, although several other small states could be found between them. In the 1050s, Otto allowed coins to be minted at Aiguebelle. The archbishop of Vienne, L\u00e9ger, who had sole right of minting in the region, complained to Pope Leo IX, so Otto forbade further coining at Aiguebelle.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "68853", "revid": "50544173", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68853", "title": "Dahlia", "text": "Genus of flowering plants in the daisy family Asteraceae\nDahlia ( , ) is a genus of bushy, tuberous, herbaceous perennial plants native to Mexico and Central America. Dahlias are members of the Asteraceae (synonym name: Compositae) family of dicotyledonous plants, its relatives include the sunflower, daisy, chrysanthemum, and zinnia. There are 49 species of dahlia, with flowers in almost every hue (except blue), with hybrids commonly grown as garden plants.\nDahlias were known only to the Aztecs and other southern North American peoples until the Spanish conquest, after which the plants were brought to Europe. The tubers of some varieties are of medicinal and dietary value to humans because, in common with species of \"Inula\" and many other flowering plants, they use inulin, a polymer of the fruit sugar fructose, instead of starch as a storage polysaccharide.\nDescription.\nDahlias are perennial plants with tuberous roots. They are not frost hardy, and require protection from frost if grown in regions with cold winters. While some have herbaceous stems, others have stems which lignify in the absence of secondary tissue and resprout following winter dormancy, allowing further seasons of growth. As members of the family Asteraceae, dahlias have composite flower heads called capitula that are composed of multiple florets arranged in a central disc with surrounding petal-like rays. Each floret is a flower in its own right. The modern name Asteraceae comes from the type genus \"Aster\" and the Ancient Greek word for \"star\", referring to the appearance of a star with surrounding rays.\nThe stems are leafy, ranging in height from as low as to more than . Flower forms are variable, with one head per stem; these can be as small as in diameter or up to (\"dinner plate\"). The majority of species do not produce scented flowers. Like most plants that do not attract pollinating insects through scent, they are brightly colored, displaying most hues, with the exception of blue.\nThe great variety in species results from garden dahlias being octoploids, having eight sets of homologous chromosomes. In addition, dahlias also contain many transposons\u2014genetic pieces that move from place to place upon an allele\u2014which contributes to their manifesting such great diversity.\nTaxonomy.\nTaxonomic history.\nEarly history.\nSpaniards reported finding the plants growing in Mexico in 1525, but the earliest known description is by Francisco Hern\u00e1ndez, physician to Philip II, who was ordered to visit Mexico in 1570 to study the \"natural products of that country\". They were used as a source of food by the indigenous peoples, who both gathered wild specimens and cultivated crops. The indigenous peoples variously identified the plants as \"Chichipatl\" (Toltecs) and \"Acocotle\" or \"Cocoxochitl\" (Aztecs). From Hern\u00e1ndez's perception of Nahuatl to Spanish (through various other translations) the word is \"water cane\", \"water pipe\", \"water pipe flower\", \"hollow stem flower\", or \"cane flower\", all referring to the hollow plant stems.\nHernandez described two varieties of dahlias (the pinwheel-like \"Dahlia pinnata\" and the huge \"Dahlia imperialis\") as well as other medicinal plants of New Spain. Francisco Dom\u00ednguez, an Hidalgo gentleman who accompanied Hernandez on part of his seven-year study, made a series of drawings to supplement the four volume report. Three of his drawings showed plants with flowers: two resembled the modern bedding dahlia, and one resembled the species \"Dahlia merckii\"; all displayed a high degree of doubleness. In 1578, a manuscript titled \"Nova Plantarum, Animalium et Mineralium Mexicanorum Historia\", was sent back to the Escorial in Madrid. It was translated into Latin by Francisco Ximenes in 1615. In 1640, Francisco Cesi, President of the \"Academia dei Lincei\" of Rome, bought the Ximenes translation and, after annotating it, published it in 1649\u20131651 as two volumes, \"Rerum Medicarum Novae Hispaniae Thesaurus Seu Nova Plantarium, Animalium et Mineralium Mexicanorum Historia\". The original manuscripts were destroyed in a fire in the mid-1600s.\nEuropean introduction.\nIn 1787, the French botanist Nicolas-Joseph Thi\u00e9ry de Menonville, sent to Mexico to steal the cochineal insect valued for its scarlet dye, reported the strangely beautiful flowers he had seen growing in a garden in Oaxaca. In 1789, Vicente Cervantes, director of the Botanical Garden at Mexico City, sent \"plant parts\" to Abbe Antonio Jos\u00e9 Cavanilles, director of the Royal Gardens of Madrid. Cavanilles flowered one plant that same year, then the second one a year later. In 1791 he called the new growths \"Dahlia\" for Anders Dahl. The first plant was called \"Dahlia pinnata\" after its pinnate foliage; the second, \"Dahlia rosea\" for its rose-purple color. In 1796, from the parts sent by Cervantes, Cavanilles flowered a third plant, which he named \"Dahlia coccinea\" for its scarlet color.\nIn 1798, Cavanilles sent \"D.\u00a0pinnata\" seeds to Parma, Italy. That year, the Marchioness of Bute, wife of the Earl of Bute, the English Ambassador to Spain, obtained a few seeds from Cavanilles and sent them to Kew Gardens, where they flowered but were lost after two to three years.\nIn the following years Madrid sent seeds to Berlin and Dresden in Germany, and to Turin and Thiene in Italy. In 1802, Cavanilles sent tubers of \"these three\" (\"D.\u00a0pinnata, D.\u00a0rosea, D.\u00a0coccinea\") to Swiss botanist Augustin Pyramus de Candolle at University of Montpelier in France, Andre Thouin at the Jardin des Plantes in Paris and Scottish botanist William Aiton at Kew Gardens. That same year, John Fraser, English nurseryman and later botanical collector to the Czar of Russia, brought \"D.\u00a0coccinea\" seeds from Paris to the Apothecaries Gardens in England, where they flowered in his greenhouse a year later, providing \"Botanical Magazine\" with an illustration.\nIn 1804, a new species, \"Dahlia sambucifolia\", was successfully grown at Holland House, Kensington. Whilst in Madrid in 1804, Lady Holland was given either dahlia seeds or tubers by Cavanilles. She sent them back to England, to Lord Holland's librarian at Holland House, who successfully raised the plants and produced two double flowers a year later. The plants raised in 1804 did not survive; new stock was brought from France in 1815. In 1824, Lord Holland sent his wife a note containing the following verse:The dahlia you brought to our isle\nYour praises for ever shall speak;\nMid gardens as sweet as your smile,\nAnd in colour as bright as your cheek.\nIn 1805, German naturalist Alexander von Humboldt sent more seeds from Mexico to Aiton in England, Thouin in Paris, and Christoph Friedrich Otto, director of the Berlin Botanical Garden. More significantly, he sent seeds to botanist Carl Ludwig Willdenow in Germany. Willdenow now reclassified the rapidly growing number of species, changing the genus from \"Dahlia\" to \"Georgina\"; after naturalist Johann Gottlieb Georgi. He combined the Cavanilles species \"D.\u00a0pinnata\" and \"D.\u00a0rosea\" under the name of \"Georgina variabilis\"; \"D.\u00a0coccinea\" was still held to be a separate species, which he renamed \"Georgina coccinea\".\nClassification.\nSince 1789 when Cavanilles first flowered the dahlia in Europe, there has been an ongoing effort by many growers, botanists and taxonomists, to determine the development of the dahlia to modern times. At least 85 species have been reported: approximately 25 of these were first reported from the wild; the remainder appeared in gardens in Europe. They were considered hybrids, the results of crossing between previously reported species, or developed from the seeds sent by Humboldt from Mexico in 1805, or perhaps from some other undocumented seeds that had found their way to Europe. Several of these were soon discovered to be identical with earlier reported species, but the greatest number are new varieties. Morphological variation is highly pronounced in the dahlia. William John Cooper Lawrence, who hybridized hundreds of families of dahlias in the 1920s, stated: \"I have not yet seen any two plants in the families I have raised which were not to be distinguished one from the other. Constant reclassification of the 85 reported species has resulted in a considerably smaller number of distinct species, as there is a great deal of disagreement today between systematists over classification.\nIn 1829, all species growing in Europe were reclassified under an all-encompassing name of \"D.\u00a0variabilis, Desf.\", though this is not an accepted name. Through the interspecies cross of the Humboldt seeds and the Cavanilles species, 22 new species were reported by that year, all of which had been classified in different ways by several different taxonomists, creating considerable confusion as to which species was which. As of now Dahlias are classified into 15 different species by botanist Liberty Hyde Bailey.\nIn 1830 William Smith suggested that all dahlia species could be divided into two groups for color, red-tinged and purple-tinged. In investigating this idea Lawrence determined that with the exception of \"D.\u00a0variabilis\", all dahlia species may be assigned to one of two groups for flower-colour: Group I (ivory-magenta) or Group II (yellow-orange-scarlet).\nModern classification.\nThe genus \"Dahlia\" is situated in the Asteroideae subfamily of the Asteraceae, in the Coreopsideae tribe. Within that tribe it is the second largest genus, after \"Coreopsis\", and appears as a well defined clade within the Coreopsideae.\nSubdivision.\nInfrageneric subdivision.\nSherff (1955), in the first modern taxonomy described three sections for the 18 species he recognised, \"Pseudodendron\", \"Epiphytum\" and \"Dahlia\". By 1969 S\u00f8rensen recognised 29 species and four sections by splitting off \"Entemophyllon\" from section \"Dahlia\". By contrast Giannasi (1975) using a phytochemical analysis based on flavonoids, reduced the genus to just two sections, \"Entemophyllon\" and \"Dahlia\", the latter having three subsections, \"Pseudodendron\", \"Dahlia\", and \"Merckii\". S\u00f8rensen then issued a further revision in 1980, incorporating subsection \"Merckii\" in his original section \"Dahlia\".\nWhen he described two new species in the 1980s (\"Dahlia tubulata\" and \"D.\u00a0congestifolia\"), he placed them within his existing sections. A further species, \"Dahlia sorensenii\" was added by Hansen and Hjerting in (1996). \nAt the same time they demonstrated that \"Dahlia pinnata\" should more properly be designated \"D.\u00a0x pinnata\". \"D.\u00a0x pinnata\" was shown to actually be a variant of \"D.\u00a0sorensenii\" that had acquired hybrid qualities before it was introduced to Europe in the sixteenth century and formally named by Cavanilles. The original wild \"D.\u00a0pinnata\" is presumed extinct. Further species continue to be described, Saar (2003) describing 35 species. However separation of the sections on morphological, cytological, and biochemical criteria has not been entirely satisfactory.\nTo date these sectional divisions have not been fully supported phylogenetically, which demonstrate only section \"Entemophyllon\" as a distinct sectional clade. The other major grouping is the core \"Dahlia\" clade (CDC), which includes most of the section \"Dahlia\". The remainder of the species occupy what has been described as the variable root clade (VRC) which includes the small section \"Pseudodendron\" but also the monotypic section \"Epiphytum\" and a number of species from within section \"Dahlia\". Outside of these three clades lie \"D.\u00a0tubulata\" and \"D.\u00a0merckii\" as a polytomy.\nHorticulturally the sections retain some usage, section \"Pseudodendron\" being referred to as 'Tree Dahlias', \"Epiphytum\" as the 'Vine Dahlia'. The remaining two herbaceous sections being distinguished by their pinnules, opposing (\"Dahlia\") or alternating (\"Entemophyllon\").\nSections.\nSections (including chromosome numbers), with geographical distribution;\nOnly \"Pseudodendron\" (\"D.\u00a0imperialis\") and \"Dahlia\" (\"D.\u00a0australis\", \"D.\u00a0coccinea\") occur outside Mexico.\nSpecies.\nThere are currently 42 accepted species in the genus \"Dahlia\" but new species continue to be described.\nEtymology.\nThe naming of the plant itself has long been a subject of some confusion. Many sources state that the name \"Dahlia\" was bestowed by the pioneering Swedish botanist and taxonomist Carl Linnaeus to honor his late student, Anders Dahl, author of \"Observationes Botanicae\". However, Linnaeus died in 1778, more than eleven years before the plant was introduced into Europe in 1789, so while it is generally agreed that the plant was named in 1791 in honor of Dahl, who had died two years before, Linnaeus could not have been the one who did so. It was probably Abbe Antonio Jose Cavanilles, Director of the Royal Gardens of Madrid, who should be credited with the attempt to scientifically define the genus, since he not only received the first specimens from Mexico in 1789, but named the first three species that flowered from the cuttings.\nRegardless of who bestowed it, the name was not so easily established. In 1805, German botanist Carl Ludwig Willdenow, asserting that the genus \"Dahlia\" Thunb. (published a year after Cavanilles's genus and now considered a synonym of \"Trichocladus\") was more widely accepted, changed the plants' genus from \"Dahlia\" to \"Georgina\" (after the German-born naturalist Johann Gottlieb Georgi, a professor at the Imperial Academy of Sciences of St. Petersburg, Russia). He also reclassified and renamed the first three species grown, and identified, by Cavanilles. It was not until 1810, in a published article, that he officially adopted the Cavanilles's original designation of \"Dahlia\". However, the name \"Georgina\" still persisted in Germany for the next few decades. In Russian, it is still named Georgina ().\nDistribution and habitat.\n\"Dahlia\" is found predominantly in Mexico, but some species are found ranging as far south as northern South America. \"D.\u00a0australis\" occurs at least as far south as southwestern Guatemala, while \"D.\u00a0coccinea\" and \"D.\u00a0imperialis\" also occur in parts of Central America and northern South America. \"Dahlia\" is a genus of the uplands and mountains, being found at elevations between , in what has been described as a \"pine\u2013oak woodland\" vegetative zone. Most species have limited ranges scattered throughout many mountain ranges in Mexico\nEcology.\nThe most common pollinators are bees and small beetles.\nPests and diseases.\nSlugs and snails are serious pests in some parts of the world, particularly in spring when new growth is emerging through the soil. Earwigs can also disfigure the blooms and foliage. The other main pests likely to be encountered are aphids (usually on young stems and immature flower buds), red spider mite (causing foliage mottling and discolouration, worse in hot and dry conditions) and capsid bugs (resulting in contortion and holes at growing tips). Diseases affecting dahlias include powdery mildew, grey mould (\"Botrytis cinerea\"), verticillium wilt, dahlia smut (\"Entyloma calendulae\" f. \"dahliae\"), phytophthora and some plant viruses. Dahlias are a source of food for the larvae of some Lepidoptera species including angle shades, common swift, ghost moth and large yellow underwing.\nCultivation.\nDahlias grow naturally in climates that do not experience frost (the tubers are hardy to USDA Zone 8). Consequently they are not adapted to withstand sub-zero temperatures. However, their tuberous nature enables them to survive periods of dormancy, and this characteristic means that gardeners in temperate climates with frosts can grow dahlias successfully, provided the tubers are lifted from the ground and stored in cool yet frost-free conditions during the winter. Planting the tubers quite deep () also provides some protection. When in active growth, modern dahlia hybrids perform most successfully in well-watered yet free-draining soils, in situations receiving plenty of sunlight. Taller cultivars usually require some form of staking as they grow, and all garden dahlias need deadheading regularly, once flowering commences.\nHorticultural classification.\nHorticulturally the garden dahlia is usually treated as the cultigen \"D.\u00a0variabilis\" hort., which while being responsible for thousands of cultivars has an obscure taxonomic status.\nHistory.\nThe inappropriate term \"D.\u00a0variabilis\" is often used to describe the cultivars of \"Dahlia\" since the correct parentage remains obscure, but probably involves \"Dahlia coccinea\". In 1846 the Caledonia Horticultural Society of Edinburgh offered a prize of 2,000 pounds to the first person succeeding in producing a blue dahlia. This has to date not been accomplished. While dahlias produce anthocyanin, an element necessary for the production of the blue, to achieve a true blue color in a plant, the anthocyanin delphinidin needs six hydroxyl groups. To date, dahlias have only developed five, so the closest that breeders have come to achieving a \"blue\" specimen are variations of mauve, purples and lilac hues.\nBy the beginning of the twentieth century, a number of different types were recognised. These terms were based on shape or colour, and the National Dahlia Society included cactus, pompon, single, show and fancy in its 1904 guide. Many national societies developed their own classification systems until 1962 when the International Horticultural Congress agreed to develop an internationally recognised system at its Brussels meeting that year, and subsequently in Maryland in 1966. This culminated in the 1969 publication of \"The International Register of Dahlia Names\" by the Royal Horticultural Society which became the central registering authority.\nThis system depended primarily on the visibility of the central disc, whether it was open-centred or whether only ray florets were apparent centrally (double bloom). The double-bloom cultivars were then subdivided according to the way in which they were folded along their longitudinal axis: flat, involute (curled inwards) or revolute (curling backwards). If the end of the ray floret was split, they were considered fimbriated. Based on these characteristics, nine groups were defined plus a tenth miscellaneous group for any cultivars not fitting the above characteristics. Fimbriated dahlias were added in 2004, and two further groups (Single and Double orchid) in 2007. The last group to be added, Peony, first appeared in 2012.\nIn many cases the bloom diameter was then used to further label certain groups from miniature to giant. This practice was abandoned in 2012.\nModern system (RHS).\nThere are now more than 57,000 registered cultivars,\nwhich are officially registered through the Royal Horticultural Society (RHS). The official register is \"The International Register of Dahlia Names 1969\" (1995 reprint) which is updated by annual supplements. The original 1969 registry published about 14,000 cultivars adding a further 1700 by 1986 and in 2003 there were 18,000. Since then about a hundred new cultivars are added annually.\nThe official RHS classification lists fourteen groups, grouped by flower type, together with the abbreviations used by the RHS;\nEarlier versions of the registry subdivided some groups by flower size. Groups 4, 5, 8 and 9 were divided into five subgroups (A to E) from Giant to Miniature, and Group 6 into two subgroups, Small and Miniature. Dahlias were then described by Group and Subgroup, e.g. 5(d) \u2018Ace Summer Sunset\u2019. Some Dahlia Societies have continued this practice, but this is neither official nor standardised. As of 2013 The RHS uses two size descriptors\nSizes can range from tiny micro dahlias with flowers less than 50\"\u00a0\"mm to giants that are over 250\"\u00a0\"mm in diameter. The groupings listed here are from the New Zealand Society:\nIn addition to the official classification and the terminology used by various dahlia societies, individual horticulturalists use a wide range of other descriptions, such as 'Incurved' and abbreviations in their catalogues, such as CO for Collarette.\nBranding.\nSome plant growers include their brand name in the cultivar name. Thus Fides (part of the D\u00fcmmen Orange Group) in the Netherlands developed a series of cultivars which they named the Dahlinova series, for example Dahlinova 'Carolina Burgundy'. These are Group 10 Miscellaneous in the RHS classification scheme.\nDouble dahlias.\nIn 1805, several new species were reported with red, purple, lilac, and pale yellow coloring, and the first true double flower was produced in Belgium. One of the more popular concepts of dahlia history, and the basis for many different interpretations and confusion, is that all the original discoveries were single-flowered types, which, through hybridization and selective breeding, produced double forms. Many of the species of dahlias then, and now, have single-flowered blooms. \"D.\u00a0coccinea\", the third dahlia to bloom in Europe, was a single. But two of the three drawings of dahlias by Dominguez, made in Mexico between 1570 and 1577, showed definite characteristics of doubling. In the early days of the dahlia in Europe, the word \"double\" simply designated flowers with more than one row of petals. The greatest effort was now directed to developing improved types of double dahlias.\nDuring the years 1805 to 1810 several people claimed to have produced a double dahlia. In 1805 Henry C. Andrews made a drawing of such a plant in the collection of Lady Holland, grown from seedlings sent that year from Madrid. Like other doubles of the time it did not resemble the doubles of today. The first modern double, or full double, appeared in Belgium; M. Donckelaar, Director of the Botanic Garden at Louvain, selected plants for that characteristic, and within a few years secured three fully double forms. By 1826 double varieties were being grown almost exclusively, and there was very little interest in the single forms. Up to this time all the so-called double dahlias had been purple, or tinged with purple, and it was doubted if a variety untinged with that color was obtainable.\nIn 1843, scented single forms of dahlias were first reported in Neu Verbass, Austria. \"D.\u00a0crocea\", a fragrant variety grown from one of the Humboldt seeds, was probably interbred with the single \"D.\u00a0coccinea\". A new scented species would not be introduced until the next century when the \"D.\u00a0coronata\" was brought from Mexico to Germany in 1907.\nThe exact date the dahlia was introduced in the United States is uncertain. One of the first dahlias in the USA may have been the \"D.\u00a0coccinea speciosissima\" grown by William Leathe, of Cambridgeport, near Boston, around 1929. According to Edward Sayers, \"it attracted much admiration, and at that time was considered a very elegant flower, it was however soon eclipsed by that splendid scarlet, the Countess of Liverpool\". However, nine cultivars were already listed in the catalog from Thornburn, 1825. And even earlier reference can be found in a catalogue from the Linnaean Botanical Garden, New York, 1820, that includes one scarlet, one purple, and two double orange Dahlias for sale.\nSayers stated that \"No person has done more for the introduction and advancement of the culture of\nthe Dahlia than George C. Thorburn, of New York, who yearly flowers many thousand plants at his place at Hallet's Cove, near Harlaem. The show there in the flowering season is a rich treat for the lovers of floriculture : for almost every variety can be seen growing in two large blocks or masses which lead from the road to the dwelling-house, and form a complete field of the Dahlia as a foreground to the house. Mr. T. Hogg, William Read, and many other well-known florists have also contributed much in the vicinity of New York, to the introduction of the Dahlia. Indeed so general has become the taste that almost every garden has its show of the Dahlia in the season.\" In Boston too there were many collections, a collection from the Messrs Hovey of Cambridgeport was also mentioned.\nIn 1835 Thomas Bridgeman, published a list of 160 double dahlias in his \"Florist's Guide\". 60 of the choicest were supplied by Mr. G. C. Thornburn of Astoria, New York, who got most of them from contacts in the UK. Not a few of them had taken prizes \"at the English and American exhibitions\".\n\"Stars of the Devil\".\nIn 1872 J. T. van der Berg of Utrecht in the Netherlands received a shipment of seeds and plants from a friend in Mexico. The entire shipment was badly rotted and appeared to be ruined, but van der Berg examined it carefully and found a small piece of root that seemed alive. He planted and carefully tended it; it grew into a plant that he identified as a dahlia. He made cuttings from the plant during the winter of 1872\u20131873. This was an entirely different type of flower, with rich, red color and a high degree of doubling. In 1874 van der Berg catalogued it for sale, calling it \"Dahlia juarezii\" to honor Mexican President Benito Pablo Juarez, who had died the year before, and described it as \"...equal to the beautiful color of the red poppy. Its form is very outstanding and different in every respect of all known dahlia flowers.\"\nThis plant has perhaps had a greater influence on the popularity of the modern dahlia than any other. Called \"Les Etoiles du Diable\" (Stars of the Devil) in France and \"Cactus dahlia\" elsewhere, the edges of its petals rolled backwards, rather than forward, and this new form revolutionized the dahlia world. It was thought to be a distinct mutation since no other plant that resembled it could be found in the wild. Today it is assumed that \"D.\u00a0juarezii\" had, at one time, existed in Mexico and subsequently disappeared. Nurserymen in Europe crossbred this plant with dahlias discovered earlier; the results became the progenitors of all modern dahlia hybrids today.\nAward of Garden Merit (RHS).\nAs of 2015, 124 dahlia cultivars have gained the Royal Horticultural Society's Award of Garden Merit, including:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nUses.\nThe Aztecs used dahlias to treat epilepsy, and employed the long hollow stem of the \"D.\u00a0imperialis\" for water pipes. Europeans attempted to introduce the tubers as a food crop, but this was unpopular.\nThe dahlia is considered one of the native ingredients in Oaxacan cuisine; several cultivars are still grown especially for their large, sweet potato-like tubers. Dacopa, an intense mocha-tasting extract from the roasted tubers, is used to flavor beverages throughout Central America.\nMedicine.\nIn Europe and America, prior to the discovery of insulin in 1923, diabetics\u2014as well as consumptives\u2014were often given a substance called \"Atlantic starch\" or \"diabetic sugar\", derived from inulin, a naturally occurring form of fruit sugar, extracted from dahlia tubers. Inulin is still used in clinical tests for kidney functionality.\nIn culture.\nFounded in 1936, the Bloemencorso Zundert is the largest flower parade in the world entirely made by volunteers using the dahlia. The parade takes place on the first Sunday of September in Zundert, Netherlands. The floats are large artworks made of steel wire, cardboard, papier-m\u00e2ch\u00e9 and flowers. In the Bloemencorso Zundert, mostly dahlias are used to decorate the objects and it takes thousands of them just to cover one float. Around 8 million dahlias are needed for the entire corso. Of these, around 6 million are cultivated in Zundert.\nThe dahlia was declared the national flower of Mexico in 1963.\nThe UK National Collection was first established in Oxfordshire in the 1980s. It then moved with its founder, David Brown, to the Duchy College at Rosewarne in Cornwall, then moved once more to Varfell Farm, near Penzance, in 1998. It is now located at the Kehelland Trust, in Kehelland near Camborne.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "68855", "revid": "4386431", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68855", "title": "Zacchaeus", "text": "Jewish Christian disciple\nZacchaeus (sometimes spelled Zaccheus; , \"\"; , \"pure, innocent\") is a character in the Gospel of Luke, a chief tax-collector at Jericho. His story includes his faith in climbing a sycamore tree to see Jesus and also his generosity in giving away half of all he possessed.\nTax collectors were despised as traitors (working for the Roman Empire, not for their Jewish community), and as being corrupt.\nBecause the lucrative production and export of balsam was centered in Jericho, such a position would have brought both importance and wealth. In the account, he arrived before the crowd who were later to meet with Jesus, who was passing through Jericho on his way to Jerusalem. He was short in stature and so was unable to see Jesus through the crowd (Luke 19:3). Zacchaeus then ran ahead and climbed a sycamore tree along Jesus's path. When Jesus reached the spot he looked up at the sycamore tree (actually a sycamore-fig \"Ficus sycomorus\"), addressed Zacchaeus by name, and told him to come down, for he intended to visit his house. The crowd was shocked that Jesus, a religious teacher and prophet, would sully himself by being a guest of a sinner.\nLater traditions.\nAt Er-riha (Jericho) there is a large, venerable looking square tower, which by tradition is named the House of Zacchaeus.\nClement of Alexandria refers once to Zacchaeus in a way which could be read as suggesting that some identified him with apostle Matthew or Matthias. However, Luke indicates that Matthias was with Jesus in the beginning since the baptism of John ().\nBecause John preached the giving away of one's excess possessions in Luke 3:7\u201314, this could explain the generosity of Little Zacchaeus. John also told us that later, many of Jesus' disciples turned back and no longer followed him (). The later Apostolic Constitutions identify \"Zacchaeus the Publican\" as the first bishop of Caesarea (7.46).\nMedieval legend identified Zacchaeus with Saint Amadour, and held him to be the founder of the French sanctuary, Rocamadour.\nLiturgical practices.\nIn Eastern Orthodox and Greek-Catholic Churches, the Gospel account of Zacchaeus is read on the penultimate Sunday of the Pre-Lenten Season preceding the start Great Lent, for which reason that Sunday is known as \"Zacchaeus Sunday\". It is the first commemoration of a new Paschal cycle. The account was chosen to open the Lenten season because of two exegetical aspects: Jesus's call to Zacchaeus to come down from the tree (symbolizing the divine call to humility), and Zacchaeus's subsequent repentance. On years when Pascha, and hence Lent, falls very early the Sunday of the Canaanite woman is dropped and the Sunday of Zaccheaus falls immediately before Great Lent. However in some Eastern churches of the Greek tradition, Zacchaeus Sunday is instead dropped and does not form part of the Lental cycle for that year. In the Russian tradition, Zacchaeus Sunday always immediately precedes Great Lent having exchanged places with the Sunday of the Canaanite Woman.\nIn Western Christianity, the gospel pericope concerning Zacchaeus is the reading for a Dedication of a Church or its anniversary. In Southern Bavaria, a red banner with a white cross may be flown outside a Church on its anniversary, which is consequently called the Zacchaeus flag."}
{"id": "68856", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68856", "title": "Limburg (Belgium)", "text": "Province of Belgium\nLimburg (, ; or ; , ), also known as Belgian Limburg, is a province in Belgium. It is the easternmost of the five Dutch-speaking provinces that together form the Region of Flanders, which is one of the three main political and cultural sub-divisions of modern-day Belgium. As of January 2024, Limburg had a population of 0.9 million.\nLimburg is located west of the Meuse (), which separates it from the similarly named Dutch province of Limburg. To the south it shares a border with the French-speaking province of Li\u00e8ge, with which it also has historical ties. To the north and west are the old territories of the Duchy of Brabant. Today these are the Flemish provinces of Flemish Brabant and Antwerp to the west, and the Dutch province of North Brabant to the north. Historically Belgian Limburg is roughly equivalent to the Dutch-speaking part of the secular lordship of the medieval Prince-Bishopric of Li\u00e8ge, which was dominated by the County of Loon.\nThe province of Limburg has an area of which comprises three arrondissements (\"arrondissementen\" in Dutch) containing 44 municipalities. Among these municipalities are the current capital Hasselt, and other large towns including Sint-Truiden, Genk, and Tongeren. Tongeren is the only Roman city in the province, and regarded as the oldest city of Belgium.\nThe municipality of Voeren is geographically detached from Limburg and the rest of Flanders, with the Netherlands to the north and the Walloon province of Li\u00e8ge to the south. This municipality was established by the municipal reform of 1977, and on 1 January 2008, with its six villages, it had a total population of 4,207. Its total area is .\nName.\nThe name Limburg was not applied to the territory of Belgian Limburg until the 19th century. Instead, the territory broadly coincides with that of the medieval County of Loon, which was one of the main parts of the Prince-bishopric of Li\u00e8ge. In the late-18th century, following the French Revolution and the subsequent French Campaign in the Low Countries, the region became part of the newly created Lower Meuse Department of the French First Republic (later the First French Empire), along with a significant part of what would become Dutch Limburg.\nAfter the defeat of the French empire and the Congress of Vienna in 1815, this department was reconstituted into the Province of Limburg as part of the United Kingdom of the Netherlands. The new name had its own medieval history, being associated with the extinct Duchy of Limburg, which had its capital at nearby Limbourg-sur-Vesdre, now in the French-speaking Belgian province of Li\u00e8ge. The new Dutch monarchy chose this name because it desired to recreate the prestigious old title in a new Duchy of Limburg.\nBecause of the Belgian revolution in 1830, this province of Limburg was divided in 1839 by the Treaty of London; the western portion being recognised as a province of the newly formed Kingdom of Belgium, while the eastern portion remained part of the Netherlands as the modern Dutch Province of Limburg. Both parts retained the name they had been given by the Dutch monarchy after the defeat of France.\nHistory.\nThe first wave of people who brought farming and pottery technology from the Middle East to northern Europe was the LBK culture, which originated in central Europe and had its roots in south-eastern Europe. It reached its geographical limit in the fertile southern Haspengouw part of Limburg about 5000 BC, only to die out about 4000 BC. A later wave of farmers, the Michelsburg culture which developed in what is now France, arrived about 3500 BC, but shared a similar fate. Pottery technology had however apparently been taken up by local tribes of the Swifterbant culture, who remained present throughout.\nThe area became permanently agricultural only in the Bronze Age with the Urnfield culture around 1200 BC, followed by the possibly related Halstatt and La T\u00e8ne material cultures, which are generally associated with Celts. Under these cultures the population increased in the region, and it is also during this period that Indo-European languages are thought to have arrived. These new technologies and languages entered Europe from the direction of Ukraine and southern Russia around 2000 BC. This migration had a similar impact across the continent.\nCaesar gave the first surviving written description of the area around 55 BC and described its people as the \"Germani cisrhenani\". He described them as allies of the Belgae and Treveri, and reported that they had ancestral links with their neighbours on the east side of the Rhine. Somewhat earlier, we know from surviving fragments of his work that Poseidonius had already mentioned these same \"Germani\", saying that they roasted meat in separate joints, and drank milk and unmixed wine. Caesar noted several peoples within the \"Germani\" group, the most important of which were the Eburones who fought against Julius Caesar under their leaders Ambiorix and Cativolcus. Apart from the \"Germani\", somewhere to the west of the Eburones (possibly outside Limburg) were the Aduatuci, who Caesar reported to be the descendants of the Cimbri and Teutones who had migrated around Europe some generations before Caesar.\nUnder Roman imperial rule, the area around Limburg was the \"city\" (\"civitas\") of the Tungri. Tacitus reported that these Tungri were the same as the earlier \"Germani cisrhenani\", and noted that the use of the name \"Germani\" had been expanded in Roman times to cover many peoples in Germany east of the Rhine. The Tungri are generally accepted to have been speakers of a Germanic language, but modern historians disagree over the extent to which they descend from new immigrants who came from over the Rhine after Caesar. Notably, the Tungri participated on the Roman side in the revolt of the Batavi against Roman rule, which was a major event in this region. In the north of Limburg during Roman times lived the Texandri.\nThe site of the fort where Caesar's soldiers encamped was called Aduatuca. This was apparently a general word for a fort, associated not only with the Eburones, but also the Aduatuci, and the later Tungri. The Roman city established in Belgian Limburg was referred to as \"Aduatuca Tungrorum\" meaning \"Aduatuca of the Tungri\". Today this has become \"Tongeren\", in the southeast of Belgian Limburg, and it was the capital of a Roman administrative region called the \"Civitas Tungrorum\". Under the Romans, the Tungri \"civitas\" was initially a part of Gallia Belgica. However, it was later split out with the more militarized border regions towards the Rhine, to become Germania Inferior, which was later converted into Germania Secunda.\nIn late Roman and early medieval times, the northern or \"Kempen\" part of Belgian Limburg became depopulated and uncultivated. This area, still known then by its Roman name as Texandria, was settled by incoming Salian Franks from the north, who were under pressure from Saxons. The southern or \"Haspengouw\" part of Belgian Limburg was an important agricultural region and remained more heavily Romanised, and eventually became a core land of the Frankish empires.\nMiddle Ages.\nBy the 9th century, the Frankish Carolingian dynasty, who had lands in and around Belgian Limburg, ruled an empire that included much of Western Europe. The Franks originally had several smaller kingdoms ruling each of the old Roman civitates (\"cities\"), but under the Merovingians one empire formed, which was divided each generation among family members. In the period around 881 and 882 the areas along the Maas and in the Haspengouw were plundered by Vikings, who established a base on the Maas river. Early Christianity was established first in the Romanised southern parts of Limburg, around Tongeren, and missionaries went north from there to convert the Franks. The church capital moved from the Roman capital Tongeren to nearby Maastricht, and then Li\u00e8ge. This was the area of activity of St Servatius, and later, Lambert of Maastricht.\nLimburg was part of the central Austrasian kingdom of the Franks which lay between the parts which would become France and Germany. The divisions of the Frankish empire were eventually fixed in the 9th century when this Middle Kingdom came to be known as Lotharingia after its first king, Lothair II. During the 10th century the region slowly came under the permanent control of Eastern Francia, which was to become the Holy Roman Empire. Under the Ottonians the archbishops became responsible for a very large territory stretching up to the delta of the river Maas. Another early saint in the south of Limburg was St Trudo, whose name survives in one of the major towns in southern Limburg, Saint Truiden.\nBelgian Limburg corresponds closely to the medieval territory of the County of Loon (French \"Looz\") which starts to appear in records only in the 11th century. This county originally centred on the fortified town of Borgloon, which was originally simply known as Loon. Although the exact details are unclear today, from an early time Loon was subservient, not only spiritually but also politically, to the powerful Prince-Bishopric of Li\u00e8ge. When the male line of the counts ended with Louis IV in 1336, the bishops began to take direct control, and the last claimant to that inheritance, Arnold of Rumigny, count of Chiny gave up his claim.\nModern history.\nLoon, and the rest of the Prince-Bishopric of Li\u00e8ge, were not joined politically with the rest of what would become Belgium until the French Revolution. Nevertheless, in the 16th, 17th, and 18th centuries the population of Loon was constantly and badly affected by the large-scale international wars of the neighbouring Spanish Netherlands and Dutch Republic, including the Eighty Years' War, the Nine Years' War, the War of the Spanish Succession, the War of the Austrian Succession, the Seven Years' War, and even the Brabant Revolution. During this period the region's episcopal government was often unable to maintain law and order, and the economy of the area was often desperately bad, affected by plundering soldiers and gangs of thieves such as the \"Bokkenrijders\". Nevertheless, the population contained strongly conservative Catholic elements, and not only supported the conservative Brabant revolution, but also rebelled unsuccessfully against the revolutionary French regime in the Peasants' War of 1798.\nThe modern Limburg region, containing the Belgian and Dutch provinces of that name, were first united within one province while under the power of revolutionary France, and later the Napoleonic empire, but then under the name of the French department of the Lower Meuse (Maas). After Napoleon's defeat, a united Kingdom of the Netherlands was formed, containing modern Belgium, Luxembourg, and the Netherlands. While it kept many of the French provincial boundaries, the first king, William I, insisted that the name be changed to the \"Province of Limburg\", based on the name of the medieval Duchy of Limburg. The only part of Belgian or Dutch Limburg which was really in the Duchy of Limburg is the extreme east of Voeren, the villages of Teuven and Remersdaal, and these only became part of Belgian Limburg in 1977.\nAfter the Belgian Revolution of 1830, the province of Limburg was at first almost entirely under Belgian rule, but the status of both Limburg and Luxembourg became unclear. During the \"Ten days campaign\", 2\u201312 August 1831, Dutch armies entered Belgium and took control of several Belgian cities in order to negotiate from a stronger position. Several Belgian militias and armies were easily defeated including the Belgian Army of the Meuse near Hasselt, on 8 August. The French and British intervened, leading to a ceasefire. \nAfter a Conference in London, they signed a treaty in 1839 and established after that both Limburg and Luxemburg would be split between the two states. That happened; Limburg was split into so-called \"Dutch\" Limburg and \"Belgian\" Limburg.\nTwentieth century.\nBelgian Limburg became officially Flemish when Belgium was divided into language areas in 1962. In the case of Voeren, surrounded by French speaking parts of Belgium, and having a significant population of French speakers, this was not without controversy.\nOnly in 1967, the Catholic Church created a diocese of Hasselt, separate from the diocese of Li\u00e8ge.\nGeography.\nThe centre of Belgian Limburg is crossed east to west by the river Demer and the Albert Canal, which run similar paths. The Demer's drainage basin covers most of the central and southern part of the province, except for the southeastern corner, where the Jeker (in French: \"(le) Geer\") runs past Tongeren and into the river Maas (in French: \"(la) Meuse\") at Maastricht.\nThe eastern border of the province corresponds to the western bank of the Maas, which originates in France. Its drainage basin includes not only the Jeker but most of the northern part of Belgian Limburg.\nThe south of the province is the northern part of the Hesbaye region (in Dutch: \"Haspengouw\"), with fertile soils, farming and fruit-growing, and historically the higher population density. The hilliness increases in the southeast, including the detached Voeren part of Limburg.\nNorth of the river Demer and the Albert Canal is part of the Campine (in Dutch: \"(de) Kempen\") region, with sandy soils, heathlands, and forests. This area was relatively less populated, until coal-mining started in the 19th century, attracting immigration from other areas, including Mediterranean countries.\nLanguage.\nAs in all Flemish provinces, the official language is Dutch, but two municipalities, Herstappe and Voeren, are to a certain extent allowed to use French to communicate with their citizens. They are two of the municipalities with language facilities in Belgium.\nSeveral variations of Limburgish are also still actively used, these being a diverse group of dialects which share features in common with both German and Dutch. \"Limburg mijn Vaderland\" is the official anthem of both Belgian and Dutch Limburg, and has versions in various dialects of Limburgish, varying from accents closer to standard Dutch in the west, to more distinctive dialects near the Maas. Outside of the two Limburgs related dialects or languages are found stretched out towards the nearby Ruhr valley region of Germany. And there are also related dialects around Aachen in Germany as well as in the extreme northeast of the mainly French-speaking province of Li\u00e8ge.\nAs in the rest of Flanders a high level of multi-lingualism is found in the population.\nLimburg is close to Germany and Wallonia, and because of the natural political, cultural and economics links, French and German have long been important second languages in the area.\nEnglish has also now become a language which is widely understood and used in business and cultural activities, and is supplanting French in this regard.\nVeldeke, the medieval property of the family of Hendrik van Veldeke, was near Hasselt, along the river Demer, to the west of Kuringen.\nEconomy.\nThe Gross domestic product (GDP) of the province was 28.7 billion \u20ac in 2018. GDP per capita adjusted for purchasing power was 29,000 \u20ac or 96% of the EU27 average in the same year.\nIn the economic field tourism is being actively promoted with publicized attractions including Limburg's claim to be a \"Bicycle Paradise\" (\"Fietsparadijs\"). There's also the possibility to walk in nature reserves, such as the \"High Kempen National Park\".\nIn the south, the Haspengouw (Hesbaye), predominantly situated in Limburg, is now Belgium's major area for fruit growing. In Limburg more than 50% of Belgium's fruit production is grown.\nCoal mining has been an important industry in the 20th century, but has now ended in this province. Nevertheless, it has laid the basis for a more complex modern economy and community. In the 20th century, Limburg became a centre for the secondary sector, attracting Ford, who had a major production centre in Genk that closed in December 2014, and the electronics company Philips, who had a major operation in Kiewit.\nMany areas such as Genk continue to have a lot of heavy and chemical industry, but emphasis has moved towards encouraging innovation. The old Philips plant is now the site of a Research Campus, and the Hasselt University in Diepenbeek has a science park attached to it. Similarly, the site of the coal mine in Genk is now Thor Park, where Energyville, a research hub of the KU Leuven, VITO, IMEC, and UHasselt.\nThe region today promotes itself as a centre for trade in the heart of industrialised Europe. It is part of the Meuse-Rhine Euroregion, which represents a partnership between this province and neighbouring provinces in Germany, the Netherlands and Wallonia.\nCulture.\nEssential elements in Limburgian culture are:\nSports.\nLike the rest of Belgium, association football (soccer) and cycling, including cyclocross, are dominant sports, and tennis has gained a high prominence. Limburg is also home to Limburg United, one of the country's top professional basketball teams. The team plays its home games in the \"Sporthal Alverberg\".\nAdministrative divisions.\nMunicipalities.\nLimburg consists of 38 municipalities.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nGovernors since the Second World War.\nThe first governor of united Limburg (including the province of Limburg in the Netherlands) was Charles de Brouck\u00e8re, from 1815, after the Battle of Waterloo until 1828. He was followed by Maximilien de Beeckman who governed the united province until 1830, when the Belgian revolution began and division of Limburg began, first with the separation of Maastricht. The splitting of Dutch and Belgian Limburg was completed by 1839.\nThere were also breaks in the sequence of governors in the First World War and at the end of the Second World War. The following list contains all governors of the province of Limburg since the Second World War.\nNotable Limburgians.\nSports &amp; Entertainment\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "68857", "revid": "2007187", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68857", "title": "The Player of Games", "text": "1988 novel by Iain M. Banks\nThe Player of Games is a science fiction novel by Scottish writer Iain M. Banks, first published in 1988. It was the second published Culture novel. A film version was planned by Path\u00e9 in the 1990s, but was abandoned.\nPlot.\nJernau Morat Gurgeh, a famously skillful player of board games and other similar contests, lives on Chiark Orbital, and is bored with his successful life. The Culture's Special Circumstances (SC) inquires about his willingness to participate in a long journey but won't explain further unless Gurgeh agrees to participate. While he is considering this offer, one of his drone acquaintances, Mawhrin-Skel, which had been ejected from SC due to its unstable personality, convinces him to cheat in one of his games in an attempt to win in an unprecedentedly perfect fashion. The attempt fails, but Mawhrin-Skel uses its recording of the event to blackmail Gurgeh into accepting the offer with the condition that Mawhrin-Skel be admitted back into SC.\nGurgeh spends the next two years travelling to the Empire of Azad in the Small Magellanic Cloud, where a complex game (also named Azad) is used to determine social rank and political status. The game itself is sufficiently subtle and complex that a player's tactics reflect their own political and philosophical outlook. By the time he arrives, he has grasped the game but is unsure how he will measure up against opponents who have been studying it for their entire lives.\nGurgeh lands on the Empire's home planet of E\u00e4, accompanied by another drone, Flere-Imsaho. As a Culture citizen, he naturally plays with a style markedly different from his opponents, many of whom stack the odds against him one way or another, including by forming backroom agreements to cooperate against him (which is allowed by the game's rules) and placing bets on the game requiring the castration of the loser. As he advances through the tournament he is matched against increasingly powerful Azad politicians, and ultimately the Emperor himself in the final round. \nThe final contests take place on Echronedal, the Fire Planet, which undergoes a periodic natural conflagration fueled by native plants that produce huge amounts of oxygen. The final game is timed to end when the flames engulf the castle where the event takes place, symbolically renewing the Empire by fire. However, faced with defeat, the Emperor's men destroy the castle's fire-suppression systems and start a closer fire front, as the Emperor places cards representing this within the game. With the castle surrounded by fire, the Emperor attempts to kill Gurgeh. Instead, the Emperor is killed by a shot from his own weapon, deflected by Flere-Imsaho, who later refuses to tell Gurgeh if it was coincidental after rescuing him from the fire.\nFlere-Imsaho reveals that Gurgeh's participation was part of a Culture plot to overthrow the corrupt and savage Empire from within, and that he, the player, was in fact a pawn in a much larger game. He is further told that in the aftermath of the final game, the Empire of Azad collapsed without further intervention from the Culture. Although Gurgeh never discovers the whole truth, in the final sentences of the novel the narrator is revealed to be Flere-Imsaho, who had been disguised as Mawhrin-Skel to manipulate Gurgeh into taking part in the game.\nAzad.\nAzad is a game played in the Empire of Azad. In the language of the fictional Empire, the word \"Azad\" means \"machine\" or \"system\", but is applied to any complex entity such as animals, plants or artificial machines.\nThe game is described in detail; however, the actual rules are never given to the reader. It is primarily tactical and played on three-dimensional boards of various shapes and sizes, though earlier rounds may be played exclusively in cards. Typically the boards are large enough for players to walk around inside them to move or interact with their pieces. The number of players differs from game to game and also influences the tactics, as players can choose to cooperate or compete with one another. As well as skill and tactics, random events may influence gameplay (often as card or other games of chance), and sometimes may change the outcome critically.\nGame elements.\nThe game consists of a number of minor games, such as card games and elemental die matching, which allow the players to build up their forces for use on the game's three giant boards (in order: the Board of Origin, the Board of Form, and finally the Board of Becoming) and a number of minor boards.\nThe game uses a variety of pieces to represent a player's units (military, resource or even philosophical premises). Some of the pieces are genetically engineered constructs, which may change form during the game according to their use and environment. These respond to their handling by a player and appear difficult to understand\u2014during his training, Gurgeh is encouraged to sleep while holding some of the more important pieces so he can better understand them in play.\nSignificance.\nIn the empire, the game is the main determinant of one's social status. The game is played in a tournament every \"Great Year\" (roughly every six Culture years), initially consisting of some 12,000 players in the main series. Through the various rounds, these are all whittled down until the final game, the victor of which becomes emperor. Players knocked out from the main series may take part in further games to determine their careers. The complexity of the game aims to represent reality to such a degree that a player's own political and philosophical outlook can be expressed in play (the idea being that rival ideologies are essentially \"tested\" in the game before the winners can apply them in reality). As the protagonist discovers, the game embodies the incumbent preferences of the social elite, reinforcing and reiterating the pre-existing gender and caste inclinations of the empire, putting the lie to the \"fairness\" which is generally perceived to govern the outcome of the tournament and thus the shape of Azadian society. In the novel, the protagonist ultimately finds that his (successful) tactics reflect the values of his own civilization, the Culture, though he also recognises that his own thought and behaviour have been markedly influenced by the manner in which he has been forced to compete. In a private audience with the emperor on the penultimate eve of the tournament, when confronted with the seeming absurdity of the possibility that a novice with a mere two years of experience at the game could systematically defeat players whose whole lives were devoted to its mastery, the protagonist comes to understand that his proficiency is merely a reflection of his experience with strategic games of all sorts. Given that, the Culture had intended all along to use him to discredit the brutality of the Azadian system by publicly giving the lie to the game's representation of social reality.\nLegacy.\nDSV \"Limiting Factor\" is named after the sapient warship (provided to Jernau Morat Gurgeh for transport) in the book. \"The naming of these vessels is a large tip of the hat and no small amount of admiration for Iain M Banks\u2019 brilliant science fiction series,\" according to Victor Vescovo, who commissioned the deep-submergence vehicle.\nIn 2015, two SpaceX autonomous spaceport drone ships\u2014\"Just Read the Instructions\" and \"Of Course I Still Love You\"\u2014were named after ships in the book, as a posthumous tribute to Banks by Elon Musk.\nCanadian singer Grimes released a song titled \"Player of Games\"; \"Kotaku\" speculated that this was a reference to both the book and her relationship with Elon Musk.\nReception.\n\"Kirkus Reviews\" described it as \"Predictable, certainly, and less imaginative than \"Consider Phlebas\", but technically much more solid: honorably crafted work, often engrossing despite some sluggish patches.\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "68858", "revid": "15881234", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68858", "title": "Luxembourg (Belgium)", "text": "Province of Belgium\nLuxembourg, also called Belgian Luxembourg or West Luxembourg, is the southernmost province of Wallonia within Belgium. It borders the country of Luxembourg to the east, the French departments of Ardennes, Meuse and Meurthe-et-Moselle to the south and southwest, and the Walloon provinces of Namur and Li\u00e8ge to the north. Its capital and largest city is Arlon, in the south-east of the province, near the border of the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg.\nIt has an area of , making it the largest Belgian province. With around 295,000 residents as of January 2024, Luxembourg is also the least populated province, with a density of , making it a relatively sparsely settled part of a very densely populated region, as well as the lowest density in Belgium. It is significantly larger (71%) than, but has less than half the population of, the neighbouring Grand Duchy of Luxembourg. About eighty percent of the province is part of the densely wooded Ardennes region. The southernmost region of the province is called Gaume or Belgian Lorraine (main city: Virton).\nThe Arelerland, the region around Arlon (coloured red on the map of arrondissements, below) bordering the neighbouring Grand-Duchy of Luxembourg has the particularity that many of its residents have historically spoken Luxembourgish alongside of Walloon spoken elsewhere in the province.\nThe province was separated from the grand-duchy by the Third Partition of Luxembourg, in 1830\u201331 by the Conference of London dealing with the consequences of the Belgian Revolution of 1830. In 1839, after William I, King of the Netherlands and Grand Duke of Luxembourg, agreed to the terms of the partition and the province was given to the newly created Kingdom of Belgium.\nAn unofficial flag of the province exists, with the current colours of Luxembourg (red, white, and blue), as well as the province's coat of arms on the foreground.\nSubdivisions.\nLuxembourg province is divided into five administrative districts () containing a total of 43 municipalities ().\nEconomy.\nThe gross domestic product (GDP) of the province was \u20ac7.0 billion in 2018, accounting for 1.5% of Belgium's economic output. GDP per capita adjusted for purchasing power was \u20ac21,800 or 72% of the EU27 average in the same year. Luxembourg was the province with the lowest GDP per capita. However, the province has some of the highest income inequalities in Belgium; towns like Arlon that border Luxembourg are known for their affluence, whereas other towns are among the poorest in the country.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "68859", "revid": "1981650", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68859", "title": "Zaanaim", "text": "Location in the Hebrew Bible\nZaanaim, Zaanannim or Bezaanaim is a place name applied to one or two locations in the Hebrew Bible. According to Serge Frolov (2013), its location \"cannot be determined with any degree of certainty.\"\nThe area was likely given the name Zaanaim because nomads camped there in tents among the towns and cities, with the name meaning \"wanderings\" or \"the unloading of tents.\"\nAccording to Joshua 19:33, the border of the tribe of Naftali passed by the \"oak in Zaanannim\" (\"Revised Version\").\nAccording to Judges 4:11, Heber the Kenite's tent, in which Jael killed Sisera, was \"as far as the oak in Zaanannim\" (\"Revised Version\"). Where the Revised Version reads \"oak,\" the King James Version reads \"plain.\" According to Cheyne and Black, an acceptable alternative reading for \"oak\" in these passages is \"terebinth\".\nWhere the \"Revised Version\" has \"in Zaanannim\" above, the Hebrew text reads \"b\u1e63\u02bfnnym.\" It has been, however, suggested by some that, following the Septuagint and the Talmud, the letter \"b\", which in Hebrew means \"in,\" should be taken as a part of the word following, and the phrase would then be \"unto the oak of Bitzanaim,\" a place which has been identified with the ruins of Bessum, about half-way between Tiberias and Mount Tabor.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\u00a0This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain:\u00a0"}
{"id": "68860", "revid": "43456359", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68860", "title": "List of puzzle video games", "text": "This is a partial list of notable puzzle video games, sorted by general category.\nTile matching.\nTile-matching video games are a type of puzzle video game where the player manipulates tiles in order to make them disappear according to a matching criterion. There are a great number of variations on this theme.\nFalling block puzzles.\nPuzzle pieces advance into the play area from one or more edges, typically falling into the play area from above. Player must match or arrange individual pieces to achieve the particular objectives defined by each game.\nAdvancing blocks puzzles.\nBlock-shaped puzzle pieces advance onto the board from one or more edges (i.e. top, bottom, or sides). The player tries to prevent the blocks from reaching the opposite edge of the playing area.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "68861", "revid": "279219", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68861", "title": "Amedeus I of Savoy", "text": ""}
{"id": "68863", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68863", "title": "Excession", "text": "1996 Book by Iain M. Banks\nExcession is a 1996 science fiction novel by Scottish writer Iain M. Banks. It is the fifth in the \"Culture\" series, a series of ten science fiction novels which feature a post-scarcity, interstellar society called the Culture. It concerns the response of the Culture and other interstellar societies to an unprecedented alien artifact, the Excession of the title.\nThe book is largely about the response of the Culture's Minds (benevolent AIs with enormous intellectual and physical capabilities and distinctive personalities) to the Excession itself and the way in which another society, the Affront, whose systematic brutality horrifies the Culture, tries to use the Excession to increase its power. As in Banks's other \"Culture\" novels the main themes are the moral dilemmas that confront a hyperpower and how biological characters find ways to give their lives meaning in a post-scarcity society that is presided over by benign super-intelligent machines. The book features a large collection of Culture ship names, some of which give subtle clues about the roles these ships' Minds play in the story. In terms of style, the book is also notable for the way in which many important conversations between Minds resemble email messages complete with headers.\nPlot summary.\nThe Excession of the title is a perfect black-body sphere that appears mysteriously on the edge of Culture space, appearing to be older than the Universe itself and that resists the attempts of the Culture and technologically equivalent societies (notably the Zetetic Elench) to probe it. The Interesting Times Gang (ITG), an informal group of Minds loosely connected with Special Circumstances, try to manage the Culture's response to the Excession. The Affront, a rapidly expanding race which practises systematic sadism towards subject species and its own females and junior males, also try to exploit the Excession by infiltrating a store of mothballed Culture warships and using them to claim control of the mysterious object.\nThe \"Sleeper Service\", an Eccentric General Systems Vehicle (GSV) who had nominally left the Culture, is instructed to head to the location of the Excession by the ITG. As a condition the \"Sleeper Service\" demands that Genar-Hofoen, a human member of Contact, attend it to seek a resolution with his ex-lover, Dajeil, who lives in solitude on the GSV. They had had an intense love-affair and, after a series of sex changes, had each become impregnated by the other until Genar-Hofoen was unfaithful and Dajeil attacked Genar-Hofoen, killing the unborn child. Dajeil then suspended her pregnancy and withdrew from society for 40 years and the \"Sleeper Service\" hopes to effect a reconciliation between them.\nAs the stolen Affront fleet approaches the Excession, the \"Sleeper Service\" deploys a fleet of 80,000 remote controlled warships, in a misguided attempt to neutralize the threat. It transpires that the Affront have been manipulated into their grab for power by members of the ITG who thought it was morally imperative to curb the Affront's cruelty by any means, and intend to use the Affront's theft of Culture warships as an excuse for war. The Excession releases a wave of destructive energy towards the \"Sleeper Service\". In desperation, the \"Sleeper Service\" transmits a complete copy of its personality, its \"Mindstate\", into the Excession, which has the effect of halting the attack. The Excession then vanishes as mysteriously as it appeared and the brief war with the Affront is halted.\nDuring these events, and after speaking with Genar-Hofoen, Dajeil decides to complete her pregnancy and remain on the \"Sleeper Service\", which sets course for a satellite galaxy. Genar-Hofoen returns to the Affront, having been rewarded by being physically transformed into a member of the Affront species (whose company he finds more stimulating than that of the Culture's people).\nThe book's epilogue reveals that the Excession is a sentient entity that was acting as a bridge for a procession of beings that travel between universes. It also assesses whether the species and societies it encounters are suitable to be enlightened about some unknown further existence beyond the universe; as a result of events in the story the Excession concludes that the civilisations it has encountered in this universe are not yet ready. It also takes the name given to it by the Culture \u2013 \"The Excession\" \u2013 as its own \u2013 in an oblique reference to the aforementioned Affront species, who had been named by another species in an attempt to label them as a lost cause of hyper-sadistic freaks.\nOutside Context Problem.\nThis novel is about how the Culture deals with an Outside Context Problem (OCP), the concept introduced by Banks for the purpose of the novel. This is a problem that is \"outside the context\" as it is generally not considered until it occurs, and the capacity to actually conceive of or consider the OCP in the first place may not be possible or very limited (i.e., the majority of the group's population may not have the knowledge or ability to realize that the OCP can arise, or assume it is extremely unlikely). An example of OCP given by Banks is an unexpected encounter with an unconceivable technologically advanced civilization. Banks describes the concept as follows:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;An Outside Context Problem was the sort of thing most civilizations encountered just once, and which they tended to encounter rather in the same way a sentence encountered a full stop. The usual example given to illustrate an Outside Context Problem was imagining you were a tribe on a largish, fertile island; you'd tamed the land, invented the wheel or writing or whatever, the neighbors were cooperative or enslaved but at any rate peaceful and you were busy raising temples to yourself with all the excess productive capacity you had, you were in a position of near-absolute power and control which your hallowed ancestors could hardly have dreamed of and the whole situation was just running along nicely like a canoe on wet grass... when suddenly this bristling lump of iron appears sailless and trailing steam in the bay and these guys carrying long funny-looking sticks come ashore and announce you've just been discovered, you're all subjects of the Emperor now, he's keen on presents called tax and these bright-eyed holy men would like a word with your priests.\nBanks has noted that he spent much time playing the \"Civilization\" computer game (appearing to refer to the first version of the game series) before writing the book and that it was one of the inspirations for the concept of the 'Outside Context Problem' central to the novel. In an interview, Banks specifically compares this to having a \"Civilization\" battleship arrive while the player is still using wooden sailing ships.\nLiterary significance and criticism.\nBanks's view of the Culture.\nThe book, more than any of the other Culture novels, focuses on the Culture's Minds as protagonists. When asked about his focus on the possibilities of technology in fiction, Banks said about the book:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;You can't escape the fact that humanity is a technological species, \"homo technophile\" or whatever the Latin is. Technology is neither good or bad, it's up to the user. We can't escape what we are, which is a technological species. There's no way back.\nThe book shows a number of Minds acting in a decidedly non-benevolent way, somewhat qualifying the godlike incorruptibility and benevolence they are ascribed in other Culture novels. Banks himself has described the actions of some of the Minds in the novel as akin to \"barbarian kings presented with the promise of gold in the hills.\"\nReviews.\n\"Kirkus Reviews\" described the book as \"Brilliantly inventive and amusing \u2013 whole sections read like strings of knowing jokes \u2013 but a mess: Chattering spaceships with splendid if confusing names [...] don't compensate for the absence of real characters.\" A few who praised it commented that \"Excession\"'s complexity and frequent use of in-jokes make it advisable for new readers of Banks's Culture stories to start with other books. In a retrospective of \"Excession\" at Tor, Peter Tieryas writes, \"There are literally paragraphs thrown in as background detail that could make for amazing novels of their own. Part of the joy of \"Excession\" is hearing the Minds speak with each other, that matrix-like shower of numbers, text, esoteric syntax, and witty repartee.\"\nReviewed in \"Arcane Magazine\" with a 10/10 rating, the novel was an \"astounding achievement,\" regarded as \"huge in scope, intricate in detail, swaying from pathos to metaphysics and from humour to light-speed action,\" with Banks considered, \"a science-fiction writer truly without equal at the moment.\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "68864", "revid": "5862", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68864", "title": "Wisdom Wise", "text": ""}
{"id": "68865", "revid": "1304456243", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68865", "title": "Peter I, Count of Savoy", "text": "Count of Savoy (1060-1078)\nPeter I (c. 1048 \u2013 9 August 1078) was count of Savoy and margrave of Turin jointly with his brother Amadeus II of Savoy from c. 1060 to 1078. He ruled only nominally, as true power was in the hands of his mother, Adelaide of Susa.\nPeter presided over court hearings alongside Adelaide and also issued several donation charters with her and his brothers Amadeus II of Savoy and Otto. Shortly before his death, Peter united with Bishop Cunibert of Turin in an attempt to drive Abbot Benedict II from his abbey of San Michele della Chiusa.\nPeter married Agnes of Aquitaine, c.1065. They had two daughters:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "68866", "revid": "38179619", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68866", "title": "Winefat", "text": ""}
{"id": "68867", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68867", "title": "Dahlia 'Bishop of Llandaff'", "text": "Dahlia cultivar\n'Bishop of Llandaff' is a cultivar of the dahlia, a garden plant. It is a branching, tuberous tender perennial with dark purple, almost black, foliage. This produces a stunning contrast with its scarlet flowers. The plant was first bred by Fred Treseder, a Cardiff nurseryman. It was selected by and named to honour Joshua Pritchard Hughes, Bishop of Llandaff, in 1924 and won the RHS Award of Garden Merit in 1928. The plant is about 1 m tall and flowers from June until September. As with all dahlias, frost blackens its foliage, and in areas prone to frost its tubers need to be overwintered in a dry, frost-free place. The variety became very popular in the 1990s.\nThe simpler form (single or semi-double) of the flower makes the nectar and pollen more accessible to pollinating insects.\nA seed strain has been produced from this plant called 'Bishops Children', they retain the dark foliage colour but produce a mix of flower colours and flower shapes from single to semi-double flowers in different sizes.\nPlant Profile:\nAlso comes in rich reds and purples, yellows and oranges, as well as paler shades\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "68868", "revid": "39005691", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68868", "title": "Big Dumb Object", "text": "Plot device in science fiction\nIn discussion of science fiction, a Big Dumb Object (BDO) is any mysterious object, usually of extraterrestrial or unknown origin and immense power, in a story which generates an intense sense of wonder by its mere existence. To a certain extent, the term deliberately deflates the intended grandeur of the mysterious object.\nThe coining of the term has been attributed to reviewer Roz Kaveney in 1981, but it was not in general use until Peter Nicholls included it in \"The Encyclopedia of Science Fiction\" as a joke in 1993. \nEdward Guimont and Horace A. Smith propose that the origins of the Big Dumb Object trope can be found in H. P. Lovecraft's novellas \"At the Mountains of Madness\" and \"The Shadow Out of Time\", both of which feature human expeditions to immense ancient alien cities in remote parts of our world, and both of which were early influences upon Arthur C. Clarke.\nList of examples.\nBig Dumb Objects often exhibit extreme or unusual properties, or a total absence of some expected properties:\nSuch unexpected properties are usually used to rule out conventional origins for the BDO and increase the sense of mystery, and even fear, for the characters interacting with it.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "68869", "revid": "7196877", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68869", "title": "Fruit press", "text": "Machine or tool for separating fruits' juices from the rest of their parts\nA fruit press is a device used to separate fruit solids\u2014stems, skins, seeds, pulp, leaves, and detritus\u2014from fruit juice.\nHistory.\nIn the United States, Madeline Turner invented the Turner's Fruit-Press, in 1916.\nCider press.\nA cider press is used to crush apples or pears. In North America, the unfiltered juice is referred to as cider, becoming known as apple juice once filtered; in Britain it is referred to as juice regardless of whether it is filtered or not (the term cider is reserved for the fermented (alcoholic) juice). Other products include cider vinegar, (hard) cider, apple wine, apple brandy, and apple jack.\nThe traditional cider press is a ram press. Apples are ground up and placed in a cylinder, and a piston exerts pressure. The cylinder and/or piston in a traditional cider press is designed to allow the juice to escape while retaining the solid matter. This is achieved through a controlled gap or a semi-permeable surface, where the pressure exerted by the piston forces the juice out of the crushed apples or pears, leaving the solids behind. The traditional cider press has not changed much since the early modern period. The only difference being that in earlier versions of the press horses were used to power the machine. Diderot's Encyclopedie offers a portrayal of the traditional cider press,\n\"This is how the cider mill is made. Imagine a circular trough made of wood connected to two wooden millstones like those used in a windmill, but fixed differently. In a windmill, they are horizontal, but in the cider mill they are placed in the trough vertically. They are fixed to a vertical piece of wood that turns on itself and which is placed in the centre of the circular part of the trough; a long axle passes through them; the axle is joined to the vertical axis; its other end juts out from the trough; a horse \u2192 is harnessed to it; the \u2190 horse \u2192 pulls the axle by walking round the trough, which also moves the pressing stones in the trough where the apples are pounded. When they are judged to be sufficiently crushed, that is to say, enough for all the juice to be extracted from them, the apples are removed with a wooden spade and put into a large vat nearby. Enough apples are pounded to make a pulp or pomace.\"\nCider presses often have attachments to grind the apples prior to pressing. Such combination devices are commonly referred to as cider mills.\nIn communities with many small orchards, it is common for one or more persons to have a large cider mill for community use. These community mills allow orchard owners to avoid the capital, space, and maintenance requirements for having their own mill. These larger mills are typically powered by electrical or gasoline engines. Mill operators also deal with the solids, which attract wasps or hornets. Cider mills typically give patrons a choice between paying by the gallon/litre or splitting the cider with the mill operator.\nLarger orchardists may prefer to have their own presses because it saves on fees, or because it reduces cartage. Orchardists of any size may believe their own sanitation practices to be superior to that of community mills, as some patrons of community mills may make cider from low quality fruit (windfall apples, or apples with worms). Those making speciality ciders, such as pear cider, may want to have their own press.\nThe world's largest cider press is located in Berne, Indiana, US.\nWine press.\nA wine press is a device used to press grapes during wine making.\nOil press.\nAn oil press is a device used to extract oil from plants and fruits.\nDIY fruit press.\nGiven the simplicity of the design, and high usability, some people (e.g. those owning an orchard) have started building their own do-it-yourself (DIY) fruit press and have uploaded detailed instructions on how to do so.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\u00a0This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain:\u00a0"}
{"id": "68870", "revid": "10808929", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68870", "title": "Look to Windward", "text": "2000 novel by Iain M. Banks\nLook to Windward is a science fiction novel by Scottish writer Iain M. Banks, first published in 2000. It is Banks' sixth published novel to feature the Culture. The book's dedication reads: \"For the Gulf War Veterans\".\nThe novel takes its title from a line in T. S. Eliot's poem \"The Waste Land\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;poem&gt;\nO you who turn the wheel and look to windward,\nConsider Phlebas, who was once handsome and tall as you.\n&lt;/poem&gt;\u2014\u200a\n\"Look to Windward\" is loosely a sequel to \"Consider Phlebas\", Banks's first published Culture novel. \"Consider Phlebas\" took its name from the following line in the poem and dealt with the events of the Idiran-Culture War; \"Look to Windward\" deals with the results of the war on those who lived through it.\nPlot summary.\nThe Chelgrians are a race of centaur-like cat aliens with three hind-limbs and a humanoid catlike torso. Major Quilan, a Chelgrian, has lost the will to live after the death of his wife, killed during the Chelgrian civil war that resulted from the Culture's interference. A high-ranked Chelgrian priest offers Quilan the chance to avenge the Chelgrians who died by taking part in a suicide mission to strike back at the Culture. His \"Soulkeeper\" (a device normally used to store its owner's personality upon their death) is equipped with both the mind of a long-dead Chelgrian admiral and a device given to the Chelgrians by a mysterious group of Involved aliens that can transport wormholes through which weapons can be delivered. Quilan is then sent to the Culture's Masaq' Orbital, ostensibly to persuade the renowned composer Mahrai Ziller to return to his native planet Chel, but in reality on a mission to destroy the Orbital's Hub Mind. To protect him from detection at Masaq', Quilan's memory is selectively blanked until he reaches his target, thus preventing the Mind from reading his thoughts.\nZiller lives in self-imposed exile on Masaq', having renounced his privileged position in Chel's caste system. He has been commissioned to compose music to mark a climactic event in the Idiran-Culture War. Upon hearing of Quilan's visit, and suspicious of his reason for travel, Ziller scrupulously avoids him.\nQuilan succeeds in placing the wormholes in the Orbital's Hub, but the Mind was already aware of the plot because Quilan's operator, the long dead admiral housed in his Soulkeeper, is actually a turncoat spy for the Culture. Although unable to track the locations on the other ends of the wormholes, the Mind suggests that the Involved \"aliens\" assisting Quilan's mission may have been a group of bellicose Culture minds seeking to keep the Culture from being too complacent. Having struggled with painful memories of the Idiran-Culture war, when it was the General Systems Vehicle \"Lasting Damage\", the Mind reveals to Quilan that it intends to destroy its own higher functions, essentially committing suicide, and offers to take Quilan with it. Quilan, who had become unsure of his own mission after experiencing dreams of his dead wife wearing the silvery skin of the Mind's avatar, agrees. They both commit suicide simultaneously during the climax of Ziller's concert, leading to much shock and outrage.\nAt the end of the novel, a nightmarishly efficient E-Dust Assassin is unleashed by the Culture in 'retribution' against the Chelgrian priest who acted as a pawn for the bellicose Culture Minds, as well as his immediate co-conspirators. The assassin kills the priest gruesomely by transforming into a swarm of insects that eat him from the inside out. Throughout the book there is a subplot about a Culture ethologist named Uagen Zlepe spending his time on a distant alien air sphere and discovering hints about the Chelgrian plot to destroy the Masaq' Orbital's Hub Mind. He attempts to warn the Culture, and the reader is led to believe that his intervention is the reason why the Mind knew about Quilan's sabotage, but ultimately he fails to get his message out and is killed by one of the Chelgrian conspirators. His dead body is resurrected using alien technology an entire galactic grand cycle later, long after all the events of the story have ended. Back in the present, the Chelgrian admiral Huyler's personality, kept alive from Quilan's Soulkeeper, and the real source of the Mind's foreknowledge regarding the attack, is given a new body and becomes an ambassador to the Culture, enjoying a very high standard of living. He says he is close to convincing Ziller to return to Chel, fulfilling Quilan's cover mission.\nThe T.S. Eliot poem which the novel takes its name from is, in part:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;poem&gt;\nPhlebas the Phoenician, a fortnight dead,\nForgot the cry of gulls, and the deep sea swell\nAnd the profit and loss.\n A current under sea\nPicked his bones in whispers. As he rose and fell\nHe passed the stages of his age and youth\nEntering the whirlpool.\n Gentile or Jew\nO you who turn the wheel and look to windward,\nConsider Phlebas, who was once handsome and tall as you.\n&lt;/poem&gt;\u2014\u200a\nThe fate of Phlebas in the poem is similar to that of Uagen Zlepe in the novel. The title may also refer to the state of mind of the Masaq' Orbital Hub Mind and Major Quilan, both already having died in spirit during their respective wars.\nReception.\nPhil Daoust in \"The Guardian\" said the story was an \"enjoyable romp\" and described Quilan as \"one of the misguided yet decent villains who are a feature of these [Culture] tales\". He went on to complain of the heavy emphasis given to the consequences of war and that the Chelgrians were too thinly disguised humans.\nGerald Jonas in \"The New York Times\" praised the sophistication of Banks' writing and said \"he asks readers to hold in mind a great many pieces of a vast puzzle while waiting for a pattern to emerge\". Jonas suggested the ending might appear to rely too much on a deus ex machina.\n\"Kirkus Reviews\" described it as \"By turns imposing, ingenious, whimsical, and wrenching, though too amorphous to fully satisfy.\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "68871", "revid": "10841396", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68871", "title": "Use of Weapons", "text": "1990 novel by Iain M. Banks\nUse of Weapons is a science fiction novel by Scottish writer Iain M. Banks, first published in 1990. It is the third novel in the Culture series.\nThe narrative takes the form of a biography of a man called Cheradenine Zakalwe, who was born outside of the Culture but was recruited into it by Special Circumstances agent Diziet Sma to work as an operative intervening in less advanced civilizations. The novel recounts several of these interventions and Zakalwe's attempts to come to terms with his own past.\nPlot summary.\nThe book is made up of two narrative streams, interwoven in alternating chapters. The numbers of the chapters indicate which stream they belong to: one stream is numbered forward in words (One, Two ...), while the other is numbered in reverse with Roman numerals (XIII, XII ...). The story told by the former moves forward chronologically (as the numbers suggest) and tells a self-contained story, while the latter is written in a reverse chronology with each chapter successively earlier in Zakalwe's life. Further complicating this structure is a prologue and epilogue set shortly after the events of the main narrative, and many flashbacks within the chapters.\nThe forward-moving narrative stream deals with the attempts of Diziet Sma and a drone named Skaffen-Amtiskaw (of Special Circumstances, a division of Contact Section) to re-enlist Zakalwe for another job. He must entice Beychae, an old politician, to come out of retirement to aid the Culture's aim in preventing war in the region. The payment that Zakalwe demands is the location of a woman, named Livueta. The backward-moving narrative stream describes earlier jobs that Zakalwe has performed for the Culture, ultimately returning to his pre-Culture childhood with his two sisters (Livueta and Darckense) and a boy his age named Elethiomel whose father has been imprisoned for treason.\nAs the two streams of the narrative conclude, it emerges that Elethiomel and Zakalwe commanded two opposing armies in a bloody civil war. Elethiomel took Darckense hostage before finally having her killed and her bones and skin made into a chair, to be sent to Zakalwe, who attempted suicide upon receiving it.\nAfter the conclusion of his mission, a severely wounded Zakalwe is taken back to his homeworld to see Livueta. She rejects him and reveals that the person called \"Cheradenine Zakalwe\" is in fact Elethiomel, who had stolen the real Zakalwe's identity after the latter killed himself during the civil war. Elethiomel suffers an aneurysm and Skaffen-Amtiskaw performs surgery in an attempt to save his life with initially unclear results. \nThe Prologue/Epilogue as well as the section, \"States of War\", ostensibly written as the opening chapter of a sequel, show how the characters continue. In the latter Sma recruits another war-torn agent for the Culture, while in the former Zakalwe is \"back to his old tricks\" in military action.\nHistory.\nAccording to Banks, he wrote a much longer version of the book in 1974, long before any of his books (science fiction or otherwise) were published. The book had an even more complicated structure (\"It was impossible to comprehend without thinking in six dimensions\") but already introduced the Culture as background for the story of Cheradenine Zakalwe. Realising that his intended structure was a \"fatal flaw\", not least because it demanded the story's climax appear exactly half-way through, Banks moved on to write\" Against a Dark Background\" instead. The book's cryptic acknowledgement credits friend and fellow science fiction author Ken MacLeod with the suggestion \"to argue the old warrior out of retirement\" (to rewrite the old book) and further credits him with suggesting \"the fitness programme\" (the new structure). MacLeod makes use of similar structures in his own novels, most notably in \"The Stone Canal\".\nReception.\nIn 1990 \"Use of Weapons\" was nominated for a British Science Fiction Association Award. In 1991 it was nominated for an Arthur C. Clarke Award, and in 1993 it won the Kurd-La\u00dfwitz-Preis for Foreign Novel. Tor.com reviewed the book favorably in 2017, describing it as \"beautiful and inevitable, and the tension is unbearable... There\u2019s so much I love about this I hardly know where to start.\" The Pequod rated the book a 9.5 (out of 10.0), saying, \"This is first-rate science fiction, with unexpected depth as it explores the nature of morality, the effectiveness (and unintended consequences) of political intervention, and even the process of decision-making in the face of uncertainty.\" In 2012 it was selected for Damien Broderick's book \"Science Fiction: The 101 Best Novels 1985-2010\".\n\"Use of Weapons\" was voted the \"Best sci-fi film never made\" by the readers of The Register in 2011.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "68872", "revid": "25860220", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68872", "title": "Winds", "text": ""}
{"id": "68875", "revid": "4796325", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68875", "title": "Wilderness of Sin", "text": "Geographic area mentioned in the Bible\nThe wilderness of Sin or desert of Sin ( \"M\u012b\u1e0fbar S\u012bn\") is a geographic area mentioned in the Hebrew Bible as lying between Elim and Mount Sinai. \"Sin\" does not refer to the moral concept of \"sin\", but comes from the Hebrew word \"S\u00een\", the Hebrew name for this region.\nThe location the Bible refers to is unknown, as its determination relies heavily on the location of Mount Sinai. The traditional Christian Orthodox identification of Mount Sinai as Jabal Musa (one of the peaks at the southern tip of the Sinai Peninsula) would imply that the \"wilderness of Sin\" was probably the narrow plain of el-Markha, which stretches along the eastern shore of the Red Sea for several miles toward the promontory of Ras Mohammed; however, some scholars have since rejected these traditional identifications. Another identification among some modern scholars, of Sinai as al-Madhbah at Petra, would imply that the \"wilderness of Sin\" was roughly equatable with the central Arabah.\nThe \"wilderness of Sin\" is mentioned by the Bible as being one of the places through which the Israelites wandered during their Exodus journey; the similarly named \"wilderness of Zin\" is also mentioned by the Bible as having been a location through which the Israelites travelled. The biblical narrative states that on reaching the wilderness of Sin, the Israelites began to complain of the lack of food, as they had already consumed all the grain they had brought with them from Egypt. According to the account, Yahweh heard their murmurings, and so provided them with abundant \"manna\" and quail. \nLater they left the wilderness of Sin and complained about a lack of water while camping at Rephidim.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\u00a0This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain:\u00a0"}
{"id": "68876", "revid": "22041646", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68876", "title": "Weights", "text": ""}
{"id": "68881", "revid": "1212433270", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68881", "title": "Omer offering", "text": "Jewish Temple offering performed on Passover\nThe omer offering (\"korban omer\"), or the sheaf offering, was an offering (\"korban\") made by the Jewish priests in the Temple in Jerusalem. The offering consisted of one omer of freshly harvested grain, and was waved in the Temple. It was offered on Passover, and signaled the beginning of the 49-day counting of the Omer (which concluded with the Shavuot holiday), as well as permission to consume \"chadash\" (grains from the \"new\" harvest). \nThe omer offering was one example of a wave offering (Hebrew: \"tenufah\" &lt;templatestyles src=\"Script/styles_hebrew.css\" /&gt;\u05ea\u05e0\u05d5\u05e4\u05d4\u200e), which was waved in the Temple.\nOmer offering.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Then the Lord spoke to Moses, saying, 10 \u201cSpeak to the sons of Israel and say to them, \u2018When you enter the land which I am going to give to you and reap its harvest, then you shall bring in the sheaf of the first fruits of your harvest to the priest. 11 He shall wave the sheaf before the Lord for you to be accepted; on the day after the sabbath the priest shall wave it.\u2014\u200a\nThe offering containing an \"omer\"-measure of barley, described as \"reishit ketzirchem\" (\"the beginning of your harvest\"). Josephus describes the processing of the offering as follows:\nAfter parching and crushing the little sheaf of ears and purifying the barley for grinding, they bring to the altar an https:// for God, and, having flung a handful thereof on the altar, they leave the rest for the use of the priests. Thereafter all are permitted, publicly or individually, to begin harvest.\nThe leftover of the \"korban\" are kept by the \"kohen\" and was listed as one of the twenty-four priestly gifts.\nThe offering was made on \"the morrow after the day of rest\". This phrase was variously interpreted (see Counting of the Omer): According to rabbinic tradition, the omer offering was offered on the second day of Passover, the 16th day of Nisan. According to Karaite Judaism, it was offered on the Sunday occurring within Passover.\nThe omer offering was discontinued following the destruction of the Second Temple.\nCounting of the Omer.\nAlong with the offering of the omer offering, the counting of the Omer begins. This is a count of 49 days beginning with the omer offering, and concluding with the holiday of Shavuot (which is the 50th day).\nFor rabbinic Jews, the count is performed at night. For example, the first day of the omer is counted on the second night of Passover (which precedes the second day, as Jewish days begin in the evening).\nOther wave offerings.\nVarious other offerings are also described as being waved as part of their ritual. After the ritual, the wave-offering then became the property of the priests.\nThe noun \"tenufah\" (waving) is formed from the verb \"nuf\" in the same way as \"terumah\", the heave offering, is formed from \"rum\" \"heave.\" In the Septuagint, \"tenufah\" was translated \"aphorisma\" (\u1f00\u03c6\u03cc\u03c1\u03b9\u03c3\u03bc\u03b1).\nBoth \"tenufah\" and \"terumah\" are often mentioned together. Both being given to the priests as kohanic gifts.\nThe Levites themselves were also offered to God by Aaron as a wave offering.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "68882", "revid": "4770293", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68882", "title": "Amadeus II, Count of Savoy", "text": "Count of Savoy (1078-1080)\nAmadeus II (c.\u20091050 \u2013 26 January 1080) was the count of Savoy from 1078 to 1080. His life is obscure, and few documents mention him. During his rule, he was overshadowed by his mother, but he had good relations with the papacy and, for a time, the Holy Roman emperor.\nBefore his countship.\nThe second son of Count Otto of Savoy and Margravine Adelaide of Turin, Amadeus II was probably born around 1050, because he, alongside other noblemen of the Kingdom of Burgundy, swore an oath on the tomb of Saint Peter in Rome to defend the Church around 1070\u201373. In 1074 Pope Gregory VII was trying to persuade William I, Count of Burgundy, to remember this vow and, with Amadeus and others, go to the defence of the Roman Empire in the East against the Seljuk Turks. As his mother is known to have had good relations with the Papacy in these years, this record seems to indicate that Amadeus was following his mother's policies at this early stage in his career.\nEarly in 1077, Amadeus, with his mother and brother Peter, then Count of Savoy, hosted his sister Bertha, and his brother-in-law, Bertha's husband, the Emperor Henry IV. Amadeus and Adelaide then escorted the imperial couple to Canossa so the excommunicated emperor could reconcile with the pope. There they both took part in the negotiations and stood as pledges for the emperor's good faith.\nOn 16 July 1078, Amadeus and Peter witnessed a donation of their mother's to the Abbey of Novalesa. It was the last act of Amadeus and Peter together.\nAs count.\nOn 9 August 1078, Peter died and Amadeus succeeded him as Count of Savoy, but in the March of Turin, where Peter had co-ruled with their mother, Amadeus was never margrave, although the reason for this is unclear. One document, issued by his widowed daughter Adelaide in 1090, refers to him as \"count and margrave\" (\"comes et marchio\"), but it is probably anachronistic. There is only one document from his reign, in the cartulary of Saint-Andr\u00e9-le-Bas in Vienne, which is dated when \"Count Amadeus [was] reigning.\" This shows, by the absence of the regnal year of the emperor, that despite his involvement in the reconciliation at Canossa, Amadeus II was neutral in the wider Investiture Controversy and the wars against Henry IV that it caused in Germany.\nAmadeus died in Turin on 26 January 1080, according to the necrology of the church of Saint Andrew there. This date must be at least approximately correct, since Adelaide made a monastic donation for the benefit of the souls of her sons, Margrave Peter and Count Amadeus, on 8 March.\nMarriage, children and succession.\nAccording to the much later \"Chronicles of Savoy\", Amadeus married Joan, daughter of \"Girard, Count of Burgundy\", who scholars have surmised to have been Count Gerold of Geneva. The \"Chronicon Altacumbae\" says only that \"the wife of Amadeus [was] from Burgundy\", which might refer to Amadeus I. If his wife were Genevan, it would explain how the house of Savoy came to possess so early a large portion of the Genevois. His wife, whatever her name and origins, bore Amadeus II several children, although there is some uncertainty about how many. His confirmed children were:\nThe succession of Amadeus II is unclear. His son Humbert II, who was later Count of Savoy, is well known, but in 1082 the Count of Savoy was Otto II. Although Amadeus is known to have had a younger brother named Otto, he is more likely to have been the Bishop of Asti of this name and time. This has led some scholars, beginning with the Conte di Vesme, to make Otto II the eldest son of Amadeus II, who succeeded him and was in turn succeeded by Humbert II. In the immediate aftermath of Amadeus's death, Adelaide took control of all the Savoyard lands on both sides of the Alps.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "68883", "revid": "1314663062", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68883", "title": "Wensleydale cheese", "text": "English cheese\nWensleydale is a style of cheese originally produced in Wensleydale, North Yorkshire, England, but now mostly made in large commercial creameries throughout the United Kingdom. The term \"Yorkshire Wensleydale\" can only be used for cheese that is made in Wensleydale. The style of cheese originated from a monastery of French Cistercian monks who had settled in northern England, and continued to be produced by local farmers after the monastery was dissolved in 1540. Wensleydale cheese fell to low production in the mid 1980s to the early 1990s, but its popularity was revitalized by frequent references in the \"Wallace &amp; Gromit\" series.\nFlavour and texture.\nWensleydale is a medium cheese that is supple and crumbly. It has a slight honey aroma.\nCommon flavour combinations.\nThe flavour of Wensleydale is suited to combination with sweeter produce, such as sweet apples. Many restaurants and delicatessens serve a version of the cheese that contains cranberries.\nIn Yorkshire and North East England, the cheese is often eaten with fruit cake or Christmas cake.\nHistory.\nWensleydale cheese was first made by French Cistercian monks from the Roquefort region, who had settled in Wensleydale. They built a monastery at Fors, but some years later the monks moved to Jervaulx in Lower Wensleydale. They brought with them a recipe for making cheese from sheep's milk. During the 14th century cows' milk began to be used instead, and the character of the cheese began to change. A little ewes' milk was still mixed in since it gave a more open texture, and allowed the development of the blue mould. At that time, Wensleydale was almost always blue with the white variety almost unknown. Nowadays, the opposite is true, with blue Wensleydale rarely seen. When the monastery was dissolved in 1540, the local farmers continued making the cheese until the Second World War, during which most milk in the country was used for the making of \"Government Cheddar\". Even after rationing ceased in 1954, cheese making did not return to pre-war levels.\nThe first creamery to produce Wensleydale commercially was established in 1897 in the town of Hawes. Wensleydale Dairy Products, who bought the Wensleydale Creamery in 1992, sought to protect the name \"Yorkshire Wensleydale\" under an EU regulation; Protected Geographical Indication status was awarded in 2013.\nReferences in culture.\nGeorge Orwell rated Wensleydale second behind Stilton in his 1945 essay \"In Defence of English Cooking\".\nIn the 1990s, sales of Wensleydale cheese from the Wensleydale Creamery had fallen so low that production in Wensleydale itself was at risk of being suspended. The cheese experienced a boost in its popularity after being featured in the \"Wallace &amp; Gromit\" franchise. The main character of the series, Wallace, a cheese connoisseur, most notably mentions Wensleydale as a particularly favourite cheese in the 1995 short \"A Close Shave\". Animator and creator Nick Park chose it solely because it had a good name that would be interesting to animate the lip sync to rather than due to its origins in northern England where the shorts were set. He was also unaware of the financial difficulties that the company was experiencing. The company contacted Aardman Animations about a licence for a special brand of Wensleydale cheese called, \"Wallace &amp; Gromit Wensleydale\", which sold well. When the 2005 full-length \"Wallace &amp; Gromit\" film, \"\", was released, sales of Wensleydale cheeses increased by 23%.\nWensleydale is one of the cheeses mentioned in the Cheese shop sketch of \"Monty Python's Flying Circus\" that Mr. Mousebender attempts to purchase, without success. There is a glimmer of hope the shop may have this variety of cheese, only for the proprietor to reveal that his name is Arthur Wensleydale, and he thought he was being personally addressed.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "68884", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68884", "title": "Watches", "text": ""}
{"id": "68885", "revid": "46496191", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68885", "title": "Humbert II, Count of Savoy", "text": "Count of Savoy from 1080 to 1103\nHumbert II (Italian: \"Umberto II\"), nicknamed the Fat (c. 1065 \u2013 19 October 1103), was Count of Savoy from 1080 until his death in 1103. He was the son of Amadeus II of Savoy.\nHe was married to Gisela of Burgundy, daughter of William I, Count of Burgundy, and had seven children:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "68886", "revid": "1398", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68886", "title": "Vine of Sodom", "text": "Translation found in Deuteronomy\nVine of Sodom is the translation of found in the King James and some other translations of the Bible into English, most notably in the Tyndale Bible, which renders it: \"Their vines are the vines of Sodom.\" The Douay-Rheims renders the phrase as, \"Their vines are of the vineyard of Sodom,\" the\nJPS Tanakh: \"The vine for them is from Sodom,\" and the Revised Standard Version, \"For their vine comes from the vine of Sodom.\" The full verse in the King James Version reads: \"For their vine is of the vine of Sodom, and of the fields of Gomorrah: their grapes are grapes of gall, their clusters are bitter.\" (Hebrew: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Script/styles_hebrew.css\" /&gt;\u05db\u05b4\u05bc\u05bd\u05d9\u05be\u05de\u05b4\u05d2\u05b6\u05bc\u05a4\u05e4\u05b6\u05df \u05e1\u05b0\u05d3\u05b9\u05dd\u0599 \u05d2\u05b7\u05bc\u05e4\u05b0\u05e0\u05b8\u0594\u05dd \u05d5\u05bc\u05de\u05b4\u05e9\u05b7\u05bc\u05c1\u05d3\u05b0\u05de\u05b9\u0596\u05ea \u05e2\u05b2\u05de\u05b9\u05e8\u05b8\u0591\u05d4 \u05e2\u05b2\u05e0\u05b8\u05d1\u05b5\u0599\u05de\u05b9\u05d5\u0599 \u05e2\u05b4\u05e0\u05b0\u05bc\u05d1\u05b5\u05d9\u05be\u05e8\u05b9\u0594\u05d5\u05e9\u05c1 \u05d0\u05b7\u05e9\u05b0\u05c1\u05db\u05b0\u05bc\u05dc\u05b9\u05a5\u05ea \u05de\u05b0\u05e8\u05b9\u05e8\u05b9\u0596\u05ea \u05dc\u05b8\u05bd\u05de\u05b9\u05d5\u05c3\u200e \"K\u00ee miggep\u0304en S\u0259\u1e0f\u014dm gap\u0304n\u0101m, \u016b-mi\u0161\u0161a\u1e0fm\u014d\u1e6f \u2018\u01cdm\u014dr\u0101h; \u2018\u0103n\u0101\u1e07\u00eam\u014dw \u2018inn\u0259\u1e07\u00ea r\u014dw\u014d\u0161, \u2019a\u0161k\u0259l\u014d\u1e6f m\u0259r\u014dr\u014d\u1e6f l\u0101m\u014dw.\")\nAmong the many conjectures as to this tree, the most probable is that it is the osher (\"Calotropis procera\") of the Arabs, which grows from Jordan to southern Egypt. The fruit of \"Calotropis procera\" is therefore called \"apples of Sodom\", Sodom apple, and Dead Sea apple. Although beautiful to the eye, are bitter to the taste.\nAnother conjecture equates it with the colocynth (\"Citrullus colocynthis\"). Its fruit are called Vine of Sodom, which, although beautiful to the eye, are bitter to the taste.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n\u00a0This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain:\u00a0"}
{"id": "68887", "revid": "1295697369", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68887", "title": "Valley of Salt", "text": "The Valley of Salt, valley of saltpits, valley of Saltpits, or vale of saltpits () is a place where David smote the Arameans (2 Sam. 8:13). This valley (the Arabah) is between Judah and Edom on the south of the Dead Sea. Hence some interpreters suggest the phrase, \"and he smote Edom,\" instead of the \"Arameans\" in the above text. This confusion may be due to the Hebrew word Edom \u05d0\u05d3\u05dd being similar to the word Aram \u05d0\u05e8\u05dd. In Hebrew, the resh \"\u05e8\" and the daleth \"\u05d3\" are very similar and easily confused if not written carefully. It is conjectured that while David was leading his army against the Ammonites and Arameans, the Edomites invaded the south of Judah, and that David sent Joab or Abishai against them, who drove them back and finally subdued Edom. (Comp. title to Ps. 60 [Ps. 59 in the Septuagint].)\n2 Samuel 8:13 - And David became famous after he returned from striking down eighteen thousand Arameans in the Valley of Salt. (New International Version)\nHere also Amaziah \"slew of Edom ten thousand men\" (2 Kings 14:7; comp. 8: 20-22 and 2 Chr. 25:5-11).\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n\u00a0This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain:\u00a0"}
{"id": "68888", "revid": "543434", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68888", "title": "Valley of Rephaim", "text": "Valley southwest of Jerusalem, Israel\nThe Valley of Rephaim (, \"Emeq Rephaim\") (; , R.V.) is a valley descending southwest from Jerusalem to Nahal Sorek below. It is an ancient route from the coastal plain to the Judean Hills, probably named after the legendary race of giants. Emek Refaim (), the German Colony in Jerusalem, takes its name from this valley.\nBiblical narrative.\nWhen David became king over all Israel, the Philistines, judging that he would now become their uncompromising enemy, made a sudden attack upon Hebron, compelling David to retire from it. He sought refuge in \"the hold\" at Adullam (), and the Philistines took up their position in (or raided) the valley of Rephaim, on the west and south-west of Jerusalem. Thus all communication between Bethlehem and Jerusalem was intercepted. While David and his army were encamped here, there occurred the battle narrated in and . Having obtained divine direction, David led his army against the Philistines, and gained a complete victory over them. The scene of this victory was afterwards called Baal-perazim.\nA second time, however, the Philistines rallied their forces in this valley ( and ). Again, warned by a divine saying about hearing a marching sound in the tops of the baka trees (\u05d4\u05d1\u05db\u05d0\u05d9\u05dd, KJV \"mulberry trees\", most modern versions \"balsam\"), David led his army to Gibeon, and attacked the Philistines from the south, inflicting on them another severe defeat, and chasing them with great slaughter to Gezer. There David kept in check these enemies of Israel and in consequence his fame grew.\nArchaeology.\nOne of the ancient farming complexes excavated in the Valley of Rephaim is Er-Ras, an Iron age terraced farm. \nRailway.\nThe Tel Aviv \u2013 Jerusalem railway, originally known as the Jaffa\u2013Jerusalem railway, uses the entire length of the Valley of the Rephaim from Jerusalem to its junction with Nahal Sorek.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\u00a0This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain:\u00a0"}
{"id": "68889", "revid": "135518", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68889", "title": "Biblical and Talmudic units of measurement", "text": "Units of measurement in Jewish religious texts\nBiblical and Talmudic units of measurement were used primarily by ancient Israelites and appear frequently within the Hebrew Bible as well as in later rabbinic writings, such as the Mishnah and Talmud. These units of measurement continue to be used in functions regulating Orthodox Jewish contemporary life, based on halacha. The specificity of some of the units used and which are encompassed under these systems of measurement (whether in linear distance, weight or volume of capacity) have given rise, in some instances, to disputes, owing to the discontinuation of their Hebrew names and their replacement by other names in modern usage.\nNote: The listed measurements of this system range from the lowest to highest acceptable halakhic value, in terms of conversion to and from contemporary systems of measurement.\nUnit conversion.\nArchaeological.\nWhile documentation on each unit's relation to another's is plentiful, there is much debate, both within Judaism and in academia, about the exact relationship between measurements in the system and those in other measurement systems. Classical definitions, such as that an \"etzba\" was seven barleycorns laid side by side, or that a \"log\" was equal to six medium-sized eggs, are also open to debate.\nNevertheless, the entire system of measurement bears profound resemblance to the Babylonian and the ancient Egyptian systems, and is currently understood to have likely been derived from some combination of the two. Scholars commonly infer the absolute sizes based on the better-known Babylonian units' relations to their contemporary counterparts.\nEzekiel refers to an \"\"amah\" (cubit) which is an \"amah\" plus a \"tefah\" (palm breadth)\", and thus is one sixth larger than the standard \"amah\". An explanation for this discrepancy seems to be suggested by the Book of Chronicles, which states that Solomon's Temple was built according to \"cubits following the first measure\", suggesting that over the course of time the original \"amah\" was supplanted by a smaller one. The Egyptians also used two different cubits, one of which\u2014the \"royal\" cubit\u2014was a sixth larger than the common cubit; this \"royal\" measurement was the earlier of the two in Egyptian use, and the one which the Pyramids of the 3rd and 4th Dynasties seem to be measured in integer multiples of.\nThe smaller of the Egyptian cubits measured , but the standard Babylonian cubit, cast in stone on one of the statues of Gudea, was 49.5\u00a0cm (19.49\u00a0in), and the larger Egyptian cubit was between 52.5 and 52.8\u00a0cm (20.67 and 20.79\u00a0in). The Books of Samuel portray the Temple as having a Phoenician architect, and in Phoenicia it was the Babylonian cubit which was used to measure the size of parts of ships. Thus scholars are uncertain whether the standard Biblical cubit would have been 49.5 or 52.5\u00a0cm (19.49 or 20.67\u00a0in), but are fairly certain that it was one of these two figures. From these figures for the size of a Biblical cubit, that of the basic unit\u2014the finger-breadth (\"Etzba\")\u2014can be calculated to be either 2.1 or 2.2\u00a0cm (0.83 or 0.87\u00a0in).\nHalakhic.\nRabbinic scholars have also attempted to calculate these measurements. The most accepted approaches are those of Rav Avraham Chaim Naeh, who approximates the \"etzba\" at 2\u00a0cm (0.79\u00a0in), and Chazon Ish at 2.38\u00a0cm (0.94\u00a0in). A third opinion, in Rabbi Chaim P. Benish's \"Midos V'Shiurei Torah\", provides an alternative understanding of the \"Rambam\" and suggests that the , according to the \"Rambam\", is 0.748\u20130.756\u00a0in (1.90\u20131.92\u00a0cm).\nIn the below tables, the range of values shown is that between the calculations of Naeh and Chazon Ish. The archaeological estimate is in the middle of this range.\nLength and distance.\nThe original measures of length were derived from the human body\u2014the finger, hand, arm, span, foot, and pace\u2014but since these measures differ between individuals, they are reduced to a certain standard for general use.\nThe Hebrew Bible mentions the palm or handbreadth (Hebrew: \u05d8\u05e4\u05d7, '; plural '), the span (Hebrew: \u05d6\u05e8\u05ea, ), and the cubit or ell (Hebrew: \u05d0\u05de\u05d4, \"Amah\", plural \"Amot\"). In later periods, more measures are recorded: the digit or fingerbreadth (Hebrew: \u05d0\u05e6\u05d1\u05e2, \"etzba\"; plural \"etzba'ot\"), the mile (Hebrew: \u05de\u05d9\u05dc, \"mil\"; plural \"milim\"), and the parasang (Hebrew: \u05e4\u05e8\u05e1\u05d4, \"parasa\"). The latter two are loan words into the Hebrew language, and borrowed measurements - the Latin \"mille\", and Iranian \"parasang\", respectively; both were units of itinerant distance, and thus varied according to terrain and stride length, and, in the case of the \"parasang\", also on the speed of travel.\nThe measurements were related as follows:\nTalmudic additions.\nTo the somewhat simple system of distance, the Talmud adds a few more units, namely the double palm (Hebrew: \u05d7\u05e1\u05d9\u05d8, ), the pace (Hebrew: \u05e4\u05e1\u05d9\u05e2\u05d4, ), the cord (Hebrew: \u05d7\u05d1\u05dc, ), the stadion (Hebrew: \u05e8\u05d9\u05e1, ), the day's journey (Hebrew:\u05d3\u05e8\u05da \u05d9\u05d5\u05dd, ), and an undetermined quantity named the (Hebrew: \u05d2\u05e8\u05de\u05d9\u05d3\u05d0). The \"stadion\" appears to have been adopted from Persia, while the \"double palm\" seems to have been derived from the Greek .\nThe relationship between four of these \"additional\" units and the earlier system is as follows:\nTwo additional units are more ambiguous. The \"garmida\" is mentioned repeatedly but without its size being indicated; it is even sometimes treated as an area, and as a volume. The \"cord\" is given two different definitions; in the Mishnah it is 50 cubits, but in the Gemara it is only 4 cubits.\nArea.\nThe Israelite system of measuring area was fairly informal; the biblical text merely measures areas by describing how much land could be sown with a certain volume measure of seed, for example the amount of land able to be sown with 2 \"seah\"s of barley. The closest thing to a formal area unit was the yoke ( ) (sometimes translated as \"acre\"), which referred to the amount of land that a pair of yoked oxen could plough in a single day; in Mesopotamia the standard estimate for this was 6,480 square cubits, which is roughly equal to a third of an acre.\nThe following units appear in rabbinic sources:\nVolume.\nThe Israelite system of powder/liquid volume measurements corresponds exactly with the Babylonian system. Unlike the Egyptian system, which has units for multiples of 1, 10, 20, 40, 80, and 160 of the base unit, the Babylonian system is founded on multiples of 6 and 10, namely units of 1, 12, 24, 60, 72 (60 plus 12), 120, and 720. The basic unit was the \"mina\", which was defined as 1 sixtieth of a \"maris\", which itself was the quantity of water equal in weight to a light royal talent; the \"maris\" was thus equal to about 30.3 litres, and hence the \"mina\" is equal to about 0.505 litres. In the Israelite system, the term \"log\" is used in place of the Babylonian \"mina\" but the measurement is otherwise the same.\nAlthough they both use the \"log\" as the basic unit, the Israelites differentiated their systems of volume measure between dry and liquid states.\nDry measure.\nFor dry measurement, or more specifically a measure of capacity rather than of weight, the smallest unit is the \"beitza\" (egg), followed by the \"log\" (\u05dc\u05d2), followed by the \"kab\" (\u05e7\u05d1), followed by the \"se'ah\" (\u05e1\u05d0\u05d4), followed by the \"ephah\" (\u05d0\u05d9\u05e4\u05d4), followed by the \"lethek\" (\u05dc\u05ea\u05da), and finally by the \"kor\" (\u05db\u05d5\u05e8). The \"lethek\" is mentioned only once in the Masoretic Text, and the Septuagint translates it by the Greek term \"nebeloinou\" (\u03bd\u03ad\u03b2\u03b5\u03bb \u03bf\u1f34\u03bd\u03bf\u03c5), meaning \"wine-skin\". These measurements were related as follows:\nLiquid measure.\nFor liquid measure, the main units were the \"Log\", \"Hin\", and \"Bath\", related as follows:\nThe \"\", or \"revi'it halog\", formed one quarter of a \"log\".\nThe \"Bath\", equal to 72 \"Logs\", is thus the liquid equivalent of the \"Ephah\", also equal to 72 \"Logs\". The liquid equivalent of the \"omer\", which appears without a special name, only being described as the tenth part of a bath, is as much of an awkward fit as the \"omer\" itself, and is only mentioned by Ezekiel and the Priestly Code; scholars attribute the same explanation to it as with the \"Omer\"\u2014that it arose as a result of decimalisation.\nAccording to Herbert G. May, chief editor of two classic Bible-related reference books, the bath may be archaeologically determined to have been about 22 liters (5.75 US gal) from a study of jar remains marked 'bath' and 'royal bath' from Tell Beit Mirsim.\nBased on this, a Revi'ith would measure (approx.) 76 ml or 2.7 fluid oz.\nTalmudic additions.\nIn Talmudic times many more measures of capacity were used, mostly of foreign origin, especially from Persia and Greece, which had both held dominance over Judea by this period. The definitions for many of these are disputed. Those that were certain (disputed) fractions of the \"Kab\" include, in increasing order of size, (\u05e2\u05d5\u05db\u05dc\u05d0), (\u05ea\u05d5\u05de\u05df), and (\u05e7\u05e4\u05d9\u05d6\u05d0). Those that were larger, in increasing order of size, included the \"modius\" (\u05de\u05d5\u05d3\u05d9\u05d0), ' (), ' (\u05d2\u05e8\u05d1). Of unidentified size were the (\u05d0\u05d3\u05e8\u05d1), the (\u05db\u05d5\u05e0\u05d0), and the (\u05e7\u05de\u05e5); the latter two of these were said to equate to a \"handful\". Some dry measures were used for liquids as well, e.g. \"se'eh\". The \"\" (\u05e7\u05d5\u05e8\u05d8\u05d5\u05d1) was used for very small amounts (1/64 of a \"log\").\nMass and money.\nThe Babylonian system, which the Israelites followed, measured weight with units of the \"kikar\" (talent), \"mina\", \"shekel\", and \"giru\" (Hebrew \"Gerah\"), related to one another as follows:\nIn the Israelite system, the ratio of the \"gerah\" to the \"shekel\" was altered to 20:1 (). In later generations, the \"minah\" was renamed to \"litra\", being the Greek form of the Latin \"libra\", meaning \"pound\". Thus, the Jewish system was as follows:\nThere were, however, different versions of the \"talent\"/\"kikkar\" in use; a \"royal\" and a \"common\" version. In addition, each of these forms had a heavy and a light version, with the heavy version being exactly twice the weight of the lighter form; the light \"royal\" talent was often represented in the form of a duck, while the heavy \"royal\" talent often took the form of a lion. The \"mina\" for the heavy \"royal\" talent weighed 1.01 kilograms (2.23\u00a0lbs), while that for the heavy \"common\" talent weighed only 984 grams (2.17\u00a0lbs); accordingly, the heavy \"common\" shekel would be about 15.87 grams (0.56\u00a0oz). According to Josephus, it was the heavy \"common\" talent, and its \"mina\" and \"shekel\", that was the normal measure of weight in Syria and Judea; Josephus also mentions an additional unit \u2013 the \"bekah\" \u2013 which was exactly half a shekel.\nGradually, the system was reformed, perhaps under the influence of Egypt, so that a \"mina\" was worth only 50 shekels rather than 60; to achieve this, the shekel remained the same weight, while the weight of the standard \"mina\" was reduced. Moses mandated that the standard coinage would be in single shekels of silver; thus each shekel coin would constitute about 15.86 grams (0.51 troy ounces) of pure silver. In Judea, the Biblical shekel was initially worth about 3\u2153 denarii, but over time the measurement had enlarged so that it would be worth exactly four denarii.\nTime.\nYear.\nThe Hebrew calendar is a lunar calendar synchronised with the seasons by intercalation, i.e. a lunisolar calendar. There are thus 12 ordinary months plus an extra month that is added in (intercalated) every few years. Some months vary in length by a day, as well.\nWeek.\nThe modern Hebrew calendar follows a seven-day weekly cycle, which runs concurrently but independently of the monthly and annual cycles. The seven-day cycle is not seen as a cycle in nature, and is rather a custom biblically originating from and other biblical references to Shabbat.\nDay.\nIn addition to \"tomorrow\" () and \"yesterday\" (), the Israelite vocabulary also contained a distinct word for \"two days ago\" (). \"Ma\u1e25aratayim\" (\"the day after tomorrow\", \"over-morrow\"), is a dual form of , literally \"two tomorrows\". In the Bible, the day is divided up vaguely, with descriptions such as \"midnight\", \"noontime\", \"eveningtime\", and \"at the beginning of the middle night watch\". Nevertheless, it is clear that the day was considered to start at dusk.\nBy Talmudic times, the Babylonian system of dividing up the day (from sunset to sunrise, and sunrise to sunset), into hours (Hebrew: \u05e9\u05e2\u05d4, \"sha'ah\"), parts (Hebrew: \u05d7\u05dc\u05e7, \"heleq\", plural \"halaqim\"), and moments (Hebrew: \u05e8\u05d2\u05e2, \"rega\", plural \"rega'im\"), had been adopted; the relationship of these units was:\nTo complicate matters, Halakha, speaking of the relative hour, states that there are always 12 hours between the break of dawn and sunset, so these measurements are averages. For example, in the summer, a day time hour is much longer than a night time hour.\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "68890", "revid": "15962047", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68890", "title": "Ecdysiast", "text": ""}
{"id": "68891", "revid": "6549", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68891", "title": "Valley of Jezreel", "text": ""}
{"id": "68892", "revid": "7770027", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68892", "title": "Vale of Siddim", "text": ""}
{"id": "68896", "revid": "4770293", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68896", "title": "Amadeus III, Count of Savoy", "text": "Count of Savoy from 1103 to 1148\nAmadeus III of Savoy (1095 \u2013 April 1148) was Count of Savoy and Maurienne from 1103 until his death. He was also known as a crusader.\nBiography.\nHe was born in Carignano, Piedmont, the son of Humbert II of Savoy and Gisela of Burgundy, the daughter of William I of Burgundy. He succeeded as Count of Savoy upon the death of his father. Amadeus had a tendency to exaggerate his titles, and also claimed to be Duke of Lombardy, Duke of Burgundy, Duke of Chablais, and vicar of the Holy Roman Empire, the latter of which had been given to his father by Henry IV, Holy Roman Emperor.\nHe helped restore the Abbey of St. Maurice of Agaune, in which the former kings of Burgundy had been crowned, and of which he himself was abbot until 1147. He also founded the Abbey of St. Sulpicius in Bugey, Tami\u00e9 Abbey in the Bauges, and Hautecombe Abbey on the Lac du Bourget.\nIn 1128, Amadeus extended his realm, known as the \"Old Chablais\", by adding to it the region extending from the Arve to the Dranse d'Abondance, which came to be called the \"New Chablais\" with its capital at Saint-Maurice. Despite his marriage to Mahaut, he still fought against his brother-in-law Guy, who was killed at the Battle of Montm\u00e9lian. Following this, King Louis VI of France, married to Amadeus' sister Ad\u00e9laide de Maurienne, attempted to confiscate Savoy. Amadeus was saved by the intercession of Peter the Hermit, and by his promise to participate in Louis' planned crusade.\nCrusade.\nIn 1147, he accompanied his nephew Louis VII of France and his wife Eleanor of Aquitaine on the Second Crusade. He financed his expedition with help from a loan from the Abbey of St. Maurice. In his retinue were many barons from Savoy, including the lords of Faucigny, Seyssel, La Chambre, Miolans, Montbel, Thoire, Montmayeur, Vienne, Viry, La Palude, Blonay, Chevron-Villette, Chignin, and Ch\u00e2tillon. Amadeus travelled south through Italy to Brindisi, where he crossed over to Durazzo, and marched east along the Via Egnatia to meet Louis at Constantinople in late 1147. After crossing into Anatolia, Amadeus, who was leading the vanguard, became separated from Louis near Laodicea, and Louis' forces were almost entirely destroyed.\nMarching on to Adalia, Louis, Amadeus, and other barons decided to continue to Antioch by ship. On the journey, Amadeus fell ill on Cyprus, and died at Nicosia in April 1148. He was buried in the Church of St. Croix in Nicosia. In Savoy, his son Humbert III succeeded him, under the regency of bishop Amadeus of Lausanne.\nFamily and children.\nWith his first wife Adelaide, he had:\nIn 1123 he married Matilda of Albon, daughter of Guigues III of Albon, they had:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "68897", "revid": "7475926", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68897", "title": "Veil", "text": "Hanging cloth covering parts of a person or object\nA veil is an article of clothing or hanging cloth that is intended to cover some part of the head or face, or an object of some significance. Veiling has a long history in European, Asian, and African societies. The practice has been prominent in different forms in Judaism, Christianity, and Islam. The practice of veiling is especially associated with women and sacred objects, though in some cultures, it is men, rather than women, who are expected to wear a veil. Besides its enduring religious significance, veiling continues to play a role in some modern secular contexts, such as wedding customs.\nHistory.\nAntiquity.\nElite women in ancient Mesopotamia and in the Macedonian and Persian empires wore the veil as a sign of respectability and high status. The earliest attested reference to veiling is found in a Middle Assyrian law code dating from between 1400 and 1100 BC. Assyria had explicit sumptuary laws detailing which women must veil and which women must not, depending upon the woman's class, rank, and occupation in society. Female slaves and prostitutes were forbidden to veil and faced harsh penalties if they did so. The Middle Assyrian law code states:\u00a7\u202f40. A wife-of-a-man, or [widows], or [Assyrian] women who go out into the main thoroughfare [shall not have] their heads [bare]. [\u2026] A prostitute shall not veil herself, her head shall be bare. Whoever sees a veiled prostitute shall seize her, secure witnesses, and bring her to the palace entrance. They shall not take her jewellery; he who has seized her shall take her clothing; they shall strike her 50 blows with rods; they shall pour hot pitch over her head. And if a man should see a veiled prostitute and release her and not bring her to the palace entrance: they shall strike that man 50 blows with rods; the one who informs against him shall take his clothing; they shall pierce his ears, thread (them) on a cord, tie (it) at his back; he shall perform the king's service for one full month. Slave-women shall not veil themselves, and he who should see a veiled slave-woman shall seize her and bring her to the palace entrance: they shall cut off her ears; he who seizes her shall take her clothing.Veiling not only was thus a marker of aristocratic rank, but also served to \"differentiate between 'respectable' women and those who were publicly available\". The veiling of matrons was also customary in ancient Greece. Between 550 and 323 B.C.E respectable women in classical Greek society were expected to seclude themselves and wear clothing that concealed them from the eyes of strange men.\nThe Mycenaean Greek term , \"a-pu-ko-wo-ko\", possibly meaning \"headband makers\" or \"craftsmen of horse veil\", and written in Linear B syllabic script, is also attested since ca. 1300 BC. In ancient Greek the word for veil was (\"kalyptra\"; Ionic Greek: , \"kalyptr\u0113\"; from the verb , \"kalypt\u014d\", \"I cover\").\nClassical Greek and Hellenistic statues sometimes depict Greek women with both their head and face covered by a veil. Caroline Galt and Lloyd Llewellyn-Jones have both argued from such representations and literary references that it was commonplace for women (at least those of higher status) in ancient Greece to cover their hair and face in public. Roman women were expected to wear veils as a symbol of the husband's authority over his wife; a married woman who omitted the veil was seen as withdrawing herself from marriage. In 166 BC, consul Sulpicius Gallus divorced his wife because she had left the house unveiled, thus allowing all to see, as he said, what only he should see. Unmarried girls normally did not veil their heads, but matrons did so to show their modesty and chastity, their \"pudicitia\". Veils also protected women against the evil eye, it was thought.\nA veil called \"flammeum\" was the most prominent feature of the costume worn by the bride at Roman weddings. The veil was a deep yellow color reminiscent of a candle flame. The \"flammeum\" also evoked the veil of the Flaminica Dialis, the Roman priestess who could not divorce her husband, the high priest of Jupiter, and thus was seen as a good omen for lifelong fidelity to one man. The Romans apparently thought of the bride as being \"clouded over with a veil\" and connected the verb \"nubere\" (to be married) with \"nubes\", the word for cloud.\nIntermixing of populations resulted in a convergence of the cultural practices of Greek, Persian, and Mesopotamian empires and the Semitic-speaking peoples of the Middle East. With the spread of Christianity, the ordinance of headcovering by women became normative throughout Christendom because it was enjoined in the Bible and by the Church Fathers. Veiling and seclusion of women appear to have established themselves among Jews and Christians, before spreading to urban Arabs of the upper classes and eventually among the urban masses. In the rural areas it was common to cover the hair, but not the face.\nLater history.\nFor many centuries, until around 1175, Anglo-Saxon and then Anglo-Norman women, with the exception of young unmarried girls, wore veils that entirely covered their hair, and often their necks up to their chins (see wimple). Only in the Tudor period (1485), when hoods became increasingly popular, did veils of this type become less common. This varied greatly from one country to another. In Italy, veils, including face veils, were worn in some regions until the 1970s. Women in southern Italy often covered their heads to show that they were modest, well-behaved and pious. They generally wore a \"cuffia\" (cap), then the \"fazzoletto\" (kerchief/head scarves) a long triangular or rectangular piece of cloth that could be tied in various ways, and sometimes covered the whole face except the eyes, sometimes \"bende (lit. swaddles, bandages)\" or a wimple underneath too.\nFor centuries, European women have worn sheer veils, but only under certain circumstances. Sometimes a veil of this type was draped over and pinned to the bonnet or hat of a woman in mourning, especially at the funeral and during the subsequent period of \"high mourning\". They would also have been used, as an alternative to a mask, as a simple method of hiding the identity of a woman who was traveling to meet a lover, or doing anything she did not want other people to find out about. More pragmatically, veils were also sometimes worn to protect the complexion from sun and wind damage (when untanned skin was fashionable), or to keep dust out of a woman's face, much as the keffiyeh (worn by men) is used today.\nIn Judaism, Christianity, and Islam the concept of covering the head is or was associated with propriety and modesty. Most traditional depictions of the Virgin Mary, the mother of Christ, show her veiled. During the Middle Ages most European married women covered their hair rather than their face, with a variety of styles of wimple, kerchiefs and headscarves. Veiling, covering the hair, was the normative practice of Christian women until at least the 19th century and still extant in certain regions, in accordance with Christian teaching delineated by Saint Paul in . While in the Western world this practice largely lapsed in the 1960s with the rise of the sexual revolution, traditional congregations, such as those of Conservative Anabaptist Christians, as well as certain Oriental Orthodox Christians and Eastern Orthodox Christians, continue observing the ordinance of headcovering. Other Christian women, including certain Catholic and Lutheran, as well as certain conservative Reformed Christian women (such as those belonging to the Heritage Reformed Congregations or Free Presbyterian Church of North America), continue to wear a headcovering at least during prayer and worship. Lace face-veils are often worn by female relatives at funerals in some Catholic countries. In Orthodox Judaism, married women cover their hair for reasons of modesty; many Orthodox Jewish women wear headscarves (tichel) for this purpose.\nChristian Byzantine literature expressed rigid norms pertaining to veiling of women, which have been influenced by Persian traditions, although there is evidence to suggest that they differed significantly from actual practice. Since Islam identified with the monotheistic religions practiced in the Byzantine and Sasanian empires, in the aftermath of the early Muslim conquests veiling of women was adopted as an appropriate expression of Qur'anic ideals regarding modesty and piety. Veiling gradually spread to upper-class Arab women, and eventually, it became widespread among Muslim women in cities throughout the Middle East. Veiling of Arab Muslim women became especially pervasive under Ottoman rule as a mark of rank and exclusive lifestyle, and Istanbul of the 17th century witnessed differentiated dress styles that reflected geographical and occupational identities. Women in rural areas were much slower to adopt veiling because the garments interfered with their work in the fields. Since wearing a veil was impractical for working women, \"a veiled woman silently announced that her husband was rich enough to keep her idle.\" By the 19th century, upper-class urban Muslim and Christian women in Egypt wore a garment which included a head cover and a \"burqa\" (muslin cloth that covered the lower nose and the mouth). Up to the first half of the twentieth century, rural women in the Maghreb and Egypt put on a face veil when they visited urban areas, \"as a sign of civilization\". The practice of veiling gradually declined in much of the Muslim world during the 20th century before making a comeback in recent decades. The choice, or the forced option for women to veil remains controversial, whether a personal choice as an outward sign of religious devotion, or a forced one because of extremist groups that require a veil, under severe penalty, even death. The motives and reasons for wearing a hijab are wide and various, but ultimately depend on each individual person's situation and can not be said to come from any one distinct reason or motive. Although religion can be a common reason for choosing to veil, the practice also reflects political and personal conviction, so that it can serve as a medium through which personal choices can be revealed, in countries where veiling is indeed a choice, such as Turkey.\nVeils for men.\nAmong the Tuareg, Songhai, Hausa, and Fulani of West Africa, women do not traditionally wear the veil, while men do. Male veiling was also common among the Berber Sanhaja tribes. The North African male veil, which covers the mouth and sometimes part of the nose, is called \"litham\" in Arabic and \"tagelmust\" by the Tuareg. Tuareg boys start wearing the veil at the onset of puberty and veiling is regarded as a mark of manhood. It is considered improper for a man to appear unveiled in front of elders, especially those from his wife's family.\nAncient African rock engravings depicting human faces with eyes but no mouth or nose suggest that the origins of litham are pre-Islamic and even pre-historic. Wearing of the litham is not viewed as a religious requirement, although it was apparently believed to provide magical protection against evil forces. In practice, the litham has served as protection from the dust and extremes of temperature characterizing the desert environment. Its use by the Almoravids gave it a political significance during their conquests.\nIn some parts of India, Pakistan, Bangladesh, and Nepal, men wear a \"sehra\" (headdress) on their wedding day. This is a male veil covering the whole face and neck. The sehra is made from either flowers or beads. The most common sehra is made from fresh marigolds. The groom wears this throughout the day concealing his face even during the wedding ceremony. In Northern India today, grooms can be seen arriving on a horse with the sehra wrapped around the head.\nVeiling and religion.\nBiblical references.\nBiblical references include:\nNote: , which the King James Version renders as: \"And unto Sarah he said, Behold, I have given thy brother a thousand pieces of silver: Behold, he is to thee a covering of the eyes, unto all that are with thee, and with all other: Thus, she was reproved\" has been interpreted in one source as implied advice to Sarah to conform to a supposed custom of married women, and wear a complete veil, covering the eyes as well as the rest of the face, but the phrase is generally taken to refer not to Sarah's eyes, but to the eyes of others, and to be merely a metaphorical expression concerning vindication of Sarah (NASB, RSV), silencing criticism (GWT), allaying suspicions (NJB), righting a wrong (BBE, NLT), covering or recompensing the problem caused her (NIV, New Life Version, NIRV, TNIV, JB), a sign of her innocence (ESV, CEV, HCSB). The final phrase in the verse, which KJV takes to mean, \"she was reproved\", is taken by almost all other versions to mean instead, \"she was vindicated\", and the word \"\u05d4\u05d5\u05d0\", which KJV interprets as \"he\" (Abraham), is interpreted as \"it\" (the money). Thus, the general view is that this passage has nothing to do with material veils.\nJudaism.\nAfter the destruction of the Temple in Jerusalem, the synagogues that were established took the design of the Tabernacle as their plan. The Ark of the Law, which contains the scrolls of the Torah, is covered with an embroidered curtain or veil called a \"parokhet\". (See also below regarding the traditional Jewish custom of veiling\u00a0\u2013 and unveiling\u00a0\u2013 the bride.)\nChristianity.\nVeiling of women.\nTraditionally, in Christianity, women were enjoined to cover their heads, and men were instructed to remove their hat when praying or prophesying. Wearing a veil (also known as a headcovering) is seen as a sign of humility before God, as well as a reminder of the bridal relationship between Christ and the church. This practice is based on in the Christian Bible, where St. Paul writes:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;2I commend you because you remember me in everything and maintain the traditions even as I have delivered them to you. 3But I want you to understand that the head of every man is Christ, the head of a woman is her husband, and the head of Christ is God. 4Any man who prays or prophesies with his head covered dishonors his head, 5but any woman who prays or prophesies with her head unveiled dishonors her head\u2014it is the same as if her head were shaven. 6For if a woman will not veil herself, then she should cut off her hair; but if it is disgraceful for a woman to be shorn or shaven, let her wear a veil. 7For a man ought not to cover his head, since he is the image and glory of God; but woman is the glory of man. 8(For man was not made from woman, but woman from man. 9Neither was man created for woman, but woman for man.) 10That is why a woman ought to have a veil on her head, because of the angels. 11(Nevertheless, in the Lord woman is not independent of man nor man of woman; 12for as woman was made from man, so man is now born of woman. And all things are from God.) 13Judge for yourselves; is it proper for a woman to pray to God with her head uncovered? 14Does not nature itself teach you that for a man to wear long hair is degrading to him, 15but if a woman has long hair, it is her pride? For her hair is given to her for a covering. 16If any one is disposed to be contentious, we recognize no other practice, nor do the churches of God.\u2014\u200a\nThe early Church Fathers, including Tertullian of Carthage, Clement of Alexandria, Hippolytus of Rome, John Chrysostom and Augustine of Hippo attested in their writings that men should pray uncovered, and that women should wear a headcovering. John Chrysostom (c.\u2009347\u00a0\u2013 407) delineated Saint Paul's teaching on the wearing of headcoverings by Christian women, continually: \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;For he said not merely covered, but \"covered over\", meaning that she be with all care sheltered from view on every side. And by reducing it to an absurdity, he appeals to their shame, saying by way of severe reprimand, \"but if she be not covered, let her also be shorn.\" As if he had said, \"If thou cast away the covering appointed by the law of God, cast away likewise that appointed by nature.\"\nAdditionally, the Church Fathers taught that because the hair of a woman has sexual potency, it should only be for her husband to see and covered the rest of the time. \nIn Western Europe and North America, from the arrival of Christianity to those lands to the mid-20th century, women in most mainstream Christian denominations wore head coverings (often in the form of a scarf, cap, veil or hat). These included many Anglican, Baptist, Catholic, Lutheran, Methodist, Moravian, and Reformed (including Continental Reformed, Congregationalist and Presbyterian traditions) Churches. In these denominations, the practice now continues in certain congregations and by individuals who have sought to follow the precedent set in Scripture and church history.\nChristian veiling throughout the day is still practiced by those who wear plain dress, such as traditional Anabaptists including Mennonites (Old Order Mennonites and Conservative Mennonites), Hutterites, Schwarzenau Brethren (Old Order Schwarzenau Brethren and Dunkard Brethren Church), River Brethren (Old Order River Brethren and Calvary Holiness Church), Apostolic Christians, Amish (Old Order Amish, New Order Amish, Para-Amish and Beachy Amish), and Charity Christians, as well as Conservative Quakers.\nMany Holiness Christians who practice the doctrine of outward holiness, also practice headcovering (such as the Calvary Holiness Church). The Plymouth Brethren and conservative Reformed and Presbyterian churches, along with Traditionalist Catholics, practice headcovering when praying at home and while attending public liturgies. In many Oriental Orthodox Churches and certain Eastern Orthodox congregations, the custom of women's covering their heads continues in church (and when praying privately at home).\nVeiling of nuns and consecrated virgins.\nA veil forms part of the headdress of some orders of nuns or religious sisters in Catholicism, Lutheranism and Anglicanism; this is why a woman who becomes a nun is said \"to take the veil\". In medieval times married women normally covered their hair outside the house, and a nun's veil is based on secular medieval styles, often reflecting the fashion of widows in their attire. In many institutes, a white veil is used as the \"veil of probation\" during novitiate.\nA black veil is the traditional sign of a professed nun. Some monasteries or communities bestow the black veil at the first profession of vows, but usually it is bestowed with the profession of solemn vows. When the vows have been professed the white veil of a novice will be swapped for the black veil of the professed, and she is usually crowned with a wreath of flowers.\nA veil of consecration, longer and fuller, is used by some orders whose nuns receive the consecration of virgins who are already in solemn vows or who are being consecrated as a virgin in the same ceremony. References to \"consecrated nuns\" in medieval literature refers to solemnly professed nuns who received the consecration of virgins from their bishops, usually some years after their final profession of vows. The reintroduced rite of the consecration of virgins for women living in the world provides, as the Roman Ritual.\nSince the reintroduction of the rite of consecration of virgins for women living in the world in 1970, the newly consecrated virgin receives a veil as a sign of her consecration, as in ancient times.\nThe nuptial symbolism of the rite was displayed particularly in the bestowal of the veil on the virgin by the bishop, as can be found in the writings of Ambrose of Milan and in the oldest liturgical sources.\nAfter the promulgation of Pope Paul VI's decree \"Perfectae caritatis\" on the adaption and renewal of religious life most monastic orders for nuns retained the veil. Regarding other institutes of religious sisters who work as teachers, nurses or in other active apostolates, some wear the veil, while some others have abolished the use of the veil.\nThe fullest versions of the nun's veil cover the top of the head and flow down around and over the shoulders. In western Christianity, it does not wrap around the neck or face. In those orders that retain one, the starched white covering about the face, neck, and shoulders is known as a wimple and is a separate garment.\nThe Catholic Church has revived the ancient practice of women to be consecrated by their bishop as a consecrated virgin living in the world. These virgins are set aside as sacred persons who belong only to Christ and the service of the church. The veil is a bridal one, because the \"velatio virginum\" primarily signified the newly consecrated virgin as the Bride of Christ. In ancient times his veil was called the \"flammeum\" because it was supposed to remind the virgin of the indissoluble nuptial bond she was contracting with Christ. The wearing of the \"flammeum\" for the sacred virgin Bride of Christ arose from the bridal attire of the strictest pagan marriage which did not permit of divorce at the time. The flammeum was a visible reminder that divorce was not possible with Christ, their Divine spouse. \nIn Eastern Orthodoxy and in the Eastern Rites of the Catholic Church, a veil called an \"epanokamelavkion\" is used by both nuns and monks, in both cases covering completely the \"kamilavkion\", a cylindrical hat they both wear. In Slavic practice, when the veil is worn over the hat, the entire headdress is referred to as a \"klobuk\". Nuns wear an additional veil under the \"klobuk\", called an \"apostolnik\", which is drawn together to cover the neck and shoulders as well as the head, leaving the face itself open.\nSome female members of Lutheran and Anglican religious communities also wear a veil, differing according to the traditions of each community.\nVeiling of objects.\nAmong Christian churches which have a liturgical tradition, several different types of veils are used. These veils are often symbolically tied to the veils in the Tabernacle in the wilderness and in Solomon's Temple. The purpose of these veils was not so much to obscure as to shield the most sacred things from the eyes of sinful men. In Solomon's Temple the veil or \"parochet\" was placed between the \"Inner Sanctuary\" and the \"Holy of Holies\". According to the New Testament, this veil in the Second Temple was torn the moment Jesus Christ died on the cross.\n Used to cover the church tabernacle, particularly in the Roman Catholic tradition but in some others as well, when the Eucharist is actually stored in it. The veil is used to remind worshipers that the (usually metal) tabernacle cabinet echoes the tabernacle tent of the Hebrew Scriptures, and signals the tabernacle is actually in use. It may be of any liturgical color, but is most often white (always appropriate for the Eucharist), cloth of gold or silver (which may substitute for any liturgical color aside from violet), or the liturgical color of the day (red, green or violet). It may be simple, unadorned linen or of silk, and may be fringed or otherwise decorated. It is often designed to match the vestments of the celebrants.\n The ciborium is a goblet-like metal vessel with a cover and usually cruciform knob on it, used in the Roman Catholic Church and some others to hold the consecrated hosts of the Eucharist when, for instance, it is stored in the tabernacle or when communion is to be distributed. It may be veiled with a white cloth, usually silk, and a hole for the top knob. This veiling was formerly required but is now optional. In part, it signals that the ciborium actually contains the consecrated Eucharist at the moment.\n During Eucharistic celebrations, a veil is often used to cover the chalice and paten to keep dust and flying insects away from the bread and wine. Often made of rich material, the chalice veils not only have a practical purpose, but are also intended to show honor to vessels used for the sacrament.\n In the West, a single chalice veil is normally used. The veil will usually be the same material and color as the priest's vestments, though it may also be white. It covers the chalice and paten when not actually in use on the altar.\n In the East, three veils are used: one for the chalice, one for the diskos (paten), and a third one (the A\u00ebr) is used to cover both. The veils for the chalice and diskos are usually square with four lappets hanging down the sides, so that when the veil is laid out flat it will be shaped like a cross. The A\u00ebr is rectangular and usually larger than the chalice veil used in the West. The A\u00ebr also figures prominently in other liturgical respects.\n The humeral veil is used in both Roman Catholic and Anglican Churches during the liturgy of Exposition and Benediction of the Blessed Sacrament, and on some other occasions when special respect is shown to the Eucharist. From the Latin for \"shoulders,\" it is an oblong piece of cloth worn as a sort of shawl, used to symbolize a more profound awareness of the respect due to the Eucharist by shielding the celebrant's hands from actually contacting the vessel holding the Eucharist, either a monstrance or ciborium, or in some cases to shield the vessel itself from the eyes of participants. It is worn by only bishops, priests and deacons.\n A vimpa is a veil or shawl worn over the shoulders of servers who carry the miter and crosier in Roman Catholic liturgical functions when they are not being used by the bishop.\n In the early liturgies, there was often a veil that separated the sanctuary from the rest of the church (again, based upon the biblical description of the Tabernacle). In the Byzantine liturgy this veil developed into the iconostasis, but a veil or curtain is still used behind the Royal Doors (the main doors leading into the sanctuary), and is opened and closed at specific times during the liturgy. In the West, it developed into the Rood Veil, and later the Rood Screen, and finally the chancel rail, the low sanctuary railing in those churches that still have this. In some of the Eastern Churches (for instance, the Syrian liturgy) the use of a veil across the entire sanctuary has been retained.\n Some churches veil their crosses during Passiontide with a fine semi-transparent mesh. The color of the veil may be black, red, purple, or white, depending upon the liturgical day and practice of the church. In traditional churches, there will sometimes be curtains placed to either side of the altar.\nThe Veil of Our Lady is a liturgical feast celebrating the protection afforded by the intercessions of the Virgin Mary.\nIslam.\nA variety of headdresses worn by Muslim women and girls in accordance with \"hijab\" (the principle of dressing modestly) are sometimes referred to as veils. The principal aim of the Muslim veil is to cover the \"Awrah\" (parts of the body that are considered private). Many of these garments cover the hair, ears, and throat, but do not cover the face.\nDepending on geography and culture, the veil is referenced and worn in different ways. The \"khimar\" is a type of headscarf. The \"niq\u0101b\" and \"burqa\" are two kinds of veils that cover most of the face except for a slit or hole for the eyes. In Algeria, a larger veil called the \"ha\u00efk\" includes a triangular panel to cover the lower part of the face. In the Arabian Peninsula and parts of North Africa (specifically Saudi Arabia), the abaya is worn constructed like a loose robe covering everything but the face itself. In another location, such as Iran, the chador is worn as the semicircles of fabric are draped over the head like a shawl and held in place under the neck by hand. The two terms for veiling that are directly mentioned in the Quran is the jilbab and the khimar. In these references, the veiling is meant to promote modesty by covering the genitals and breasts of women.\nThe Afghan burqa covers the entire body, obscuring the face completely, except for a grille or netting over the eyes to allow the wearer to see. The \"boshiya\" is a veil that may be worn over a headscarf; it covers the entire face and is made of a sheer fabric so the wearer is able to see through it. It has been suggested that the practice of wearing a veil\u00a0\u2013 uncommon among the Arab tribes prior to the rise of Islam\u00a0\u2013 originated in the Byzantine Empire, and then spread.\nThe Bedouin living in Southern Palestine and the Sinai peninsula also use face veils. The traditional veils in Palestine are short and decorated with coins. In northern Sinai, the veil sections are longer, and often contain embroidery, chains, pendants, beads, \u2026 The Bedouin-style mask is known as al-maghrun, al-baghrah, or al-niqab.\nIn the UAE, Qatar and Oman, a face mask known as the burghu is used, and in Bahrain, Qatar and Oman, the batulah is used.\nIn Central Asian sedentary Muslim areas (today Uzbekistan and Tajikistan) women wore veils which when worn the entire face was shrouded, called Paranja or faranji. The traditional veil in Central Asia worn before modern times was the faranji but it was banned by the Soviet Communists.\nIn Pakistan, upper and middle-class women in towns wear burqas over their normal clothes in public. The burqa is the most visible dress in Pakistan. It is typically a tent-like garment worn over the ordinary clothes and is made of white cotton. Many upper-class women wear a two-piece burqa which is usually black in colour but sometimes navy blue or dark red. It consists of a long cloak and a separate headpiece with a drop-down face veil. Some educated urban women no longer wear the burqa. The burqa is also not worn by rural peasant women who work in the fields. In rural areas only elite women wear burqas.\nRestrictions.\nThe wearing of head and especially face coverings by Muslim women has raised political issues in the West; including in Quebec, and across Europe. Countries and territories that have banned or partially banned the veil include, among others:\nPlaces where headscarves continue to be a contentious political issue include:\nIndian religions.\nIn Indian subcontinent, from 1st century B.C. societies advocated the use of the veil for married Hindu women which came to be known as Ghoonghat. Buddhists attempted to counter this growing practice around 3rd century CE. Rational opposition against veiling and seclusion from spirited ladies resulted in system not becoming popular for several centuries. Under the Medieval Islamic Mughal Empire, various aspects of veiling and seclusion of women was adopted, such as the concept of Purdah and Zenana, partly as an additional protection for women. Purdah became common in the 15th and 16th century, as both \"Vidy\u0101pati\" and \"Chaitanya\" mention it.\nSikhism was highly critical of all forms of strict veiling, Guru Amar Das condemned it and rejected seclusion and veiling of women, which saw decline of veiling among some classes during late medieval period. This was stressed by Kabir.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;poem&gt;Stay, stay, O daughter-in-law - do not cover your face with a veil. In the end, this shall not bring you even half a shell. The one before you used to veil her face; do not follow in her footsteps. The only merit in veiling your face is that for a few days, people will say, \"What a noble bride has come\". Your veil shall be true only if you skip, dance and sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord. Says Kabeer, the soul-bride shall win, only if she passes her life singing the Lord's Praises.&lt;/poem&gt;\u2014\u200a\nBridal veils.\nThe veil is one of the oldest parts of a bridal ensemble, dating as far back as Greek and Roman times, to hide a bride \"from evil spirits who might want to thwart her happiness\" or to frighten the spirits away. The veil also served to hide the bride's face from the groom prior to the wedding, as superstition says that it is bad luck for the groom to see the bride before the ceremony.\nIn the context of weddings in Western Christian culture, the veil has been used to symbolize modesty before God, obedience, and when the veil is white, chastity; the practice of the wedding veil is part of the larger practice of the woman's headcovering in Christianity, rooted in . By the 17th and 18th century, bridal veils were occasionally worn, but were generally out of fashion in Britain and North America, with brides choosing from many other options instead. However, the bridal veil returned to popularity after Queen Victoria wore a veil in her wedding to Prince Albert in 1840. The bridal veil became a status symbol during the Victorian era, and the weight, length, and quality of the veil indicated the bride's social status. Bridal veils worn over the face were not common until the second half of the 19th century.\nThe tradition of a veiled bride's face continues today wherein, a virgin bride, especially in Christian or Jewish culture, enters the marriage ritual with a veiled face and head, and remains fully veiled, both head and face, until the ceremony concludes. After the full conclusion of the wedding ceremony, either the bride's father lifts the veil, presenting the bride to the groom who then kisses her, or the new groom lifts her face veil in order to kiss her. Some see the lifting of the veil as symbolically consummating the marriage, representing another thin membrane (the hymen) that will be physically penetrated on the wedding night. In Orthodox Judaism, as well as among Christians in certain parts of the world such as Eastern Europe, women will then wear a headcovering in public after being married (as well as while worshipping). In Scandinavia, the bridal veil is usually worn under a traditional crown and does not cover the bride's face; instead, the veil is attached to and hangs from the back.\nA bridal veil is not normally worn during a civil marriage ceremony, nor when the bride is remarrying. In these cases, when it is worn, the veil is worn as a fashion accessory as part of the bridal attire, instead of for its symbolism.\nJudaism.\nIn Judaism, the tradition of the bride wearing a veil during the wedding ceremony dates back to biblical times. According to the Torah in , Isaac is brought Rebekah to marry by his father Abraham's servant, and Rebekah took her veil and covered herself when Isaac was approaching.\nIn a traditional Jewish wedding, just before the ceremony, the \"badeken\" takes place, at which the groom places the veil over the bride's face, and either he or the officiating rabbi gives her a blessing. The veil stays on her face until just before the end of the wedding ceremony\u00a0\u2013 when they are legally married according to Jewish law\u00a0\u2013 then the groom helps lift the veil off her face. The most often cited interpretation for the \"badeken\" is that, according to , when Jacob went to marry Rachel, his father-in-law Laban tricked him into marrying Leah, Rachel's older and homelier sister.\nMany say that the veiling ceremony takes place to make sure that the groom is marrying the right bride. Some say that as the groom places the veil over his bride, he makes an implicit promise to clothe and protect her. Finally, by covering her face, the groom recognizes that he is marrying the bride for her inner beauty; while looks will fade with time, his love will be everlasting. In some ultra-orthodox communities, it is a custom for the bride to wear an opaque veil as she is escorted to the groom. This is said to show her complete willingness to enter into the marriage and her absolute trust that she is marrying the right man.\nIn ancient Judaism, the lifting of the veil took place just prior to the consummation of the marriage in sexual union. The uncovering or unveiling that takes place in the wedding ceremony is a symbol of what will take place in the marriage bed. Just as the two become one through their words spoken in wedding vows, so these words are a sign of the physical oneness that they will consummate later on. The lifting of the veil is a symbol and anticipation of this.\nChristianity.\nIn Christian theology, St. Paul's words concerning how marriage symbolizes the union of Christ and His Church underlie part of the tradition of veiling in the marriage ceremony. In historic Christian traditions, the veil is seen as \"a visible sign that the woman is under the authority of a man\" and that she is submitting herself to her husband's Christ-like leadership and loving care. As such, the practice of the wedding veil is part of the wider ordinance of the woman's headcovering in Christianity, rooted in .\nThe removing of the veil can be seen as a symbol of the temple veil that was torn when Christ died, giving believers direct access to God, and in the same way, the bride and the groom, once married, now have full access to one another.\nChurch of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.\nIn 2019 a letter by the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints President Russell M. Nelson and his counselors, Dallin H. Oaks and Henry B. Eyring, declared that \"Veiling the faces of deceased, 'endowed' [members who have been through a temple ceremony] women prior to burial is optional\"; previously it had been required. The letter went on to say that such veiling, \"may be done if the sister expressed such a desire while she was living. In cases where the wishes of the deceased sister on this matter are not known, her family should be consulted.\" That same year veiling of women during part of the temple endowment ceremony was also made optional where it had been required before.\nMourning veils.\nVeils remained a part of Western mourning dress customs into the early 20th century. The tradition of widow's veiling has its roots in the attire of a Christian nun, which symbolized modesty and chastity, and the mourning veil became a way to demonstrate sincerity and piety. The mourning veil was commonly seen as a means of shielding the mourner and hiding her grief, and, on the contrary, seen by some women as a means of publicly expressing their emotions. Widows in the Victorian era were expected to wear mourning veils for at least three months and up to two and a half years, depending on the custom.\nMourning veils have also been sometimes perceived as expressions of elegance or even sex appeal. In a 19th-century American etiquette book one finds: \"Black is becoming, and young widows, fair, plump, and smiling, with their roguish eyes sparkling under their black veils are very seducing\".\nInterpretations.\nOne view is that as a religious item, it is intended to honor a person, object or space. The actual sociocultural, psychological, and sociosexual functions of veils have not been studied extensively but most likely include the maintenance of social distance and the communication of social status and cultural identity.\nA veil also has symbolic interpretations, as something partially concealing, disguising, or obscuring.\nTradition of veil use in China.\nChina has a long tradition of wearing veils. Veils were used to cover the face and had been used since the Han dynasty, where they were called \"facial clothes\" or \"facial hats\"; they were used to protect its wearer's face from the wind and sand when they would ride horses or when they would travel on long trips.202 In the Tang dynasty, mili and weimao were used to cover the face when horse riding.202 In the Song dynasty, women would wear a veiled hat or veil when they left their houses, honggaitou on their wedding, a veil called 'white jade silk' during their mourning period.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "68898", "revid": "41195652", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68898", "title": "Uzziah (disambiguation)", "text": ""}
{"id": "68899", "revid": "15881234", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68899", "title": "Mol, Belgium", "text": "Mol () is a municipality located in the Belgian province of Antwerp. The municipality only comprises the town of Mol. In 2021, Mol had a total population of 37,021 inhabitants. The total area is 114.19\u00a0km2.\nMol is a popular holiday resort, with many lakes surrounded by woods. There are two main tourist lakes:\nFurthermore, there is a Sun Parks holiday centre called \"Kempense Meren\" with an indoor swimming pool. The museum of Jakob Smits is located in the former vicarage of Mol-Sluis. This displays works of the artist Jakob Smits (1855\u20131928) and other painters of the Molse School, who were attracted to the area by its rustic views including several windmills (of which only one remains).\nIn the north-east corner of Mol, near the Dutch border, lies the Norbertine Postel Abbey. Mol is also home to the SCK\u2022CEN Belgian Nuclear Research Centre, the Flemish institute for technological research (VITO) and a European School. The first industries in Mol were the \"Vieille Montagne\" company and the explosive factory \"N.V. La Forcite\". In 1872 the \"Sabli\u00e8res et Carri\u00e8res R\u00e9unies\" (SCR), now Sibelco, was founded in order to extract the silica sand layers in Mol for industrial applications. The company became the global market leader in this sector with production sites all over the world.\nThe 15 chapels were built by Pater Helsen in 1815 with 14 co-workers of the region. It is a protected monument.\nMunicipality structure.\nThe municipality of Mol is divided in different townships respectively named:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Sister-inline/styles.css\"/&gt; Media related to at Wikimedia Commons"}
{"id": "68900", "revid": "294180", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68900", "title": "Arctic islands (Canada)", "text": ""}
{"id": "68901", "revid": "41354242", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68901", "title": "Uzzi", "text": "Uzzi is a given name. One derivation is biblical, from \"Uzz\u00ee\" () meaning \"my strength\". The name can also be transliterated as Uzi. It may be a nickname for Uzza/Uzzah, Uzzia/Uzziah, and Uziel/Uzziel.\nBiblical characters with this name:\nAccording to Samaritan tradition, Uzzi hid the tent sanctuary of the desert wandering (Mishkan) in a cave on Mount Gerizim when the Israelites introduced the cult in Shiloh, which was illegitimate from the Samaritan point of view.\nOther people with this given name include:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAttribution.\n\u00a0This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain:\u00a0\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n Name listThis page or section lists people that share the same given name. "}
{"id": "68902", "revid": "1319816738", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68902", "title": "Uzzah", "text": "Biblical figure who died from touching the Ark of the Covenant\nAccording to the Tanakh, \u05e2\u05d6\u05d4, Uzzah or Uzza, meaning \"Her Strength\", was an Israelite whose death is associated with touching the Ark of the Covenant. The account of Uzzah appears in two places in scripture: 2 Samuel 6:3-8 and 1 Chronicles 13:7-11.\nUzzah was the son of Abinadab, in whose house the men of Kirjath-Jearim placed the Ark when it was brought back from the land of the Philistines. With his brother Ahio, he drove the cart on which the ark was placed when David sought to bring it up to Jerusalem. When the oxen stumbled, making the ark tilt, Uzzah steadied the ark with his hand, in direct violation of the divine law, and he was immediately killed by the Lord for his error. David, displeased because Yahweh had killed Uzzah, called the place where this occurred \"Perez-uzzah\", which means \"to burst out against Uzzah\".\nDavid was afraid to bring the ark any further, and placed it in the house of Obed-Edom the Gittite for three months. The Lord then blessed Obed-edom and David went and brought up the ark of God into the city of David.\nRabbanic Literature.\nThe Rabbis made various attempts to explain and palliate the death of Uzza. By an \"argumentum a majore ad minus\" proof is offered that if the Ark could bear those who bore it, so much more could it bear itself. By not perceiving this, and thinking that the Ark might be prevented from falling by stopping the oxen, Uzza had brough death on himself. R Johanan thought that \"' al ha-shal\" implied that he died as a result of his act, while R. Eleazar drew from \"shal\" the inference stated that he died \"by\" the Ark; and as the latter belonged to eternity, Uzza in like manner must be immortal (Sotah 35a; Yalk., I Sam. 142, ed. Wilna, 1898.)\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "68903", "revid": "1304456326", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68903", "title": "Humbert III, Count of Savoy", "text": "Count of Savoy\nHumbert III (1136 \u2013 4 March 1189), surnamed the Blessed, was Count of Savoy from 1148 to 1189. His parents were Amadeus III of Savoy and Mahaut of Albon. He ceded rights and benefits to monasteries and played a decisive role in the organisation of Hautecombe Abbey. It is said that he would rather have been a monk than a sovereign. On the death of his third wife, he retired to Hautecombe, but then changed his mind and, by his fourth wife finally had a son, Thomas. He sided with the Guelph party of Pope Alexander III against the Ghibelline emperor Frederick Barbarossa. The result was an invasion of his states twice: in 1174 Susa was set on fire, and in 1187 Henry VI banished him from the Holy Roman Empire and wrested away most of his domains. He was left with only the valleys of Susa and Aosta. He died at Chamb\u00e9ry in 1189. He was the first prince buried at Hautecombe. His memorial day is 4 March.\nEarly life.\nHumbert III was born around 1136 in the castle of Avigliana, Piedmont, near Turin, to Count Amadeus III of Savoy and Mahaut (Mathilde), Countess of Albon and Vienne. Humbert III is an important figure in medieval society, as attested in the history of the House of Savoy. His life was characterised by certain key features, including mysticism, borne of a vocation and tradition of the contemplative life. This he fostered in parallel with, and notwithstanding, his role as military leader and politician, undertaken reluctantly and only to safeguard his family\u2019s dynastic claims.\nWith his father he had inherited from his grandfather, Humbert II, the dream of reuniting the fragmented Kingdom of Burgundy, in sharp contrast with a centralising policy of the French royal family. In those efforts, Humbert was supported by Frederick I Barbarossa, but found himself required to quell neighbouring feudal lords settled among his domains. Like his father, himself dying young when his son was not yet of age, his education was entrusted to Amadeus of Lausanne, former abbot of Hautecombe. Under his guidance the young Humbert made great progress in studies and spiritual formation, foregoing worldly glamour and giving himself to prayer, meditation and penance. To better achieve this he frequently withdrew to Hautecombe Abbey, on the banks of Lake Bourget in Savoy, founded by his father. It was always with expressions of regret when duties to the family and the Savoyard nobility called him back to political affairs.\nMarriages.\nAmadeus III was a pilgrim in the Holy Land in 1122. He went there through the offices of Pope Callixtus II, and in 1146 he participated in the Second Crusade, and died on the island of Cyprus in Nicosia on 1 April 1148, where he was buried, leaving the twelve-year-old Humbert as heir. Although still at an early age, in 1151 Humbert was betrothed to Faidiva, daughter of Alphonse Jourdain, Count of Toulouse. She soon died without issue. He later married Gertrude, daughter of Thierry, Count of Flanders and Sibylla of Anjou. This second marriage was annulled.\nIn 1164, Humbert married Clementia of Z\u00e4hringen, by whom he had two daughters: Alice and Sofia. She died in 1173, and he decided to retire to Hautecombe, but not for long. In 1177, the nobility convinced him to marry for the fourth time. As a wife, he took Beatrice, daughter G\u00e9raud I of M\u00e2con and Maurette de Salins. They had a son, Thomas, to continue the dynasty. Beatrice also bore him a daughter who died at the age of seven.\nReign.\nHumbert's reign lasted forty years, and was characterized by struggles with the Holy Roman emperor, various lords and count-bishops. The main reason for conflict consisted in the patronage of the bishop of Turin by Frederick Barbarossa, who dreamed of undisturbed dominance of the capital of Piedmont. This led to a gradual reduction of the possessions and authority of Humbert III on the Italian side, leaving him with the rump territories of the valleys of Susa and Aosta. In 1174 the emperor pillaged the town of Susa.\nIn 1187, he was banished from the Holy Roman Empire by Henry VI for supporting the emperor's opponents. He did not retire, as has been said, to his Alpine domains, devoting himself in particular to the practice of personal virtues and fraternal charity. He also promoted the foundation of Precettoria of St. Anthony of Ranverso at Buttigliera Alta, not far from the town of Avigliana, entrusting it to Antoniani from Vienne, France.\nDeath.\nThe death of Humbert III, 4 March 1189 in Chamb\u00e9ry, Savoy at the age of fifty-two, was mourned sincerely by all the people. He was the first prince of Savoy to be buried in Hautecombe Abbey, which has since become a burial place for the dynasty.\nVeneration.\nThe spirituality of Humbert undoubtedly blossomed in an environment of ancient Christian traditions, favoured especially by the example of his father, a pilgrim and crusader in the Holy Land, and of his tutor, Amadeus, Bishop of Lausanne. However, Humbert's life was full of contradictions: He was a lover of peace but had frequent hostilities and wars. He was penitent, ascetic, and contemplative, but was forced to take the reins of government, during which time he had a life of action, and found himself forced into marriage in order to have an heir. However, he let unmistakable signs of great moral balance, severity with himself and indulgence and love of neighbour. He was a benefactor to churches, monasteries, and charitable causes, the care of the poor. Throughout his life, he supported Hautecombe Abbey. In 1188 he founded the Monastery of Sant'Antonio di Ranverso.\nHumbert was venerated by many immediately after his death. Miracles were reportedly wrought through his intercession. In Aosta, he is depicted on the facade of the city's cathedral. He is mentioned by Alphonsus Ligouri as a particularly pious monk.\nIn 1838, Charles Albert, King of Sardinia and his descendant, succeeded in having him beatified by Pope Gregory XVI. The king's efforts on behalf of Boniface of Savoy, Archbishop of Canterbury, also succeeded. In Italy, Humbert is still remembered in particular at Racconigi, where the Royal Sanctuary of the Madonna delle Grazie houses a picture of him.\nFamily.\nHumbert had four wives:&lt;br&gt;\n* Sofia, (1165\u20131202), married Azzo VI of Este\n* Alicia, (1166\u20131178), betrothed to John of England\n* Thomas (born 1178)\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "68904", "revid": "37698590", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68904", "title": "Michael J. Fox", "text": "Canadian-American actor and activist (born 1961)\nMichael Andrew Fox (born June 9, 1961), known professionally as Michael J. Fox, is a Canadian and American actor and activist. Beginning his career as a child actor in the 1970s, he rose to prominence portraying Alex P. Keaton on the NBC sitcom \"Family Ties\" (1982\u20131989) and Marty McFly in the \"Back to the Future\" film trilogy (1985\u20131990). Fox went on to star in films such as \"Teen Wolf\" (1985), \"The Secret of My Success\" (1987), \"Casualties of War\" (1989), \"Doc Hollywood\" (1991) and \"The Frighteners\" (1996). He returned to television on the ABC sitcom \"Spin City\" in the lead role of Mike Flaherty (1996\u20132000).\nIn 1998, Fox disclosed his 1991 diagnosis of Parkinson's disease. He became an advocate for finding a cure and founded The Michael J. Fox Foundation in 2000 to help fund research. Worsening symptoms forced him to reduce his acting work.\nFox voiced the lead roles in the \"Stuart Little\" films (1999\u20132005) and the animated film \"\" (2001). He continued to make guest appearances on television, including comedy-drama \"Rescue Me\" (2009), the legal drama \"The Good Wife\" (2010\u20132016) and spin-off \"The Good Fight\" (2020) and the comedy series \"Curb Your Enthusiasm\" (2011, 2017). Fox's last major role was the lead on the short-lived sitcom \"The Michael J. Fox Show\" (2013\u20132014). He officially retired in 2020 due to his declining health, though he has made periodic acting appearances since then.\nFox has won five Emmy Awards, four Golden Globe Awards, two Screen Actors Guild Awards and a Grammy Award. He was appointed an Officer of the Order of Canada in 2010 and was inducted to Canada's Walk of Fame in 2000 and the Hollywood Walk of Fame in 2002. For his advocacy of a cure for Parkinson's disease, he received the Jean Hersholt Humanitarian Award from the Academy of Motion Pictures Arts and Sciences in 2022 and the Presidential Medal of Freedom in 2025.\nEarly life.\nFox was born on June 9, 1961, in Edmonton, Alberta, Canada. His mother, Phyllis Evelyn (n\u00e9e\u00a0Piper; 1929\u20132022), was a payroll clerk and actress, while his father, William Nelson \"Bill\" Fox (1928\u20131990), served as a regular soldier in the Royal Canadian Corps of Signals. When they met in Ladner, a village in the then-district municipality of Delta, British Columbia, Phyllis was working for \"The Ladner Optimist\", a local newspaper, and Bill was serving at the nearby Vancouver Wireless Station. The couple married in 1950. Fox is the fifth of six children, with three sisters and two brothers. Phyllis's father was an English emigrant, and her mother was an emigrant from Belfast, Northern Ireland. Bill's mother was born in Alberta to American parents, and his father was an English emigrant.\nThe Fox family lived in various cities and towns across Canada due to Bill's career. Bill served in the army for 25 years, retiring in 1971. The family moved to Burnaby, British Columbia, the same year. Bill worked as a dispatcher for the Delta Police Department from the following year to 1985. Fox attended Burnaby Central Secondary School and has a theatre named for him at Burnaby South Secondary School. At the age of 16, he starred in the Canadian television series \"Leo and Me\", produced by the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation. Fox moved to Los Angeles, California, in 1979 to further his acting career.\nFox was discovered by producer Ronald Shedlo and made his American debut in the television film \"Letters from Frank\", credited under the name \"Michael Fox\". However, when he registered with the Screen Actors Guild, he discovered that Michael Fox, a veteran actor, was already registered under that name. Fox explained in his memoir \"Lucky Man\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The Screen Actors Guild prohibits any two members from working under the same stage name, and they already had a 'Michael Fox' on the books. My middle name is Andrew, but 'Andrew Fox' or 'Andy Fox' didn't cut it for me. 'Michael A. Fox' was even worse, the word fox having recently come into use as a synonym for attractive. (Presumptuous?) It also sounded uncomfortably Canadian \u2013 Michael Eh? Fox \u2013 but maybe I was just being oversensitive. And then I remembered one of my favorite character actors, Michael J. Pollard, the guileless accomplice in Bonnie and Clyde. I stuck in the J, which sometimes I tell people stands for either Jenuine or Jenius, and resubmitted my forms.\nActing career.\n1980\u20131984: Early roles and television.\nFox's first feature film roles were \"Midnight Madness\" (1980) and \"Class of 1984\" (1982), credited in both as Michael Fox. Shortly afterward, he began playing \"Young Republican\" Alex P. Keaton in the show \"Family Ties\", which aired on NBC for seven seasons from 1982 to 1989. In an interview with Jimmy Fallon in April 2014, Fox stated he negotiated the role at a payphone at Pioneer Chicken. He received the role only after Matthew Broderick was unavailable. \"Family Ties\" had been sold to the television network using the pitch \"Hip parents, square kids\", with the parents originally intended to be the main characters. However, the positive reaction to Fox's performance led to his character becoming the focus of the show following the fourth episode. \nBrandon Tartikoff, one of the show's producers, felt that Fox was too short in relation to the actors playing his parents, and tried to have him replaced. Tartikoff reportedly said that \"this is not the kind of face you'll ever find on a lunchbox.\" After his later successes, Fox presented Tartikoff with a custom-made lunchbox with the inscription \"To Brandon: This is for you to put your crow in. Love and Kisses, Michael J.\" Tartikoff kept the lunchbox in his office for the rest of his NBC career.\n1985\u20131990: \"Back to the Future\" and stardom.\nIn January 1985, Fox was cast to replace Eric Stoltz as Marty McFly, a teenager who is accidentally sent back in time from 1985 to 1955 in \"Back to the Future\". Director Robert Zemeckis originally wanted Fox to play Marty, but Gary David Goldberg, the creator of \"Family Ties\", on which Fox was working at the time, refused to allow Zemeckis even to approach Fox. Goldberg felt that, as Meredith Baxter was on maternity leave at the time, Fox's character Alex Keaton was needed to carry the show in her absence. Stoltz was cast and was already filming \"Back to the Future\", but Zemeckis felt that Stoltz was not giving the right type of performance for the humour involved.\nZemeckis quickly replaced Stoltz with Fox, whose schedule was now more open with the return of Baxter. During filming, Fox rehearsed for \"Family Ties\" from 10 a.m. to 6 p.m.; he then rushed to the \"Back to the Future\" set, where he would rehearse and shoot until 2:30\u00a0a.m. This schedule lasted for two full months. \"Back to the Future\" was both a critical and commercial success. The film spent eight consecutive weekends as the number-one movie at the US box office in 1985, and it eventually earned a worldwide total of $381.11 million. \"Variety\" applauded the performances, opining that Fox and his co-star Christopher Lloyd imbued Marty and Doc Brown's friendship with a quality reminiscent of King Arthur and Merlin. Fox's performance in particular was praised, earning him a nomination for Best Actor in a Motion Picture \u2013 Musical or Comedy at the 43rd Golden Globe Awards. The film was followed by two successful sequels, \"Back to the Future Part II\" (1989) and \"Back to the Future Part III\" (1990), which were produced at the same time but released separately. While filming the scene where Buford \"Mad Dog\" Tannen tries to hang Marty in \"Part III\", Fox was allowed to perform the stunt himself as long as he knew where to put his hand on the noose to keep himself from choking; however, on the third take, Fox accidentally placed his hand in the wrong spot, which resulted in him choking, passing out, and nearly dying until Zemeckis noticed him in peril and had him cut down.\nAs a result of working on \"Family Ties\", and his back-to-back hit performances in \"Back to the Future\" and \"Teen Wolf\" (1985), Fox became a teen idol. The VH1 television series \"The Greatest\" later named him among their \"50 Greatest Teen Idols\".\nDuring and immediately after the \"Back to the Future\" trilogy, Fox starred in \"Teen Wolf\" (1985),\" Light of Day\" (1987), \"The Secret of My Success\" (1987), and \"Bright Lights, Big City\" (1988). In \"The Secret of My Success\", Fox played a recent graduate from Kansas State University who moves to New York City, where he deals with the ups and downs of the business world. The film was successful at the box office, grossing $110\u00a0million worldwide. Roger Ebert in the \"Chicago Sun-Times\" wrote, \"Fox provides a fairly desperate center for the film. It could not have been much fun for him to follow the movie's arbitrary shifts of mood, from sitcom to slapstick, from sex farce to boardroom brawls.\"\nIn \"Bright Lights, Big City\", Fox played a fact-checker for a New York magazine who spends his nights partying with alcohol and drugs. The film received mixed reviews, with Hal Hinson in \"The Washington Post\" criticizing Fox by claiming that \"he was the wrong actor for the job\". Meanwhile, Roger Ebert praised the actor's performance: \"Fox is very good in the central role (he has a long drunken monologue that is the best thing he has ever done in a movie)\". During the shooting of \"Bright Lights, Big City\", Fox co-starred again with Tracy Pollan, his on-screen girlfriend from \"Family Ties\". \nFox won three Emmy Awards for \"Family Ties\" in 1986, 1987, and 1988. He won a Golden Globe Award in 1989, the year the show ended. When Fox left the television series \"Spin City\" in 2000, his final episodes made numerous allusions to \"Family Ties\": Michael Gross (who played Alex's father Steven) portrays Mike Flaherty's (Fox's character's) therapist, and there is a reference to an off-screen character named \"Mallory\". Also, when Flaherty becomes an environmental lobbyist in Washington, D.C., he meets a conservative senator from Ohio named Alex P. Keaton, and in one episode Meredith Baxter played Mike's mother.\nFox then starred in \"Casualties of War\" (1989), a dark and violent war drama about the Vietnam War, alongside Sean Penn. \"Casualties of War\" was not a major box office hit, but Fox was praised for his performance. Don Willmott wrote: \"Fox, only one year beyond his \"Family Ties\" sitcom silliness, rises to the challenges of acting as the film's moral voice and sharing scenes with the always intimidating Penn.\" While \"Family Ties\" was ending, his production company Snowback Productions set up a two-year production pact at Paramount Pictures to develop film and television projects.\n1991\u20132001: Further films and acclaim.\nIn 1991, he starred in \"Doc Hollywood\", a romantic comedy about a talented medical doctor who decides to become a plastic surgeon. While moving from Washington, D.C. to Los Angeles, he winds up as a doctor in a small southern town in South Carolina. Michael Caton-Jones, of \"Time Out\", described Fox in the film as \"at his frenetic best\". \"The Hard Way\" was also released in 1991, with Fox playing an undercover actor learning from police officer James Woods. After being privately diagnosed with Parkinson's disease in 1991 and being cautioned he had \"ten good working years left\", Fox hastily signed a three-film contract, appearing in \"For Love or Money\" (1993), \"Life with Mikey\" (1993), and \"Greedy\" (1994). In the mid-1990s Fox played smaller supporting roles in \"The American President\" (1995) and \"Mars Attacks!\" (1996).\nHis last major film role was in \"The Frighteners\" (1996), directed by Peter Jackson. Fox's performance received critical praise, Kenneth Turan in the \"Los Angeles Times\" wrote; \"The film's actors are equally pleasing. Both Fox, in his most successful starring role in some time, and [Trini] Alvarado, who looks rather like Andie MacDowell here, have no difficulty getting into the manic spirit of things.\"\nIn the 1990s and 2000s, Fox took on multiple voice acting roles. He voiced the American Bulldog Chance in Disney's live-action film ' and its sequel ', the titular character in \"Stuart Little\" and its two sequels \"Stuart Little 2\" and ', and Milo James Thatch in Disney's animated film '.\n1996\u20132020: Later career and retirement.\n\"Spin City\" ran from 1996 to 2002 on American television network ABC. The show depicts a fictional New York City government, originally starring Fox as Deputy Mayor Mike Flaherty. Fox served as an executive producer of \"Spin City\" alongside co-creators Bill Lawrence and Gary David Goldberg. He won an Emmy Award for \"Spin City\" in 2000, three Golden Globe Awards in 1998, 1999, and 2000, and two Screen Actors Guild Awards in 1999 and 2000. During the third season, Fox told the cast and crew of the show that he had Parkinson's disease, and during the fourth season, he announced his retirement from the show. A character played by Charlie Sheen replaced his, and he made three more appearances during the final season. In 2002, his Lottery Hill Entertainment production company attempted to set up a pilot for ABC with DreamWorks Television and Touchstone Television company via first-look agreements, but it never went to series.\nIn 2004, Fox guest-starred in two episodes of the comedy-drama \"Scrubs\" \u2013 created by \"Spin City\" creator Bill Lawrence \u2013 as Dr. Kevin Casey, a surgeon with severe obsessive-compulsive disorder. In 2006, he appeared in four episodes of \"Boston Legal\" as a lung cancer patient. The producers brought him back in a recurring role for season three, beginning with the season premiere. Fox was nominated for an Emmy Award for best guest appearance.\nIn 2009, Fox appeared in five episodes of the television series \"Rescue Me\" which earned him an Emmy for Outstanding Guest Actor in a Drama Series. Starting in 2010, Fox played a recurring role in the American drama \"The Good Wife\" as crafty attorney Louis Canning and earned Emmy nominations for three consecutive years. In 2011, Fox portrayed himself in the eighth season of Larry David's \"Curb Your Enthusiasm\", in which David's fictionalized self becomes Fox's neighbour and accuses him of using his Parkinson's disease as a manipulative tool. Fox returned in 2017 for a brief appearance, referencing his prior time on the show.\nIn August 2012, NBC announced that Fox would star in \"The Michael J. Fox Show\", loosely based on his life. It was granted a 22-episode commitment from the network and premiered in September 2013, but was taken off the air after 15 episodes and later cancelled.\nFox has made several appearances in other media. At the 2010 Winter Olympics closing ceremony in Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada, he delivered comedy monologues, along with William Shatner and Catherine O'Hara, in the \"I am Canadian\" part of the show.\nDespite sound-alike A.J. LoCascio voicing Marty McFly in , Fox lent his likeness to the in-game version of Marty alongside Christopher Lloyd. Fox made a special guest appearance in the final episode of the series as an elder version of Marty, as well as his great-grandfather Willie McFly.\nFox appeared in five episodes of the second season of the ABC political drama \"Designated Survivor\", in the recurring role of Ethan West, investigating whether the president was fit to continue in the job.\nIn 2020, Fox retired from acting due to the increasing unreliability of his speech. Fox's memoir, \"No Time Like the Future: An Optimist Considers Mortality\", was released that November. In the book, Fox explained that, \"not being able to speak reliably is a game-breaker for an actor\" and that he was experiencing memory loss. Fox wrote, \"There is a time for everything, and my time of putting in a 12-hour workday, and memorizing seven pages of dialogue, is best behind me...I enter a second retirement. That could change, because everything changes. But if this is the end of my acting career, so be it.\"\n2021\u2013present: \"Still\", and return to acting.\nIn 2021, Fox appeared in one episode of the television series \"Expedition: Back to the Future\", as well as in the animated film \"Back Home Again\". On May 12, 2023, \"\", a documentary which follows his career and Parkinson's disease diagnosis, was released. The film was directed by Davis Guggenheim and made for Apple TV+. It was positively received, winning four of the seven awards it was nominated for at the 75th Primetime Emmy Awards. Stephanie Zacharek on behalf of \"Time\" wrote, \"\"Still: A Michael J. Fox Movie\" reminds us that a person stricken with a disease doesn't \"become\" that disease... What's striking about \"Still\" is how celebratory it is. This isn't the story of a wonderful actor felled by an illness; it's the story of a wonderful actor,\" while Mark Kermode of \"The Guardian\" called it \"An intimate, uplifting star portrait.\"\nOn June 29, 2024, he was featured on the Glastonbury Festival as a guest of British rock band Coldplay, playing the guitar with them on the songs \"Humankind\" and \"Fix You\". Lead singer and pianist Chris Martin mentioned during the show that \"\"Back to the Future\" is the main reason we became a band\".\nOn May 15, 2025, it was revealed that Fox had been cast in the third season of the comedy drama \"Shrinking\", making a return to acting. In June 2025, Fox acted for the National Hockey League's Boston Bruins, playing himself in a video parodying \"Back to the Future\" to promote new uniforms for the team. Fox is a close friend of Bruins president Cam Neely, who also appeared in the video.\nOn October 14, 2025, his fifth book, \"Future Boy: Back to the Future and My Journey Through the Space-Time Continuum\", co-written with Nelle Fortenberry, was published by Flatiron Books. The memoir covers his time on set while filming \"Back to the Future\".\nActivism.\nFox was diagnosed with Parkinson's disease in 1991. He has since become an activist and began the Michael J. Fox Foundation to increase research efforts to find a cure.\nHe has written several memoirs on his experiences. His first book, \"Lucky Man\", focused on how, after seven years of denial of the disease, he set up the Michael J. Fox Foundation, stopped drinking and became an advocate for people living with Parkinson's disease. In 2006, Fox starred in a campaign ad for then-State Auditor of Missouri Claire McCaskill in her successful 2006 Senate campaign against incumbent Jim Talent, expressing her support for embryonic stem cell research. In the ad, he visibly showed the effects of his Parkinson's disease:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;As you might know, I care deeply about stem cell research. In Missouri, you can elect Claire McCaskill, who shares my hope for cures. Unfortunately, Senator Jim Talent opposes expanding stem cell research. Senator Talent even wanted to criminalize the science that gives us the chance for hope. They say all politics is local, but that's not always the case. What you do in Missouri matters to millions of Americans, Americans like me.\u2014\u200a\n\"The New York Times\" called it \"one of the most powerful and talked about political advertisements in years\" and polls indicated that the commercial had a measurable impact on the way voters voted, in an election that McCaskill won. His second book, \"Always Looking Up: The Adventures of an Incurable Optimist\", describes his life between 1999 and 2009, with much of the book centered on how Fox got into campaigning for stem cell research. On March 31, 2009, Fox appeared on \"The Oprah Winfrey Show\" with Mehmet Oz to discuss his condition as well as his book, his family and his primetime special, which aired May 7, 2009, (\"Michael J. Fox: Adventures of an Incurable Optimist\").\nHis work led him to be named one of the 100 people \"whose power, talent or moral example is transforming the world\" in 2007 by \"Time\" magazine. On March 5, 2010, Fox received an honorary doctorate in medicine from Karolinska Institute for his contributions to research in Parkinson's disease. He received an honorary doctorate of laws from the University of British Columbia. His third book, \"A Funny Thing Happened on the Way to the Future: Twists and Turns and Lessons Learned\", was released in 2010.\nOn May 31, 2012, he received an honorary degree of Doctor of Laws from the Justice Institute of British Columbia to recognize his accomplishments as a performer as well as his commitment to raising research funding and awareness for Parkinson's disease. Fox recalled performing in role-playing simulations as part of police recruit training exercises at the Institute early in his career.\nIn 2016, his organization created a raffle to raise awareness for Parkinson's disease and raised $6.75\u00a0million, with the help of Nike, Inc. via two auctions, one in Hong Kong and the other in London.\nIn 2020, his fourth book, \"No Time Like the Future: An Optimist Considers Mortality\", was released.\nAt the 2022 Governors Awards, Fox was awarded the Jean Hersholt Humanitarian Award for his efforts in fighting Parkinson's, having raised over $1\u00a0billion for research. The award was presented by friend Woody Harrelson.\nIn a 2023 interview with Jane Pauley on \"CBS Sunday Morning\", Fox said, \"I'm not gonna lie. It's getting harder. Every day it's tougher.\" He said he has had spinal surgery for a benign tumour and has broken bones in several falls.\nHe was named in \"Time Magazine\"'s 2024 list of influential people in health.\nPersonal life.\nMarriage and family.\nFox met his wife, Tracy Pollan, when she played the role of his girlfriend, Ellen, on \"Family Ties\". The couple married on July 16, 1988, at West Mountain Inn in Arlington, Vermont. They have four children: one son and three daughters. Shortly before the couple's marriage, Fox purchased a estate named Lottery Hill Farm in South Woodstock, Vermont, which he listed in 2012. In 1997, Fox purchased an apartment on Fifth Avenue within the Upper East Side, Manhattan, where he and his family lived primarily until 2020. The same year, Fox and Pollan built an estate on of farmland in Sharon, Connecticut, which he listed in 2016. In 2007, Fox purchased a house in Quogue, New York, where he and his family lived part-time and spent the early months of the COVID-19 pandemic. In 2021, Fox sold the house and moved to Santa Barbara, California, with his family; they took up residence in Malibu several months later.\nCitizenship and politics.\nFox acquired US citizenship in 2000 but remains a Canadian citizen as well. He provided a light-hearted segment during the 2010 Winter Olympics' closing ceremony in Vancouver on February 28, 2010, when he expressed how proud he is to be Canadian. On June 4, 2010, the city of Burnaby granted him the Freedom of the City. Fox endorsed Pete Buttigieg prior to the 2020 United States presidential election.\nParkinson's disease.\nFox started displaying symptoms of early-onset Parkinson's disease in early 1991 while shooting the film \"Doc Hollywood\" and was diagnosed shortly thereafter. Though his initial symptoms were only a twitching little finger and a sore shoulder, he was told that within a few years he would not be able to work. The causes of Parkinson's disease are not well understood, and may include genetic and environmental factors. Fox is one of at least four members of the cast and crew of \"Leo and Me\" who developed early-onset Parkinson's. According to Fox, this is not enough people to be defined as a cluster so it has not been well researched. In 2020, he told Hadley Freeman of \"The Guardian\": \"I can think of a thousand possible scenarios: I used to go fishing in a river near paper mills and eat the salmon I caught; I've been to a lot of farms; I smoked a lot of pot in high school when the government was poisoning the crops. But you can drive yourself crazy trying to figure it out.\"\nAfter his diagnosis, Fox began drinking heavily and grew depressed. In 1992, he eventually sought help and stopped drinking altogether. Fox went public with his Parkinson's disease in 1998 and has become a strong advocate for Parkinson's disease research. His foundation, The Michael J. Fox Foundation, was created to help advance every promising research path to curing Parkinson's disease. Since 2010, he has led a $100-million effort, which is the Foundation's landmark observational study, to discover the biological markers of Parkinson's disease with the Parkinson's Progression Markers Initiative (PPMI).\nFox manages the symptoms of his Parkinson's disease with the drug carbidopa/levodopa. He had a thalamotomy in 1998.\nIn \"Lucky Man\", Fox wrote that he did not take his medication prior to his testimony before the Senate Appropriations Subcommittee in 1999.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I had made a deliberate choice to appear before the subcommittee without medication. It seemed to me that this occasion demanded that my testimony about the effects of the disease, and the urgency we as a community were feeling, be seen as well as heard. For people who had never observed me in this kind of shape, the transformation must have been startling.In an interview with NPR in April 2002, Fox explained what he does when he becomes symptomatic:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt; Well, actually, I've been erring on the side of caution\u2014I think 'erring' is actually the right word\u2014in that I've been medicating perhaps too much, in the sense [that] ... the symptoms ... people see in some of these interviews that [I] have been on are actually dyskinesia, which is a reaction to the medication. Because if I were purely symptomatic with Parkinson's symptoms, a lot of times speaking is difficult. There's a kind of a cluttering of speech and it's very difficult to sit still, to sit in one place. You know, the symptoms are different, so I'd rather kind of suffer the symptoms of dyskinesia ... this kind of weaving and this kind of continuous thing is much preferable, actually, than pure Parkinson's symptoms. So that's what I generally do ... I haven't had any, you know, problems with pure Parkinson's symptoms in any of these interviews, because I'll tend to just make sure that I have enough Sinemet in my system and, in some cases, too much. But to me, it's preferable. It's not representative of what I'm like in my everyday life. I get a lot of people with Parkinson's coming up to me saying, 'You take too much medication.' I say, 'Well, you sit across from Larry King and see if you want to tempt it.'\nFilmography.\nTelevision.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"template:sticky header/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAwards and honours.\nOver his career Fox won five Emmy Awards, four Golden Globe Awards, two Screen Actors Guild Awards and a Grammy Award. He was also appointed an Officer of the Order of Canada in 2010, along with being inducted to Canada's Walk of Fame in 2000 and the Hollywood Walk of Fame in 2002. For his advocacy of a cure for Parkinson's disease he received the Jean Hersholt Humanitarian Award from the Academy of Motion Pictures Arts and Sciences in 2022.\nExplanatory notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "68906", "revid": "19295592", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68906", "title": "Uriah (prophet)", "text": "Biblical prophet, son of Shemaiah\nUriah (or Urijah in some older English translations) is a prophet and martyr mentioned in the Book of Jeremiah.\nBiblical narrative.\nHe is described as being the son of Shemaiah from Kiriath-Jearim. During the reign of Jehoiakim, king of Judah, he fled into Egypt from the cruelty of the king, but having been brought back he was beheaded and his body \"cast into the graves of the common people.\" His life shows one possible consequence of giving biblical prophecy. \nHe spoke the same message as Jeremiah did but unlike Jeremiah he ended up being killed. There is some discussion as to why one was killed and the other was not.\nIn Islam.\nIn Islam, Ury\u0101 ibn Sham\u0101y\u0101 (Arabic: \u0623\u0648\u0631\u064a\u0627 \u0627\u0628\u0646 \u0634\u0645\u0627\u064a\u0627) has no mention in the Quran nor Hadith. Some people consider him to be an unmentioned prophet. \nLachish Letters.\nWhile it is not certain, there is a scholarly opinion that Uriah might be referenced in the Lachish letters. See Lachish letters.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "68907", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68907", "title": "X-efficiency", "text": ""}
{"id": "68908", "revid": "22753251", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68908", "title": "Tyropoeon Valley", "text": "Valley in Jerusalem\nTyropoeon Valley (Greek: i.e., \"Valley of the Cheesemakers\" or \"Cheesemongers\") is the name given by the first-century Jewish-Roman historian Josephus (http://) to the valley or rugged ravine, which in his times separated Jerusalem's Temple Mount (Mount Moriah) from the Western Hill or Mount Zion, and emptied into the valley of Hinnom. In modern scholarly terms it is also known as the central valley/Central Valley of Jerusalem.\nNames, etymology.\nIn the ancient Copper Scroll this valley is called in Hebrew the Outer Valley (3Q15 col.8, line 4).\nThe name used by Josephus, (), possibly arose as an ancient mistranslation from Hebrew to the Greek of Josephus's book; Semitic languages use the same root for \"outer\" and \"congeal\".\nDescription, history.\nThe Tyropoeon, filled over the centuries with a vast accumulation of debris, and almost a plain, was spanned by bridges, the most noted of which was Zion Bridge, which was probably the ordinary means of communication between the royal palace on Zion and the temple.\nThe Western Wall of the Temple Mount rose up from the bottom of this valley to the height of 84 feet, where it was on a level with the area, and above this, and as a continuance of it, the wall of Solomon's cloister rose to the height of about 50 feet, \"so that this section of the wall would originally present to view a stupendous mass of masonry scarcely to be surpassed by any mural masonry in the world.\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "68909", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68909", "title": "Telecommunications in Armenia", "text": "Telecommunications in Armenia involves the availability and use of electronic devices and services, such as the telephone, television, radio or computer, for the purpose of communication. The various telecommunications systems found and used in Armenia includes radio, television, fixed and mobile telephones, and the internet.\nMobile.\nAs of 2017, Armenia has 3.5 million mobile subscribers in total, and a 120% penetration rate.\nThere are three mobile phone operators currently in Armenia: Viva, Team and Ucom. All three offer both 2G and 3G as well as 4G services. All three networks are widely modern and reliable with shops located in major towns and cities where one can purchase a sim card or get assistance if needed. Most unlocked mobile phones are able to be used on roaming, however, network charges apply. Ucom and Viva are often recommended to tourists due to the variety of tariffs available and the help available in a variety of languages.\nAs of 2012, approximately 90% of all main lines are digitized. The remaining 10% is in modernization process.\nInternational system.\nYerevan is connected to the Trans-Asia-Europe fiber-optic cable via Georgia. Additional international service is available by microwave radio relay and landline connections to other countries of the Commonwealth of Independent States, the Moscow international switch and by satellite.\nThe main backbones of Armenian networks are made by E3 or STM-1 lines via microwave units across whole country with many passive retranslations.\nWire telephone services.\nTraditionally, Armenia has well-developed landline telephone services. According to official statistic data of the International Telecommunication Union, as of 2017 there were 505,190 fixed telephone service subscribers in Armenia (residents and businesses) or 17.24 subscribers per 100 inhabitants. The number of fixed telephone users have significantly declined as compared with the previous 10 years from 20.41 in 2006. The main reason for the decline is mobile-fixed substitution.\nRadio.\nAs of 2008, Armenia has 9 AM stations, 17 FM stations, and one shortwave station. Additionally, there are approximately 850,000 radios in existence.\nThe primary network provider is TRBNA.\nTelevision.\nArmenia has 48 private television stations alongside 2 public networks with major Russian channels widely available throughout the country. In 2008, TRBNA upgraded the main circuit to a digital distribution system based on DVB-IP and MPEG2 standards. According to the Television Association Committee of Armenia, TV penetration rate is 80% according to 2011 data.\nInternet.\nAs of 2009[ [update]], there were approximately 1,400,000 Internet users and approximately 65,279 Internet hosts in Armenia. The country code (Top level domain) for Armenia is .am, which has been used for AM radio stations and for domain hacks.\nThe national communications company Armentel's (now Telecom Armenia OJSC) only fiber optic connection to the Internet enters Armenia through Georgia (via Marneuli) and then connects to the rest of the Internet via an undersea fiber-optic cable in the Black Sea. Armenia is connected to the Trans-Asia-Europe fiber-optic cable system via Georgia, which runs along the railroad from Poti to Tbilisi to the Armenian border near Marneuli. At Poti, the TAE cable connects to the undersea Georgia-Russia system KAFOS which then connects to the Black Sea Fiber Optic Cable System. The BSFOCS is co-owned by Armentel.\nGNC-Alfa is the largest independent internet and data provider in Armenia with 1,500\u00a0km fibre-optic cable infrastructure, and covering 70% of Armenia.\nDial-up.\nDial-up was the main type of connectivity in Armenia for several years. The United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) supported dial-up internet, starting with an office in Armenia in 1997, and developing a network called \"Freenet\" that reached 6000 users by the year 2000, with 1000 websites and each user having 3 Mb of email storage space and 3 Mb of website storage. By 2004, usage grew to 21,000 users and 3000 websites, with increased storage. A local \"Yerevan Internet Exchange\" was established, initial based on radio connections and by 2004 mostly on DSL connections. The UNDP viewed the role of the internet as promoting democracy, with online forums discussing human rights, the environment, political parties and the Armenian constitution. In 2008, dial-up connections expanded when Telecom Armenia OJSC (Beeline TM) started operation of an ADSL network and together with VivaCell-MTS (now Viva Armenia) and Orange Armenia also introduced portable USB-modems, which are operated mainly in 3G networks and are still very popular in rural areas especially in small mountainous villages where landline connectivity is not available.\nBroadband.\nAccording to official statistics from the International Telecommunication Union, the number of broadband subscribers in Armenia in 2017 was 315,319 users or 10.76 users per 100 persons.\nADSL.\nA major part of DSL connectivity is offered by Telecom Armenia OJSC (Beeline TM). Some other ISPs (Arminco, WEB, Bionet and others) also offer DSL connectivities mainly using leased infrastructure of Telecom Armenia OJSC.\nWiMAX.\nRapid development of WiMAX was recorded in 2008\u20132010. Two WiMAX providers, namely Icon Communications and Cornet Ltd. operating in the 3.6\u20133.8\u00a0GHz band using IEEE 802.16e reached 2000 users each, but shortly disappeared from the market due to strong competition with ADSL and FTTB operators. Cornet was closed and Icon Communications was acquired by Telecom Armenia OJSC (Beeline TM).\nFTTB.\nFibre to the building broadband connectivity is offered by at least four major operators, namely Viva Armenia, Ucom, Telecom Armenia OJSC (operated under Beeline TM) and GNC-Alfa (operated under Rostelecom TM). All three companies offer triple play services including internet, IPTV and telephone services.\nInternet censorship.\nListed as engaged in substantial filtering in the political area and selective filtering in the social, conflict/security, and internet tools areas by the OpenNet Initiative (ONI) in November 2010.\nAccess to the internet in Armenia is largely unfettered, although evidence of second and third-generation filtering is mounting. Armenia's political climate is volatile and largely unpredictable. In times of political unrest, the government has not hesitated to put in place restrictions on the internet as a means to curtail public protest and discontent. According to Article 11 of the Law of the Republic of Armenia on Police, law enforcement has the right to block content to prevent criminal activity.\nArmenia's internet access is delivered by Russian providers, occasionally resulting in censorship by Russian ISPs. In 2012 Russian authorities blocked kavkazcenter.com, resulting in it being blocked in Armenia. In 2014 five other websites were blocked due to filtering by the Russian telecommunications regulator Roskomnadzor. ISPs claimed the blocks were due to technical error and were removed.\n2011 Armenian internet outage.\nThe 2011 Armenian internet outage occurred in April 2011 when an elderly woman from Georgia accidentally cut through an underground cable giving internet access to Armenia.\nInternational cooperation.\nArmenia is a member of the European Telecommunications Satellite Organization, the International Telecommunications Satellite Organization, the International Telecommunication Union, and the International Amateur Radio Union.\nArmenia has also ratified the Budapest Convention on Cybercrime and the Constitution and Convention of the International Telecommunication Union.\nIn 2019, Armenia joined the \"EU's Cybersecurity East Project\" by the European Union Agency for Cybersecurity. The project aims at improving cybersecurity and fostering cooperation with the EU.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n "}
{"id": "68911", "revid": "13875983", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68911", "title": "Telecommunications in Australia", "text": " \nTelecommunications in Australia refers to communication in Australia through electronic means, using devices such as telephone, television, radio or computer, and services such as the telephony and broadband networks. Telecommunications have always been important in Australia given the \"tyranny of distance\" with a dispersed population. Governments have driven telecommunication development and have a key role in its regulation.\nHistory.\nColonial period.\nPrior to Federation of Australia in 1901, each of the six Australian colonies had its own telephony communications network. The Australian networks were government assets operating under colonial legislation modelled on that of Britain. The UK Telegraph Act 1868 for example empowered the Postmaster-General to \"acquire, maintain and work electric telegraphs\" and foreshadowed the 1870 nationalisation of competing British telegraph companies.\nAustralia's first telephone service, connecting the Melbourne and South Melbourne offices of Robison Brothers, a Melbourne engineering firm, was launched in 1879. The private Melbourne Telephone Exchange Company opened Australia's first telephone exchange in August 1880. Around 7,757 calls were handled in 1884.\nThe nature of the networks meant that regulation in Australia was undemanding: network personnel were government employees or agents, legislation was enhanced on an incremental basis and restrictions could be achieved through infrastructure. All the colonies ran their telegraph networks at a deficit through investment in infrastructure and subsidisation of regional access, generally with bipartisan support.\nGovernment-operated post office and telegraph networks \u2013 the largest parts of the bureaucracy \u2013 were combined into a single department in each colony on the model of the UK Post Office: South Australia in 1869, Victoria in 1870, Queensland in 1880 and New South Wales in 1893.\nAt Federation (1901).\nAt Federation, the colonial networks (staff, switches, wires, handsets, buildings etc.) were transferred to the Commonwealth Postmaster-General's Department responsible for domestic postal, telephone and, telegraph services becoming the responsibility of the first Postmaster-General (PMG), a federal. With 16,000 staff (and assets of over \u00a36 million) the PMG accounted for 80% of the new federal bureaucracy.\nPublic phones were available in a handful of post offices. Subscriber telephones were initially restricted to major businesses, government agencies, institutions and wealthier residences. Eight million telegrams were sent that year over 43,000 miles of line.\nThere were around 33,000 phones across Australia, with 7,502 telephone subscribers in inner Sydney and 4,800 in the Melbourne central business district.\nOverseas cable links to Australia remained in private hands, reflecting the realities of imperial politics, demands on the new government's resources, and perceptions of its responsibilities.\nAfter Federation.\nA trunk line between Melbourne (headquarters of the PMG Department) and Sydney was established in 1907, with extension to Adelaide in 1914, Brisbane in 1923, Perth in 1930 and Hobart in 1935.\nOn 12 July 1906 the first Australian wireless overseas messages were sent between Point Lonsdale, Victoria and Devonport, Tasmania. Australia and New Zealand ratified the 1906 Berlin Radio-telegraph Convention in 1907. The PMG department became responsible for some international shortwave services, particularly from the 1920s and for a new Coastal Radio Service in 1911, with the first of a network of stations operational in February 1912.\nThe Sydney\u2013Melbourne co-axial cable was officially opened on 9 April 1962.\nThe coaxial cable infrastructure supported the introduction of subscriber trunk dialling between the cities and live television link-ups. After its commissioning in April 1962 the cable carried telegraph and telephone traffic. It also provided the first inter-city television transmission in Australia, allowing simultaneous television broadcasting in Melbourne and Sydney for the first time.\nOptus was formed as AUSSAT, a government owned corporation, in 1981. It was privatized later in the 1980s under the Hawke Labor government. Telstra (previously known as Telecom), another government owned asset, was also privatized in 1997 under the Howard Liberal government.\nBroadcasting in Australia.\nAustralia developed its own radio broadcasting system, through its own engineers, manufacturers, retailers, newspapers, entertainment services, and news agencies. Initially hobbyists and amateurs were dominant, however with the Commonwealth Government setting up the first radio system, and business interests becoming increasingly involved, hobbyists and amateurs were marginalised. The Australian Labor Party was especially interested in radio because it allowed them to bypass the newspapers, which were mostly controlled by their opposition. Both parties agreed on the need for a national system, and in 1932 set up the Australian Broadcasting Commission was set up as a government agency largely separate from political interference.\nThe first commercial broadcasters, originally known as \"B\" class stations were on the air as early as 1925. Many were sponsored by newspapers in Australia, by theatrical interests, by amateur radio enthusiasts and radio retailers, and by retailers generally. Almost all Australians were within reach of a station by the 1930s, and the number of stations remained relatively stable through the post-war era. However, in the 1970s, the Labor government under Prime Minister Gough Whitlam commenced a broadcasting renaissance so that by the 1990s there were 50 different radio services available for groups based on tastes, languages, religion, or geography. The broadcasting system was largely deregulated in 1992, except that there were limits on foreign ownership and on monopolistic control. By 2000, 99 percent of Australians owned at least one television set, and averaged 20 hours a week watching it.\nTelevision.\nAs early as 1929, two Melbourne commercial radio stations, 3UZ and 3DB were conducting experimental mechanical television broadcasts \u2013 these were conducted in the early hours of the morning, after the radio stations had officially closed down. In 1934 Dr Val McDowall at amateur station 4CM Brisbane conducted experiments in electronic television.\nTelevision broadcasting officially began in Sydney and Melbourne just prior to the Melbourne Olympic Games in November/December 1956 and then phased in at other capital cities, and then into rural markets. Many forms of entertainment, particularly drama and variety, proved more suited to television than radio, so the actors and producers migrated there.\nIt now includes a broad range of public, commercial, community, subscription, narrowcast, and amateur stations across the country. Colour television in the PAL 625-line format went to a full-time basis in 1975. Subscription television, on the Galaxy platform, began in 1995. Digital terrestrial television was introduced in 2001.\nAustralia moved from PAL 625 to DVB-T on 10 December 2013.\nSubscription television, whether Foxtel or Netflix type services, has become more important and is one factor driving demand for the National Broadband Network.\nCore technologies, the network, backhaul and the local loop.\nCopper cable and optical fibre networks.\nPrior to the government opening telecommunications to multi player competition the PMG (and later Telecom Australia) operated a vertically integrated system, providing the Core network, backhaul, ancillary networks and a range of services to end users.\nWith opening telecommunications to multi provider competition the government required Telstra to sell wholesale access to its core facilities and networks.\nIn the 2000s, larger ISPs began taking over more of the delivery infrastructure themselves by taking advantage of regulated access to the unconditioned local loop. As well as significantly reducing costs, it gave the service providers complete control of their own service networks, other than the copper pair (phone line from the exchange to the customer).\nTelstra in 2006 proposed replacing its copper network with an optical fibre node network with the drop connection into end user premises being the existing copper cable. They abandoned this as under competition policy they would be required to open their network to competing carriers on a wholesale basis.\nFurther options were explored with the first Rudd government deciding to set up a National Broadband Network using Fibre to the Premises as the main carrier network, supported by satellite and wireless to remote areas.\nAfter the election of the Abbott government in 2013 a Multi Technological Mix was implemented, replacing FTTP where development was yet to start with Fibre to the Node and also repurposing the Telstra and Optus hybrid fibre-coaxial networks.\nCable.\nIn the late 1990s, Telstra and Optus rolled-out separate cable Internet services, focusing on the east coast.\nSatellite.\nThe Overseas Telecommunications Commission (OTC) was established by Australia in August 1946 with responsibility for all international telecommunications services into, through and out of Australia.\nIn 1981 Aussat Pty Ltd was established as a GBE to operate domestic satellite telecommunication and broadcasting services. Aussat's charter restricted it from acting as a competitor to Telecom, including a prohibition on interconnecting public switched traffic with Telecom's network.\nProposals for a merger of Aussat and OTC (thereby permitting national delivery of telecommunication services in competition with Telecom) were rejected in favor of disposal of the satellite operator to a non-government entity that would be allowed to compete with Telecom\nSatellites are used to provide telecommunications services in very remote areas. These are primarily the Optus satellites C1 D1 and D2.\nThere are also a number of satellite earth stations, which provide access points into the Australian networks:\nSubmarine cables.\nDue to Australia's large size, sparse population, and relative remoteness to other countries, a significant amount of infrastructure is required for Internet communications. The vast majority of Australia's international telecommunications transit capacity is sourced from undersea several fibre-optic cables to Asia and the US: \nTelephony and related arrangements.\nThe Postmaster-General's Department regulated telecommunications and operated telephone and related communications within Australia over the copper telephony network from federation up to 22 December 1975, replaced by the Postal and Telecommunications Department.\nIn mid-1975 the department was disaggregated by the Whitlam government into the two Government Business Enterprises: the Australian Telecommunications Commission (trading as Telecom Australia) and the Australian Postal Commission (trading as Australia Post) with a new Postal and Telecommunications Department. The change was intended to take account of the increase in the functions of the department to include all electronic media matters which had previously been the responsibility of the Department of the Media.\nThe 1982 Davidson Inquiry regarding private sector involvement in delivery of existing/proposed telecommunications services recommended ending Telecom Australia's monopoly.\nIn June 1991, legislation was passed allowing duopoly competition with Telstra, Optus Communications became Australia's second general telecommunications carrier. It was guaranteed access to Telecom's existing infrastructure on reasonable terms - meant to ensure its viability. Other players were prevented from entering the general telephone market until 1997.\nTelecom Australia changed its name to Telstra in 1995 and has since been privatised. It faced growing competition in market niches such as long distance corporate voice and data services. Telstra was progressively privatised (33.3% 1997, 16.6% 1999, 33.3% 2006, with 17% transferred to the Future Fund.\nNumbers of licensed telecommunications carriers grew from: ~20 controlling facilities in Australia at 1998 (with several hundred entities providing services using those facilities to end users); to 99 at 2002.\nRegulation.\nThe Postmaster-General's Department regulated telecommunications and operated telephone and related communications within Australia over the copper telephony network from federation up to 22 December 1975, replaced by the Postal and Telecommunications Department.\nOn 1 July 2005, the Australian Communications &amp; Media Authority (ACMA) brought together the Australian Broadcasting Authority (ABA) and the Australian Communications Authority (ACA).\nInternet censorship.\nOn 31 December 2007, Stephen Conroy announced the federal government's intention to censor \"inappropriate material\" from the Internet. Under the proposed system any Australian who subscribes to an ISP would receive a \"clean\" version of the Internet. The Federal Government's stated aim is to protect children from accessing violent and pornographic websites. This plan was later abandoned and the Australian government continues to only block websites that violate online laws.\nInternet.\nPermanent Internet access was first available in Australia to universities via AARNet in 1989. The first commercial dial-up Internet Service Provider (ISP) appeared in capital cities soon after, and by the mid-1990s almost the entire country had a range of choices of dial-up ISPs. Today, Internet access is available through a range of technologies, i.e. hybrid fibre coaxial cable, digital subscriber line (DSL), Integrated Services Digital Network (ISDN) and satellite Internet. The Australian Government, in partnership with the industrial sector, began rolling out a nationwide FTTP broadband network in July 2009.\nThe .au domain (ccTLD) was delegated to Robert Elz of the Australian Computing Science Network (ACSNet) in March 1986. From then, universities connected one at a time to allow for the sending and receiving of email and for use newsgroup facilities. An earlier restricted IP-based network, linking academic institutions within Australia, known as ACSNet, used the .oz domain. This domain was subsumed under .au to become .oz.au.\nA permanent connection between AARNet and ARPANet was established in May 1989 by a satellite connection.\nIn 1992 there were two competing commercial ISPs expanding to excess of 100 by June 1995 [Internet Australasia Magazine], attributing some fifth of all AARNet traffic.\nThe Vice Chancellors' Committee sold all commercial customers with Telstra leading the commercial push of the Internet into Australia.\nBroadband access.\nBroadband internet access is available in Australia using predominantly ADSL, plus cable, fibre, satellite and wireless technologies. Since July 2008 almost two thirds of Australian households have had internet access, with broadband connections outnumbering dial-up two to one. According to the recent ABS statistics the non-dial-up services outnumber dial up services 3.6 to 1.\nxDSL.\nIn 2000, the first consumer ADSL services were made available via Telstra Bigpond, at speeds of 256/64\u00a0kbit/s (downstream/upstream), 512/128\u00a0kbit/s, and 1500/256\u00a0kbit/s. Telstra chose to artificially limit all ADSL speeds to a maximum of 1500/256\u00a0kbit/s. As ADSL required access to the telephone exchange and the copper line \u2013 which only Telstra had \u2013 this allowed Telstra to be dominant due to the expense of roll-out for other companies and Telstra's established customer base. Other ISPs followed suit soon after; reselling connections purchased wholesale from Telstra.\nIn response to Telstra's monopolisation of ADSL provision other carriers installed their own DSLAMs. Internode\nThe presence of non-Telstra DSLAMs allowed the service providers to control the speed of connection, and most offered \"uncapped\" speeds, allowing the customers to connect at whatever speed their copper pair would allow, up to 8\u00a0Mbit/s. Ratification of ADSL2 and ADSL2+ increased the maximum to 12\u00a0Mbit/s, then 24\u00a0Mbit/s. \nIn November 2007 the first Naked DSL product was announced by iiNet. Shortly after this other internet providers also started to provide DSL products without telephony service over copper, reducing line rental fees.\nTelstra FTTN.\nTelstra proposed to upgrade to Fibre to the Node (FTTN) in 2006 but did not pursue the development because it would be required to share the network.\nWireless broadband.\nWireless broadband in Australia is widespread, with many point-to-point fixed wireless broadband providers serving broadband-poor regional and rural areas, predominantly with Motorola Canopy and WiMAX technologies. Telstra's 2006 introduction of the \"Next G\" HSPA network (which reportedly covers 99% of the Australian population as of September 2008) with speeds advertised of being up to 14\u00a0Mbit/s stimulated investment in wireless broadband by competitors Optus, Vodafone and Hutchison Telecommunications, who are presently expanding their HSPA networks to cover 96\u201398% of the Australian population.\nRural coverage.\nDelivering competitive telecommunications services to regional and rural areas is a major issue, with Telstra having a Universal Service Obligation regarding telephony services. Government monies have been made available on a competitive basis to carriers to address broadband and mobile telephone blackspots and gaps in service provision.\nNational Broadband Network.\nThe National Broadband Network was initially a fibre-to-the-home open-access network in planning and trial operation in Australia by the federal government. The national broadband network aimed to provide up to 1000\u00a0Mbit/s speeds and to connect to 93% of Australian households and businesses. This has since been revised under a Coalition government to a mixed-technology system relying largely on Australia's existing and largely depreciated copper networks. This revision aims for 50\u00a0Mbit/s to 100\u00a0Mbit/s, with consumer reports ranging from 1\u00a0Mbit/s to 100\u00a0Mbit/s. The government will hold a majority share (51%) in the network company, with the remainder being held by private firms. The Australian government had previously called for proposals to build a fibre-to-the-node broadband network providing download speeds up to 100 and upload speeds up to 40 megabits per second. The government also utilises fixed wireless technology and satellite technology to provide fast broadband connection in rural area and very remote area. Fixed wireless provides speeds up to 50/20\u00a0Mbit/s. Satellite technology uses two Sky Muster communication satellites launched in 2015 and 2016 to provide fast broadband in very remote areas and offshore. It provides speeds up to 25/5\u00a0Mbit/s.\nThe network will be the largest single infrastructure investment in Australia's history.\nIncidents.\n2023 Optus outage.\nOn 8 November 2023 at around 04:00 AEDT, all Optus services, including wireless phone, internet, and mobile, stopped working. This led to over 10 million people and over 400,000 businesses without services provided by the telco. The outage lasted from 9-13 hours, with mobile coverage being the first thing restored.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "68913", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68913", "title": "Telecommunications in Austria", "text": " \nTelecommunications in Austria encompass highly developed and efficient internet and telephone networks, complemented by a number of radio and television broadcast stations.\nIn the 2022 Digital Economy and Society Index (DESI) report, Austria ranks 10th among 27 European Union (EU) countries. It places 11th in Human Capital, with 63% of individuals possessing at least basic digital skills, surpassing the EU average of 54%. In terms of Connectivity, Austria shows noteworthy advancement with 77% 5G coverage, though it faces challenges in fixed network capacity. The Integration of Digital Technology in businesses is notable, with 64% of Small and Medium-sized Enterprises (SMEs) reaching a basic level of digital intensity, above the EU's 55%. Digital Public Services are also well-adopted, with 79% of internet users engaging in e-government services, exceeding the EU average of 65%.\nInfrastructure.\nThe telephone system is highly developed and efficient. Fibre-optic coverage is extensive, although it remains very expensive. A full range of telephone and Internet services are available via the network.\nAustria has 15 satellite earth stations, two Intelsat (one Atlantic Ocean and one Indian Ocean) and one Eutelsat. Additionally, there are around 600 very-small-aperture terminals (VSATs) (2007).\nInternet.\nUser statistics.\nThe country code for Austria is \"AT\", the country code top level domain (ccTLD) is \".at\".\nFixed broadband.\nAustria's fixed broadband connectivity demonstrates both advancement and areas needing enhancement, according to the DESI 2022 report. The country achieves a fixed broadband take-up rate of 78% among households, aligning with the EU average. However, Austria falls short in adopting high-speed broadband (at least 100 Mbit/s), with an 18% take-up rate, significantly lower than the EU average of 41%. Coverage of Very High Capacity Networks (VHCN) and Fibre to the Premises (FTTP) in Austria, at 45% and 27% respectively, also trails behind the EU averages of 70% and 50%.\nMobile broadband.\nThe country has demonstrated substantial advancements in mobile broadband connectivity, achieving a 91% take-up rate among individuals, which exceeds the EU average of 87%. Notably, the country has made progress in 5G deployment, providing coverage to 77% of populated areas, surpassing the EU average by 11 percentage points and aligning with its objective of achieving nationwide 5G coverage by 2025. Additionally, Austria has allocated 66% of the total harmonized 5G spectrum as of 2022, surpassing the EU average of 56%.\nDigital public services.\nIn the DESI 2022 report, Austria ranked 12th among EU countries in terms of digital public services, aligning closely with EU averages in the provision of digital public services for citizens and businesses, with take-up rates of 76 out of 100 and 81 out of 100, respectively. The country exhibited strong engagement in e-government services, with a usage rate of 79% among its internet users, surpassing the EU average of 65%. Additionally, Austria demonstrated proficiency in providing pre-filled forms and open data, scoring 71 out of 100 and 92%, respectively. These scores exceed the EU averages of 64 out of 100 for pre-filled forms and 81% for open data.\nUnder the 'Digital Action Plan Austria', the country has implemented strategic initiatives to improve digital interactions between the government and citizens. One such initiative is the 'Business Service Portal', developed to simplify public service procedures, which has been recently updated to enhance user experience and integrate AI for improved service delivery. The rollout of 'ID Austria' represents an important step towards establishing a unified electronic identification system, aimed at succeeding the 'Mobile Phone Signature' system and ensuring compatibility with the EU-wide e-IDAS regulation for cross-border authentication. Projects like the 'Digital Office App' and the ELGA electronic health record system are part of efforts to make digital public services more accessible in Austria.\nInternet censorship and surveillance.\nIn August 2014, IFPI Austria has requested Internet blocking for several file sharing web sites such as The Pirate Bay and isoHunt, starting the latest August 14, 2014 (postponed from August 1, 2014). This procedure has been heavily criticized in the media, as there is no formal procedure for unblocking such IPs ever again, and no formal review process that incorrect blocks cannot be obtained. Users sharing an IP may be blocked as a side effect, too.\nAs of May 2016[ [update]], Austrian ISPs are now once again free to unblock all previously blocked sites after the government appealed a new law for file sharing similar to the one in Switzerland. Although the IFPI is still trying to challenge this ruling.\nThere are no government restrictions on access to the Internet or credible reports that the government monitors e-mail or Internet chat rooms without appropriate legal authority. Individuals and groups engage in the peaceful expression of views via the Internet, including by e-mail. Authorities work to restrict access to Web sites containing information that violates the law, such as neo-Nazi and child pornography sites. Authorities restrict access to banned Web sites by trying to shut such sites and forbidding the country's Internet service providers to carry them.\nThe Austrian constitution provides for freedom of speech and press, and the government generally respects these rights in practice. An independent press, an effective judiciary, and a functioning democratic political system combine to ensure freedom of speech and the press. The independent media are active and express a wide variety of views with few restrictions. Individuals generally criticize the government publicly or privately without reprisal. The law prohibits arbitrary interference with privacy, family, home, or correspondence, and the government generally respects these prohibitions in practice.\nThe law prohibits incitement, insult, or contempt against a group because of its members\u2019 race, nationality, or ethnicity if the statement violates human dignity and the government strictly enforces these laws. The law prohibits public denial, belittlement, approval, or justification of the Nazi genocide or other Nazi crimes against humanity in a print publication, a broadcast, or other media and the government strictly enforces these laws. Strict libel and slander laws discourage reporting of governmental abuse. For example, many observers believed that the ability and willingness of the police to sue for libel or slander discourages individuals from reporting abuse by police.\nOn 31 July 2012, a 26-year-old man received an 18-month sentence, of which 12 months were to be served, for posting that his favorite book was Hitler\u2019s \"Mein Kampf\" and linking to Nazi material on his Facebook page.\nIn February 2007 Austrian authorities were able to uncover a \"child-pornography ring\" involving seventy-seven countries, based on a report by a man working for a Vienna-based Internet file-hosting service.\nAs of March 2022 the websites of RT have been blocked by the major Internet service providers.\nIn August 2022, ISPs were ordered to block further domains, as well as individual IP addresses belonging to CDN providers. The latter rendered a large number of websites to become unavailable.\nTelephones.\nFixed line phones.\nThe majority of fixed lines are analogue, with Integrated Services Digital Network (ISDN) lines for the remainder.\nFixed-line subscribership has been in decline since the mid-1990s and was eclipsed by mobile-cellular in the late 1990s.\nMobile phones.\nThe Austrian mobile phone market is highly competitive, with some of the lowest rates in Europe. Due to the geographical structures of Austria (mountains, flat lands, lakes) many providers use it as a \"testing range\" for new services. Mobile number portability was introduced in 2008, allowing users to retain their mobile phone numbers when switching between network operators. The original area codes allocated to each operator can no longer be used to determine the network with which a subscriber is registered.\nD-Netz by Telekom Austria. This network was switched off at the end of the 1990s.\nThere are three nationwide GSM networks which also support additional brands and mobile virtual network operators (MVNOs).\nDrei: Owned by Hutchinson Whampoa, a Hong Kong based company that runs its own UMTS network.\nRadio and television.\nThe largest broadcasting corporations are:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "68915", "revid": "50747961", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68915", "title": "Aral Sea", "text": "Lake in Kazakhstan and Uzbekistan\nThe Aral Sea was an endorheic salt lake lying between Kazakhstan to its north and Uzbekistan to its south, which began shrinking in the 1960s and had largely dried up into desert by the 2010s. It was in the Aktobe and Kyzylorda regions of Kazakhstan and the Karakalpakstan autonomous region of Uzbekistan. The name roughly translates from Mongolic and Turkic languages to \"Sea of Islands\", a reference to the large number of islands (over 1,100) that once dotted its waters. The Aral Sea drainage basin encompasses Uzbekistan and parts of Afghanistan, Iran, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan, and Turkmenistan.\nFormerly the third-largest lake in the world with an area of , the Aral Sea began shrinking in the 1960s after the rivers that fed it were diverted by Soviet irrigation projects. By 2007, it had declined to 10% of its original size, splitting into four lakes: the North Aral Sea, the eastern and western basins of the once far larger South Aral Sea, and the smaller intermediate Barsakelmes Lake. By 2009, the southeastern lake had disappeared and the southwestern lake had retreated to a thin strip at the western edge of the former southern sea. In subsequent years occasional water flows have led to the southeastern lake sometimes being replenished to a small degree. Satellite images by NASA in August 2014 revealed that for the first time in modern history the eastern basin of the Aral Sea had completely dried up. The eastern basin is now called the Aralkum Desert.\nIn a Kazakhstani effort to save and replenish the North Aral Sea, the Dike Kokaral dam was completed in 2005. By 2008, the water level had risen above that of 2003, to . As of 2013[ [update]], salinity dropped, and fish were again present in sufficient numbers for some fishing to be viable.\nAfter the visit to Muynak in 2011, United Nations Secretary General Ban Ki-moon called the shrinking of the Aral Sea \"one of the planet's worst environmental disasters\". The region's once-prosperous fishing industry has been devastated, bringing unemployment and economic hardship. The water from the diverted Syr Darya river is used to irrigate about of farmland in the Ferghana Valley. The Aral Sea region is heavily polluted, with consequent serious public health problems. UNESCO has added historical documents concerning the Aral Sea to its Memory of the World Register as a resource to study the environmental tragedy.\nFormation.\nThe Amu Darya river flowed into the Caspian Sea via the Uzboy Channel until the Holocene. Geographer Nick Middleton believes it did not begin to flow into the Aral Sea until that time.\nEcology.\nNative fish.\nDespite its former vast size, the Aral Sea had relatively low indigenous biodiversity. However, the Aral Sea basin had an exceptional array of endemic fish subspecies (including three endemic sturgeon species). Most of these still survive in the North Aral Sea, but some, such as the sturgeons, have been greatly reduced or even driven to extirpation by the lake's shrinkage. Native fish species of the lake included \nAll these fish aside from the stickleback lived an or semi-anadromous lifestyle.\nThe salinity increase and drying of the lake led to the local extinction of the Aral trout, ruffe, Turkestan barbel, and all sturgeon species, and dams now block their return and migration routes; the Aral trout and Syr Darya sturgeon (\"Pseudoscaphirhynchus fedtschenkoi\") may be extinct due to their restricted range. All other native fish, barring the stickleback (which persisted during the lake's shrinkage and salinity increase), were also extirpated, but many have returned to the North Aral Sea following its recovery from the 1990s onwards.\nIntroduced fish.\nOther salt-tolerant fish species were intentionally or inadvertently introduced during the 1960s when hydropower and irrigation projects reduced the flow of fresh water thereby increasing salinity. These include the Baltic herring (\"Clupea harengus membras\"), big-scale sand smelt (\"Atherina boyeri caspia\"), black-striped pipefish (\"Syngnatus abaster caspius\"), Caucasian dwarf goby (\"Knipowitschia caucasica\"), monkey goby (\"Neogobius fluviatilis\"), round goby (\"N. melanostomus\"), Syrman goby (\"N. syrman\"), bighead goby (\"Ponticola kessleri\"), tubenose goby (\"Proterorchinus marmoratus\"), grass carp (\"Ctenopharyngodon idella\"), silver carp (\"Hypophtalmichthys molitrix\"), bighead carp (\"H. nobilis\"), black carp (\"Mylopharyngodon piceus\"), and northern snakehead (\"Channa argus warpachowski\").\nThe herring, sand smelt, and gobies were the first planktivorous fish in the lake, leading to a collapse of the lake's zooplankton population. This in turn caused a collapse of the herring and sand smelt population from which neither species has recovered. All introduced species aside from the carp, snakehead, and (possibly) pipefish survived the lake's shrinkage and salinity increase, and during this time the European flounder (\"Platichthys flesus\") was introduced to revive fisheries. The extirpated species (aside from possibly the pipefish) returned to the North Aral Sea following its recovery. Herring, sand smelt, gobies and flounder persisted in the South Aral Sea until increasing salinity extirpated all but the gobies.\nInvertebrates.\nPrior to its shrinkage, the Aral Sea had about 250 species of native aquatic invertebrates, the majority (about 80%) being freshwater species; the rest were marine invertebrates with ties to the Ponto-Caspian and Mediterranean-Atlantic fauna. The dominant species (excluding protozoa) were rotifers, cladocerans, and copepods. Advanced crustaceans (Malacostraca) were represented by a single amphipod species, \"Dikerogammarus aralensis\", an endemic of the Syr Darya basin. There were several native bivalves in the Aral Sea, including members of the genera \"Dreissena\" (including an endemic subspecies of zebra mussel, \"Dreissena polymorpha aralensis\"), \"Hypanis\", and the lagoon cockle (\"Cerastoderma glaucum\") (formerly considered distinct species \"Cerastoderma rhomboides\" and \"C. isthmica\"). Native gastropods included \"Theodoxus pallasi\" and a member of \"Caspiohydrobia\".\nMany of these invertebrates had their numbers drastically reduced due to the introduced fish species. Later, during an unsuccessful attempt to introduce mullet (\"Mugil\" sp.) to the Aral from the Caspian Sea, the rockpool shrimp (\"Palaemon elegans\") was inadvertently introduced to the sea. The shrimp is thought to be responsible for the extirpation of the near-endemic amphipod \"Dikerogammarus aralensis\", which now survives only in the Syr Darya basin. The copepod \"Calanipeda aquaedulcis\" was introduced to the Aral to replace the zooplankton species reduced by the herring population, and the North American mud crab \"Rhithropanopeus harrisii\" was inadvertently introduced during this attempt as well.\nLater, as the lake's salinity increased, many of the freshwater-adapted species disappeared, only leaving behind the marine and saline species. However, the zooplankton population in the North Aral Sea has recovered as salinity has decreased from the 1990s onwards, with extirpated crustacean and rotifer species returning naturally via the Syr Darya River, at the expense of the saltwater species. The cladoceran \"Moina mongolica\", extirpated by the introduced fish species, has also returned. The zebra mussel (\"Dreissena polymorpha aralensis\") has been reintroduced. In contrast, in the South Aral Sea only a few nematodes, rotifers, and parthenogenic brine shrimp (\"Artemia parthenogenetica\") exist. The future prospects for aquatic invertebrates in all remaining Aral Sea fragments depend on their future changes in salinity.\nHistory.\nClimate shifts have driven multiple phases of sea-level rise and fall. Inflow rates from the Amu Darya and Syr Darya are affected by glacial melt rates at the rivers' headwaters as well as precipitation within the river basins; cold, dry climates restrict both processes. Geologically driven shifts in the course of the Amu Darya between the Aral Sea and the Sarykamysh basins and anthropogenic water withdrawal from Amu Darya and Syr Darya have caused fluctuations in the Aral Sea's water level. Artificial irrigation systems began in ancient times and continue to the present. According to Sergey Tolstov's theory, once Amu Darya was connected to Caspian sea, but this connection was broken by people 2500 years ago to feed the Aral Sea and irrigation system in Khorezm, more princely in Khiva and other cities in this region. \nThe Aral Sea was part of the western frontier of the Chinese Empire during the Tang dynasty.\nDuring Mongol Invasion, Mongols destroyed the cities and waterworks, which led to changes in Amu Darya's route, or some of its branches, and refilling the Lake Sarykamysh, that connected Caspian Sea again. Aral Sea region was divided between three Mongol Hordes: the Jochi or Golden Horde, the Ilkhanids, and the Chagatai.\nMuslim geographers, such as Hafiz-i Abru, wrote about the disappearance of the Aral Sea in 1417 due to diversions in both the Amu Darya and Syr Darya. The Syr Darya only resumed its natural course into the lake after 1573, when the channels that had been carved to divert its course to the south fell into disrepair. That caused the surface of the sea to steadily rise, flooding the basin for the next four centuries.\nThe Russian expedition of Alexey Butakov performed the first observations of the Aral Sea in 1848. The first steamer arrived in the Aral Sea three years later. The Aral Sea fishing industry began with the Russian dealers Lapshin, Ritkin, Krasilnikov, and Makeev, which later formed major fishing unions.\nNaval.\nRussian naval presence on the Aral Sea began in 1847 with the founding of Raimsk, soon renamed Fort Aralsk, near the mouth of the Syr Darya. As the Aral Sea basin is not connected to other bodies of water, the Imperial Russian Navy deployed its vessels by disassembling them in Orenburg on the Ural River and transporting them overland to be reassembled at Aralsk. The first two ships, assembled in 1847, were the two-masted schooners \"Nikolai\" and \"Mikhail\". The former was a warship; the latter a merchant vessel to establish fisheries. They surveyed the northern part of the sea in 1848, the same year that a larger warship, the \"Constantine\", was assembled. Commanded by Lt. Alexey Butakov (), the \"Constantine\" completed the survey of the entire Aral Sea over the next two years. Exiled Ukrainian poet and painter Taras Shevchenko participated in the expedition and produced a number of sketches.\nIn 1851 two newly built steamers arrived from Sweden. The geological surveys had found no coal deposits in the area so the Military Governor-General of Orenburg Vasily Perovsky ordered an \"as large as possible supply\" of saxaul (\"Haloxylon ammodendron\") to be collected in Aralsk for the new steamers. Saxaul wood proved not to be a suitable fuel and in the later years the Aral Flotilla was provisioned, at substantial cost, by coal from the Donbas.\nIrrigation canals.\nIn the early 1960s, as part of the Soviet government plan for cotton, or \"white gold\", to become a major export, the Amu Darya river in the south and the Syr Darya river in the east were diverted from feeding the Aral Sea to irrigate the desert in an attempt to grow cotton, melons, rice and cereals. This plan was initially successful, and by 1988, Uzbekistan was the world's largest exporter of cotton. However to achieve these results farms relied heavily on agro-chemicals, including dioxins, which were used even after being banned. Farmers, including children, were negatively affected by these chemicals. Due to abuse, the soil crucially degraded. Though production levels declined from its peak, cotton remains Uzbekistan's main cash crop, accounting for 17% of the country's exports in 2006.\nLarge scale construction of irrigation canals first began in the 1930s and was greatly increased in the 1960s. Many canals were poorly built, allowing leakage and evaporation. Between 30 and 75% of the water from the Qaraqum Canal, the largest in Central Asia, went to waste. It was estimated in 2012 that only 12% of Uzbekistan's irrigation canal length was waterproofed. Only 28% of interfarm irrigation channels, and 21% of onfarm channels have anti-infiltration linings, which retain on average 15% more water than unlined channels. Only 77% of farm intakes have flow gauges.\nBy 1960, between of water each year was going to the land instead of the Aral Sea and the sea began to recede. From 1961 to 1970, the Aral's level fell an average of per year. In the 1970s the rate nearly tripled to per annum, and in the 1980s to per annum. The amount of water taken for irrigation from the rivers doubled between 1960 and 2000. In the first half of the 20th century prior to the irrigation, the sea's water level above sea level held steady at 53 m. By 2010, the large Aral was 27 m and the small Aral 43 m above sea level.\nThe disappearance of the lake was no surprise to the Soviets, they expected it to happen long before. As early as 1964, Aleksandr Asarin at the Hydroproject Institute pointed out that the lake was doomed, explaining, \"It was part of the five-year plans, approved by the council of ministers and the Politburo. Nobody on a lower level would dare to say a word contradicting those plans, even if it was the fate of the Aral Sea.\"\nThe reaction to the predictions varied. Some Soviet experts apparently considered the Aral to be \"nature's error\", and a Soviet engineer said in 1968, \"it is obvious to everyone that the evaporation of the Aral Sea is inevitable.\" On the other hand, starting in the 1960s, a large-scale project was proposed to redirect part of the flow of the rivers of the Ob basin to Central Asia over a gigantic canal system. Refilling of the Aral Sea was considered one of the project's main goals. However, due to its staggering costs and the negative public opinion in Russia proper, the federal authorities had abandoned the project by 1986.\nFrom 1960 to 1998, the sea's surface area shrank by 60%, and its volume by 80%. In 1960, the Aral Sea had been the world's fourth-largest lake with an area of and a volume of . By 1998, it had dropped to and eighth largest. Its salinity increased; having originally been 10\u00a0g/L, by 1990 it was at 376\u00a0g/L. (By comparison, seawater is typically 35\u00a0g/L, and the Dead Sea between 300 and 350\u00a0g/L.)\nIn 1987, the lake split into two separate bodies of water: the North Aral Sea (the Lesser Sea, or Small Aral Sea) and the South Aral Sea (the Greater Sea, or Large Aral Sea). In June 1991, Uzbekistan gained independence from the Soviet Union. Craig Murray, UK ambassador to Uzbekistan in 2002, attributes the shrinkage of the Aral Sea in the 1990s to president Islam Karimov's cotton policy. The enormous irrigation system was massively wasteful, crop rotation was not used, and huge quantities of pesticides and fertilizer were applied. The runoff from the fields washed these chemicals into the shrinking sea, creating severe pollution and health problems. As demand for cotton increased, the government applied more pesticides and fertilizer to the monocultured and depleted soil. Forced labor was used and profits were siphoned off by the powerful and well-connected.\nIn 2003, the South Aral further divided into eastern and western basins. The waters in the deepest parts of the sea were saltier and didn't mix with the top waters, so only the top of the sea was heated in the summer, resulting in faster evaporation than had been predicted. A plan was announced for the recovery of the North Aral Sea by building Dike Kokaral, a concrete dam separating the two halves of the Aral Sea.\nIn 2004, the sea's surface area was , 25% of its original size, and a nearly fivefold increase in salinity had killed most of its flora and fauna. Dike Kokaral was completed in 2005 and, as of 2006, some recovery of sea level had been recorded.\nImpact on environment, economy, and public health.\nThe Aral Sea is considered an example of ecosystem collapse. The ecosystems of the Aral Sea and the river deltas feeding into it have been nearly destroyed, largely because of the salinity being dramatically higher than ocean water. The receding sea has left huge plains covered with salt and toxic chemicals from weapons testing, industrial projects, and runoff of pesticides and fertilizer. Because of the shrinking water source and worsening water and soil quality, pesticides were increasingly used from the 1960s to raise cotton yield, which further polluted the water with toxins (e.g. HCH, TCCD, DDT). Industrial pollution also resulted in PCB and heavy-metal contamination.\nOwing to the insufficiency of water left in the Aral sea, concentrations of these pollutants rose drastically both in the remaining water and in the dry beds. This resulted in wind-borne toxic dust that spread quite widely. People living in the lower parts of the river basins and former shore zones ingested pollutants through drinking local water and inhaling contaminated dust. Furthermore, due to absorption by plants and livestock, toxins\u2014many of which bioaccumulate and are not easily broken down or excreted by the liver and kidneys\u2014entered the food chain. Inhabitants of the surrounding areas commonly experience a shortage of fresh water, and health problems are widespread\u2014including high rates of certain cancers, respiratory illnesses including tuberculosis (mostly drug resistant), digestive disorders, anaemia, and infectious diseases. Liver, kidney, and eye problems may also be due to the toxic dust storms. Together, this presented an unusually high fatality rate among vulnerable age groups: child mortality stood at 75 per 1,000 in 2009, while maternal mortality was 12 in every 1,000.\nThe dust storms have also contributed to water shortages through salt deposition. Overusing pesticides on crops to preserve yields has exacerbated this. Crops are destroyed where salt is deposited by the wind. The most heavily affected fields must be flushed with water four times per day to remove salt and toxic matter. A 1998 study indicated that few crops (besides fodder) tolerate the degradation, restricting what Kazakhstan farmers now choose to seed.\nInland seas and lakes generally moderate a region's climate through humidification, regulation of thermal energy, and peri-winter albedo effects. Loss of water in the Aral Sea has changed surface temperatures and wind patterns. This has led to a broader annual temperature range (about a 4 to 12 \u00b0C broadening) and more dust in storms locally and regionally.\nBiology.\nThe Aral Sea fishing industry, which at its peak employed some 40,000 and reportedly produced one-sixth of the Soviet Union's entire fish catch, has been devastated. In the 1980s commercial harvests were becoming unsustainable, and by 1987 commercial harvest became nonexistent. Due to the declining sea levels, salinity levels became too high for the 20 native fish species to survive. The only fish that could survive the high-salinity levels was the flounder. Also, as water has receded, former fishing towns along the original shores have become ship graveyards.\nAral, originally the main fishing port, is now about 15 kilometres from the sea and has seen its population decline dramatically since the beginning of the crisis. The town of Moynaq in Uzbekistan had a thriving harbour and fishing industry that employed about 30,000 people; now it lies 30\u201390 kilometres from the shore. Fishing boats lie scattered on the dry dusty land that was once covered by water; many have been there for 20 years.\nThe South Aral Sea remains too saline to host any species other than halotolerant organisms. The South Aral has been incapable of supporting fish since the late 1990s, when the flounder were killed by rising salinity levels.\nAlso destroyed is the muskrat-trapping industry in the deltas of the Amu Darya and Syr Darya, which used to yield as many as 500,000 pelts a year.\nVulnerable populations.\nLocal inhabitants are the most vulnerable population in this environmental health crisis due to the highly polluted and salinated water used for drinking and the dried seabed. Toxic chemicals associated with pesticide use have been found in blood and breast milk of mothers; specifically organochlorides, polychlorinated biphenyl compounds (PCBs), DDT compounds, and TCDD. These toxins can be, and often are, passed on to the children of these mothers, resulting in low birthweight and congenital abnormalities. The rate of infants being born with abnormalities is five times higher in this region than in European countries. The Aral Sea region has 26% of its children born at low birthweight, which is two standard deviations away from a national population study gathered by the WHO.\nExposures to toxic chemicals from the dry seabed and polluted water have caused other health issues in women and children. Renal tubular dysfunction has become a large health concern in children in the Aral Sea region as it is showing extremely high prevalence rates. Renal tubular dysfunction can also be related to growth and developmental stunting. This, in conjunction with the already high rate of low-birthweight children and children born with abnormalities, contributes to severe negative health effects and outcomes for children. These issues are compounded by the lack of research on maternal and child health effects caused by the demise of the Aral Sea. For example, only 26 English-language peer-reviewed articles and four reports on children's health were produced between 1994 and 2008. In addition, there is a lack of health infrastructure and resources in the Aral Sea region to combat the health issues that have arisen.\nThere is a lack of medication and equipment in many medical facilities, so health professionals do not have access to the necessary supplies to do their jobs in the Kazakhstan and Uzbekistan regions. There is also meager development of a health information system that would allow for extensive research or surveillance of emerging health issues due to Aral Sea issues. An absence of a primary care approach in the health systems of this region also hinders services and access that could prevent and treat issues stemming from the Aral Sea crisis, especially in women and children.\nThe impoverished are also particularly vulnerable to the environmental and health related effects of changes to the Aral Sea. These populations were most likely to reside downstream from the Basin and in former coastal communities. They were also among the first to be detrimentally affected, representing at least 4.4 million people in the region. Considered to have the worst health in this region, their plight was not helped when their fishery livelihoods vanished with the decreasing levels of water and loss of many aquatic species. Thus, those in poverty are entrenched in a vicious cycle.\nSolutions.\nProposed environmental solutions.\nMany different solutions to the problems have been suggested over the years, varying in feasibility and cost, including:\nIn January 1994, Kazakhstan, Uzbekistan, Turkmenistan, Tajikistan, and Kyrgyzstan signed a deal to pledge 1% of their budgets to help the sea recover.\nIn March 2000, UNESCO presented their \"Water-related vision for the Aral Sea basin for the year 2025\".\nBy 2006, the World Bank's restoration projects, especially in the North Aral, were giving rise to some unexpected, tentative relief in what had been an extremely pessimistic picture.\nRestoration strategies.\nTechnology.\nFunded in part by the United Nations Development Programme, implementations in Kazakhstan such as laser levelling and irrigation optimization using energy-efficient technologies has shown effectiveness.\nAral Sea Basin Programme - 1.\nThe future of the Aral Sea and the responsibility for its survival are now in the hands of the five countries: Kazakhstan, Uzbekistan, Tajikistan, Kyrgyzstan, and Turkmenistan. In 1994, they adopted the Aral Sea Basin Programme or ASBP. The Programme's four objectives are:\nASBP: Phase One.\nThe first phase of the plan effectively began with the first involvement from the World Bank in 1992, and was in operation until 1997. It was ineffectual for a number of reasons, but mainly because it was focused on improving directly the land around the Aral Sea, whilst not intervening in the water usage upstream. There was considerable concern amongst the Central Asian governments, which realised the importance of the Aral Sea in the ecosystem and the economy of Central Asia, and they were prepared to cooperate, but they found it difficult to implement the procedures of the plan.\nThis is due in part to a lack of co-operation among the affected people. The water flowing into the Aral Sea has long been considered an important commodity, and trade agreements have been made to supply the downstream communities with water in the spring and summer months for irrigation. In return, they supply the upstream countries with fuel during the winter, instead of storing water during the warm months for hydroelectric purposes in winter. However, very few legal obligations are binding these contracts, particularly on an international stage.\nASBP: Phase Two.\nPhase Two of the Aral Sea Basin programme followed in 1998 and ran for five years. The main shortcomings of phase two were due to its lack of integration with the local communities involved. The scheme was drawn up by the World Bank, government representatives, and various technical experts, without consulting those who would be affected. An example of this was the public awareness initiatives, which were seen as propagandist attempts by people with little care or understanding of their situation. These failures have led to the introduction of a new plan, funded by a number of institutions, including the five countries involved and the World Bank.\nASBP: Phase Three.\nIn 1997, a new plan was conceived which would continue with the previous restoration efforts of the Aral Sea. The main aims of this phase are to improve the irrigation systems currently in place, whilst targeting water management at a local level. The largest project in this phase is the North Aral Sea Project, a direct effort to recover the northern region of the Aral Sea. The North Aral Sea Project's main initiative is the construction of a dam across the Berg Strait, a deep channel which connects the North Aral Sea to the South Aral Sea. The Kok-Aral Dam is long and has capacity for over 29 cubic kilometres of water to be stored in the North Aral Sea, whilst allowing excess to overflow into the South Aral Sea.\nAral Sea Basin Programme \u2013 2.\nOn 6 October 2002, the Heads of States met again to revise the ASBP program. ASBP-2 was in place from 2003 to 2010. The main purpose of the ASBP-2 was to set up projects that covered a vast amount of environmental, socioeconomic and water management issues. The ASBP-2 was financed by organization such as the UNDP, World Bank, USAID, Asian Development Bank, and the governments of Switzerland, Japan, Finland, Norway and others. Over 2 billion US Dollars was provided by the IFAS country members to the program.\nAral Sea Basin Programme \u2013 3.\nOn 28 April 2009, the Head of States came together with the Interstate commission for Water Coordination, Interstate Commission for Sustainable Development and National Experts and donors to develop the ASBP-3. This Program was in effect from 2011- 2015. The main purpose of the ASBP-3 was to improve the environmental and socio-economic situation of the Aral Sea Basin. The four program priorities were:\nASBP-3: Direction One.\nDirection One's main purpose is to propose program that focus on addressing transboundary water resources management, establishment of monitoring systems and addressing safety concerns in water facilities. Examples of programs that have been proposed include:\nASBP-3: Direction Two.\nDirections two's main focus is on addressing the issues related to environmental protection and improvement of the environment. Areas of interest include:\nASBP-3: Direction Three.\nDirection three looks to address socio-economic issues by focusing on education and public health, improving unemployment rates, improving water systems, increasing sustainable development and improving living conditions. The expected outputs are:\nASBP-3: Direction Four.\nDirection Four aims to address issues related to institutional development and the development of policies and strategies that relate to sustainable development and public awareness. Expected outputs include:\nNorth Aral Sea restoration work.\nWork is being done to restore in part the North Aral Sea. Irrigation works on the Syr Darya have been repaired and improved to increase its water flow, and in October 2003, the Kazakh government announced a plan to build Dike Kokaral, a concrete dam separating the two halves of the Aral Sea. Work on this dam was completed in August 2005; since then, the water level of the North Aral has risen, and its salinity has decreased. As of 2006[ [update]], some recovery of sea level has been recorded, sooner than expected. \"The dam has caused the small Aral's sea level to rise swiftly to 38\u00a0m (125 ft), from a low of less than 30\u00a0m (98 ft), with 42\u00a0m (138 ft) considered the level of viability.\"\nEconomically significant stocks of fish have returned, and observers who had written off the North Aral Sea as an environmental disaster were surprised by unexpected reports that, in 2006, its returning waters were already partly reviving the fishing industry and producing catches for export as far as Ukraine. The improvements to the fishing industry were largely due to the drop in the average salinity of the sea from 30 grams to 8 grams per liter; this drop in salinity prompted the return of almost 24 freshwater species. The restoration also reportedly gave rise to long-absent rain clouds and possible microclimate changes, bringing tentative hope to an agricultural sector swallowed by a regional dustbowl, and some expansion of the shrunken sea.\nThe sea, which had receded almost south of the port-city of Aralsk, is now a mere away. The Kazakh Foreign Ministry stated that \"The North Aral Sea's surface increased from in 2003 to in 2008. The sea's depth increased from 30 meters (98 ft) in 2003 to 42 meters (138 ft) in 2008.\" Now, a second dam is to be built based on a World Bank loan to Kazakhstan, with the start of construction initially slated for 2009 and postponed to 2011, to further expand the shrunken Northern Aral, eventually reducing the distance to Aralsk to only . Then, it was planned to build a canal spanning the last 6\u00a0km, to reconnect the withered former port of Aralsk to the sea.\nOn 15 June 2021 the Central Communications Service of Kazakhstan announced that they plan to plant saxaul trees on one million hectares of the drained bottom of the Aral Sea as part of efforts to stop dust storms on the region. Other efforts include expanding the sea's water level.\nFuture of South Aral Sea.\nThe South Aral Sea, half of which lies in Uzbekistan, was abandoned to its fate. Most of Uzbekistan's part of the Aral Sea is completely shriveled up. Only excess water from the North Aral Sea is periodically allowed to flow into the largely dried-up South Aral Sea through a sluice in the dike. Discussions had been held on recreating a channel between the somewhat improved North and the desiccated South, along with uncertain wetland restoration plans throughout the region, but political will is lacking. Unlike Kazakhstan, which has partially revived its part of the Aral Sea, Uzbekistan shows no signs of abandoning the Amu Darya river to irrigate their cotton, and is moving toward oil exploration in the drying South Aral seabed.\nAttempts to mitigate the effects of desertification include planting vegetation in the newly exposed seabed; however, intermittent flooding of the eastern basin is likely to prove problematic for any development. Redirecting what little flow there is from the Amu Darya to the western basin may salvage fisheries there while relieving the flooding of the eastern basin. The reforestation is focused on plants adapted to desert conditions such as \"Haloxylon ammodendron\", \"Ephedra strobilacea\", \"Salsola\" species, and \"Tamarix\" species. The eventual aim is to plant up to of forest in the Uzbekistan portion. The forest is intended to slow desertification and reduce the impact of sandstorms on nearby communities.\nInstitutional bodies.\nThe Interstate Commission for Water Coordination of Central Asia (ICWC) was formed on 18 February 1992 to formally unite Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan and Uzbekistan in the hopes of solving environmental, as well as socioeconomic problems in the Aral Sea region. The River Basin Organizations (the BVOs) of the Syr Darya and Amu Darya rivers were institutions called upon by the ICWC to help manage water resources. According to the ICWC, the main objectives of the body are:\nThe International Fund for Saving the Aral Sea (IFAS) was developed on 23 March 1993, by the ICWC to raise funds for the projects under Aral Sea Basin programmes. The IFAS was meant to finance programmes to save the sea and improve on environmental issues associated with the basin's drying. This programme has had some success with joint summits of the countries involved and finding funding from the World Bank to implement projects; however, it faces many challenges, such as enforcement and slowing progress.\nVozrozhdeniya Island.\nVozrozhdeniya (Russian for \"rebirth\") Island is a former island of the Aral Sea or South Aral Sea. Due to the ongoing shrinkage of the Aral, it became first a peninsula in mid-2001 and finally part of the mainland. Other islands like Kokaral and Barsa-Kelmes shared a similar fate. Since the disappearance of the Southeast Aral in 2008, Vozrozhdeniya Island effectively no longer exists as a distinct geographical feature. The area is now shared by Kazakhstan and Uzbekistan.\nIn 1948, a top-secret Soviet bioweapons laboratory was established on the island, in the centre of the Aral Sea which is now disputed territory between Kazakhstan and Uzbekistan. The exact history, functions and current status of this facility are still unclear, but bio-agents tested there included \"Bacillus anthracis\", \"Coxiella burnetii\", \"Francisella tularensis\", \"Brucella suis\", \"Rickettsia prowazekii\", \"Variola major\" (smallpox), \"Yersinia pestis\", botulinum toxin, and Venezuelan equine encephalitis virus.\nIn 1971, weaponized smallpox from the island reached a nearby ship, which then allowed the virus to spread to the city of Aral. Ten people there were infected, of whom three died, and a massive vaccination effort involving 50,000 inhabitants ensued (see Aral smallpox incident). The bioweapons base was abandoned in 1992 following the disintegration of the Soviet Union the previous year. Scientific expeditions proved this had been a site for production, testing and later dumping of pathogenic weapons. In 2002, through a project organized by the United States and with Uzbekistan's assistance, 10 anthrax burial sites were decontaminated. According to the Kazakh Scientific Center for Quarantine and Zoonotic Infections, all burial sites of anthrax were decontaminated.\nOil and gas exploration.\nErgash Shaismatov, the deputy prime minister of Uzbekistan, announced on 30 August 2006, that the Uzbek government and an international consortium consisting of state-run Uzbekneftegaz, LUKoil Overseas, Petronas, Korea National Oil Corporation, and China National Petroleum Corporation signed a production-sharing agreement to explore and develop oil and gas fields in the Aral Sea, saying, \"The Aral Sea is largely unknown, but it holds a lot of promise in terms of finding oil and gas. There is risk, of course, but we believe in the success of this unique project.\" The consortium was created in September 2005.\nAs of 1 June 2010, 500,000 cubic meters of gas had been extracted, from 3\u00a0km down.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "68918", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68918", "title": "Telecommunications in the Bahamas", "text": "Telecommunications in the Bahamas is accomplished through the transmission of information by various types of technologies within The Bahamas, mainly telephones, radio, television, and the Internet.\nInternet censorship and surveillance.\nAccess to the Internet is unrestricted. There were no government restrictions on access to the Internet or credible reports that the government monitors e-mail or Internet chat rooms without judicial oversight.\nThe constitution provides for freedom of speech and press, and the government generally respects these rights in practice. An independent press combined with a relatively effective\u2014albeit extremely backlogged\u2014judiciary, and a functioning democratic political system ensures freedom of speech and press. The constitution prohibits arbitrary interference with privacy, family, home, or correspondence, and the government generally respects these prohibitions in practice. Strict and antiquated libel laws dating to British legal codes are seldom invoked.\nIn April 2013, the Bahamas Commissioner of Police Ellison Greenslade warned that the police would press charges against people who post \u201clewd\u201d or \u201cobscene\u201d pictures on social media websites and Attorney General Allyson Maynard-Gibson announced that the government was working on legislation that will police information posted on the Internet. \"We have to balance freedom of the press with protecting the public,\u201d she added. Also in April Rodney Moncur was charged with \"committing a grossly indecent act\" by posting autopsy photographs of a man who died in police custody on his Facebook page.\nPhone calls to the Bahamas are monitored by the U.S. National Security Agency's MYSTIC program.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "68919", "revid": "1265838589", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68919", "title": "Telecommunications in Bahrain", "text": " \nTelecommunications in Bahrain are provided by the Bahrain Telecommunications Company, trading as Batelco, as well as other companies such as Zain and STC. \nPrior to 1981 telecommunications services were provided by two separate departments: national services were provided by the Bahrain Telephone Company and international services by Cable &amp; Wireless of the United Kingdom. These were combined in 1981 to form Batelco. Since then, other telecommunications companies have entered the market.\nHistory.\nWhen Batelco was founded in 1981, Bahrain had 45,627 telephone lines in use. By 1982, the number reached 50,000. In 1985, the country's first fibre optic cable was installed. Batelco was a monopoly in the telecommunications sector until 2003. By 1999, the company had around 100,000 mobile contracts.\nIn 2002, under pressure from international bodies, Bahrain implemented its telecommunications law which included the establishment of an independent Telecommunications Regulatory Authority (TRA). In 2003, Batelco's monopoly over the sector ended when the TRA awarded a licence to MTC Vodafone, which later re-branded itself as Zain. In January 2010, Viva Bahrain, which later re-branded into STC Bahrain (a subsidiary of STC) started operations in Bahrain.\nTelephonic services.\nIn 2006, there were 194,200 telephones main lines in Bahrain.\n\"county comparison to the world:\" 124\nIn 2007, there were 1,116,000 mobile cellular contracts in Bahrain.\n\"county comparison to the world:\" 132\nTelephone system:\nBroadcast radio.\nRadio broadcast stations: AM 2, FM 3, shortwave 0 (1998)\nBroadcast television.\nTelevision broadcast stations: 4 (1997)\nInternet service.\nInternet country code: .bh\nInternet hosts: 2,621 (2008)\n\"country comparison to the world:\" 135\nInternet users: 250,000 (2007)\n\"country comparison to the world:\" 124\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "68920", "revid": "11487766", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68920", "title": "Trophimus", "text": "Christian who accompanied Paul during a part of his third missionary journey\nTrophimus (, \"Tr\u00f3phimos\") or Trophimus the Ephesian (, \"Tr\u00f3phimos ho Eph\u00e9sios\") was a Christian who accompanied Paul during a part of his third missionary journey. He was with Paul in Jerusalem, and the Jews, supposing that the apostle had brought him into the temple, raised a tumult which resulted in Paul's imprisonment. (See Herod's Temple). In writing to Timothy, the apostle comments that he left Trophimus in Miletus due to illness. This must refer to some event not noticed in the Acts.\nHis feast is kept on 29 December.\nBackground.\nTrophimus and companion Tychicus are called \"Asianoi\"(). He was from Edessa.\nCompanion to Paul.\nTrophimus was one of eight friends (), who accompanied Paul at the close of his third missionary journey and traveled with him from Greece, through Macedonia, into Asia, and onward by sea until Jerusalem was reached. Trophimus completed the journey with Paul, for, in the passages , he is mentioned as being with Paul in Jerusalem immediately on the close of this journey.\nCause of Apostle Paul's Arrest.\nHe was the cause of Paul being assaulted in the courts of the temple by the mob, and then of his being arrested and imprisoned by the Romans. The occasion of this outrage was that Paul had \"brought Greeks also into the temple, and...defiled this holy place\" ().\nLeft at Miletus.\nTrophimus is also mentioned in : \"Trophimus I left at Miletus sick.\" This shows that he was again \u2014 several years after the date indicated in the previous passages \u2014 traveling with Paul on one of the missionary journeys which the apostle undertook after being liberated from his first imprisonment in Rome.\nUnnamed brother.\nIt has been conjectured that Trophimus is to be identified with the person mentioned in 2 Corinthians 8:16-24. There, Paul speaks in the highest terms of one of his companions whom he sent with Titus but does not provide his name. Titus and this disciple were evidently, those to whose care Paul entrusted the carrying of the Second Epistle to the Corinthians. The apostle says of this unnamed brother, not only that his praise is in the gospel throughout all the churches, but also that he was chosen by the churches to travel with him.\nRelevant verses.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Sopater the Berean, son of Pyrrhus, accompanied him; and of the Thessalonians, Aristarchus and Secundus; and Gaius of Derbe, and Timothy; and the Asians, Tychius and Trophimus.\u2014\u200a\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;For they had previously seen Trophimus the Ephesian with him in the city, they supposed that Paul had brought him into the temple.\u2014\u200a\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Erastus remained at Corinth, and I left Trophimus, who was ill, at Miletus.\u2014\u200a\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "68921", "revid": "20483999", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68921", "title": "Geography of Bangladesh", "text": "Bangladesh is a densely populated, low-lying, mainly riverine country located in South Asia with a coastline of on the northern littoral of the Bay of Bengal. The delta plain of the Ganges (Padma), Brahmaputra (Jamuna), and Meghna Rivers and their tributaries occupy 79 percent of the country. Four uplifted blocks (including the Madhupur and Barind Tracts in the centre and northwest) occupy 9 percent and steep hill ranges up to approximately high occupy 12 percent in the southeast (the Chittagong Hill Tracts) and in the northeast. Straddling the Tropic of Cancer, Bangladesh has a tropical monsoon climate characterised by heavy seasonal rainfall, high temperatures, and high humidity. Natural disasters such as floods and cyclones accompanied by storm surges periodically affect the country. Most of the country is intensively farmed, with rice the main crop, grown in three seasons. Rapid urbanisation is taking place with associated industrial and commercial development. Exports of garments and shrimp plus remittances from Bangladeshis working abroad provide the country's three main sources of foreign exchange income.\nPhysical geography.\nThe physical geography of Bangladesh is varied and has an area characterised by two distinctive features: a broad deltaic plain subject to frequent flooding, and a small hilly region crossed by swiftly flowing rivers. The country has an area of (according to BBS 2020) or (according to CIA World Factbook 2021) and extends north to south and east to west. Bangladesh is bordered on the west, north, and east by a land frontier with India and, in the southeast, by a short land and water frontier of with Myanmar. On the south is a highly irregular deltaic coastline of about , fissured by many rivers and streams flowing into the Bay of Bengal. The territorial waters of Bangladesh extend , and the exclusive economic zone of the country is .\nRoughly 80% of the landmass is made up of fertile alluvial lowland called the Bangladesh Plain. The plain is part of the larger Plain of Bengal, which is sometimes called the Lower Gangetic Plain. Although, altitudes up to above sea level occur in the northern part of the plain, most elevations are less than above sea level; elevations decrease in the coastal south, where the terrain is generally at sea level. With such low elevations and numerous rivers, water\u2014and concomitant flooding\u2014is a predominant physical feature. About of the total area of Bangladesh is covered with water, and larger areas are routinely flooded during the monsoon season.\nThe only exceptions to Bangladesh's low elevations are the Chittagong Hills in the southeast, the Low Hills of Sylhet in the northeast, and highlands in the north and northwest. The Chittagong Hills constitute the only significant hill system in the country and, in effect, are the western fringe of the north\u2013south mountain ranges of Myanmar and eastern India. The Chittagong Hills rise steeply to narrow ridgelines, generally no wider than , with altitudes from above sea level. Saka Haphong Mountain is the highest peak in Bangladesh with an elevation of , located in the south-eastern part of the hills. Fertile valleys lie between the hill lines, which generally run north\u2013south. West of the Chittagong Hills is a broad plain, cut by rivers draining into the Bay of Bengal, that rises to a final chain of low coastal hills, mostly below , that attain a maximum elevation.\nIn Bangladesh forest cover is around 14% of the total land area, equivalent to 1,883,400 hectares (ha) of forest in 2020, down from 1,920,330 hectares (ha) in 1990. In 2020, naturally regenerating forest covered 1,725,330 hectares (ha) and planted forest covered 158,070 hectares (ha). Of the naturally regenerating forest 0% was reported to be primary forest (consisting of native tree species with no clearly visible indications of human activity) and around 33% of the forest area was found within protected areas. For the year 2015, 100% of the forest area was reported to be under public ownership.\nThe country produces large quantities of quality timber, bamboo, and sugarcane. Bamboo grows in almost all areas, but high-quality timber grows mostly in the highland valleys. Rubber planting in the hilly regions of the country was undertaken in the 1980s, and rubber extraction had started by the end of the decade. A variety of wild animals are found in the forest areas, such as in the Sundarbans on the southwest coast, which is the home of the Royal Bengal tiger. The alluvial soils in the Bangladesh Plain are generally fertile and are enriched with heavy silt deposits carried downstream during the rainy season.\nHuman geography.\nUrbanisation is proceeding rapidly, and it is estimated that only 30% of the population entering the labour force in the future will be absorbed into agriculture, although many will likely find other kinds of work in rural areas. The areas around Dhaka and Comilla are the most densely settled. The Sundarbans, an area of coastal tropical jungle in the southwest and last wild home of the Bengal tiger, and the Chittagong Hill Tracts on the south-eastern border with Myanmar and India, are the least densely populated.\nClimate.\nBangladesh is divided between a monsoon-influenced humid subtropical climate in the northern half (north of Dhaka), and a tropical monsoon climate in the southern half which is characterized by wide seasonal variations in rainfall, high temperatures, and high humidity. Regional climatic differences in this flat country are minor, though some variations can be seen between the weather patterns of the northern and southern regions, as the piedmontal plains of the former have a humid subtropical climate. According to Bangladesh Meteorological Department, there are six seasons in Bangladesh depending on the temperature, rainfall and direction of wind: mild and cool winter from December to February, hot and sunny summer or pre-monsoon season from March to May, somewhat cooler and very wet monsoon season from June to September and pleasant, shorter and cooler autumn or post-monsoon season in October\u2013November. In general, maximum summer temperatures range between . April is the hottest month in most parts of the country. January is the coolest month, when the average temperature for most of the country is during the day and around at night.\nWinds are mostly from the north and northwest in the winter, blowing gently at in northern and central areas and near the coast. From March to May, violent thunderstorms, called northwesters by local English speakers, produce winds of up to . During the intense storms of the early summer and late monsoon season, southerly winds of more than cause waves to crest as high as in the Bay of Bengal, which brings disastrous flooding to coastal areas.\nHeavy rainfall is characteristic of Bangladesh, causing it to flood every year. Except for the relatively dry western region of Rajshahi, where the annual rainfall is about , most parts of the country receive at least of rainfall per year. Because of its location just south of the foothills of the Himalayas, where monsoon winds turn west and northwest, the region of Sylhet in northeastern Bangladesh receives the greatest average precipitation. From 1977 to 1986, annual rainfall in that region ranged between per year. Average daily humidity ranged from March lows of between 55 and 81% to July highs of between 94 and 100%, based on readings taken at selected stations nationwide in 1986.\nAbout 80% of Bangladesh's rain falls during the monsoon season. The monsoons result from the contrasts between low and high air pressure areas that result from differential heating of land and water. During the hot months of April and May, hot air rises over the Indian subcontinent, creating low-pressure areas into which rush cooler, moisture-bearing winds from the Indian Ocean. This is the southwest monsoon, commencing in June and usually lasting through September. Dividing against the Indian landmass, the monsoon flows in two branches, one of which strikes western India. The other travels up the Bay of Bengal and over eastern India and Bangladesh, crossing the plain to the north and northeast before being turned to the west and northwest by the foothills of the Himalayas.\nNatural calamities, such as floods, tropical cyclones, tornadoes, and tidal bores\u2014destructive waves or floods caused by flood tides rushing up estuaries\u2014ravage the country, particularly the coastal belt, almost every year. Between 1947 and 1988, 13 severe cyclones hit Bangladesh, causing enormous loss of life and property. In May 1985, for example, a severe cyclonic storm packing winds and waves high swept into south-eastern and southern Bangladesh, killing more than 11,000 persons, damaging more than 94,000 houses, killing some 135,000 head of livestock, and damaging nearly of critically needed embankments.\nAnnual monsoon flooding results in the loss of human life, damage to property and communication systems, and a shortage of drinking water, which leads to the spread of disease. For example, in 1988, two-thirds of Bangladesh's 64 districts experienced extensive flood damage in the wake of unusually heavy rains that flooded the river systems. Millions were left homeless and without potable water. Half of Dhaka, including the runway at the Shahjalal International Airport\u2014an important transit point for disaster relief supplies\u2014was flooded. About of crops were reported destroyed, and relief work was rendered even more challenging than usual because the flood made transportation exceedingly difficult. A tornado in April 1989 killed more than 600 people, possibly many more.\nThere are no precautions against cyclones and tidal bores except giving advance warning and providing safe public buildings where people may take shelter. Adequate infrastructure and air transport facilities that would ease the suffering of the affected people had not been established by the late 1980s. Efforts by the government under the Third Five-Year Plan (1985\u201390) were directed toward accurate and timely forecast capability through agrometeorology, marine meteorology, oceanography, hydrometeorology, and seismology. Necessary expert services, equipment, and training facilities were expected to be developed under the United Nations Development Programme.\nCold weather is unusual in Bangladesh. When temperatures decrease to or less, people without warm clothing and living in inadequate homes may die from the cold.\nRiver systems.\nThe rivers of Bangladesh mark both the physiography of the nation and the life of the people. About 700 in number, these rivers generally flow south. The larger rivers serve as the main source of water for cultivation and as the principal arteries of commercial transportation. Rivers also provide fish, an important source of protein. Flooding of the rivers during the monsoon season causes enormous hardship and hinders development, but fresh deposits of rich silt replenish the fertile but overworked soil. The rivers also drain excess monsoon rainfall into the Bay of Bengal. Thus, the great river system is at the same time the country's principal resource and its greatest hazard.\nThe profusion of rivers can be divided into five major networks. The Jamuna-Brahmaputra is long and extends from northern Bangladesh to its confluence with the Padma. Originating as the Yarlung Tsangpo River in China's Xizang Autonomous Region (Tibet) and flowing through India's state of Arunachal Pradesh, where it becomes known as the Brahmaputra (\"Son of Brahma\"), it receives waters from five major tributaries that total some in length. At the point, where the Brahmaputra meets the Tista River in Bangladesh, it becomes known as the Jamuna. The Jamuna is notorious for its shifting subchannels and for the formation of fertile silt islands (chars). No permanent settlements can exist along its banks.\nThe second system is the Padma-Ganges, which is divided into two sections: a segment, the Ganges, which extends from the western border with India to its confluence with the Jamuna some west of Dhaka, and a segment, the Padma, which runs from the Ganges-Jamuna confluence to where it joins the Meghna River at Chandpur. The Padma-Ganges is the central part of a deltaic river system with hundreds of rivers and streams\u2014some in length\u2014flowing generally east or west into the Padma.\nThe third network is the Surma-Meghna River System, which courses from the north-eastern border with India to Chandpur, where it joins the Padma. The Surma-Meghna, at by itself the longest river in Bangladesh, is formed by the union of six lesser rivers. Below the city of Kalipur it is known as the Meghna. When the Padma and Meghna join, they form the fourth river system\u2014the Padma-Meghna\u2014which flows to the Bay of Bengal.\nThis mighty network of four river systems flowing through the Bangladesh Plain drains an area of some . The numerous channels of the Padma-Meghna, its distributaries, and smaller parallel rivers that flow into the Bay of Bengal are referred to as the Mouths of the Ganges. Like the Jamuna, the Padma-Meghna and other estuaries on the Bay of Bengal are also known for their many chars.\nA fifth river system, unconnected to the other four, is the Karnaphuli. Flowing through the region of Chittagong and the Chittagong Hills, it cuts across the hills and runs rapidly downhill to the west and southwest and then to the sea. The Feni, Karnaphuli, Sangu, and Matamuhari\u2014an aggregate of some \u2014are the main rivers in the region. The port of Chittagong is situated on the banks of the Karnaphuli. The Karnaphuli Reservoir and Karnaphuli Dam are located in this area. The dam impounds the Karnaphuli River's waters in the reservoir for the generation of hydroelectric power.\nThe Ganga\u2013Brahmaputra rivers contribute nearly 1000\u00a0million tons/yr of sediment. The sediment contributed from these two rivers forms the Bengal Delta and Submarine fan, a vast structure that extends from Bangladesh to the south of the Equator which is up to 16.5\u00a0km thick, and contains at least 1130\u00a0trillion tonnes of sediment accumulating over the last 17 million years at an average rate of 665\u00a0million tons/yr. The Bay of Bengal used to be deeper than the Mariana Trench, the present deepest ocean point.\nDuring the annual monsoon period, the rivers of Bangladesh flow at about , but during the dry period they diminish to . Because water is vital to agriculture, more than 60% of the net arable land, some , is cultivated in the rainy season despite the possibility of severe flooding, and nearly 40% of the land is cultivated during the dry winter months. Water resources development has responded to this \"dual water regime\" by providing flood protection, drainage to prevent over flooding and waterlogging, and irrigation facilities for the expansion of winter cultivation. Major water control projects have been developed by the national government to provide irrigation, flood control, drainage facilities, aids to river navigation and road construction, and hydroelectric power. In addition, thousands of tube wells and electric pumps are used for local irrigation. Despite severe resource constraints, the Government of Bangladesh has made it a policy to try to bring additional areas under irrigation without salinity intrusion.\nWater resources management, including gravity flow irrigation, flood control, and drainage, were largely the responsibility of the Bangladesh Water Development Board. Other public sector institutions, such as the Bangladesh Krishi Bank, the Bangladesh Rural Development Board, the Bangladesh Bank, and the Bangladesh Agricultural Development Corporation were also responsible for the promotion and development of minor irrigation works in the private sector through government credit mechanisms.\nCoastal systems.\nBangladesh coastal areas are covering the south part of Bangladesh. The main rivers of Bangladesh derived from the Himalayas carry a high level of sediment and deposit it across the Bay of Bengal. This has led to major changes in the coastal region between 1989 and 2018. Over 30 years of morphological changes many islands are losing land area. However, there has been an overall net gain in the land area due to the regular acceleration process in other parts of those islands. In the west, new islands were found, but no significant changes were observed. At the mouth of the Meghna estuary, noticeable variable changes have been observed with the formation of many new islands.\nIn 1989, the land area was only 28835\u00a0km2 (56.06%), while the water area was 22600\u00a0km2 (43.94%) with the region falling among 20\u00b0 34' N to 26\u00b038 N and 88\u00b0 01' E to 92\u00b0 41' E, and with an area of 147,570\u00a0km2. In 2018, the land area increased to 29426\u00a0km2 (57.21%); an increase of 590\u00a0km2 (1.15%). The land area in 1999 and 2009 was 56.49% and 56.68%, respectively, with a total increase of 0.19%. The island reformation tendency showed that the new land area increased every year by an average of 20\u00a0km2 (0.038) along the coastal region of Bangladesh. Plant growth has been observed in the newly formed islands over a period of 30 years. In the early stages, the islands are usually muddy waste areas that gradually changed into grasslands and Trees.\nA recent global remote sensing analysis suggested that there were 2,262\u00a0km2 of tidal flats in Bangladesh and is therefore ranked 14th in terms of how much tidal flat occurs there. The analysis showed that the tidal flats of the Meghna River estuary have undergone considerable geomorphological change over a 33-year period, from 1984 to 2016, now only occurring in 17.1% of their initial extent despite expanding in area by 20.6%.\nArea and boundaries.\nArea:\nArea comparative\nLand boundaries:\nCoastline: 580\u00a0km\nMaritime claims:\nElevation extremes:\nResources and land use.\nNatural resources: natural gas, arable land, timber, coal\nLand use:\n\"Arable land:\" 58.96%\n\"Permanent crops:\" 6.53%\n\"other:\" 34.51% (2012)\nIrrigated land: 50,000\u00a0km2 (2008)\nTotal renewable water resources: 1,227\u00a0km3 (2011)\nFreshwater withdrawal (domestic/industrial/agricultural):\n\"total:\" 35.87\u00a0km3/yr (10%/2%/88%)\n\"per capita:\" 238.3 m3/yr (2008)\nEnvironmental concerns.\nNatural hazards:\nMuch of the country is submerged by floodwater in the monsoon season (and traditional settlements and agriculture are adapted to this); damaging floods occur when rivers rise higher than normal; tropical cyclones (hurricanes) and storm surges; droughts; riverbank erosion along the country's major rivers and in the Meghna estuary; earthquakes; possibly tsunamis.\nEnvironment \u2013 current issues:\nCountry very densely populated (1,125 per km2); rapid urbanisation taking place; many people landless, and many live on and cultivate land exposed to floods, riverbank erosion or cyclones; groundwater used for drinking water and irrigation is widely contaminated with naturally occurring arsenic in some floodplain areas; water-borne diseases prevalent; surface water widely polluted by industrial, agricultural and urban effluents, affecting domestic supplies and inland fisheries; intermittent water shortages because of falling water tables in some northern and central parts of the country; increasing water and soil salinity in some coastal areas, especially in the south-west, due to abstraction of river and groundwater upstream; soil degradation due to intensive cropping, depletion of organic matter and unbalanced use of fertilisers; deforestation and soil erosion in hill areas.\nEnvironment \u2013 international agreements:\n\"party to:\"\nBiodiversity, Climate Change, Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol, Desertification, Endangered Species, Environmental Modification, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution, Wetlands\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "68922", "revid": "49380818", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68922", "title": "Demographics of Bangladesh", "text": "Bangladesh is the eighth-most populated country in the world with almost 2.2% of the world's population. As per the final results of the 2022 Census of Bangladesh, the country's population is 169,828,911. Bangladesh has one of the highest population densities in the world and is the only country in the world ranking in the top 10 for both population density and total population.\nBangladesh (previously East Pakistan between 1955 and 1971 and East Bengal between 1947 and 1955) is largely ethnically homogeneous and its name derives from the Bengali ethno-linguistic group which comprises 99% of the population. The Chittagong Hill Tracts, Sylhet, Mymensingh, Barisal and North Bengal regions are home to diverse tribal peoples. There are many dialects of Bengali spoken throughout the region. The dialect spoken by those in Chittagong and Sylhet are particularly distinctive. About (91.04%) of Bangladeshis are Muslims, followed by Hindus (largest-minority) at (7.95%), Buddhists (0.61%) and Christians (0.30%) and others (0.12%) as per 2022 census.\nBangladesh has one of the highest population densities in the world. The total fertility rate (TFR) has been reduced by two thirds since its independence in 1971. The 2025 the TFR in Bangladesh was surveyed at 2.4 per woman, an increase from the last decade and just above the global average.\nPopulation.\nThe April 2023 total population was 169,532,362, which makes Bangladesh the eighth-most populous country in the world.\nPopulation growth rate.\nBangladesh had high rates of population growth in the 1960s and 1970s. Since then however it has seen significant reduction in its total fertility rate. Over a period of three decades it dropped from almost 7 to 2 in 2005\u20132018.\nCensus.\nThe latest decennial census was conducted by the Bangladesh Bureau of Statistics in 2022.\nPopulation by sex and age group.\nPopulation by sex and age group (Census 15.III.2011):\nPopulation census by sex and age group (2022 census):\nUrban and rural.\nThe sprawling mega-city of Dhaka has a huge population, but the majority of the people nonetheless still live in villages in rural areas.\nUrban population: 37.4% of total population (2019 est.)\nRate of urbanisation: 3.13% annual rate of change (2019 est.)\nBangladesh is considered an urban country based on their population density{{citation needed|date=June 2022}}\nVital statistics.\nUN estimates.\nThe Population Department of the United Nations prepared the following estimates. Population estimates account for under numeration in population censuses.\nTotal population: 72.7 years (2018)\nMale: 71.1 years\nFemale: 74.4 years\nLife expectancy at birth.\nSource: \"UN World Population Prospects\"\nEthnic group.\nThe vast majority (about 99%) of Bangladeshis are of the Bengali ethno-linguistic group. This group also spans the neighbouring Indian province of West Bengal. Minority ethnic groups include Meitei, Tripuri, Marma, Tanchangya, Barua, Khasi, Santhals, Chakma, Rakhine, Garo, Biharis, Oraons, and Mundas.\nBiharis are Urdu-speaking, non-Bengalis who emigrated from the state of Bihar and other parts of northern India during the 1947 partition. They are concentrated in the Dhaka and Rangpur areas and number some 300,000. In the 1971 independence war many of them sided with Pakistan, as they stood to lose their positions in the upper levels of society. Hundreds of thousands went to Pakistan and those that remained were interned in refugee camps. Their population declined from about 1 million in 1971 to 600,000 in the late 1980s. Refugees International has called them a \"neglected and stateless\" people as they are denied citizenship by the governments of Bangladesh and Pakistan. As nearly 40 years has passed, two generations of Biharis have been born in these camps. Biharis were granted Bangladeshi citizenship and voting rights in 2008.\nBangladesh's tribal population was enumerated at 897,828 in the 1981 census. These tribes are concentrated in the Chittagong Hill Tracts and around Mymensingh, Sylhet, and Rajshahi. They are of Sino-Tibetan descent and differ markedly in their social customs, religion, language and level of development. They speak Tibeto-Burman languages and most are Buddhist or Hindu. The four largest tribes are Chakmas, Marmas, Tipperas, Tanchangya, and Mros. Smaller groups include the Santals in Rajshahi and Dinajpur, and Khasis, Garos, and Khajons in Mymensingh and Sylhet regions.\nThere are small communities of Meitei people (alias Manipuri people) in the Sylhet district, which is close to the Meitei homeland across the border in Manipur, India.\nThere is a large population of Rohingya refugees from Myanmar near the border in the southeast. There are 28,000 living in two UN refugee camps in Cox's Bazar as well as some 200,000 \"unregistered people of concern\" living outside of the camps. The refugee crisis originated in the early 1990s when the first wave numbering some 250,000 of the predominantly Muslim ethnic group fled persecution from their home in Rakhaine\u2014Myanmar's westernmost state. Bangladesh seeks to repatriate the refugees back to Myanmar. Since 2017, there are approximately 1.1 million Rohingya refugees living in Bangladesh.\nLanguages.\nBangladesh has 44 indigenous languages according to Professor Shameem Reza.\nAccording to the Ethnologue, there are 36 indigenous living languages, which include 17 Sino-Tibetan, 10 Indo-European, 7 Austro-Asiatic and 2 Dravidian languages.\nReligion.\nBangladesh has a population of 165,158,616 as per 2022 census.\nMigration.\nImmigration.\nAccording to the United Nations, there were 1,500,921 international migrants in Bangladesh in 2017. Estimation shows that over 1 million Rohingya Muslim refugees live in Bangladesh have arrived during the ongoing Rohingya genocide in Myanmar. On 28 September 2018, at the 73rd United Nations General Assembly, Bangladeshi Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina said there are 1.1-1.3 million Rohingya refugees now in Bangladesh.\nTheir most common countries of origin were as follows:\nThe United Nations has estimated the Bangladesh diaspora as 4,499,919 people with the greatest migration to the following countries:"}
{"id": "68923", "revid": "613068", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68923", "title": "Thomas, Count of Savoy", "text": "Count of Savoy from 1189 to 1233\nThomas \u0399 (\"Tommaso I\"; c. 1178 \u2013 1 March 1233) was Count of Savoy from 1189 to 1233. He is sometimes numbered \"Thomas I\" to distinguish him from his son of the same name. His long reign marked a decisive period in the history of Savoy.\nBiography.\nThomas was born in Aiguebelle, the son of Humbert III of Savoy and Beatrice of Viennois. He was still a minor when his father died in 1189, and his mother acted as regent until 1191 during his minority reign. Despite his youth he began the push northwest into new territories. In the same year he granted Aosta Valley the \"Charte des Franchises\", recognising the right to administrative and political autonomy (this right was maintained until the French Revolution). Later he conquered Vaud, Bugey, and Carignano. He supported the Hohenstaufens, and was known as \"Thomas the Ghibelline\" because of his career as Imperial Vicar of Lombardy.\nThomas worked throughout his reign to expand the control and influence of the County of Savoy. One of the key tools that he used was his large number of children, whom he worked to get into positions of influence in neighbouring regions. In part, this was done by getting many of his sons into episcopal offices in surrounding territories, at a time when bishops had temporal as well as spiritual authority. In addition to William and Boniface, who made their careers in the clergy, their brother Thomas started out as a canon at Lausanne and became pr\u00e9v\u00f4t of Valence by 1226. Pietro was also a canon at Lausanne and served as acting bishop there until he was replaced in 1231. In 1219 he worked to get his daughter Beatrice married to the fourteen-year-old Ramon Berenguer IV, Count of Provence. This established a close relationship between the two adjoining counties which would help cement Savoy's control over trade between Italy and France.\nThomas fought many battles to expand his control. In 1215, his troops fought in an alliance with Milan against Monferrato, destroying the town of Casale. In 1222, he captured Cavour. He also worked through diplomatic and economic means to expand his control. The county of Savoy long enjoyed control over critical passes through the Alps. In his quest to gain more control over Turin, Thomas made an agreement with its rival Asti to reroute its French trade around Turin through Savoyard lands in a treaty on 15 September 1224. In 1226, Emperor Frederick II came to northern Italy and named Thomas Imperial Vicar of Lombardy. In this role, he mediated in a Genoese rebellion and a dispute between the town of Marseille and its bishop. Thomas also made a policy of granting franchises and charters to towns on key trade routes, which enabled the merchant class to develop more wealth and built support for his rule.\nFamily and children.\nIn 1195, Thomas ambushed the party of Count William I of Geneva, which was escorting the count's daughter, Margaret of Geneva, to France for her intended wedding to King Philip II of France. Thomas carried off Margaret and married her himself. They had:\n# Amadeus, married Margaret d'Albon and later married Cecile de Beaux\n# Humbert, d. between March and November 1223\n# Thomas, lord and then count in Piedmont and founder of a line that became the Savoy-Achaea, married Jeanne of Flanders, and later Beatrice de Fiesco\n# Aymon, d. 30 August 1237, Lord of Chablais\n# William, Bishop of Valence and Dean of Vienne\n# Amadeus, Bishop of Maurienne\n# Peter, who resided much in England, held the Honour of Richmond, and ultimately in 1263 became the disputed count of Savoy\n# Philip, archbishop of Lyon, who resigned, through marriage became Count Palatine of Burgundy and ultimately in 1268 became the disputed count of Savoy\n# Boniface, who became archbishop of Canterbury\n# Beatrice, d. 1265 or 1266, married in December 1219 to Ramon Berenguer IV, Count of Provence (1209\u20131245)\n# Alice (1209\u20131277), abbess of the monastery of St Pierre in Lyon (1250\u20131277) \n# Agatha, abbess of the monastery of St Pierre in Lyon (1277) following her sister's death (d. ?)\n# Margaret, d. 1273, married in 1218 to Hartmann IV of Kyburg\n# Avita (1215\u201392)\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "68925", "revid": "4497767", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68925", "title": "Boniface of Savoy (bishop)", "text": "Archbishop of Canterbury from 1241 to 1270\nBoniface of Savoy (c.\u20091207\u00a0\u2013 18 July 1270) was a medieval Bishop of Belley in Savoy and Archbishop of Canterbury in England. He was the son of Thomas, Count of Savoy and owed his initial ecclesiastical posts to his father. Other members of his family were also clergymen, and a brother succeeded his father as count. One niece Eleanor of Provence was married to King Henry III of England, and another was married to King Louis IX of France. It was Henry who secured Boniface's election as Archbishop, and throughout his tenure of that office, he spent much time on the continent. He clashed with his bishops, with his nephew-by-marriage, and with the papacy but managed to eliminate the archiepiscopal debt that he had inherited on taking office. During Simon de Montfort's struggle with King Henry, Boniface initially helped Montfort's cause but later supported the king. After his death in Savoy, his tomb became the object of a cult, and he was eventually beatified in 1839.\nEarly life.\nBoniface and his elder brother Amadeus IV, Count of Savoy were sons of Thomas I, Count of Savoy, and Margaret of Geneva. He is thus not to be confused with his nephew and fellow member of the House of Savoy, Count Boniface of Savoy, the son of Amadeus IV. The elder Boniface was born about 1207 in Savoy. He was the eleventh child of his parents. Some sources state that at a young age he joined the Carthusian Order. However, there is no evidence of this, and it would have been very unusual for a nobleman to enter that order with its very strict discipline. He also had a brother Peter of Savoy who was named Earl of Richmond in 1240 and yet another brother William of Savoy, who was Bishop of Valence and a candidate to be Bishop of Winchester in England.\nEcclesiastical career.\nBoniface was the Prior of Nantua in 1232 along with the bishopric of Belley in Burgundy. When his father died, he received the castle of Ugine as his inheritance, and he surrendered any entitlement to any other inheritance in 1238. After the marriage of his niece, Eleanor of Provence to King Henry III of England, he came with a number of her relatives to England.\nHenry attempted to have Boniface elected Bishop of Winchester but was unable to get the cathedral chapter to elect Boniface. On 1 February 1241 he was nominated to the see of Canterbury. Papal approval was delayed, however, by the opposition of Simon Langton, archdeacon of Canterbury, and by the deaths of two popes. Pope Innocent IV confirmed the appointment on 16 September 1243, as an attempt to placate Henry. Boniface did not, however, come to England until 1244 and was present, in the following year 1245, at the First Council of Lyon. There, he was consecrated by Innocent IV on 15 January at Lyons, but it was only in 1249 that he returned to England and was enthroned at Canterbury Cathedral on 1 November 1249. Before he returned in 1249, he helped arrange the marriage another of his nieces, Beatrice of Provence, the sister of Queen Eleanor, to Charles of Anjou, the brother of King Louis IX of France.\nThe medieval chronicler Matthew Paris said that Boniface was \"noted more for his birth than for his brains.\" He showed little concern for the spiritual duties of his office. His exactions and his overbearing behaviour, combined with the fact that he was a foreigner, offended the English. He was heavily involved in advancing the fortunes of his family on the continent and spent fourteen of the twenty-nine years he was archbishop outside England. He made strenuous efforts to free his office from debt, as he had inherited a see that was in debt over 22,000 marks, but managed to clear the debt before his death. He did this by securing the right to tax his clergy, for seven years, from the papacy. When a number of bishops refused to pay, they were suspended from office. He also worked for the canonisation of Edmund of Abingdon while he was at the papal court-in-exile at Lyon from 1244 to 1249.\nIn 1244, Boniface rejected Robert Passelewe, who had been selected as Bishop of Chichester, on the grounds that Passelewe was illiterate. Boniface then nominated his own candidate, Richard of Chichester, and although the king objected, Pope Innocent IV confirmed Richard's election. In 1258, Boniface objected to the selection of Hugh de Balsham as Bishop of Ely, and tried to elevate Adam Marsh instead, but Hugh appealed to Rome, which upheld Hugh's election. Boniface held church councils to reform the clergy, in 1257 at London, in 1258 at Merton, and in 1261 at Lambeth.\nDuring his archiepiscopate, a provincial court was established in the archdiocese of Canterbury, with a presiding \"Officialis\" appointed by Boniface.\nControversies.\nBoniface was energetic in defending the liberties of his see, and clashed with King Henry over the election of Henry's clerk Robert Passelewe to the see of Chichester. Robert Grosseteste, the Bishop of Lincoln, had examined Passelewe, and found him unfit for episcopal office, and Boniface then quashed the election in 1244. He was also involved in disputes with the king's half-brothers, especially Aymer de Valence, who was Bishop of Winchester. He also quarrelled with his suffragan bishops, who resented his attempts to supervise their affairs closely. In 1250 Boniface attempted a visitation of his province, and this disturbed his suffragan bishops, who protested that Boniface was taking exorbitant amounts of money during his visits. They appealed to the pope, who reaffirmed the right of Boniface to conduct his visitation but set a limit on the amount that could be taken from any monastery or church. After the visitation, Boniface left England again and only returned in 1252, after the pope had decided the bishops' appeal in Boniface's favour. After his return, he continued to assert his rights and settled a number of disputes with his bishops. He secured professions of obedience from all but three of the 37 bishops consecrated during his time as archbishop. He also set up a court at Canterbury that heard appeals from the ecclesiastical courts of his suffragan bishops.\nBoniface clashed with Henry's half-brothers, the Lusignans, who arrived in England in 1247 and competed for lands and promotions with the queens' Savoy relatives. Boniface's quarrel with Aymer de Valence over a hospital in Southwark led to the archbishop's palace at Lambeth being plundered and one of Boniface's functionaries being kidnapped. The dispute with Aymer was only settled in early 1253. Boniface was once more absent from England from October 1254 to November 1256, and spent most of that time in Savoy where he attempted to help his brothers rescue their eldest brother Thomas who was being held captive at Turin.\nIn 1258 and 1259, Boniface was a member of the Council of Fifteen, which conducted business for Henry III under the Provisions of Oxford. This Council consisted of the earls of Leicester, Gloucester, Norfolk, Warwick, Hereford, the Count of Aumale, Peter of Savoy, John fitzGeoffrey, Peter de Montfort, Richard Grey, Roger Mortimer, James Audley, John Maunsell, Walter de Cantilupe, Bishop of Worcester as well as Boniface. One of the actions of this council was to send the Lusignans into exile. In April 1260, Boniface worked with Richard of Cornwall to broker a peace between King Henry and Prince Edward.\nBoniface accompanied the queen and Prince Edward to Burgos for the marriage of Edward to Eleanor of Castile and Edward's knighting. But in 1261 Boniface held a church council at Lambeth, where a series of ecclesiastical laws were published which denounced any royal limitations on ecclesiastical courts. These decrees were done without royal consent and thus was tantamount to an ecclesiastical revolt against royal authority similar to the baronial opposition movement that had begun in 1258.\nDuring the Second Barons' War, Boniface seems to have sided first with the English bishops against King Henry, but later he sided with Henry. In 1262, he went to France, excommunicating the barons opposing the king. He was not summoned to the Parliament at London in January 1265 because he was abroad. On the triumph of the king's party in 1265, he returned to England, arriving there in May 1266.\nDeath and aftermath.\nThe Early English Gothic chapel of Lambeth Palace dates from work carried out while Boniface was archbishop. Boniface left England in November 1268 and never returned. He died 18 July 1270, in Savoy. He was buried with his family in the Cistercian abbey of Hautecombe in Savoy. In his will, he left legacies to all the houses of the Franciscans and Dominicans in the diocese of Canterbury. His will had differing provisions for his burial depending on whether he died in England, France, or near the Alps. Oddly enough, his official seal included a head of the pagan god Jupiter Serapis along with the usual depiction of the archbishop in full vestments.\nAfter his death, Boniface's tomb was the center of a cult, and when the tomb was opened in 1580, his body was found to be perfectly preserved. The tomb and effigy were destroyed in the French Revolution, his remains were reburied and a new tomb built in 1839. He was beatified by Pope Gregory XVI in 1839, and his feast day is 14 July.\nAlthough Matthew Paris disapproved of Boniface, modern historians have seen him as a responsible archbishop. The historian D. A. Carpenter says that Boniface \"became a respected and reforming archbishop\". His episcopal registers do not survive.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "68926", "revid": "10248457", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68926", "title": "Politics of Bangladesh", "text": " \nThe politics of Bangladesh operate in a framework of a parliamentary representative democratic republic, whereby the Prime Minister is the head of government and of a multi-party system. Executive power is exercised by the government. Legislative power is vested in both the government and parliament. The Constitution of Bangladesh was written in 1972 and has undergone seventeen amendments.\nThe current parliamentary system was adopted in 1991 and is based on the Westminster system. Between 1975 and 1990, the nation experienced military rule. A caretaker government was first introduced in 1990, after the resignation of military dictator Lieutenant General Hussain Muhammad Ershad to observe a neutral democratic election, as per demands of the two major political parties Bangladesh Nationalist Party (BNP) and Awami League (AL). Following the forced resignation of Ershad, Chief Justice Shahabuddin Ahmed was nominated as the Chief Advisor and observed the 1991 general election. A Caretaker government is headed by a Chief Adviser who enjoys the same power as the regular prime minister of the country except defense matters. The Advisors function as Ministers. After 1991, the Caretaker government has also held the elections of 1996, 2001 and 2008. Although, the first caretaker government was intended to help the transition from authoritarianism to democracy, this system was institutionalized in 1996, by the Sixth Parliament due to rising mistrust between the BNP and AL. In 2011, the then ruling party AL abolished the caretaker government system. This has been the biggest cause of dispute among many others between the BNP and the AL since then.\nThe Economist Intelligence Unit rated Bangladesh a \"hybrid regime\" in .\nPolitical parties and elections.\nThe two major parties in Bangladesh are the Bangladesh Nationalist Party (BNP) and Bangladesh Awami League. Traditionally, the BNP found allies among Islamist parties like Jamaat-e-Islami Bangladesh while the AL aligned itself with leftist and secular parties such as Jatiya Samajtantrik Dal. Although in recent times, the BNP aligns itself more with leftist parties while the AL acts independently. Another important player is the Jatiya Party, headed by late Hussain Muhammad Ershad's brother GM Quader. The Awami League-BNP rivalry has been bitter and punctuated by protests, violence and murder. Student politics is particularly strong in Bangladesh, a legacy from the liberation movement era. Almost all parties have highly active student wings, and students have been elected to the parliament.\nThree radical Islamist parties, Jagrata Muslim Janata Bangladesh (JMJB), Jama'atul Mujahideen Bangladesh (JMB) and Harkatul Jihad, were banned in February 2004 on grounds of militancy and terrorism. Following the first series of bans, a series of bomb attacks took place in the country in August 2005. Evidence of staging these attacks by these extremist groups had been found in the investigation, and hundreds of suspected members were detained in numerous security operations in 2006, including the two chiefs of the JMB, Shaykh Abdur Rahman and Bangla Bhai, who were executed with other top leaders in March 2007, bringing the radical parties to an end.\nElection History.\n1973.\nThe 1973 general election was held on 7 March 1973. There were 15 seats reserved for women.\n1979.\nThe 1979 general election was held on 18 February 1979. There were 30 seats reserved for women.\n1986.\nThe 1986 general election was held on 7 May 1986. There were 30 seats reserved for women.\n1988.\nThe 1988 general election was held on 3 March 1988. There were 30 seats reserved for women.\n1991.\nThe 1991 general election was held on 13 January 1991. There were 30 seats reserved for women.\nFebruary 1996.\nFollowing boycotts by the main opposition party, the Bangladesh Awami League, the Bangladesh Nationalist Party won the uncontested elections. However, amidst protests, they were made to cave into Awami League's original demands, dissolve the parliament, and hold elections under a neutral caretaker government, after the enactment of the 13th amendment.\nJune 1996.\nThe Awami League had won a general election for the first time since 1973 by forming a coalition government, since they fell 5 seats short of a majority.\n2001.\nThe BNP won a two-thirds parliamentary majority and won the 2001 general election.\n2008.\nThe Awami League won a two-thirds parliamentary majority and won the 2008 general election.\n2014.\nThe Awami League were declared victors in 127 of 154 uncontested seats by default in the 5 January 2014 elections. Of the remaining uncontested seats, the Jatiya Party led by Rowshan Ershad won 20, the JSD won three, the Workers Party won two and the Jatiya Party (Manju) won one.\nAs a result of violence and the opposition boycott, voter turnout was only 22%. Results of 139 seats out of 147 were released, with the Awami League winning 105, the Jatiya Party winning 13, the Workers Party winning four, the JSD winning two and the Tarikat Federation and BNF winning one each. The remaining 8 constituencies election were suspended due to violence and re-election to be held. The newly elected MPs were sworn in on 9 January.\n2018.\nThe 2018 general election held on 30 December 2018, voter turnout was 80%. Bangladesh Awami League under the leadership of Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina won their 4th term as the ruling party with 257 seats. The Jatiya Party became the main opposition party with only 22 seats.\n2024.\nThe 2024 Bangladesh general election was held on 7 January 2024.\nNepotism and dynastic politics.\nPolitical dynasties are a common occurrence in East Asia, and have been prevalent in Bangladesh since it gained independence. A political dynasty usually refers to a party or any political body run by a single family, with long-established economic or political dominance passed down or inherited. The influence of political dynasties often spills over to the general public sphereand prevalence of this phenomenon has the potential to discourage civil society organizations from taking part in politics \nThere are several suggested explanations for the prevalence and success of dynastic politics.\nTwo major political dynasties, one led by former prime minister Khaleda Zia, the widow of former military ruler Ziaur Rahman, who has led the BNP since 1981, and her son Tarique Rahman, alongside the prime minister Sheikh Hasina, daughter of Sheikh Mujibur Rahman, who has led the AL since 1981, are known for their rivalry.\nIn recent years, increased awareness of the adverse effects of this political system has caused some shift in public perception.\nPolitical issues.\nCorruption.\nBangladesh has seen political corruption for decades. According to all major ranking institutions, Bangladesh routinely finds itself among the most corrupt countries in the world.\nSocial issues.\nSocial issues in Bangladesh range from liberal inceptions such as women's rights, religious liberty, religious freedom, modernity, industrialization to religious issues such as blasphemy laws, sharia legal system, religious conservatism and state religion. The two main parties, the Bangladesh Nationalist Party and the Awami League, both have contested against each other since the millennium over these issues.\nHistory.\nBackground, Independence movement and Provisional Government.\nAfter the British conquest of Bengal on 23 June 1757 and the overthrowing and execution of Nawab Siraj ud-Daulah, considered as the last independent ruler of the region before regaining independence 200 years later, the Bengal Presidency was divided in British India in the year 1947, as East Bengal and West Bengal mainly on religious grounds. East Bengal allied itself with the newly formed Muslim state of Pakistan and became known as East Pakistan. However the relations between West Pakistan and East Pakistan were politically strained due to various issues of inequality, language, culture and a large distance of over 2,000 kilometres between the two states separated by the foreign lands of India. The central power remained confined in West Pakistan, thus demand for total independent rule of East Pakistan begun led by prominent Bengali politician Abdul Hamid Khan Bhashani, better known as Maulana Bhashani. After a food shortage crisis 1n 1956, between 7 and 23 May 1956, Bhashani went on a hunger strike to demand food for the affected people of East Pakistan. Following the Six point movement in 1966, led by Maulana Bhashani's prot\u00e9g\u00e9 Sheikh Mujibur Rahman, the East Pakistan independence movement gained further momentum.\nOn 5 December 1969, Sheikh Mujibur Rahman stated after independence East Pakistan will be renamed Bangladesh. The situation escalated after the 1970 elections and the 7 March 1971 speech of Sheikh Mujibur Rahman. Maulana Bhashani was the first ever Bengali to declare independence of East Pakistan in a massive public rally on 23 November 1970 but it was not officially recognized. \nAfter a brutal Pakistani army crackdown on the local people of East Pakistan on 25 March 1971 carried out under orders of Pakistan President Yahya Khan, Sheikh Mujibur Rahman, the then Chief of Awami League and the leader of the liberation movement declared independence of Bangladesh (East Pakistan) on 26 March 1971, which was broadcast from Chittagong radio station on 27 March, first by the then Awami League Secretary of Chittagong Mr Abdul Hannan and other Awami League leaders and then by Major Ziaur Rahman on behalf of Sheikh Mujibur Rahman in the evening of 27 March, thus starting the Bangladesh Liberation War. Captain Rafiq BU Commanding Officer of Chittagong East Pakistan Rifles revolted first and subsequently other commanding officers at different places: Major Shafiullah, Major Khaled Musharraf and Major Ziaur Rahman revolted with their forces. Sheikh Mujibur Rahman was arrested by the Pakistan Army in early hours of 26 March, immediately after he declared independence and was taken to West Pakistan, where he remained in jail until early January 1972.\nBangladesh's first government formed on 10 April 1971 and took the oath of office in Meherpur, Kushtia on 17 April 1971. Sheikh Mujibur Rahman was elected as the first president of the Provisional Government of Bangladesh, Syed Nazrul Islam was elected as the vice president, and Tajuddin Ahmed was elected as the first prime minister. Other major cabinet members were Mr Kamruzzaman, Mr Monsur Ali and Khodokar Mustaq Ahmed, all senior Awami League leaders. Sheikh Mujibur Rahman by virtue of his position as the president of Bangladesh became the Supreme Commander of the Liberation Army, while Colonel M.A.G. Osmani was appointed by the provisional government as the Commander-in- Chief of the liberation army. Subsequently, the provisional government formed its secretariat and designated top bureaucrats as chiefs of the divisions of the Secretariat. The Provisional Government later divided Bangladesh into eleven Sectors for conducting war efficiently and in an organized manner. This Government became the first legal political entity on behalf of the fighting people of Bangladesh and represented the people in the international arena. Prime Minister Tajuddin Ahmed started intergovernmental dialogue with the Indian Government immediately after the formation of the Provisional Government. Bangladesh achieved victory in the liberation war on 16 December 1971.\nAs this government was formed during the war of independence from Pakistan, its significance holds a distinction. Its temporary headquarters had been set up at 8 Theatre Road in Calcutta, India.\nFirst Parliamentary Era.\n1972\u20131975: Sheikh Mujibur Rahman.\nOn 8 January 1972, the leader of the Liberation War and Liberation movement Sheikh Mujibur Rahman was released from Pakistan Jail and was sent to London. On Mujib's arrival in London, he was met by the Prime Minister of UK and other world leaders. Sheikh Mujib returned to Bangladesh on 10 January 1972, by a British Royal Air Force Aircraft. Mujib congratulated the Bengali Mukti Bahini (the Bangladesh Liberation Force) for succeeding in the war of liberation against Pakistan army. Mujib was placed at the helm of government, according to the election victory under the unified Pakistan government. In 1973, after the first Bangladesh elections, he continued his term in office with immense backing from India, and public popularity, but had great difficulty transforming this popular support into the political strength needed to function as head of government. The new constitution, which came into force on 16 December 1972, created a strong executive prime minister, a largely ceremonial presidency, an independent judiciary, and a unicameral legislature on a modified Westminster model. The 1972 constitution adopted as state policy the Awami League's (AL) four basic principles of nationalism, secularism, socialism, and democracy. A key author of the constitution of Bangladesh was Dr Kamal Hossain, who has since been a major political figure of the country.\nThe first parliamentary elections held under the 1972 constitution were in March 1973, with the Awami League winning a massive majority, winning a historic 293 out of a total of 300 seats. No other political party in Bangladesh's early years was able to duplicate or challenge the League's broad-based appeal, membership, or organizational strength. Mujib and his cabinet having no experience in governance nor administration, relied heavily on experienced civil servants and political factions of the Awami League, the new Bangladesh Government focused on relief, rehabilitation, and reconstruction of the economy and society. Mujib nationalised the entire economy, banking and industrial sector. Economic conditions took a serious downturn. On top of that heavy corruption among his own party members, factions and senior leadership also added to the devastation and famine. The then U.S. Secretary of State had termed Bangladesh a \"Bottomless Basket\". Amid mass corruption and famine throughout 1974, in December 1974, Mujib decided that continuing economic deterioration and mounting civil disorder required strong measures. After proclaiming a state of emergency, Mujib used his parliamentary majority to win a constitutional amendment limiting the powers of the legislative and judicial branches, establishing an executive presidency, and instituting a one-party system, the Bangladesh Krishak Sramik Awami League (BAKSAL), which all members of Parliament were obliged to join.\nDespite promises, no sign of improvement in the economic situation surfaced. Implementation of promised political reforms was almost nil, and criticism of government policies became increasingly centered on Mujib. Serious disorientation in the armed services, disenchantment in society, deterioration of law and order created a huge mistrust of Mujib and his government including the Awami League itself. The then chief of army staff K M Shafiullah and chief of air staff A.K. Khandker stood stunned and idle during this situation. On 15 August 1975, Mujib, and most of his family, were assassinated by a small group of mid-level army officers. Mujib's daughters, Sheikh Hasina and Sheikh Rehana, happened to be out of the country. A new government, headed by former Mujib associate Khondaker Mostaq Ahmad, was formed.\nMilitary Era.\nAugust\u2013November 1975: Khondaker Mostaq Ahmad.\nMujib's senior cabinet minister Khondaker Mostaq Ahmad formed a new government and immediately initiated a few critical changes in Mujib's policies and rules of business in government. The notorious Jail Killings happened during this period, amidst the confusion in which Bangladesh was plunged on 3 November. On the same day, Brig General Khaled Mosharraf launched his own coup fundamentally as a move to restore the chain of command broken in the army Musharraf moved swiftly to remove Moshtaque Ahmad from office. On 7 November Khaled Musharaf was killed in a counter coup engineered by Colonel Abu Taher.\n1975\u20131981: Ziaur Rahman.\nFollowing Khondaker Mostaq Ahmad's removal and assassination of Brigadier General Khaled Musharaf by a segment of army personnel in 1975, a very short lived revolution resulted in the emergence of arrested deputy Army Chief of Staff Major General Ziaur Rahman, who managed to take the lead and bring the whole nation out of a political quagmire. His first action was to communicate to the people through radio and television and bring order and calm to the nation. He pledged full support to the civilian government headed by President Chief Justice Sayem. Acting at Zia's behest, Sayem dissolved Parliament, and instituted state of emergency under martial law. Zia brought an end to the turbulence within the army. In 1976, Colonel Abu Taher was tried for treason and executed. Fresh elections were to be in 1977 under a multi party democracy with full freedom of the press.\nActing behind the scenes of the Martial Law Administration (MLA), Zia sought to invigorate government policy and administration. Lifting the ban on political parties from Mujib's one party BAKSAL rule, he sought to revitalize the demoralized bureaucracy, to begin new economic development programs, infrastructure buildup, a free press and to emphasize family planning. In November 1976, Zia became Chief Martial Law Administrator (CMLA) and assumed the presidency upon Sayem's retirement 5 months later, on 21 April 1977.\nAs President, Zia announced a 19-point program of economic reform and began dismantling the MLA. Keeping his promise to hold elections, Zia won a 5-year term in the June 1978 elections, with 76% of the vote. In November 1978, his government removed the remaining restrictions on political party activities in time for parliamentary elections in February 1979. These elections, which were contested by more than 30 parties, marked the culmination of Zia's transformation of Bangladesh's Government from the MLA to a democratically elected, constitutional one. The Awami League and the Bangladesh Nationalist Party (BNP), founded by Zia, emerged as the two major parties. The constitution was again amended to provide for an executive prime minister appointed by the president, and responsible to a parliamentary majority. Zia invigorated a strong foreign policy based on sovereignty and economic independence. He initiated many social programs to uplift the poor through honest hard work and education. During this period, Bangladesh's economy achieved fast economic and industrial growth. His greatest legacy on the people of Bangladesh was unity and self-dependence.\nIn May 1981, Zia was assassinated in Chittagong by dissident elements of the military. There was no coup or uprising attempted, and the major conspirators were never taken into custody or killed. In accordance with the constitution, Vice President Justice Abdus Sattar was sworn in as acting president. He immediately set out to continue Zia's policies and called for fresh elections. Due to President Zia's tremendous popularity Sattar won as the BNP's candidate. President Sattar sought to follow the policies of his predecessor and retained essentially the same cabinet.\n1982\u20131990: Hussain Mohammad Ershad.\nArmy Chief of Staff Lt. Gen. Hussain Mohammad Ershad assumed power in a full-fledged but bloodless coup on 24 March 1982. He removed the country's democratically elected president and suspended the constitution and declared martial law. He cited pervasive corruption, ineffectual government, and economic mismanagement for legitimising his action. The following year, Ershad assumed the presidency on 11 December 1983, retaining his positions as army chief and CMLA, for the first time in Bangladesh. During most of 1984, Ershad sought the opposition parties' participation in local elections under martial law. The opposition's refusal to participate, however, forced Ershad to abandon these plans. Ershad was capable of managing the Awami League through financial and political support. The Awami League's support gave him the strength and legitimacy to seek public support for his regime in a national referendum on his leadership in March 1985. He won overwhelmingly, although turnout was small. Two months later, Ershad held elections for local council chairmen. Pro-government candidates won a majority of the posts, setting in motion the President's ambitious decentralization program that Ziaur Rahman had initiated. Political life was finally liberalized in early 1986, and additional political rights, including the right to hold large public rallies, were restored. Additional support from Jamaati Islami at the same time gave Ershad's political vehicle for the transition from martial law some form of legitimacy and the political order of Ershad and his Jatiya Party was established.\nDespite a boycott by the BNP, led Begum Khaleda Zia, parliamentary elections were held on schedule on 7 May 1986. The Jatiya Party won a modest majority of the 300 elected seats in the national assembly. The participation of the Awami League led by party chairman Sheikh Hasina Wazed\u2014lent the elections some credibility, despite widespread charges of voting irregularities and ballot box theft.\nErshad resigned as Army Chief of Staff and retired from military service in preparation for the presidential elections, scheduled for October 1986. Protesting that martial law was still in effect, the BNP refused to put up opposing candidates. The Awami League participated by breaking their open public promise. Ershad easily outdistanced the remaining candidates, taking 84% of the vote. Although Ershad's government claimed a turnout of more than 50%, opposition leaders of BNP, and much of the foreign press, estimated a far lower percentage and alleged voting irregularities.\nErshad continued his stated commitment to lift martial law. In November 1986, his government mustered the necessary two-thirds majority in the national assembly to amend the constitution and confirm the previous actions of the martial law regime. The President then lifted martial law, and the opposition party Awami League of Hasina Wazed took their elected seats in the national assembly.\nIn July 1987, however, after the government hastily pushed through a controversial legislative bill to include military representation on local administrative councils. Passage of the bill helped spark an opposition movement by Bangladesh Nationalist Party that quickly gathered momentum. The Awami League and Jamaat Islami. understanding their political gamble, gradually united with Bangladesh Nationalist Party for the first time. The government began to arrest scores of opposition activists under the country's \"Special Powers Act\" of 1974. Despite these arrests, opposition parties continued to organize protest marches and nationwide strikes. After declaring a state of emergency, Ershad dissolved Parliament and scheduled fresh elections for March 1988.\nAll major opposition parties refused government overtures to participate in these polls, maintaining that the government was illegal and incapable of holding free and fair elections. Despite the opposition boycott, the government proceeded. The ruling Jatiya Party won 251 of the 300 seats. The Parliament, while still regarded by the opposition as an illegitimate body, held its sessions as scheduled, and passed numerous bills.\nBy 1989, the domestic political situation in the country seemed to have quieted. The local council elections were generally considered by international observers to have been less violent and more free and fair than previous elections. However, opposition to Ershad's rule began to regain momentum, escalating by the end of 1990 in frequent general strikes, increased student's campus protests, public rallies, and a general disintegration of law and order. This was popularly termed the 1990 Mass Uprising in Bangladesh.\nOn 6 December 1990, after 2 months of widespread civil unrest, Ershad offered his resignation. On 27 February 1991, an interim government oversaw what most observers widely believed to be the nation's most free and fair elections to date.\nCurrent Parliamentary Era.\n1991\u20131996: Khaleda Zia.\nThe center-right BNP won a plurality of seats in the 1991 Bangladesh General Election and formed a coalition government with the Islamic party Jamaat-e-Islami Bangladesh, with Khaleda Zia, widow of Ziaur Rahman, obtaining the post of prime minister. Only four parties had more than 10 members elected to the 1991 Parliament: The Bangladesh Nationalist Party, led by Prime Minister Khaleda Zia; the Awami League, led by Sheikh Hasina; the Jamaat-e-Islami (JI), led by Golam Azam; and the Jatiya Party (JP), led by acting chairman Mizanur Rahman Chowdhury while its founder, former President Ershad, served out a prison sentence on corruption charges. The electorate approved still more changes to the constitution, formally re-creating a parliamentary system and returning governing power to the office of the prime minister, as in Bangladesh's original 1972 constitution. In October 1991, members of Parliament elected a new head of state, President Abdur Rahman Biswas.\nIn March 1994, controversy over a parliamentary by-election, which the opposition claimed the government had rigged, led to an indefinite boycott of Parliament by the entire opposition. The opposition also began a program of repeated general strikes to press its demand that Khaleda Zia's government resign and a caretaker government supervise a general election. Efforts to mediate the dispute, under the auspices of the Commonwealth Secretariat, failed. After another attempt at a negotiated settlement failed narrowly in late December 1994, the opposition resigned en masse from Parliament. The opposition then continued a campaign of Marches, demonstrations, and strikes in an effort to force the government to resign. The year 1995 observed nearly 200 days of general strikes disrupting the countries normal activities. The opposition, including the Awami League's Sheikh Hasina, pledged to boycott national elections scheduled for 15 February 1996.\nIn February, Khaleda Zia was re-elected for the second term by a landslide in voting boycotted and denounced as unfair by the three main opposition parties. In March 1996, following escalating political turmoil, the sitting Parliament enacted a constitutional amendment to allow a neutral caretaker government to assume power conduct new parliamentary elections; former Chief Justice Muhammad Habibur Rahman was named Chief Advisor (a position equivalent to prime minister) in the interim government. New parliamentary elections were held in June 1996, and were won by the Awami League; party leader Sheikh Hasina became prime minister.\n1996\u20132001: Sheikh Hasina.\nSheikh Hasina formed what she called a \"Government of National Consensus\" in June 1996, which included one minister from the Jatiya Party and another from the Jatiyo Samajtantrik Dal, a very small leftist party. The Jatiya Party never entered into a formal coalition arrangement, and party president H.M. Ershad withdrew his support from the government in September 1997. Only three parties had more than 10 members elected to the 1996 Parliament: The Awami League, BNP, and Jatiya Party. Jatiya Party president, Ershad, was released from prison on bail in January 1997.\nBNP staged a walkout from parliament in August 1997. The BNP returned to Parliament under another agreement in March 1998. In June 1999, the BNP and other opposition parties again began to abstain from attending Parliament. Opposition parties have staged an increasing number of nationwide general strikes, rising from 6 days of general strikes in 1997 to 27 days in 1999. A four-party opposition alliance formed at the beginning of 1999 announced that it would boycott parliamentary by-elections and local government elections unless the government took steps demanded by the opposition to ensure electoral fairness. The government did not take these steps, and the opposition has subsequently boycotted all elections, including municipal council elections in February 1999, several parliamentary by-elections, and the Chittagong city corporation elections in January 2000. The opposition demands that the Awami League government step down immediately to make way for a caretaker government to preside over parliamentary and local government. In March 2000, US President Bill Clinton became the first US president to visit Bangladesh. Hasina later stated that during the visit Clinton wanted to import gas from the Country, but she had to decline due to fear of scarcity of gas and for the welfare of the people as they were heavily dependent on gas.\n2001\u20132006: Khaleda Zia.\nA Khaleda-led four-party alliance won two-thirds of total parliamentary seats with a total 193 seats, while Awami League won 62 seats. Thus Khaleda Zia won a third term as prime minister in 2001. Her coalition included several Islamist parties. The Awami League walked out from the Parliament in June 2003 to protest derogatory remarks about Sheikh Hasina by a State Minister and the allegedly partisan role of the Parliamentary Speaker. Throughout the year 2004 the opposition party Awami League carried out various processions pressing various demands and claiming government incompetence on various issues. In June 2004, the Awami League returned to Parliament without having any of their demands met.\nOn 21 August 2004, a group of terrorists conducted vicious grenade attacks on a rally held by the opposition party Awami League including leader Sheikh Hasina. Prominent leaders including Ivy Rahman were killed in the attack, and Hasina herself sustained injuries to her ears. A total of 13 grenades were blasted and 24 people killed. The Awami League called for a nationwide hartal (general strikes) on 23 and 24 August 2004 following the incident. Begum Khaleda Zia, then Prime Minister of Bangladesh condemned the attacks, and also vowed a strong probe to catch the culprits. But no charge sheet was provided by the investigating departments. Only after the current government tenure ended a neutral probe formed and charge sheet was provided includes terrorist Mufti Hannan. Later, during Awami League tenure another probe formed and alleged that Tarique Rahman son of Prime Minister Khaleda Zia along with the then Home Minister Lutfuzzaman Babar had masterminded the attack. But BNP has denied the allegations.\nIn 2005, Awami League attended Parliament irregularly before announcing a boycott of the entire June 2005 budget session. The BNP government tenure expired in October 2006, and was followed by a period of widespread political crisis.\n2006\u20132008: Caretaker government: Fakhruddin Ahmed.\nFollowing the end of Khaleda Zia's government in late October 2006, there were protests and strikes over uncertainty about who would head the caretaker government (which was accused of BNP bias), held by Awami League, paralyzing the country and resulting in the death of at least 40 people in the following month in November 2006.\nAn election was scheduled for the beginning of 2007, however it did not take place. Given the parties' failure to agree on a candidate For Chief Advisor, according to the constitution the position devolved to the President, Iajuddin Ahmed, serving since 2002. He took it on in addition to his regular responsibilities, which under the caretaker government included the Defense Ministry. Iajuddin Ahmed formed a government, appointing ten advisors to a council to act as ministers. He appointed his press spokesman, the journalist-editor turned politician M Mukhlesur Rahman Chowdhury, as his chief Presidential Advisor, with the status of Minister of State. Chowdhury had the responsibility to negotiate with the political parties to bring them to participation in the election. In January 2007, Iajuddin Ahmed stepped down as the head of the caretaker government, under pressure from the military.\nFakhruddin Ahmed, former World Bank economist, was selected to replace him and with the commitment to rooting out corruption and preparing a better voter list. Fakhruddin Ahmed became the Chief Advisor. A State of Emergency was declared and a massive campaign to crack down on corruption was undertaken. By July 2007, some 200,000 people had been arrested under corruption charges. The government said it would hold elections before the end of 2008.\nIn April 2007, Ahmed's military backed administration attempted to reform the political parties by exiling Hasina and Zia, but this was never enforced. Hasina, who had been visiting her children in the US, was allowed to return but she had to face serious charges, including involvement in the assassination of four political rivals. In July, she was arrested after two businessmen testified that she had extorted \u09f380 million (US$1.16 million) from them. This provoked angry protests from her supporters; even her bitter rival Khaleda Zia, as well as six British MPs and MEPs, called for her release. Khaleda herself faced charges of tax evasion and was later arrested. Tarique Rahman was taken to custody for the 2004 grenade attacks and various corruption charges including money laundering, and was later sent on forced exile on 11 September 2008 and since then has not been able to return to the country. After holding power for almost two years, the political situation had finally calmed and Ahmed decided to return parliamentary democracy, testing the political situation with some local elections held on 4 August 2008, which were peaceful. Both Hasina and Khaleda were finally released from prison and the General elections were held on 29 December 2008. The Awami League and its Grand Alliance won the elections with two-thirds of the seats in parliament. The BNP and its four-party alliance, including Jamaat-e-Islami, was the major opposition.\n2009\u20132024: Sheikh Hasina.\nThe Awami League came to power by winning the vast majority of parliament seats in the election held on 29 December 2008, and Sheikh Hasina became the Prime Minister of Bangladesh for the second time. Her cabinet took oath on 6 January 2009. HM Ershad was promised to be made President in exchange for support for Awami League, but despite supporting Awami League, this promise was not fulfilled and Zillur Rahman became president. The first two years under this government was peaceful, but a debatable issue took place when the Awami League government enforced an existing law to reclaim the house where Khaleda Zia had lived for nearly 40 years for a nominal cost. Khaleda Zia moved to the house of her brother Sayeed Iskandar at Gulshan. In protest BNP would abstain from parliament. This period also observed tremendous economic growth.\nControversy erupted in 2011 after Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina declared the abolition of the care-taker government system, contradicting her own motives and views in the mid-1990s when she had demanded that elections should be held under neutral care-taker governments. Hasina justified this by stating that a neutral care-taker government may abuse its power (referring to the care-taker government crisis in 2006\u20132008) and take unlawful and autocratic control of the country. At the same time, arrests and trials of members accused of war crimes of the political party Jamaat-e-Islami had begun. This caused major disagreements among the ruling Awami League with the chief opposition party BNP and its major ally Jamaat. In a bid to return to the 1972 Constitution, the government made several reforms to the constitution of Bangladesh in 2011, and readopted Secularism. In 2012, a coup attempt against Hasina by mid-ranking army officers was stopped, with Bangladesh army being tipped off by Indian intelligence agency. Also in 2012, Bangladesh won a legal battle against Myanmar under international court regarding disputed sea territories, giving Bangladesh a tremendous advantage on the oceanic areas.\nThe period 2012-2014 was marked by widespread political unrest and violence in strikes and riots initiated by the opposition party. Petrol bombs were utilized for arson attacks. Members of both the ruling party and opposition party clashed throughout the whole nation resulting in injuries and deaths. Both the ruling party and the opposition received International criticism. The scheduled date of the 10th general election was 5 January 2014. The opposition party received several pleas by the ruling party to abandon their path of violence and join the election, but they repeatedly declined. Despite the crisis the controversial 5 January 2014 election was held with mass boycott from BNP and its major allies. At least 21 people were killed on the 5 January election day violence. Awami League had a landslide victory, and Sheikh Hasina was sworn in as prime minister for the third time on 9 January 2014, while Rowshan Ershad of the Jatiya Party became the new leader of the opposition, as Khaleda-led BNP boycotted the election. The ongoing BNP-Jamaat protests diluted after failing to stop the January 2014 election, and overthrow the ruling party, and by the end of March 2014, political stability was reached.\nIn the tenth general election, Sheikh Hasina won a controversial one-sided walkover election after her main rival Khaleda Zia and all other opposition parties boycotted the polls. Awami League once again took office on 9 January 2014. Over 100 people were killed in the 2016 Union Parishad Election in violent clashes between Awami League and BNP supporters. In April 2017 Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina made a landmark visit to neighboring India and signed 22 new deals and MoUs with India taking the Indo-BD bilateral relationships to a new height. This also included a defense cooperation, originally proposed by India. BNP harshly criticized the move with Khaleda alleging the ruling party was selling Bangladesh to India and pointing the Government's failure to make the long-awaited Teesta deal. Awami League dismissed the allegations, assuring that it was just a framework to strengthen regional ties with India. Also in 2017 Bangladesh was met with the 2017 Rohingya Refugee Crisis, in which the government received international praise for allowing over 700,000 Rohingya refugees fleeing violence in Myanmar (where around 20,000 of them were killed) into the country but also some domestic criticisms due to this being an additional burden to Bangladesh a country already overpopulated with 17 crore (170 million) people and having a small land.\nMost of the post 2014 election period however saw political calm. Tensions between the BNP and Awami League reignited in 2018 after BNP once again started pressing demands for a neutral caretaker government to observe the 11th general election. BNP also criticized Awami League's rising dependency on law enforcement agencies such as the police force and for holding back people's freedom of speech. On 8 February 2018 Khaleda Zia and Tarique Rahman as per court verdict, were jailed for 5 and 10 years respectively due to their involvement in the Zia Charitable Trust corruption case. While Tarique was on exile, Khaleda would be imprisoned on old Dhaka Central Jail located in Nazimuddin Road. BNP totally rejected the verdict, alleging that it was Awami League's conspiracy to destroy their party and to keep them out of the next general election. In protest BNP held nationwide demonstrations, which were foiled by the well prepared police force across the nation, with a large number of BNP members also being arrested during clashes with the police. After Khaleda Zia was jailed, BNP Secretary General Mirza Fakhrul Islam Alamgir and prominent leader Ruhul Kabir Rizvi oversaw most of the party's activities. After Khalada Zia's prison sentence was challenged at the High Court, it was increased to 10 years, potentially ending her political career. During this time the government passed the controversial \"Digital Security Act 2018\", under which any criticisms of the government over the internet or any other media, would be met with various degrees of prison terms.\nOn 22 September 2018, in a massive rally, the newly formed coalition party: Jatiya Oikya Prokriya (JOP), a platform led by Dr. Kamal Hossain and Prof. Badruddoza Chowdhury, allied themselves with the main opposition party BNP, on condition BNP will no longer be alliance with Jamaat, and vowed joint movements to restore democracy. The BNP-JOP alliance was named the Jatiya Oikya Front. The Awami League General Secretary Obaidul Quader called the opposing Jatiya Oikya Front, weak and stated that the opposing alliance was not being viewed as a credible threat by the Government. On 10 October 2018, court verdict against the 2004 grenade attack was given. Top BNP leader Lutfuzzaman Babar was given the death penalty and Tariqe Rahman was given life term imprisonment. BNP rejected the verdict and carried out protests against it. During this time, Kamal Hossain as the leader of the Jatiya Oikya Front became the main opposition leader.\nThe 2018 Bangladeshi general election was held on 30 December 2018. On the election day at least 14 people died in violence between the Awami League supporters and the Jatiya Oikya Front supporters. The Awami League returned to power winning 259 out of 300 parliamentary seats, making up the largest government body in Bangladesh after 1973 (where Awami League had won 293 out of 300 seats). The Jatiya Oikya Front only won 7 seats and alleged the 2018 election to be rigged and opted to boycott the parliament and stated that they would demand for fresh elections. The Jatiya Party became the main opposition party with only 20 seats.\nBangladesh Awami League leader Sheikh Hasina's new cabinet took oath on 3 January 2019. Despite refusing to sell gas (LPG) at a better deal to the US back in 2000, in October 2019 Sheikh Hasina in a contradictory statement controversially stated that she will sell LPG to India despite the scarcity of LPG in Bangladesh (BD). Hasina also stated she will give India free access to extract BD's Feni water, despite her failure to secure the Teesta river sharing deal. The dispute between Bangladesh and Myanmar over the unresolved Rohingya Refugee Crisis continued during this period, with Myanmar's unwillingness to take back the refugees. In October 2020 Myanmar deployed their army troops on the Bangladesh border. Bangladesh appealed to the UN Security Council to prevent any escalation. Later Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina assured \"a safe zone must be created for the Rohingyas Refugees. If that is done, Myanmar will face a huge problem in the Rakhine region. I don't think Myanmar will lock in war with Bangladesh; China will not let that happen.\" No further escalations have been reported, Bangladesh and Myanmar have since remained in peace militarily, but the diplomatic dispute continues to be debated at the UN.\nSince the 2018 General Election the nation witnessed four years of political silence due to strict policing.During this time corruption remained rampant. The Awami League government allowed Politicians, Government Officials and Businessmen to smuugle billions of taka out of the country to Canada, particularly Begum Para, Toronto. In 2022 BNP and Jamaat-e-Islami Bangladesh after temporarily renewing their alliance, increasingly started to criticize the Awami League Government over rising inflationary crisis and corruption, including unsustainable fuel and energy price hikes as well as massive power outage despite the Government's promise to implement 100% electricity in the nation. While price levels of every items especially food, begun to rise, people's income level became stale and the Prime Minister herself warned of possible famine in the future and called for the general public to reduce their consumption, however did not say anything about politicians, businessmen and government officials living luxurious lives and causing flight of capital abroad. This cumulated to BNP and Jamaat-e-Islami Bangladesh staging massive protests on 24 December 2022, during clashes with the police one BNP activist was killed in Panchagarh. Due to strict policing the protests ended prematurely On 1 January 2024 the government came under international controversy and criticism after their involvement in Nobel laureate Muhammad Yunus being convicted under labor law that was allegedly a false case.\nUnlike the 2014 and 2018 general elections which were marred by violence, the 2024 Bangladeshi general election held on 7 January 2024 were generally peaceful and once again won by Awami League, although record low voter turnout was noted. The Awami League Government led by Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina took oath for a record fourth consecutive time on 10 January 2024. The election was boycotted by both Bangladesh Nationalist Party and Jamaat-e-Islami Bangladesh. Due to increasing authoritarianism by the Government, Bangladesh was grappled by large scale protests led by ordinary students and later joined by ordinary people in July and August 2024 namely the Student-People's Uprising and protests were met by brutal resistance under Government order, that resulted in the death of over a thousand people across the whole country and the eventual resignation of the Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina and the Awami League government on 5 August 2024, and Sheikh Hasina subsequently fled to India on the same day.\n2024\u2013Present: Interim government of Muhammad Yunus.\nOn 5 August 2024, following the fall of the previous government, the Army Chief Waker-uz-Zaman addressed the whole nation at 4 PM on the same day assuring the formation of an interim government within a few days. The interim government headed by Nobel laureate Muhammad Yunus as Chief Advisor was formed on 8 August 2024 through his oath of office. 16 advisors took oath under Yunus, they were:\nLaw adviser Dr. Asif Nazrul stated that the thirteenth general election may be possible by 2025. However he was contradicted by Religious Affairs Adviser AFM Khalid Hossain who said the date for the next general election has not yet been decided by the Interim Government. In January 2025 the Interim Government came under criticism for increasing VAT on numerous essential commodities amidst the country's existing uncontrolled inflationary crisis. On 28 February a new political party named National Citizen Party was formed by the leaders of the Student-People's Uprising.\nClashes in Gopalganj between Bangladeshi security forces and Awami League supporters on 16 July 2025 resulted in at least four deaths and numerous injuries after the National Citizens Party (NCP) rally was attacked by Awami League supporters who deemed the rally provocative.\nOn 5 August 2025 Chief Adviser Muhammad Yunus formally read out the July Declaration a year after the revolution had ended. On the same day he scheduled July Charter and the 2026 Bangladeshi general election to be held on February 2026. On 13 November 2025 Awami League supporters carry mass arson attacks throughout the nation killing people and vandalizing vehicles. They were however thwarted by the law enforcement and students union. During this time both BNP and Jamaat grew stronger but drifted apart and by November 2025 the two parties begun engaging in major confrontations against each other.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "68927", "revid": "48614100", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68927", "title": "Economy of Bangladesh", "text": "The economy of Bangladesh is considered to be a major developing mixed economy. As the second-largest economy in South Asia, Bangladesh's economy is the 34th largest in the world in nominal terms, and 25th largest by purchasing power parity. Bangladesh is seen by various financial institutions as one of the Next Eleven. It has been transitioning from being a frontier market into an emerging market. Bangladesh is a member of the South Asian Free Trade Area and the World Trade Organization. In fiscal year 2021\u20132022, Bangladesh registered a GDP growth rate of 7.2% after the global pandemic. Bangladesh is one of the fastest growing economies in the world.\nIndustrialisation in Bangladesh received a strong impetus after the partition of India due to labour reforms and new industries. Between 1947 and 1971, East Bengal generated between 70% and 50% of Pakistan's exports. Modern Bangladesh embarked on economic reforms in the late 1970s which promoted free markets and foreign direct investment. By the 1990s, the country had a booming ready-made garments industry. As of 16 March 2024, Bangladesh has the highest number of green garment factories in the world with Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design (LEED) certification from the United States Green Building Council (USGBC), where 80 are platinum-rated, 119 are gold-rated, 10 are silver, and four are without any rating. As of 6 March 2024, Bangladesh is home to 54 of the top 100 LEED Green Garment Factories globally, including 9 out of the top 10, and 18 out of the top 20. As of 27 April 2024, Bangladesh has a growing pharmaceutical industry with 12 percent average annual growth rate. Bangladesh is the only nation among the 48 least-developed countries that is almost self-sufficient when it comes to medicine production as local companies meet 98 percent of the domestic demand for pharmaceuticals. Remittances from the large Bangladeshi diaspora became a vital source of foreign exchange reserves. Agriculture in Bangladesh is supported by government subsidies and ensures self-sufficiency in food production. Bangladesh has pursued export-oriented industrialisation.\nBangladesh experienced robust growth after the pandemic with macroeconomic stability, improvements in infrastructure, a growing digital economy, and growing trade flows. Tax collection remains very low, with tax revenues accounting for only 7.7% of GDP. Bangladesh's banking sector has a large amount of non-performing loans or loan defaults, which have caused a lot of concern. The private sector makes up 80% of GDP. The Dhaka Stock Exchange and Chittagong Stock Exchange are the two stock markets of the country. Most Bangladeshi businesses are privately owned small and medium-sized enterprises (SME) which make up 90% of all businesses.\nEconomic history.\nPrecolonial period.\nPunch-marked coins are the earliest form of currency found in Bangladesh (Bengal region of Ancient India), dating back to the Iron Age and the first millennium BCE. 1st century Roman coins with images of Hercules have been excavated in Bangladesh and point to trade links with the Roman world. The Wari-Bateshwar ruins are believed to be the emporium (trading center) of Sounagoura mentioned by Roman geographer Claudius Ptolemy. The eastern segment of Bengal was a historically prosperous region. The Ganges Delta provided advantages of a mild, almost tropical climate, fertile soil, ample water, and an abundance of fish, wildlife, and fruit. Living standards for the elite were comparatively better than other parts of the Indian subcontinent. Trade routes like the Grand Trunk Road, Tea Horse Road and Silk Road connected the region to the wider neighborhood. Between 400 and 1200, the region had a well-developed economy in terms of land ownership, agriculture, livestock, shipping, trade, commerce, taxation, and banking. Muslim trade with Bengal increased after the fall of the Sasanian Empire and the Arab takeover of Persian trade routes. Much of this trade occurred east of the Meghna River in southeastern Bengal. After 1204, Muslim conquerors inherited the gold and silver reserves of pre-Islamic kingdoms.\nThe Bengal Sultanate presided over a mercantile empire of its own. Bengali ships were the largest ships in the Bay of Bengal and other parts of the Indian Ocean trade network. Ship-owning merchants often acted as royal envoys of the Sultan. A large number of wealthy Bengali merchants and shipowners lived in Malacca. A vessel from Bengal transported embassies from Brunei and Sumatra to China. Bengal and the Maldives operated the largest shell currency network in history. A Masai giraffe from Malindi in Africa was shipped to Bengal and later gifted to the Emperor of China as a gift from the Sultan of Bengal. The rulers of Arakan looked to Bengal for economic, political and cultural capital. The Sultan of Bengal financed projects in the Hejaz region of Arabia.\nUnder Mughal rule, Bengal operated as a centre of the worldwide muslin, silk and pearl trades. Domestically, much of India depended on Bengali products such as rice, silks and cotton textiles. Overseas, Europeans depended on Bengali products such as cotton textiles, silks and opium; Bengal accounted for 40% of Dutch imports from Asia, for example. Bengal shipped saltpeter to Europe, sold opium in Indonesia, exported raw silk to Japan and the Netherlands, and produced cotton and silk textiles for export to Europe, Indonesia and Japan. Real wages and living standards in 18th-century Bengal were comparable to Britain, which in turn had the highest living standards in Europe.\nDuring the Mughal era, the most important centre of cotton production was Bengal, particularly around its capital city of Dhaka, leading to muslin being called \"daka\" in distant markets such as Central Asia. Bengali agriculturalists rapidly learned techniques of mulberry cultivation and sericulture, establishing Bengal as a major silk-producing region of the world. Bengal accounted for more than 50% of textiles and around 80% of silks imported by the Dutch from Asia, for example.\nBengal also had a large shipbuilding industry. The shipbuilding output of Bengal during the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries was 223,250tons annually, compared with 23,061tons produced in nineteen colonies in North America from 1769 to 1771. The region was also a center of ship-repairing. Bengali shipbuilding was advanced compared to European shipbuilding at the time. An important innovation in shipbuilding was the introduction of a flushed deck design in Bengal rice ships, resulting in hulls that were stronger and less prone to leak than the structurally weak hulls of traditional European ships built with a stepped deck design. The English East India Company later duplicated the flushed-deck and hull designs of Bengal rice ships in the 1760s, leading to significant improvements in seaworthiness and navigation for European ships during the Industrial Revolution. Among the oldest businesses from the pre-colonial and Mughal periods, the biryani restaurant Fakhruddin's traces its history to the era of the Nawabs of Bengal.\nColonial period.\nThe British East India Company, that took complete control of Bengal in 1793 by abolishing Nizamat (local rule), chose to develop Calcutta, now the capital city of West Bengal, as their commercial and administrative center for the Company-held territories in South Asia. The development of East Bengal was thereafter limited to agriculture. The administrative infrastructure of the late eighteenth and nineteenth centuries focused on East Bengal's function as a primarily agricultural producer\u2014chiefly of rice, tea, teak, cotton, sugar cane and jute \u2014 for processors and traders in the British Empire. British rule saw the introduction of railways. The Hardinge Bridge was built to carry trains across the Padma River. In the early 20th century, Eastern Bengal and Assam was established in the British Raj to promote jobs, education and investment in East Bengal. In 1928, the Port of Chittagong was declared to be a \"Major Port\" of British India. East Bengal extended its rice economy into Arakan Division in British Burma. The river and sea ports of East Bengal, including Goalundo Ghat, the Port of Dhaka, the Port of Narayanganj, and the Port of Chittagong became entrepots for trade between Bengal, Assam and Burma. Some of Bangladesh's venerable and oldest companies were born in British Bengal, including A K Khan &amp; Company, M. M. Ispahani Limited, James Finlay Bangladesh, and Anwar Group of Industries.\nPakistan period.\nThe partition of India changed the economic geography of the region. The Pakistani government in East Bengal prioritized industries based on local raw materials like jute, cotton, and leather. The Korean War drove up demand for jute products. Adamjee Jute Mills, the world's largest jute processing plant, was built in the Port of Narayanganj. The plant was a symbol of East Pakistan's industrialization. Living standards began to gradually improve. Labor reforms in 1958 eventually benefitted a future independent Bangladesh to develop industry. Free market principles were generally accepted. The government promoted an industrial policy which aimed to produce consumer goods as quickly as possible in order to avoid dependence on imports. Certain sectors, like public utilities, fell under state ownership. Natural gas in Sylhet was discovered by the Burmah Oil Company in 1955. By the late 1960s, East Pakistan's share of Pakistan's exports went down from 70% to 50%.\nPakistan's rulers launched a so-called \"Decade of Development\" that \"resulted in numerous economic and social contradictions, which played themselves out, not just in the 1960s, but beyond, where Ayub Khan's rule created the social and economic conditions leading to the separation of East Pakistan\". According to the World Bank, economic discrimination against East Pakistan included diverting foreign aid and other funds to West Pakistan, the use of East Pakistan's foreign-exchange surpluses to finance West Pakistani imports, and refusal by the central government to release funds allocated to East Pakistan. Rehman Sobhan paraphrased the Two-Nation Theory into the Two Economies Theory by arguing that East and West Pakistan diverged and became two different economies within one country.\nPost-independence period.\nSocialist era (1972\u20131975).\nAfter its independence from Pakistan, Bangladesh initially followed a socialist economy for five years, which proved to be a blunder by the Sheikh Mujibur Rahman-led Awami League government. During Mujib era, the state development strategy envolved every possible way to the extension of protectionism. Private companies had to operate under heavy regulation and restrictions. For example, profit limits were imposed on companies. Any company with revenues or profits above the limit were susceptible to nationalization. The state nationalized all banks, insurance companies, and 580 industrial plants. Many of the nationalized industries were abandoned by West Pakistanis during the war; while many pro-Awami League and other Bengali businesses also suffered nationalization of properties and industries. The Awami League initiated work for the Ghorashal Fertilizer Factory and the Ashuganj Power Station. In spite of restrictions, several of Bangladesh's leading companies in the future were founded during this period, including BEXIMCO and Advanced Chemical Industries. Land ownership was restricted to less than 25 \"bighas\". Land owners with more than 25 \"bighas\" were subjected to taxes. Farmers had to sell their products at prices set by the government instead of the market.\nSince Bangladesh followed a socialist economy, it underwent a slow growth of producing experienced entrepreneurs, managers, administrators, engineers, and technicians. There was hardly any foreign investment. There were critical shortages of essential food grains and other staples because of wartime disruptions. External markets for jute had been lost because of the instability of supply and the increasing popularity of synthetic substitutes. Foreign exchange resources were minuscule, and the banking and monetary systems were unreliable. Although Bangladesh had a large work force, the vast reserves of under trained and underpaid workers were largely illiterate, unskilled, and underemployed. Commercially exploitable industrial resources, except for natural gas, were lacking. Inflation, especially for essential consumer goods, ran between 300 and 400 percent.\nThe war of independence had crippled the transportation system. Hundreds of road and railroad bridges had been destroyed or damaged, and rolling stock was inadequate and in poor repair. The new country was still recovering from a severe cyclone that hit the area in 1970 and caused 250,000 deaths. India came forward immediately with critically measured economic assistance in the first months after Bangladesh achieved independence from Pakistan. Between December 1971 and January 1972, India committed US$232 million in aid to Bangladesh from the politico-economic aid India received from the US and USSR.\nMilitary rule and economic reforms (1975\u20131990).\nAfter 1975 coups, new Bangladeshi military leaders began to promote private industry and turned their attention to developing new industrial capacity and rehabilitating the economy. The socialist economic model adopted by early leaders had resulted in inefficiency and economic stagnation. Beginning in late 1975, the government gradually gave greater scope to private sector participation in the economy, a pattern that has continued since then.\nAfter Lt. Gen. Ziaur Rahman's ascension to the power in 1975, new strategy was taken to encourage private enterprise with a primary goal of maximization of GNP growth rate. Zia's government revised the First Five-Year Plan (1973\u20131978) taken by the Mujib government and formulated a \"Three year hard core plan\" for remaining three years. This was followed by the Two-Year Plan (1978\u201380) and the Second Five Year Plan (1980\u201385). The government also established special economic zones called Export Processing Zones (EPZs) to attract investors and promote export industries. These zones have played a key role in Bangladesh's export economy. The government also de-nationalized and privatized state-owned industries by either returning them to their original owners or selling them to private buyers. Meanwhile, inefficiency in the public sector gradually increased; and left-wing opposition grew against the export of natural gas.\nThe 1980s saw the emergence of dynamic local brands like PRAN. Muhammad Yunus began experimenting with microcredit in the late 1970s. In 1983, the Grameen Bank was established. Bangladesh became the pioneer of the modern microcredit industry, with leading players like Grameen Bank, BRAC and Proshika. In the industrial sector, two policy innovations in the mid-1980s helped exporters. The reforms introduced the back-to-back letter of credit and duty-drawback facilities through bonded warehouses. These reforms removed major constraints for the country's fledgling garment industry. The reforms allowed a garment manufacturer to obtain letters of credit from domestic banks to finance its import of inputs, by showing letters of credit from foreign buyers of garments. The reforms also reimbursed manufacturers the duty paid on imported inputs on proof that the inputs, stored in bonded warehouses, had been used to manufacture the exports. These reforms spurred the growth of industry into the world's second largest textile exporting sector.\nIn the mid-1980s, there were encouraging signs of progress. Economic policies aimed at encouraging private enterprise and investment, privatising public industries, reinstating budgetary discipline, and liberalising the import regime were accelerated. The International Finance Investment and Commerce Bank was set up as a multinational bank for Bangladesh, Nepal and the Maldives.\nEconomic growth (1991\u20132022).\nFrom 1991 to 1993, the government engaged in an enhanced structural adjustment facility (ESAF) with the International Monetary Fund (IMF). A series of economic liberalization measures was introduced by finance minister Saifur Rahman, including opening up sectors like telecom to foreign investment. The Chittagong Stock Exchange was also set up. The 1990s was a boon for the private sector. Banking, telecommunications, aviation and tertiary education saw new private players and increased competition. The pharmaceutical industry in Bangladesh grew to meet 98% of domestic demand. The ceramics industry in Bangladesh developed to meet local demand for 96% of tableware ceramics, 77% of tiles and 89% of sanitary ceramics. The Chittagong-based steel industry in Bangladesh exploited scrap steel from ship-breaking yards and started contributing to shipbuilding in Bangladesh.\nBut the government failed to sustain reforms in large part because of preoccupation with the government's domestic political troubles, including tensions between the Awami League, the Bangladesh Nationalist Party (BNP) and Jatiya Party. Frequent hartals and strikes disrupted the economy. In the late 1990s the government's economic policies became more entrenched, and some gains were lost, which was highlighted by a precipitous drop in foreign direct investment in 2000 and 2001. Many new private commercial banks were given licenses to operate.\nBetween 2001 and 2006, annual GDP growth touched an average of 5-6%. In June 2003 the IMF approved 3-year, $490-million plan as part of the Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility (PRGF) for Bangladesh that aimed to support the government's economic reform programme up to 2006. Seventy million dollars was made available immediately. In the same vein the World Bank approved $536 million in interest-free loans. The economy saw continuous real GDP growth of at least 6% since 2009. Bangladesh emerged as one of the fastest growing economies.\nAccording to economist Syed Akhtar Mahmood, the Bangladeshi government is often seen as the villain in the country's economic story. But government has played an important role in stimulating the economy through building infrastructure, liberalizing regulations, and promoting high yielding crops in agriculture. According to Mahmood, \"[m]ost roads linking the villages with one another, and with the cities, were not paved and not accessible throughout the year. This situation was remarkably transformed within a span of 10 years, from 1988 to 1997, with the construction of the so-called feeder roads. In 1988, Bangladesh had about 3,000 kilometers of feeder roads. By 1997, this network expanded to 15,500 kilometers. These \"last-mile\" all-weather roads helped connect the villages of Bangladesh to the rest of the country\".\nAs a result of export-led growth, Bangladesh has enjoyed a trade surplus in recent years. Bangladesh historically has run a large trade deficit, financed largely through aid receipts and remittances from workers overseas. Foreign reserves dropped markedly in 2001 but stabilised in the US$3 to US$4 billion range (or about 3 months' import cover). In January 2007, reserves stood at $3.74 billion, and then increased to $5.8 billion by January 2008, in November 2009 it surpassed $10.0 billion, and as of April 2011 it surpassed the US$12 billion according to the Bank of Bangladesh, the central bank. The dependence on foreign aid and imports has also decreased gradually since the early 1990s. Foreign aid now accounts for only 2% of GDP.\nIn the last decade, poverty dropped by around one third with significant improvements in the human development index, literacy, life expectancy and per capita food consumption. With the economy growing annually at an average rate of 6% over a prolonged period, more than 15 million people have moved out of poverty since 1992. The poverty rate went down from 80% in 1971 to 44.2% in 1991 to 12.9% in 2021. In recent years, Bangladesh has focused on promoting regional trade and transport links. The Bangladesh Bhutan India Nepal Motor Vehicles Agreement seeks to create hassle free road transport across international borders. Bangladesh also signed a coastal shipping agreement with India. While prioritizing food security in the domestic market, Bangladesh exports more than US$1 billion worth of processed food products. As the result of a robust agricultural supply chain, supermarkets have sprung up in cities and towns across the country.\nBangladesh became the second largest textile exporter in the world. An estimated 4.4 million workers are employed in the garments industry, with the majority being women. The sector contributes 11% of Bangladesh's GDP. The 2013 Rana Plaza factory collapse caused global concern on industrial safety in Bangladesh, leading to the formation of the Accord on Fire and Building Safety in Bangladesh and the Alliance for Bangladesh Worker Safety. The local clothing industry has seen fiercely competitive brands vying for the market, including Aarong, Westecs, Ecstasy, and Yellow among many others.\nThe World Bank notes the economic progress of the country by stating that \"[w]hen the newly independent country of Bangladesh was born on December 16, 1971, it was the second poorest country in the world\u2014making the country's transformation over the next 50 years one of the great development stories. Since then, poverty has been cut in half at record speed. Enrolment in primary school is now nearly universal. Hundreds of thousands of women have entered the workforce. Steady progress has been made on maternal and child health. And the country is better buttressed against the destructive forces posed by climate change and natural disasters. Bangladesh's success comprises many moving parts\u2014from investing in human capital to establishing macroeconomic stability. Building on this success, the country is now setting the stage for further economic growth and job creation by ramping up investments in energy, inland connectivity, urban projects, and transport infrastructure, as well as prioritizing climate change adaptation and disaster preparedness on its path toward sustainable growth\".\nAs of 2022, Bangladesh had the second largest foreign-exchange reserves in South Asia. In 2021, Bangladesh surpassed both India and Pakistan in terms of per capita income. The country achieved 100% electricity coverage for households in 2022. Megaprojects like the Padma Bridge, Dhaka Metro, Matarbari Port, and Karnaphuli Tunnel have been planned to stimulate economic activity. The completion of Padma Bridge was expected to boost Bangladeshi GDP by 1.23%.\nEconomic depression (2022\u2013present).\nFollowing the Russian invasion of Ukraine, Bangladesh experienced pressure on its foreign exchange reserves due to rising import costs; this affected the country's electricity sector which relies on imported fuel; rising import prices also contributed to inflation. International Monetary Fund (IMF) had forecasted Consumer Price Index (CPI) in Bangladesh to rise to 5.9% by the year 2022. According to the Bangladesh Bureau of Statistics, general inflation climbed to 6.17% by February 2022.\nDue to the mass uprising of July\u2013August 2024, Bangladeshi economy witnessed a huge loss, suffering losses of over $1.2 billion as a result of the nationwide curfew and protests. It also resulted in a sudden sharp rise in inflation in July 2024; after momentary stabilization, inflation once again begun to increase. By September 2025, The general inflation rate in Bangladesh reached 10.87%, up from 9.92%. By 2026, Bangladeshi taka lost 43% of its value against the US dollar since 2021. Bangladesh had the highest consumer price in South Asia this year per Asian Development Bank's projection.\nIn November 2024, the International Crisis Group (ICG) said \"early signs suggest that policymakers can avoid a Sri Lanka-style economic crash\" and added exchange rate reforms helped improve foreign reserves while inflation had declined from its peak, although it warned that \"serious economic risks remain\". The crisis group also said that long-term economic reform was \"far longer\" than the interim government's \"likely lifespan\", stating that the government was focused on \"short-term macro-economic priorities\" such as inflation, foreign reserves and economic stability.\nIn April 2025, the Trump administration imposed 37% \"reciprocal\" tariffs on Bangladesh, which is second highest in South Asia just after Sri Lanka (44%). \"New York Times\" described it a major blow particularly for the garments industry of Bangladesh. \"France24\" reported that many US buyers started to halt orders in Bangladesh saying that it was too costly to bear the import tariffs for them. It was later lowered to 20% on 1 August.\nMacro-economic trend.\nThis is a chart of trend of gross domestic product of Bangladesh at market prices http:// by the International Monetary Fund with figures in millions of Bangladeshi Taka. However, this reflects only the formal sector of the economy.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Static row numbers/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Table alignment/tables.css\" /&gt;\nMean wages were $0.58 per man-hour in 2009.\nGDP per capita (nominal).\nHistorical evolution of GDP per capita (Nominal) of Bangladesh during the period 1980-2030\nSource: International Monetary Fund (IMF)\nGDP per capita (PPP).\nHistorical evolution of GDP per capita (PPP) of Bangladesh during the period 1980-2030\nSource: International Monetary Fund (IMF)\nThe following table shows the main economic indicators in 1980\u20132021 (with IMF staff estimates in 2022\u20132027). Inflation below 5% is in green. The annual unemployment rate is extracted from the World Bank, although the International Monetary Fund find them unreliable.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Static row numbers/styles.css\" /&gt;\nEconomic sectors.\nThe Bangladesh Bureau of Statistics divides the country's economy into 19 broad categories. Their contributions to gross domestic product (GDP) for 2023-24 are:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Table alignment/tables.css\" /&gt;\nManufacturing and industry.\nMany new jobs \u2013 mostly for women \u2013 have been created by the country's dynamic private ready-made garment industry, which grew at double-digit rates through most of the 1990s. By the late 1990s, about 1.5 million people, mostly women, were employed in the garments sector as well as Leather products specially Footwear (Shoe manufacturing unit). During 2001\u20132002, export earnings from ready-made garments reached $3,125 million, representing 52% of Bangladesh's total exports. Bangladesh has overtaken India in apparel exports in 2009, its exports stood at 2.66 billion US dollar, ahead of India's 2.27 billion US dollar and in 2014 the export rose to $3.12 billion every month. At the fiscal year 2018, Bangladesh has been able to garner US$36.67 billion export earnings by exporting manufactured goods, of which, 83.49 percent has come from the apparel manufacturing sector.\nEastern Bengal was known for its fine muslin and silk fabric before the British period. The dyes, yarn, and cloth were the envy of much of the premodern world. Bengali muslin, silk, and brocade were worn by the aristocracy of Asia and Europe. The introduction of machine-made textiles from England in the late eighteenth century spelled doom for the costly and time-consuming hand loom process. Cotton growing died out in East Bengal, and the textile industry became dependent on imported yarn. Those who had earned their living in the textile industry were forced to rely more completely on farming. Only the smallest vestiges of a once-thriving cottage industry survived.\nOther industries which have shown very strong growth include the pharmaceutical industry, shipbuilding industry, information technology, leather industry, steel industry, and light engineering industry.\nBangladesh has a robust pharmaceutical industry. As of 27 April 2024, Bangladesh is the only nation among the 48 least-developed countries that is almost self-sufficient when it comes to medicine production as local companies meet 98 percent of the demand while 213 pharmaceutical companies are operating in Bangladesh and the industry clocks an average annual growth rate of 12 percent. Nine drug manufacturers have received approvals from regulators in the United States, the European Union, and Australia as well as from the World Health Organisation. The sector ships products to around 150 countries.\nBangladesh's textile industry, which includes knitwear and ready-made garments (RMG) along with specialised textile products, is the nation's number one export earner, accounting for $21.5 billion in 2013 \u2013 80% of Bangladesh's total exports of $27 billion.\nBangladesh is 2nd in world textile exports, behind China, which exported $120.1 billion worth of textiles in 2009. The industry employs nearly 3.5 million workers. Current exports have doubled since 2004. Wages in Bangladesh's textile industry were the lowest in the world as of 2010. The country was considered the most formidable rival to China where wages were rapidly rising and currency was appreciating. As of 2012 wages remained low for the 3 million people employed in the industry, but labour unrest was increasing despite vigorous government action to enforce labour peace. Owners of textile firms and their political allies were a powerful political influence in Bangladesh.\nThe urban garment industry has created more than one million formal sector jobs for women, contributing to the high female labour participation in Bangladesh. While it can be argued that women working in the garment industry are subjected to unsafe labour conditions and low wages, Dina M. Siddiqi argues that even though conditions in Bangladesh garment factories \"are by no means ideal,\" they still give women in Bangladesh the opportunity to earn their own wages. As evidence she points to the fear created by the passage of the 1993 Harkins Bill (Child Labor Deterrence Bill), which caused factory owners to dismiss \"an estimated 50,000 children, many of whom helped support their families, forcing them into a completely unregulated informal sector, in lower-paying and much less secure occupations such as brick-breaking, domestic service and rickshaw pulling.\"\nEven though the working conditions in garment factories are not ideal, they tend to financially be more reliable than other occupations and, \"enhance women's economic capabilities to spend, save and invest their incomes.\" Both married and unmarried women send money back to their families as remittances, but these earned wages have more than just economic benefits. Many women in the garment industry are marrying later, have lower fertility rates, and attain higher levels of education, then women employed elsewhere.\nAfter massive labour unrest in 2006 the government formed a Minimum Wage Board including business and worker representatives which in 2006 set a minimum wage equivalent to 1,662.50 taka, $24 a month, up from Tk950. In 2010, following widespread labour protests involving 60,000 workers in June 2010, a controversial proposal was being considered by the Board which would raise the monthly minimum to the equivalent of $50 a month, still far below worker demands of 5,000 taka, $72, for entry level wages, but unacceptably high according to textile manufacturers who are asking for a wage below $30. On 28 July 2010 it was announced that the minimum entry level wage would be increased to 3,000 taka, about $43.\nThe government also seems to believe some change is necessary. On 21 September 2006 then ex-Prime Minister Khaleda Zia called on textile firms to ensure the safety of workers by complying with international labour law at a speech inaugurating the Bangladesh Apparel &amp; Textile Exposition (BATEXPO).\nMany Western multinationals use labour in Bangladesh, which is one of the cheapest in the world: 30 euros per month compared to 150 or 200 in China. Four days is enough for the CEO of one of the top five global textile brands to earn what a Bangladeshi garment worker will earn in her lifetime. In April 2013, at least 1,135 textile workers died in the collapse of their factory. Other fatal accidents due to unsanitary factories have affected Bangladesh: in 2005 a factory collapsed and caused the death of 64 people. In 2006, a series of fires killed 85 people and injured 207 others. In 2010, some 30 people died of asphyxiation and burns in two serious fires.\nIn 2006, tens of thousands of workers mobilized in one of the country's largest strike movements, affecting almost all of the 4,000 factories. The Bangladesh Garment Manufacturers and Exporters Association (BGMEA) uses police forces to crack down. Three workers were killed, hundreds more were wounded by bullets, or imprisoned. In 2010, after a new strike movement, nearly 1,000 people were injured among workers as a result of the repression.\nShipbuilding and shipbreaking.\nShipbuilding is a growing industry in Bangladesh with great potential. Due to the potential of shipbuilding in Bangladesh, the country has been compared to countries like China, Japan and South Korea. Referring to the growing amount of export deals secured by the shipbuilding companies as well as the low cost labour available in the country, experts suggest that Bangladesh could emerge as a major competitor in the global market of small to medium ocean-going vessels.\nBangladesh also has the world's largest ship breaking industry which employs over 200,000 Bangladeshis and accounts for half of all the steel in Bangladesh. Chittagong Ship Breaking Yard is the world's second-largest ship breaking area.\nKhulna Shipyard Limited (KSY) with over five decades of reputation has been leading the Bangladesh Shipbuilding industry and had built a wide spectrum of ships for domestic and international clients. KSY built ships for Bangladesh Navy, Bangladesh Army and Bangladesh Coast Guard under the contract of ministry of defence.\nFinance.\nMost banks in Bangladesh are privately owned. Until the 1980s, the financial sector of Bangladesh was dominated by state-owned banks. With the grand-scale reform made in finance, private commercial banks were established through privatisation. The next finance sector reform programme was launched from 2000 to 2006 with focus on the development of financial institutions and adoption of risk-based regulations and supervision by Bangladesh Bank. As of date, the banking sector consisted of 4 SCBs, 4 government-owned specialized banks dealing in development financing, 39 private commercial banks, and 9 foreign commercial banks.\nTourism.\nThe World Travel and Tourism Council (WTTC) reported in 2013 that the travel and tourism industry in Bangladesh directly generated 1,281,500 jobs in 2012 or 1.8 percent of the country's total employment, which ranked Bangladesh 157 out of 178 countries worldwide. Direct and indirect employment in the industry totalled 2,714,500 jobs, or 3.7 percent of the country's total employment. The WTTC predicted that by 2023, travel and tourism will directly generate 1,785,000 jobs and support an overall total of 3,891,000 jobs, or 4.2 percent of the country's total employment. This would represent an annual growth rate in direct jobs of 2.9 percent. Domestic spending generated 97.7 percent of direct travel and tourism gross domestic product (GDP) in 2012. Bangladesh's world ranking in 2012 for travel and tourism's direct contribution to GDP, as a percentage of GDP, was 142 out of 176.\nin 2014 125,000 tourists visited Bangladesh. This number is extremely low relative to total population. As of 22 May 2019 the total local population numbering 166,594,000 inhabitants. This gives a ratio of 1 tourist for every 1,333 locals.\nInformation and communication technology.\nBangladesh's information technology sector is a sector that has seen much growth in the past three years. Bangladesh has 80 million internet users, an estimated 9% growth in internet use by June 2017 powered by mobile internet. Bangladesh currently has an active 23 million\nFacebook users. Bangladesh currently has 143.1 million mobile phone customers.\nBangladesh exported $800 million worth of software, games, outsourcing and services to European countries, the United States, Canada, Russia and India by 30 June 2017.\nInvestment.\nThe stock market capitalisation of the Dhaka Stock Exchange in Bangladesh crossed $10 billion in November 2007 and the $30 billion mark in 2009, and US$50 billion in August 2010. Bangladesh had the best performing stock market in Asia during the recent global recession between 2007 and 2010, due to relatively low correlations with developed country stock markets.\nMajor investment in real estate by domestic and foreign-resident Bangladeshis has led to a massive building boom in Dhaka and Chittagong.\nRecent (2011) trends for investing in Bangladesh as Saudi Arabia trying to secure public and private investment in oil and gas, power and transportation projects, United Arab Emirates (UAE) is keen to invest in growing shipbuilding industry in Bangladesh encouraged by comparative cost advantage, Tata, an India-based leading industrial multinational to invest Taka 1500 crore to set up an automobile industry in Bangladesh, World Bank to invest in rural roads improving quality of live, the Rwandan entrepreneurs are keen to invest in Bangladesh's pharmaceuticals sector considering its potentiality in international market, Samsung sought to lease 500 industrial plots from the export zones authority to set up an electronics hub in Bangladesh with an investment of US$1.25 billion, National Board of Revenue (NBR) is set to withdraw tax rebate facilities on investment in the capital market by individual taxpayers from the fiscal 2011\u201312. In 2011, Japan Bank for International Cooperation ranked Bangladesh as the 15th best investment destination for foreign investors.\n2010\u201311 market crash.\nThe bullish capital market turned bearish during 2010, with the exchange losing 1,800 points between December 2010 and January 2011. Millions of investors have been rendered bankrupt as a result of the market crash. The crash is believed to be caused artificially to benefit a handful of players at the expense of the big players.\nCompanies.\nThe list includes ten largest Bangladeshi companies by trading value (millions in BDT) in 2018.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Static row numbers/styles.css\" /&gt;\nComposition of economic sectors.\nThe Bangladesh Garments Manufacturers and Exporters Association (BGMEA) has predicted textile exports will rise from US$7.90 billion earned in 2005\u201306 to US$15\nbillion by 2011. In part this optimism stems from how well the sector has fared since the end of textile and clothing quotas, under the Multifibre Agreement, in early 2005.\nAccording to a United Nations Development Programme report \"Sewing Thoughts: How to Realize Human Development Gains in the Post-Quota World\" Bangladesh has been able to offset a decline in European sales by cultivating new markets in the United States.\n\"[In 2005] we had tremendous growth. The quota-free textile regime has proved to be a big boost for our factories,\" said BGMEA president S.M. Fazlul Hoque told reporters, after the\nsector's 24 per cent growth rate was revealed.\nThe Bangladesh Knitwear Manufacturers and Exporters Association (BKMEA) president Md Fazlul Hoque has also struck an optimistic tone. In an interview with United News Bangladesh he lauded the blistering growth rate, saying \"The quality of our products and its competitiveness in terms of prices helped the sector achieve such... tremendous success.\"\nKnitwear posted the strongest growth of all textile products in 2005\u201306, surging 35.38 per cent to US$2.82 billion. On the downside however, the sector's strong growth came amid sharp falls in prices for textile products on the world market, with growth subsequently dependent upon large increases in volume.\nBangladesh's quest to boost the quantity of textile trade was also helped by US and EU caps on Chinese textiles. The US cap restricts growth in imports of Chinese textiles to 12.5 per cent next year and between 15 and 16 per cent in 2008. The EU deal similarly manages import growth until 2008.\nBangladesh may continue to benefit from these restrictions over the next two years, however a climate of falling global textile prices forces wage rates the centre of the nation's efforts to increase market share.\nThey offer a range of incentives to potential investors including 10-year tax holidays, duty-free import of capital goods, raw materials and building materials, exemptions on income tax on salaries paid to foreign nationals for three years and dividend tax exemptions for the period of the tax holiday.\nAll goods produced in the zones are able to be exported duty-free, in addition to which Bangladesh benefits from the Generalised System of Preferences in US, European and Japanese markets and is also endowed with Most Favoured Nation status from the United States.\nFurthermore, Bangladesh imposes no ceiling on investment in the EPZs and allows full repatriation of profits.\nThe formation of labour unions within the EPZs is prohibited as are strikes.\nBangladesh has been a world leader in its efforts to end the use of child labour in garment factories. On 4 July 1995, the Bangladesh Garment Manufacturers and Exporters Association, International Labour Organization, and UNICEF signed a memorandum of understanding on the elimination of child labour in the garment sector. Implementation of this pioneering agreement began in fall 1995, and by the end of 1999, child labour in the garment trade virtually had been eliminated. The labour-intensive process of ship breaking for scrap has developed to the point where it now meets most of Bangladesh's domestic steel needs. Other industries include sugar, tea, leather goods, newsprint, pharmaceutical, and fertilizer production.\nThe Bangladesh government continues to court foreign investment, something it has done fairly successfully in private power generation and gas exploration and production, as well as in other sectors such as cellular telephony, textiles, and pharmaceuticals. In 1989, the same year it signed a bilateral investment treaty with the United States, it established a Board of Investment to simplify approval and start-up procedures for foreign investors, although in practice the board has done little to increase investment. The government created the Bangladesh Export Processing Zone Authority to manage the various export processing zones. The agency currently manages EPZs in Adamjee, Chittagong, Comilla, Dhaka, Ishwardi, Karnaphuli, Mongla, and Uttara. An EPZ has also been proposed for Sylhet. The government has given the private sector permission to build and operate competing EPZs-initial construction on a Korean EPZ started in 1999. In June 1999, the AFL\u2013CIO petitioned the U.S. Government to deny Bangladesh access to U.S. markets under the Generalized System of Preferences (GSP), citing the country's failure to meet promises made in 1992 to allow freedom of association in EPZs.\nInternational trade.\nRecently, the COVID-19 pandemic has taken a heavy toll on almost all sectors of the economy, inter alia, most notably, it has caused a reduction of exports by 16.93 percent, and imports by 17 percent in the FY2019-20.\nIn 2015, the top exports of Bangladesh are Non-Knit Men's Suits ($5.6B), Knit T-shirts ($5.28B), Knit Sweaters ($4.12B), Non-Knit Women's Suits ($3.66B) and Non-Knit Men's Shirts ($2.52B). In 2015, the top imports of Bangladesh are Heavy Pure Woven Cotton ($1.33B), Refined Petroleum ($1.25B), Light Pure Woven Cotton ($1.12B), Raw Cotton ($1.01B) and Wheat ($900M).\nIn 2015, the top export destinations of Bangladesh are the United States ($6.19B), Germany ($5.17B), the United Kingdom ($3.53B), France ($2.37B) and Spain ($2.29B). In 2015, the top import origins are China ($13.9B), India ($5.51B), Singapore ($2.22B), Hong Kong ($1.47B) and Japan ($1.36B).\nBangladeshi women and the economy.\nAs of 2014, female participation in the labour force is 58 percent as per World Bank data, and male participation at 82 percent. Through the efforts of government and non-governmental organizations like CARE International, the participation of women in the Bangladeshi politics and the economy has improved drastically.\nA 2007 World Bank report stated that the areas in which women's work force participation have increased the most are in the fields of agriculture, education and health and social work. Over three-quarters of women in the labour force work in the agricultural sector. On the other hand, the International Labour Organization reports that women's workforce participation has only increased in the professional and administrative areas between 2000 and 2005, demonstrating women's increased participation in sectors that require higher education. Employment and labour force participation data from the World Bank, the UN, and the ILO vary and often under report on women's work due to unpaid labour and informal sector jobs. Though these fields are mostly paid, women experience very different work conditions than men, including wage differences and work benefits. Women's wages are significantly lower than men's wages for the same job with women being paid as much as 60\u201375 percent less than what men make.\nOne example of action that is being taken to improve female conditions in the work force is Non-Governmental Organisations. These NGOs encourage women to rely on their own self-savings, rather than external funds provide women with increased decision-making and participation within the family and society. However, some NGOs that address microeconomic issues among individual families fail to deal with broader macroeconomic issues that prevent women's complete autonomy and advancement.\nHistorical statistics.\nBangladesh has made significant strides in its economic sector performance since independence in 1971. Although the economy has improved vastly in the 1990s, Bangladesh still suffers in the area of foreign trade in South Asian. Despite major impediments to growth like the inefficiency of state-owned enterprises, a rapidly growing labour force that cannot be absorbed by agriculture, inadequate power supplies, and slow implementation of economic reforms, Bangladesh has made some headway improving the climate for foreign investors and liberalising the capital markets; for example, it has negotiated with foreign firms for oil and gas exploration, bettered the countrywide distribution of cooking gas, and initiated the construction of natural gas pipelines and power stations. Progress on other economic reforms has been halting because of opposition from the bureaucracy, public sector unions, and other vested interest groups.\nThe especially severe floods of 1998 increased the flow of foreign aid. The 2008 financial crisis did not have a major impact on the economy. Foreign aid has seen a gradual decline over the last few decades but economists see this as a good sign for self-reliance. There has been a dramatic growth in exports and remittance inflow which has helped the economy to expand at a steady rate. Bangladesh's GDP is expected to grow at 5.3 percent in 2023 and 6.5 percent in 2024 according to the latest ADB report.\nBangladesh has been on the list of UN Least Developed Countries (LDC) since 1975. Bangladesh met the requirements to be recognised as a developing country in March 2018 with Bangladesh's Gross National Income (GNI) US$1,724 per capita, the Human Assets Index (HAI) 72 and the Economic Vulnerability (EVI) Index 25.2 then. Bangladesh's GNI is now forecasted to reach at US$4,753.39 in 2030.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "68928", "revid": "50524176", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68928", "title": "Hermes Trismegistus", "text": "Legendary author of the Hermetica\nHermes Trismegistus (from , \"Hermes the Thrice-Greatest\") is a legendary Hellenistic period figure that originated as a syncretic combination of the Greek god Hermes and the Egyptian god Thoth. He is the purported author of the \"Hermetica\", a widely diverse series of ancient and medieval pseudepigraphica that laid the basis of various philosophical systems known as Hermeticism.\nThe wisdom attributed to this figure in antiquity combined a knowledge of both the material and the spiritual world, which rendered the writings attributed to him of great relevance to those who were interested in the interrelationship between the material and the divine.\nThe figure of Hermes Trismegistus can also be found in both Muslim and Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed writings. In those traditions, Hermes Trismegistus has been associated with the prophet Idris (the Biblical Enoch).\nOrigin and identity.\nHermes Trismegistus may be associated with the Greek god Hermes and the Egyptian god Thoth. Greeks in the Ptolemaic Kingdom of Egypt identified Thoth with Hermes through the . Consequently, the two gods were worshiped as one, in what had been the Temple of Thoth in Khemenu, which was known in the Hellenistic period as Hermopolis.\nHermes, the Greek god of interpretive communication, was combined with Thoth, the Egyptian god of wisdom. The Egyptian priest and polymath Imhotep had been deified long after his death, and therefore assimilated to Thoth in the classical and Hellenistic periods. The renowned scribe Amenhotep and a wise man named Te\u00f4s were coequal deities of wisdom, science, and medicine; and, thus, they were placed alongside Imhotep in shrines dedicated to Thoth\u2013Hermes during the Ptolemaic Kingdom.\nCicero enumerates several deities referred to as \"Hermes\":\nThe most likely interpretation of this passage is as two variants on the same syncretism of Greek Hermes and Egyptian Thoth (or sometimes other gods): The fourth (where Hermes turns out \"actually\" to have been a \"son of the Nile\", (i.e. a native Egyptian god) is the Egyptian perspective, the fifth (who went from Greece to Egypt) is the Arcadian Greek perspective. Both of these early references in Cicero (the oldest Trismegistus material is from the early corroborate the view that Thrice-Great Hermes originated in Hellenistic Egypt through syncretism between Greek and Egyptian gods (the \"Hermetica\" refer most often to Thoth and Amun).\nThe Hermetic literature of the Egyptians was concerned with conjuring spirits and animating statues, the newly developed practice of alchemy, and informs the oldest Hellenistic writings on Greco-Babylonian astrology. In a parallel tradition, Hermetic philosophy rationalized and systematized religious cult practices and offered the adept a means of personal ascension from the constraints of physical being. This latter tradition has led to the conflation of Hermeticism with the contemporaneously developing, but distinct, Gnosticism.\nThe epithet \"thrice great\".\nFowden asserts that the first datable occurrences of the epithet \"thrice great\" are in the \"Legatio\" of Athenagoras of Athens and in a fragment from Philo of Byblos, c.. However, in a later work, Copenhaver reports that this epithet is first found in the minutes of a meeting of the council of the Ibis cult, held in 172 BCE near Memphis in Egypt.(pxiv) Hart explains that the epithet is derived from an epithet of Thoth found at the Temple of Esna, \"Thoth the great, the great, the great.\"\nMany Christian writers, including Lactantius, Augustine, Marsilio Ficino, Campanella, and Giovanni Pico della Mirandola, as well as Giordano Bruno, considered Hermes Trismegistus to be a wise pagan prophet who foresaw the coming of Christianity. They believed in the existence of a \"prisca theologia\", a single, true theology that threads through all religions. It was given by God to man in antiquity and passed through a series of prophets, which included Zoroaster and Plato. In order to demonstrate the verity of the \"prisca theologia,\" Christians appropriated the Hermetic teachings for their own purposes. By this account, Hermes Trismegistus was either a contemporary of Moses, or the third in a line of men named Hermes, i.e. Enoch, Noah, and the Egyptian priest king who is known to us as Hermes Trismegistus(p52) on account of being the greatest priest, philosopher, and king.(pxlviii)(p52)\nAnother explanation, in the \"Suda\" (10th century), is that \"He was called 'Trismegistus' on account of his praise of the trinity, saying there is one divine nature in the trinity.\"(pxli)\nHermetic writings.\nDuring the Middle Ages and the Renaissance, the \"Hermetica\" enjoyed great prestige and were popular among alchemists. Hermes was also strongly associated with astrology, for example by the influential Islamic astrologer Abu Ma'shar al-Balkhi (787\u2013886). The \"Hermetic tradition\" consequently refers to alchemy, magic, astrology, and related subjects. The texts are usually divided into two categories:\nThe expression \"hermetically sealed\" comes from the alchemical procedure to make the Philosopher's Stone. This required a mixture of materials to be placed in a glass vessel which was sealed by melting and fusing the neck closed, a procedure known as the \"Seal of Hermes\". The vessel was then heated for 30\u201340\u00a0days.\nDuring the Renaissance, it was accepted that Hermes Trismegistus was a contemporary of Moses. However, after Isaac Casaubon's demonstration in 1614 that the Hermetic writings must postdate the advent of Christianity, the whole of Renaissance Hermeticism collapsed. As to their actual authorship:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe French figurist Jesuit missionary to China Joachim Bouvet thought that Hermes Trismegistus, Zoroaster and the Chinese cultural hero Fuxi were actually the Biblical patriarch Enoch.\nVarious critical editions of the Hermetica have been published in modern academia, such as \"Hermetica\" by Brian Copenhaver.\nIslamic tradition.\n has pointed out that Hermes Trismegistus has a place in the Islamic tradition, although the name Hermes does not appear in the Qur'an. Hagiographers and chroniclers of the first centuries of the Islamic Hijrah quickly identified Hermes Trismegistus with Idris, the Islamic prophet of surahs 19.57 and 21.85, whom Muslims also identified with Enoch (cf. Genesis 5:18\u201324). According to the account of the Persian astrologer Abu Ma'shar al-Balkhi (787\u2013886), Idris / Hermes was termed \"Thrice-Wise\" Hermes Trismegistus because he had a threefold origin. The first Hermes, comparable to Thoth, was a \"civilizing hero\", an initiator into the mysteries of the divine science and wisdom that animate the world; he carved the principles of this sacred science in hieroglyphs. The second Hermes, in Babylon, was the initiator of Pythagoras. The third Hermes was the first teacher of alchemy. Islamicist Pierre Lory writes:\n \"A faceless prophet, Hermes [Trismegistus] possesses no concrete or salient characteristics, differing in this regard from most of the major figures of the Bible and the Quran.\"\nThe star-worshipping sect known as the Sabians of Harran also believed that their doctrine descended from Hermes Trismegistus.\nThere are least twenty Arabic \"Hermetica\" extant. While some of these Arabic Hermetic writings were translated from Greek or Middle-Persian, some were originally written in Arabic. Hermetic fragments are also found in the works of Muslim alchemists such as Jabir ibn Hayyan (died c.\u2009806\u2013816, cited an early version of the \"Emerald Tablet\" in his )\nBah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed writings.\nBah\u00e1'u'll\u00e1h, founder of the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Faith, identifies Idris with Hermes in his \"Tablet on the Uncompounded Reality\".\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "68929", "revid": "49913377", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68929", "title": "Telecommunications in Bangladesh", "text": "The telecom sector in Bangladesh is rapidly emerging. Bangladesh Telecommunication Regulatory Commission (BTRC) is the regulatory authority for this sector, overseeing licensing, policy, etc.\nThe calling code of Bangladesh is +880. There are also several SubCodes.\nHistory.\nLandmarks in the history of the telecom industry in Bangladesh:\nStructure.\nAs defined in the National Telecommunications Policy (1998) and the International Long-Distance Telecommunications Services (ILDTS) Policy (2007), all mobile operators must interconnect through Interconnection Exchanges (ICXs), while all international calls are to be routed through International Gateways (IGWs), which connect to both mobile and fixed operators via the ICXs.\nThe Interconnection Exchange (ICX) will receive all calls from the mobile and fixed operators whenever the call is made to another network and will pass it to the destination network if the call is local, and will pass to the IGWs if the call is international. ICX will also deliver calls received from IGWs where the call is destined.\nBelow illustrate the structure of interconnection between different interfaces.\nService providers.\nPublic switched telephone network.\nThe number of public switched telephone network (PSTN) subscribers in Bangladesh as of February 2009 was 1.372\u00a0million. PSTN operators in Bangladesh include:\nMobile phone operators.\nThere are four mobile phone operators in Bangladesh, operating under the names of Banglalink, Grameenphone, Robi and TeleTalk. The number of mobile phone subscribers in Bangladesh as of April 2015 was 124.705\u00a0million, having risen from the February 2009 figure of 45.21\u00a0million. As of September, 2022 the number of mobile phone subscriber has risen to 181.43 Million. https://\nLong distance operators (as per ILDTS Policy 2007).\nOn 25 February 2008 the Bangladesh Telecommunications Regulatory Commission awarded licenses for two Interconnection Exchanges (ICX), three International Gateways (IGm), and one International Internet Gateway (IIG) to six firms through an open auction in February 2008. The incumbent BTTB got the same licenses too. And after then on 12 April 2012, the Bangladesh Telecommunications Regulatory Commission awarded licenses for twenty-one Interconnection Exchanges (ICX), twenty two International Gateways (IGw), and thirty International Internet Gateway (IIG). Here is the list of all operators:\nInternet Protocol Telephony Service Provider (IPTSP) operators.\nOn 18 August 2009, the Bangladesh Telecommunications Regulatory Commission commenced awarding licenses for IPTSP. IPTSP operators are regulated by the BTRC. Current IPTSP operators in Bangladesh are:\nRadio.\nRadio broadcast stations: AM 12, FM 12, shortwave 2, community radio 1, Internet radios\nRadios: 6.15 million (1997)\nThe government-owned Betar-Radio Bangladesh operates from Dhaka and other local districts. Currently, private FM radio channels are very popular. They are trying to attract young people by broadcasting music and news. The operating private radio channels include:\nTelevision.\nAs of 2012, there are 23 broadcast television stations in Bangladesh, including the state-run BTV and BTV World, with 20 million television sets in the country.\nThe number of private satellite channels are growing. The first private channel in Bangladesh was ATN Bangla. There are 8 full-fledged news channels (ATN News, Channel 24, DBC News, Ekattor, Independent Television, Jamuna Television, News24 and Somoy TV).\nInternet.\nBangladesh first received Internet access in 1996. In the recent years, Internet usage has rapidly increased. The Bangladesh government imposes a high Internet tariff, stunting the sector's growth, claims Norwegian-owned Telenor. Due to controversy, the Bangladesh government decided to reduce the tariff by 50%.\nThe Bangladesh's Internet country code is .bd.\nAs of 2005, more than 180 Internet Service Providers are operating in the country. ISPs are regulated by the Bangladesh Telecommunication Regulatory Commission (BTRC).\nIn April 2010, Akhtaruzzaman Manju, president of the Internet Service Providers' Association of Bangladesh, told Xinhua that the country's six mobile phone operators and Internet Service Providers have so far provided over 800,000 Internet connections. \"We've estimated that nearly 10 million people in the country are using 800,000 internet connections on a shared basis,\" he said, adding the number of Internet users in the country is increasing yearly by around 15-16 percent.\nA 2009 study by the Boston Consulting Group found that the number of Internet subscribers in Bangladesh is likely to reach 18.3 million by 2020, equivalent to a 32 percent household Internet penetration, which will result in a 2.6 percent contribution to the country's GDP while creating 129,000 more jobs, the research added.\nBroadband Internet access.\nThough broadband Internet access is available, the cost of high-speed connection is higher than in other south Asian countries. Broadband Internet and e-commerce in Bangladesh is progressing slowly. WiMAX service is now available from some Internet service providers. In Bangladesh broadband is legally defined as 128/128\u00a0kbit/s, which is not in line with ITU standards.\nThe ISPs currently providing broadband services in Bangladesh are:\nSatellite.\nThere are six satellite Earth stations, including Talimabad, and Betbunia. Bangladesh sent its first satellite, Bangabandhu-1, into space on May 11, 2018.\nSubmarine cables.\nBangladesh is connected to SEA-ME-WE 4 or SMW-4 (South-East Asia \u2013 Middle East \u2013 Western Europe 4) and SEA-ME-WE 5 submarine cable systems. The landing site of the SMW-4 Bangladesh branch is located in Cox's Bazar and the landing site of the SMW-5 Bangladesh branch is located in Kuakata. The two submarine cables provide the country with redundancy to support uninterrupted Internet and long-distance communications and also with a huge bandwidth. Bangladesh Submarine Cable Company Limited is the only submarine cable operator in Bangladesh.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "68930", "revid": "4796325", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68930", "title": "Transport in Bangladesh", "text": "Transport in Bangladesh is dominated by roadways, accounting for the majority of both passenger and cargo traffic due to substantial development efforts since independence. Eight major national highways connect the capital, Dhaka, with divisional and district headquarters, port cities, and international routes. Despite this, vehicle usage per capita remains low, with non-motorised modes prevailing. However, Bangladesh's roads are unsafe, having one of the highest road accident fatality rates. They also suffer from high congestion, as well as severe air and noise pollution.\nThe share of railway traffic has seen a significant decline since 1975, facing challenges like shortage of rolling stock and poor track conditions. Transportation through inland waterways, though also declining, remains popular thanks to Bangladesh's extensive river network and the use of ferries.\nAir travel in Bangladesh is supported by three international and five domestic airports, of which Hazrat Shahjalal is the largest and busiest. Biman Bangladesh, the national airline, and the privately owned US-Bangla are the two international carriers based in Bangladesh, which also operate domestic flights to these airports alongside three other private airlines.\nIn 2023, Bangladesh ranked 88 in the Logistics Performance Index among 139 countries and third among South Asian countries, after India and Sri Lanka.\nRoad.\nWith around of roads, Bangladesh ranks 16th in the world for total length of road network. It has the highest road density in South Asia after India and ranks 13th globally. However, only about 30 per cent, or , of these roads are paved. The network maintained by the Roads and Highways Department\u2014the government agency responsible for the construction and upkeep of the country's major road and bridge network\u2014includes approximately of national highways, of regional highways, and of district (\"zila\") roads. \nAs of none }}, there were 410,532 private passenger cars, 121,387 microbuses, and 4.34 million motorcycles \u2014 bringing the total number of vehicles, including those mentioned, to nearly 6 million. In addition, there were around 4 million unregistered electric auto rickshaws circulating in Bangladesh by 2025. These so-called \"Bangla Teslas\" dominate local transport and constitute \"perhaps the world's biggest informal EV fleet.\" \nHighways.\nThere are eight major national highways, linking the capital with various divisional and district headquarters, port cities, and international routes. The Dhaka\u2013Chittagong highway (N1) is regarded as the lifeline of the country's trade and commerce, connecting the capital, Dhaka, with the primary port city of Chittagong. The Dhaka\u2013Mawa\u2013Bhanga Expressway, opened in 2020, is the first controlled-access highway in the country.\nThree Asian Highway routes pass through Bangladesh, with parts of the network undergoing upgrades to meet international standards. The routes are:\nUsage.\nAlthough road transport usage has risen significantly compared to rail and inland waterways since 1975, the rate of vehicle usage remains notably low, with only 7.89 vehicles and 4.22 passenger cars per 1,000 people. There are nearly 4.3 million motorcycles, 714 thousand passenger cars, and 86.5 thousand buses, collectively covering 140.7 billion passenger-kilometres in 2021, and accounting for 88 per cent of passenger traffic in 2005. This marks a significant increase from the 9.2 billion passenger-kilometres recorded in 1975, which accounted for 54 per cent of passenger traffic. Additionally, approximately 535,000 vans, pickups, lorries, and tractors are actively used, transporting 80 per cent of cargo in 2005 and covering 137.2 billion tonne-kilometres in 2021, a sharp increase from 900 million tonne-kilometres, comprising 35 per cent of cargo traffic, in 1975.\nDespite significant growth in the number of motor vehicles, Bangladesh's transportation demand continues to be predominantly met by non-motorised modes, especially walking and rickshaws. The level of motorisation in the country remains considerably lower compared to many other nations.\nIssues.\nSafety.\nBangladesh has one of the highest road accident fatality rates globally, with estimates from non-governmental sources reaching as high as 25,000 deaths in 2019, although official government figures are much lower. The annual road crash deaths per capita in Bangladesh are twice the average rate for high-income countries and five times that of the best-performing countries worldwide. Buses and trucks are identified as the primary contributors to traffic accidents, with pedestrian casualties being particularly common. Major contributing factors include a mix of diverse traffic, inadequate enforcement of laws, poor road conditions, and a lack of formal training and education.\nRoad safety concerns have sparked significant movements, such as Nirapad Sarak Chai, and mass protests, primarily led by students. A notable instance was the major 2018 road safety protests, when tens of thousands of schoolchildren in Dhaka and nearby cities protested following the deaths of two students caused by a speeding bus. In response to these events, the government passed the Road Transport Act in September 2018, despite opposition from transport workers. The act aimed to enhance road safety by increasing fines for traffic violations, imposing stricter licensing requirements, and introducing harsher penalties, including the possibility of the death penalty for causing serious injury or death in motor vehicle accidents. Despite its hasty introduction, enforcement of the law has been inconsistent, leading to no significant improvement in road safety. Road accidents have continued to increase, while the government has reduced fines and sentences, attributed to entrenched interests and conflicts of interest between businesses, regulatory authorities, and politicians.\nCongestion.\nRoad traffic congestion is a common issue in major cities, caused by an increasing number of vehicles due to population growth, inadequate road infrastructure, and the presence of slow-moving vehicles like rickshaws, among other factors. Traffic congestion varies during the day, necessitating planning and longer trips; this impacts productivity, cutting across social and economic status. Although walking is a major travel mode of the low-income majority, pedestrian needs are ignored in transport planning. Despite comprising four percent of total vehicles, private cars occupy about 70 percent of road space.\nPollution.\nA significant contributor to air pollution in urban areas is motor vehicle emissions. In Bangladesh, pollution severity is exacerbated by a large number of high-polluting vehicles, impure fuel, inefficient land use, and poor traffic management. Leaded gasoline was banned in 1999, and the change to compressed natural gas (CNG) cars in early 2000s saved over 4,000 premature deaths in 2009, but their low cost has increased the number of cars on the roads (although CNG price increases may have tempered the increase) and decreased the amount of natural gas available for other purposes.234\nDhaka is the noisiest city in the world, with levels 1.3 to 2 times higher than acceptable limits. The Farmgate intersection in Dhaka experiences the highest noise pollution at 135.6 decibels, while the least polluted area, Uttara-14, registers 100.8 decibels, still far above the permissible level. Rajshahi ranked the fourth noisiest in the world, while noise levels are also above acceptable limits in other cities like Chittagong, Sylhet, Comilla, and Khulna. Despite a ban on the import of loud hydraulic horns in 2017, they remain in widespread illegal use.\nRail.\nThe national rail infrastructure is primarily passenger-focused, managed by the state-owned Bangladesh Railway (BR), which was largely inherited from the British Assam Bengal Railway system after the partition of India in 1947. There are about 500 railway stations, with Dhaka Kamalapur being the largest and busiest. In 2023, Bangladesh Railway operated 402 trains daily, while an additional 37 trains were run by four main private companies as of 2024[ [update]], a practice permitted since the early 2000s. New legislation drafted in 2024 as a successor to a centuries-old law includes provisions allowing private companies to own rolling stock for carrying passengers, goods, and parcels.Bangladesh Railway has approximately of main and branch lines (route km) linking 43 of the 64 districts. Of these, the majority, covering , are metre-gauge tracks, mainly in the central and eastern regions. About are broad-gauge tracks, concentrated in the western region. The gauge difference is being addressed by adding third rails to major routes, making them dual gauge, with a total of about converted. Since independence in 1971, few new tracks were laid until the early 20s, when four additional districts were connected.\nIn 2020, 64 million passengers travelled by rail in Bangladesh, accumulating nearly 10 billion passenger-kilometres. Despite the railway's emphasis on intercity services, which earned the majority of revenue, almost half of these passengers were on local routes. More than three million tonnes of cargo were transported, totalling over one billion tonne-kilometres, handled by two inland container depots (dry ports): one at Kamalapur, Dhaka, and the other at Pangaon, which is connected to Chittagong port. Regardless of its significance, the railway system faces several challenges\u2014including ageing and scarcity of rolling stock, poor track conditions, and a lack of manpower\u2014leading to substantial losses for Bangladesh Railway.\nAbout 93 million passengers used railways in 2019, while the figure was 73 million in 1970. However, the modal share of rail transport has been decreasing since 1975, dropping from 30 per cent of passenger traffic and 28 per cent of cargo traffic to just 4 per cent for both in 2005.\nAs of 2024[ [update]], the country has only one metro line, located in Dhaka, which opened in December 2022. The Dhaka Metro Rail is operated by the Dhaka Mass Transit Company Limited, with additional lines under construction.\nImportant links.\nThe Hardinge Bridge, opened in 1915, connected the south-western railways to the north-western regions divided by the Padma River. The Bhairab Railway Bridge (also Bangladesh\u2013UK Friendship Bridge), opened in 1937, facilitates communication between Dhaka and Chittagong over the Meghna River. The combined Jamuna Bridge, opened in 1998, connects the eastern and western rail networks, which were previously separated by the Jamuna River. A dedicated rail bridge beside it\u2014the longest in the country\u2014was opened in none }} to meet growing traffic demands.\nRailway penetration has been relatively low in the riverine south-western regions of the Ganges Delta, particularly from the capital and the north-east, due to the Padma River acting as a barrier. This challenge was addressed in none }} with the inauguration of train services on the Dhaka\u2013Jessore line.\nInternational rail.\nThe border between India and Bangladesh cuts across railway lines, forcing them into the adjacent country for short distances and complicating border controls such as passport validation. After 43 years, the Maitree Express renewed rail transport between Bangladesh and Kolkata of India in 2008. A second rail service, the Bandhan Express, connecting Kolkata and Khulna, began in 2017. A third service, the Mitali Express, from Siliguri to Dhaka, started in June 2022.\nBangladesh is part of the Trans-Asian Railway network. As part of the project, it planned to extend the railway from Chittagong to Cox's Bazar, with the eventual goal of connecting to Myanmar. However, as of 2022, the plan was to end the track at Cox's Bazar due to deteriorating bilateral relations.\nAir.\nAir travel in Bangladesh peaked at over 17 million passengers in 2023. The Civil Aviation Authority of Bangladesh, which manages and regulates civil aviation activities in the country, reported that the number of outbound travellers from Bangladesh in 2022 was 4.2 million, marking a 124 per cent year-on-year increase. This surge was primarily attributed to migrant workers and pilgrimage. Conversely, 3.5 million travellers arrived in Bangladesh during the same period. Approximately 285,000 tonnes of cargo were transported by air in 2023, with over 30 airlines operating cargo flights to and from the country.\nAirports.\nOf the three international airports in Bangladesh, Hazrat Shahjalal International Airport in Dhaka is the largest and busiest, handling 11.6 million passengers in 2023, which included 52 per cent of domestic and international flights. That year, it served 9.4 million international passengers, with 33 international airlines operating about 160 daily flights. Additionally, it handled 2.2 million domestic passengers with four private airlines and one national airline conducting 170 daily domestic flights. Hazrat Shahjalal processed about 96 per cent of the total air freight, handling a daily average of 400 to 500 tonnes of cargo. Originally built to handle eight million annual passengers, the airport's capacity is expected to more than double to 20 million once the modern third terminal opens fully in October 2024.\nChittagong's Shah Amanat International Airport ranks second, handling 17 percent of passengers. As of 2022, six foreign and two domestic airlines operates flights from Shah Amanat, primarily to destinations in the Middle East. The airport, undergoing significant expansions and renovations, has reported a 20 per cent increase in annual revenue. Osmani International Airport in Sylhet is the third, having seen its first international flight in 2017, and is also undergoing major expansions as of 2023.\nIn addition to the international airports, there are five operational airports handling domestic-only flights: Barisal, Cox's Bazar, Jessore, Shah Makhdum (Rajshahi), and Saidpur (Nilphamari). Nearly all services at these airports are to or from Dhaka.\nThe opening of the Padma Bridge in 2022 has particularly impacted air traffic to south-western airports like Jessore and Barisal. Cox's Bazar, a destination that accounts for the bulk of domestic airline revenue, has also seen a decline in air passengers due to a new railway link opened in 2023. Despite this, the government has undertaken projects worth \u09f3350 billion () to modernise all airports by 2023. Cox's Bazar airport is being upgraded to international status as of 2024, which includes extending its runway to become the longest in the country. Saidpur airport is being turned into a regional hub to facilitate flights from neighbouring countries such as Nepal, Bhutan, and north-east India, while Khan Jahan Ali Airport in Khulna is still under construction, as of 2023.\nAirlines.\nBiman Bangladesh Airlines, the country's national airline, served eight domestic destinations and 22 international destinations in 16 countries, in 2023. The airline, founded in 1972, has its hub at Hazrat Shahjalal International Airport.\nOther Bangladeshi-registered passenger airlines include US-Bangla Airlines, Novoair, Air Astra, and Fly Dhaka. All these carriers have their hub at Hazrat Shahjalal International Airport and operate domestic flights. Except for Air Astra and Fly Dhaka, the aforementioned airlines also offer international flights. As of 2024, Fly Dhaka Airlines marks the 12th private airline to join Bangladesh's aviation sector since the 2000s. However, this period has also witnessed the closure of at least eight private airlines, the most recent being Regent Airways in 2022, primarily due to financial difficulties.\nForeign airlines dominate about 75 per cent of the international route market, with the remaining 25 per cent held by Biman and US-Bangla Airlines. Additionally, more than 80 per cent of the domestic market is controlled by US-Bangla Airlines and Air Astra, both owned by US-Bangla Group. Biman holds less than 20 per cent of the domestic market share, while Novoair covers the rest.\nDedicated cargo airlines of Bangladesh include Bismillah Airlines, Easy Fly Express, SkyAir, Hello Airlines and NXT Air.\nWater.\nInland waterways.\nThere are approximately of navigable waterways depending on the season, including up to of major cargo routes. In 2009, it was reported that 20 million tonnes of freight and 90 million passengers utilised inland waterways for transportation annually. However, this number has been in decline, particularly following the opening of the Padma Bridge in 2022, which significantly reduced travel time between south-western Bangladesh and the capital, Dhaka, by road and rail. The modal share of passenger transport through inland waterways in Bangladesh was 8 per cent in 2005, down from 16 per cent in 1975. In 2005, 16 per cent of cargo traffic in Bangladesh used inland waterways, a decrease from 37 per cent in 1975. The Bangladesh Inland Water Transport Authority (BIWTA) is responsible for the development, maintenance, and regulation of inland water transport and navigable waterways in Bangladesh.\nFerries.\nThe country's extensive river network makes ferries a practical and affordable mode of transport. Passenger ferries, locally referred to as \"launches,\" are widely used to travel to the southern and south-western regions of Bangladesh from the capital. The most popular destinations include Barisal, Bhola, Patuakhali, and Khulna. Additionally, there are water-transport routes connecting Dhaka with Kolkata in India.\nApproximately 200 launches operate across 107 water routes throughout the country as of 2022[ [update]]. To support the launch services, the BIWTA has developed 292 wharfs (\"ghats\") for the docking of these vessels, and oversees 380 launch terminals.\nThere are 53 roll-on/roll-off ferries running on seven routes across the country: Paturia\u2013Daulatdia, Aricha\u2013Kazirhat, Shimulia\u2013Banglabazar, Bhola\u2013Lakshmipur, Lajarhat\u2013Veduria, Char Kalipur\u2013Kalipur Bazar and Harinaghat Chandpur\u2013Shariatpur.\nMore than 800,000 small and medium wooden sailboats and rowboats, often retrofitted to be motorised, are an important means of transportation for people and goods across the country, especially during the rainy season. These boats transport over 1.2 million tonnes of freight annually. Among these are the \"dingi\", which is the oldest form of Bengal boat. Larger cargo boats includes vessels such as the \"balam\", \"bajra\" and \"sampan\". Under the category of \"bainkata\" (flat-bottomed) boats are the \"ghasi\", \"gachari\", \"dorakha\", \"kathami\", \"mallar\", \"patam\" and \"panshi\", among others. Ubiquitous throughout Bangladesh, especially in monsoon flood-prone regions, is the \"kosha,\" a small, highly manoeuvrable boat that is easy to operate. These various traditional wooden boats play a vital role in providing transportation during the rainy season when other modes become impractical due to flooding.\nThe ferries are often overloaded and continue to operate in poor weather; many people die each year in ferry and launch accidents. From 2005 to 2015, nearly 1,800 casualties have been reported due to river transport incidents, a number which may be higher due to the prevalence of unregistered vessels. In 2014, the launch \"Pinak 6\" sank in the Padma River with more than 200 passengers aboard near Munshiganj's Louhajang Upazila.\nMerchant marine.\nAs of 2023[ [update]], the country's merchant navy consisted of 558 ships, including 68 bulk carriers, 10 container ships, 170 cargo ships and 162 oil tankers. The Bangladesh Shipping Corporation, a state-owned entity overseeing the management of ocean-going vessels, has seven ships in its fleet, including tanker ships dedicated to transporting oil for Bangladesh Petroleum Corporation and five ships operating on a charter basis for carrying oil, chemicals, and other products.\nPorts and harbours.\nBangladesh has 22 major river ports used for loading and unloading passengers and goods, as well as for landing motorised marine vessels. These include:\nDhaka, Narayanganj, Barisal, Chandpur, Khulna, Baghabari, Patuakhali, Narsingdi, Aricha, Nagarbari, Daulatdia, Tongi, Maoa, Char Jannat, Ashugonj (Bhairab Bazar), Bhola, Barguna, Noapara, Munshiganj, Chatak, Meghnaghat and Cox's Bazar.\nIn addition to these major ports, there are 448 small to medium-sized ports throughout the country.\nChittagong is the busiest sea port in Bangladesh, handling 92 per cent of the country's international cargo, followed by Mongla and Payra. The Matarbari Port, under construction, will be the first deep-sea port capable of accommodating large ships by 2026.\nPipelines.\nIn 2013, Bangladesh had about of natural gas pipelines. In 2023, the first cross-border pipeline to import petroleum products from India was inaugurated, totalling in length. In the same year, the first under-sea pipeline to transport crude oil and diesel from a deep-sea mooring, spanning , was commissioned.\nNeighbouring countries.\nBangladesh shares border with two nations, India and Myanmar.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "68932", "revid": "50880149", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68932", "title": "Bangladesh Armed Forces", "text": "Combined military forces of Bangladesh\nThe Bangladesh Armed Forces is the military force of Bangladesh. It consists of three uniformed organizations, they are the Bangladesh Army, the Bangladesh Navy, and the Bangladesh Air Force. The Armed Forces is under the jurisdiction of the Ministry of Defence of the Government of Bangladesh, and is directly administered by the Armed Forces Division of the Prime Minister's Office. The President of Bangladesh serves as the Commander-in-Chief of the Bangladesh Armed Forces. Bangladesh has the third-largest defence budget in South Asia. The Bangladeshi military is also the 35th strongest in the world and the third most powerful military force in South Asia. Border Guard Bangladesh and Bangladesh Coast Guard is under the jurisdiction of the Ministry of Home Affairs during peacetime, but during wartime, they fall under the command of the Bangladesh Army and the Bangladesh Navy, respectively.\nMilitary policy is formulated and executed by the Armed Forces Division (AFD), whereas the Ministry of Defence (MoD) does not exercise any operational or policy authority over the Armed Forces. Since independence, the AFD and MoD have been led by the Prime Minister. To coordinate military policy with foreign and intelligence policy, both the President and the Prime Minister are advised by a six-member advisory board, which consists of the three military services Chiefs of Staff, Principal Staff Officer of the Armed Forces Division, and Military secretaries to the President and the Prime Minister. The directors-general of the NSI, the DGFI, and the BGB also serve in an advisory capacity when invited.\nArmed Forces Day is observed on 21 November and commemorates the founding of the three services of the Armed Forces, who subsequently initiated a joint military operation against the occupying Pakistani Armed Forces during the Bangladesh Liberation War. Official functions are held across the country, including at Bangabhaban, the Armed Forces Division Headquarters at Dhaka Cantonment, all military cantonments, and at every military installation throughout Bangladesh.\nHistory.\nEast Pakistan.\nWith the partitioning of India on 15 August 1947, the territory constituting modern Bangladesh was partitioned from the province of Bengal as East Bengal which joined Pakistan. Ethnic and sectional discrimination prevailed in various sectors of the state. Like other government sectors, Bengalis were under-represented in the Pakistani military too. Officers of Bengali origin in different wings of the armed forces made up just 5% of the entire military by 1965. West Pakistanis believed that Bengalis were not \"martially inclined\" unlike Pashtuns and Punjabis; the \"Martial Races\" notion was dismissed as ridiculous and humiliating by Bengalis. Moreover, despite huge defence spending, East Pakistan received none of the benefits, such as contracts, purchasing and military support jobs. The Indo-Pakistani War of 1965 over Kashmir also highlighted the sense of military insecurity among Bengalis as only an under-strength infantry division and 15 combat aircraft without tank support were in East Pakistan to repel any Indian attack during the conflict.\nThe East Bengal Regiment was formed on 15 February 1948 following Pakistan's independence and transition from post British rule, composed exclusively of men from the western part of the country. The first East Bengal Regiment was composed of Bengali members of the \"British Indian Army Pioneer Corps\" and \"Bihar Regiment\" of the abolished \"British-Indian army\". Between 1948 and 1965, a total of eight battalions of EBR were raised.\nBangladesh War of Independence.\nFollowing the victory of the Awami League in the 1970 elections, then-president General Yahya Khan refused to appoint its leader Sheikh Mujibur Rahman as the prime minister and launched a brutal attack named \"Operation Searchlight\" on the Bengali nationalists of the then East Pakistan, using the Pakistan Army to repress political movements. The number of people killed by Pakistani forces vary from a minimum of around 300,000 to a maximum of around 3\u00a0million. Responding to Mujib's call for rebellion, many students, workers and other civilians mutinied against Pakistan and raised the Mukti Bahini, a guerrilla force. Later on, many Bengali officers and units from the Pakistan Army and East Pakistan Rifles mutinied against their West Pakistani counterparts and joined the Mukti Bahini. On 17 April 1971, M. A. G Osmani took oath as the commander-in-chief of Mukti Bahini. While the war raged on, the necessity of a well-trained armed force was always felt. During the first Bangladesh Sector Commanders Conference, held from 11 to 17 July 1971, the Bangladesh Forces started its journey composed of the revolting Bengali members of the Pakistan Army and EPR. In this historic conference the field command structure, sector reorganization, reinforcement, appointment of field commanders and tactics of warfare were decided upon and carried out. On 21 November 1971, the Bangladesh Forces was divided into three separate services as Bangladesh Army, Bangladesh Navy and Bangladesh Air Force.\nThe Bangladesh Forces received modest assistance from the Indian Government soon after the start of the war, On 3 December 1971, the India-Pakistan war broke out and Indian troops entered Bangladesh allied with the Bangladesh Armed Forces. On 16 December 1971, the Pakistani military surrendered to the joint Indian and Bangladesh forces.\nPost-independence.\nThe newly formed Bangladeshi armed forces incorporated some of the units and guerrillas of the Mukti Bahini. Gen. Osmani, who had led the Mukti Bahini was appointed the General of the Bangladesh armed forces. For many years, there was active discrimination in favour of the inductees from the Mukti Bahini against those Bengali officers who had continued service in the Pakistani armed forces or had been detained in West Pakistan. A group of angered officers assassinated the president Sheikh Mujib on 15 August 1975 and established a regime with politician Khondaker Mostaq Ahmed as President of Bangladesh and new army chief Maj. Gen. Ziaur Rahman. The military itself was subject of divisions as Mujib's assassins were overthrown by the pro-Mujib Brig. Gen. Khaled Mosharraf on 3 November, who himself was soon overthrown by a socialist group of officers under Col. Abu Taher on 7 November who returned Ziaur Rahman to power\u2014an event now called the \"Sipoy-Janata Biplob\" (\"Soldiers and People's Coup\"). Under the presidency of Ziaur Rahman, the military was reorganised to remove conflicts between rival factions and discontented cadre. However, Ziaur Rahman was himself overthrown in a 1981 coup attempt, and a year later, Lt. Gen. Hossain Mohammad Ershad took power from the elected government of president Abdus Sattar. The military remained the most important force in national politics under the regimes of Ziaur Rahman and later Hossain Mohammad Ershad until democracy was restored in 1991.\nModern period.\nHaving relied primarily on India and the Soviet Union for military aid, Bangladesh has also developed military ties with the People's Republic of China and the United States. The Bangladesh Army has been actively involved in United Nations Peace Support Operations (UNPSO). During the first Gulf War in 1991, the Bangladesh Army sent a 2,193 member team to monitor peace in Saudi Arabia and Kuwait. The Bangladesh Army also participated in peace keeping activities in Namibia, Cambodia, Somalia, Uganda, Rwanda, Mozambique, former Yugoslavia, Liberia, Haiti, Tajikistan, Western Sahara, Sierra Leone, Kosovo, Georgia, East Timor, Congo, C\u00f4te d'Ivoire and Ethiopia. As of October 2008, Bangladesh remained the second largest contributor with 9,800 troops in the UN Peacekeeping forces.\nUntil a peace accord was signed in 1997, the Bangladeshi military engaged in counterinsurgency operations in the Chittagong Hill Tracts fighting the Shanti Bahini separatist group. In 2001, Bangladeshi military units engaged in clashes with the Indian Border Security Force (BSF) along the northern border.\nSeveral projects and schemes aiming to expand and modernize the Bangladeshi armed forces were launched by the government of former Prime Minister Begum Khaleda Zia.\nForces Goal 2030 was launched by the government of Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina to secure new equipment for the Bangladeshi military.\nBangladesh-Myanmar border.\nStandoffs have occasionally occurred at the Bangladesh-Myanmar border, including in 1991 and 2008. Most of the standoffs took place, when Myanmar attempted to force Rohingyas into Bangladesh. In 2008, the two countries deployed warships after Myanmar attempted to explore a disputed Bay of Bengal seabed for oil and gas. The dispute was resolved at an international tribunal in 2012. Bangladesh and Myanmar have also conducted counter-insurgency operations on the border.\nMedals and decorations.\nThe following are the various gallantry, service and war medals of the Bangladesh Armed Forces.\nCurrent deployments.\nBangladesh has consistently made large contributions to United Nations peacekeeping operations. As of May 2007, Bangladesh had major deployments in Democratic Republic of Congo, Liberia, Lebanon, Sudan, Timor-Leste and C\u00f4te d'Ivoire. With 10,736 troops deployed, it ranks first in personnel contributions to UN peacekeeping. The government declined to participate in Iraq on a request from the United States. The deployment to Liberia began in October 2003 and has remained at a level of about 3,200 who are participating in peacekeeping, charitable activities and infrastructure development.\nTraining.\nOfficers are trained and educated for three years at the Bangladesh Military Academy, Bhatiary, Bangladesh Naval Academy at Patenga, both located in Chittagong and Bangladesh Air Force Academy located in Jessore. For advance training during their career, officers are sent to Bangladesh Defence Services Command and Staff College at Mirpur, while senior officers attend the National Defense University for Armed Forces War Course. Many attend the Military Institute of Science and Technology while serving. Officers of the Army Medical Corps are recruited after graduation from both military or civil medical colleges. They undergo basic military training at Bangladesh Military Academy followed by professional training in medical corps centre and Armed Forces Medical Institute. Recently cadets of Armed Forces Medical College also started joining the services directly.\nRanks.\nBangladeshi military ranks, essentially corresponds to those used by the armed forces of the commonwealth nations.\nThe rank insignia for commissioned officers for the Armed forces respectively.\nOrganization.\nMilitary districts.\nDhaka Cantonment\nArmy Cantonments.\nCantonments are where Bangladesh Army personnel work, train, and live.\nFuture modernisation plans.\nBangladesh has made a long term modernisation plan for its Armed Forces named Forces Goal 2030. The plan includes the modernization and expansion of all equipment and infrastructures and providing enhanced training.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "68933", "revid": "42975076", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68933", "title": "Foreign relations of Bangladesh", "text": "The foreign relations of Bangladesh are Bangladesh's relationships with foreign countries. The Government of Bangladesh's policies pursue a moderate foreign policy that heavily relies on multilateral diplomacy, especially at the United Nations (UN) and the World Trade Organization (WTO). Since its independence in 1971, Bangladesh has stressed its principle of \"Friendship towards all, malice towards none\" in dictating its diplomacy. As a member of the Non-Aligned Movement, Bangladesh has tended to not take sides with major powers. Since the end of the Cold War, Bangladesh has pursued better relations with its neighbours and other nearby states.\nThe Bangladeshi government has begun to implement a foreign policy that pursues regional economic integration in South Asia and aims to establish Bangladesh as a regional hub of transit trade in Asia. Bangladesh has established official diplomatic relations with most of the members of the United Nations as well as some non-UN members like Palestine. Relations with these nations are largely cordial except for some bilateral disputes with Myanmar and Pakistan. Issues with India stem from Teesta and other river water sharing and border killings.\nPolicy.\nThe foreign policy of Bangladesh consists of various strategies chosen by the Constitution and government of the country to safeguard its national interests and to achieve goals from its place on the world stage. The Bangladeshi Ministry of Foreign Affairs formulates and executes the policies according to the guidance from the relevant section of the Constitution of Bangladesh.\nThe fundamental principles of foreign policies of Bangladesh originate from Article 25 of the Constitution of Bangladesh:\n\"The State shall base its international relations on the principles of respect for national sovereignty and equality, non-interference in the internal affairs of other countries, peaceful settlements of international disputes, and respect for international law and the principles enunciated in the United Nations Charter, and on the basis of those principles shall-\nParticipation in multilateral organisations.\nCommonwealth of Nations.\nBangladesh, which was part of the British Raj until 1947, joined the Commonwealth of Nations in 1972 after its establishment as an independent nation in 1971 from Pakistan. It has actively participated in the Heads of Government conferences that take place bi-annually.\nUnited Nations.\nBangladesh was admitted to the United Nations in 1974 and was elected to a Security Council term in 1978\u20131980 and again for a 2000\u20132002 term. Foreign Minister Mr. Humayun Rasheed Choudhury served as president of the 41st UN General Assembly in 1986.\nIn recent years, Bangladesh has played a significant role in international peacekeeping operations. In 2021, nearly 10,000 Bangladeshi military personnel were deployed overseas on peacekeeping operations, making it the single largest contributor to the UN peacekeeping forces. Under UN auspices, Bangladeshi troops have historically served in Somalia, Rwanda, Mozambique, Kuwait, Bosnia and Herzegovina, and Haiti, and units are currently serving in Kuwait and East Timor. For example, Bangladesh responded quickly to US President Bill Clinton's 1994 request for troops and police as part of the multinational intervention to restore democracy in Haiti and provided the largest non-US contingent. As of December 2021, Bangladesh is the largest provider of UN peacekeeping troops with 6,608 personnel, followed by Rwanda with 6,335 personnel.\nNon-Aligned Movement.\nBangladesh was selected to provide the next chair of the Non-Aligned Movement (NAM) at the organization's 2001 summit, scheduled to take place in Dhaka. However, it was later decided to host the summit at an alternative venue. As a member of the Non-Aligned Movement, Bangladesh has adopted a principle of staying neutral in the affairs of the great powers. However, it parted from this principle by voting against North Korea at the United Nations in December 2008, under pressure from Japan.\nOrganisation of Islamic Cooperation.\n \"See also\" OIC role in Pakistan-Bangladesh relationship\nIn 1974, then Prime Minister Sheikh Mujibur Rahman, led a Bangladeshi delegation team consisting of Kamal Hossain, Enayet Karim, Ataur Rahman Khan, Taheruddin Thakur, Tofail Ahmed, and Shah Azizur Rahman to the international meeting of the Organisation of the Islamic Conference (OIC, now the Organisation of Islamic Cooperation) held in Lahore. Following this, Bangladesh was admitted as a member of OIC. In 1977, President Ziaur Rahman amended the Constitution of Bangladesh, including a clause stating that \"the state shall endeavour to consolidate, preserve and strengthen fraternal relations among Muslim countries based on Islamic solidarity\". Since then, an explicit goal of Bangladeshi foreign policy has been to seek close relations with other Islamic states. In 1980, President Ziaur Rahman was included in a 3-member \"Al-Quds\" summit committee to attend the summit in Morocco. In 1983, Bangladesh hosted the assembled foreign ministers of the OIC in Dhaka. At the OIC headquarters in Jeddah, Bangladesh is represented in the capacity of one of the Director Generals.\nSouth Asian Association for Regional Cooperation.\nThe government also pursued the expansion of cooperation among the nations of South Asia, bringing the process, an initiative of former President Ziaur Rahman, through its earliest, most tentative stages to the formal inauguration of the South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation (SAARC) at a summit of South Asian leaders in Dhaka in December 1985. Bangladesh has served as the chair of SAARC and has participated in a wide range of ongoing SAARC regional activities\nBay of Bengal Initiative for Multi-Sectoral Technical and Economic Cooperation.\nThe Bay of Bengal Initiative for Multi-Sectoral Technical and Economic Cooperation (BIMSTEC) is an international organisation that includes South Asian and Southeast Asian nations. The member nations of this group are Bangladesh, India, Myanmar, Sri Lanka, Thailand, Bhutan, and Nepal. The organisation focuses on regional cooperation in the sectors of economics, trade, and investment.\nDeveloping-8 Organization for Economic Cooperation.\nBangladesh is among the 8 member countries of the Developing-8 Organization for Economic Cooperation (D-8). The Developing-8 is an economic alliance consisting of Islamic-majority states that focuses on development in the areas of science and technology, banking, finance, agriculture and rural development, humanitarian development, energy, the environment, health, and finance. On 14 May 2006 in Bali, Indonesia, Bangladesh was the only nation not to sign a preferential trade agreement with the other D-8 states. Bangladesh has been the incumbent chair of the Developing-8 Countries since the organization's tenth summit in Dhaka in April 2021.\nAsia-Pacific Trade Agreement.\nThe Asia-Pacific Trade Agreement (APTA), formerly known as the Bangkok Agreement, was signed in 1975 under one of the major initiatives taken by the United Nations Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific (UNESCAP). Seven participating states, Bangladesh, the People's Republic of China, India, Laos, Mongolia, the Republic of Korea (South Korea), and Sri Lanka are parties to the APTA. In 2005, Bangladesh signed the APTA agreement in order to enable it to reduce trade deficits between itself and other nations such as China, South Korea, and its neighbour India. The total APTA market includes around 2.9 billion people and, as of the fiscal year (FY) 2015\u20132016, a gross domestic product (GDP) of around $14.6 trillion USD. APTA's objective is to hasten the economic development of the seven participating states by encouraging trade liberalisation measures.\nWorld Trade Organization.\nBangladesh is an active member of the World Trade Organization (WTO). Bangladesh has had a permanent mission in Geneva to look after matters relating to the multilateral trading system under the WTO regime since the mid-1990s.\nWorld Customs Organization.\nBangladesh is an active member of the World Customs Organization (WCO). Bangladesh has a permanent representative to the WCO, which has its headquarters in Brussels.\nLike Minded Group.\nBangladesh has formed an alliance with nineteen other developing countries to vote as a bloc in organisations such as the WTO and the United Nations.\nOther.\nThe government has participated in numerous international conferences, especially those dealing with population, food, development, and women's issues. In 1982\u201383, Bangladesh played a constructive role as chairman of the \"Group of 77\", an informal association encompassing most of the world's developing nations. It has taken a leading role in the \"Group of 48\", another association of developing countries. Aside from the groups detailed previously, Bangladesh also participates in the following international organisations:\nARF, AsDB, CP, FAO, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICC, ICCt (signatory), ICRM, IDA, IDB, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, IHO, ILO, IMF, IMO, Interpol, IOC, IOM, IPU, ISO, ITU, ITUC, MIGA, MINURSO, MONUC, SACEP, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNHCR, UNIDO, UNMEE, UNMIL, UNMIS, UNOCI, UNOMIG, UNWTO, UPU, WCL, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, and OPCW.\nDiplomatic relations.\nList of countries which Bangladesh maintains diplomatic relations with:\nAsia.\nSouth Asia.\nBangladesh maintains friendly relations with Bhutan, the Maldives, Nepal, Sri Lanka, Pakistan, and India. It strongly opposed the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan. Bangladesh and Nepal have agreed to facilitate land transit between the two countries.\nWestern Asia (Middle East).\nDuring the Bangladesh Liberation War, the majority of conservative Arab nations were against Bangladeshi liberation because India, a largely non-Muslim nation, was supporting the break-up of a Pakistan, an Islamic country. However, non-Arab Islamic nations such as Indonesia and Turkiye established relations quickly. At the present, Bangladesh maintains relations with the Middle East through many areas such as commerce, history, military, and most importantly religious ties which enabled the two to co-operate more easily than with Western or Far Eastern partners. Bangladesh supplies over one million guest workers to Saudi Arabia, the United Arab Emirates, Kuwait, and other Gulf states. In turn, most of Bangladesh's oil is imported from this region. Islamic countries and charities provide economic aid usually to advance the Islamic agenda, including funding mosques and madrassas.\nDuring the Yom Kippur War, Bangladesh supported the Arabs and Palestinians and sent a medical team and relief supply, which was appreciated. In return, they enabled Bangladesh to become a member of the Non-Aligned Movement (NAM) at the Algiers Summit in 1973 and pressured Pakistan into recognising Bangladesh to get Mujib to go to the 1974 OIC Summit in Lahore, as he stated that was his only condition.\nBangladesh also took an active part in trying to broker a ceasefire between Iran and Iraq during their eight-year war as a member of the United Nations Security Council and participating in the UNIIMOG mission, of which it became Acting Head in the last few years before withdrawal. It later helped them to be elected into the OIC Peace Committee.\nBangladesh strongly opposed the Israeli bombardment of South Lebanon which killed approximately 1,191 civilians and described it as \"State Terrorism\" and a double standard conflict, saying that a non-western nation would have been labelled a terrorist and a western nation would have never been deemed a terrorist. It also contributed to the peacekeeping effort after the 2006 Lebanon War by sending in battalions of infantry.\nAfrica.\nBangladesh's presence in Africa is mostly due to their large contribution to the peacekeeping forces present around the continent such as Liberia, Sierra Leone, Ivory Coast, Sudan (Darfur) and Somalia. Bangladesh can foster ties based on its history such as nations in Southeast Africa where there is a South Asian population (whose ancestors immigrated there during the British Empire). In countries such as Ivory Coast and Sierra Leone, Bangladeshi peacekeepers have been honoured. It is currently trying to increase ties with the southern economic bloc in Southern Africa with nations such as Zimbabwe.\nEurope.\nEuropean countries provide significant economic assistance to Bangladesh. Scandinavian countries contribute a greater percentage of their GDP to this aid than the rest of Europe does. Europe is the top export destination for Bangladeshi products (53% in 2021). Textiles make up 97% of these exports, followed by agricultural products, particularly shrimp.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "68934", "revid": "1311013723", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68934", "title": "Geography of Barbados", "text": " \nBarbados is a continental island in the Atlantic Ocean east of the Caribbean and is located at 13\u00b010' north of the equator, and 59\u00b032' west of the Prime Meridian. As the easternmost isle of the Lesser Antilles in the West Indies, Barbados lies 160 kilometres (100\u00a0mi) east of the Windward Islands and Caribbean Sea. The maritime claim for Barbados is a territorial sea of , with an exclusive economic zone of which gives Barbados a total maritime area of . Of the total EEZ area, 70,000\u00a0km2 is set aside for offshore oil exploration. A pending application to UNCLOS has placed for consideration a continental shelf to the east and south (or to the edge of the continental margin). To the west, most of Barbados's maritime boundaries consist of median lines with neighbours. These neighbours include: Martinique, and Saint Lucia to the northwest, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines to the west, Trinidad and Tobago and Venezuela to the southwest, and Guyana to the southeast.\nBarbados's total land area is , and it has a coastline of length. The island is sometimes compared to a pear or leg of mutton for its physical shape. Barbados has a maximum north\u2013south length of and a maximum east\u2013west breadth of .\nPhysical characteristics.\nThe physical characteristics of Barbados are its lowlands or gently sloping, terraced plains, separated by rolling hills that generally parallel the coasts. Elevations in the interior range from 180 to 240 meters above sea level. Mount Hillaby is the highest point at 340 meters above sea level. Farther south, at Christ Church Ridge, elevations range from sixty to ninety meters. Eighty-five percent of the island's surface consists of coralline limestone twenty-four to thirty meters thick; Scotland District contains outcroppings of oceanic formations at the surface, however. Sugarcane is planted on almost 80 percent of the island's limestone surface. The soils vary in fertility; erosion is a problem, with crop loss resulting from landslides, washouts, and falling rocks. Most of the small streams are in Scotland District. The rest of the island has few surface streams; nevertheless, rainwater saturates the soil to produce underground channels such as the famous Coles Cave. Also notable in the island is the rocky cape known as Pico Teneriffe or Pico de Tenerife, which is named after the fact that the island of Tenerife in Spain is the first land east of Barbados according to the belief of the locals.\nIn Barbados forest cover is around 15% of the total land area, equivalent to 6,300 hectares (ha) of forest in 2020, which was unchanged from 1990. In 2020, naturally regenerating forest covered 6,300 hectares (ha) and planted forest covered 0 hectares (ha). Of the naturally regenerating forest 0% was reported to be primary forest (consisting of native tree species with no clearly visible indications of human activity) and around 5% of the forest area was found within protected areas. For the year 2015, 1% of the forest area was reported to be under public ownership, 0% private ownership and 99% with ownership listed as other or unknown.\nPopulated places.\n\"List of\": Cities, towns and villages in Barbados.\nProposed developments.\nIn 2009 and 2010, members of the upscale real estate industry in Barbados proposed the creation of artificial islands to be placed off the west coast. According to Paul Altman of Altman Realty the envisioned plan, would consist of two islands, one measuring in size, and would house new tourism based developments and upscale boutique shops; while the second island would be in size, and would serve as an open national park. Both proposed islands would be a short distance from the Deep Water Harbour in Bridgetown.\nThe south-eastern part of the island has undergone small scale oil and gas capturing from possibly as early as 1919 when the British Union Oil Company acquired over 75% of the drilling rights in Barbados. Similar to Trinidad and Tobago to the southwest, the territorial Atlantic Ocean surrounding Barbados has been found to contain fossil fuels, however ongoing research is being conducted to give estimates of actual quantities.\nTime zone.\nBarbados is in the Eastern Caribbean Time Zone. Barbados no longer observes Daylight Saving Time. It was last used between Sunday, 20 April 1980 at 2:00 AM and Thursday, 25 September 1980 at 2:00 AM. On 25 September of that year the clock was shifted from -3:00 to -4:00, where it has remained since.\n Barbados is located east of the Caribbean Sea and the Windward Islands in the North Atlantic Ocean, most directly east of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines.\n Central America and the Caribbean\n* Total: 430 km\u00b2\n* Land: 430 km\u00b2\n* Water: 0 km\u00b2\n* Australia comparative: less than one-fifth of the area of the Australian Capital Territory\n* Canada comparative: slightly larger than London in the Province of Ontario\n* United Kingdom comparative: slightly larger than the Isle of Wight or Saint Helena\n* United States comparative: 2.5 times the size of Washington, DC, about the size of San Antonio, Texas, or half the size of New York City\n 0 km\n 97 km\n* Territorial sea: \n* Exclusive economic zone: and \n Tropical; rainy season (June to October)\n Relatively flat; rises gently to central highland region\n* Northernmost point \u2013 North Point, Saint Lucy\n* Southernmost point \u2013 South Point, Silver Sands, Christ Church\n* Westernmost point \u2013 Harrison Point, Saint Lucy\n* Easternmost point \u2013 Kitridge Point, Saint Philip\n* Lowest point: Atlantic Ocean: 0 m\n* Highest point: Mount Hillaby: 336 m\n Fish, natural gas\n* Arable land: 25.58%\n* Permanent crops: 2.33%\n* Other: 72.09% (2012)\n 54.35 km\u00b2 (2003)\n 0.08 cu km (2011)\n total: 0.1 cu km/yr (20%/26%/254)\n per capita: 371.3 cu m/yr (200p)\n Infrequent hurricanes; periodic landslides; periodic flooding, from storm surge and intense rainfall events; and occasional droughts, causing fires.\n Pollution of coastal waters from waste disposal by ships; soil erosion; illegal solid waste disposal threatens contamination of aquifers\n* Party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol, Desertification, Endangered Species, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Marine Dumping, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution, Wetlands\n* Signed, but not ratified: none of the selected agreements\n Easternmost Caribbean island\nClimate.\nBarbados lies within the tropics. Its generally pleasant maritime climate is influenced by northeast trade winds, which moderate the tropical temperature. Cool, northeasterly trade winds are prevalent during the December to June dry season. The overall annual temperature ranges from ; slightly lower temperatures prevail at higher elevations. Humidity levels are between 71 percent and 76 percent year round. Rainfall occurs primarily between July and December and varies considerably with elevation. Rainfall may average per year in the higher central area as compared with in the coastal zone.\nDisputes.\nGuyana's and Barbados's offshore territorial claims overlap, and are also disputed with Venezuela, which itself claims ownership of the waters overlapping the first two. In 2008 Barbados sought to place the oil blocks on open market for oil exploration tender but faced a challenge by Venezuela's government in Caracas.\nIn 2006 a local Barbadian group purporting to represent descendants of indigenous Caribbean peoples announced its claim to Culpepper Island, a small rocky outcrop on the eastern shore of Barbados.\nOceanography.\nDue to the location of Barbados far east of Windward Islands chain it possesses an expansive Exclusive Economic Zone of about extending predominantly to the east.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "68935", "revid": "49380818", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68935", "title": "Demographics of Barbados", "text": "This is a demography of Barbados including population density, ethnicity, education level, health of the populace, economic status, religious affiliations and other aspects of the population.\nPopulation.\nAt the 2010 census Barbados had an estimated population of 277,821. The tabulated population was only 226,193 due to a high undercount (estimated at 18%).\nThe estimated population of is ().\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nStructure of the population.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Hidden begin/styles.css\"/&gt;Population by Sex and Age Group (Census 01.V.2010) (Data refers to resident population adjusted for the undercount of 18 per cent and including the institutional population.): \nVital statistics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"template:sticky header/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Sort under/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Table alignment/tables.css\" /&gt;\nEthnic groups.\nThe population of Barbados is predominantly black (91%) or mixed (4%). 3.5% of the population is white and 1% South Asian. The remaining 0.5% of the population includes East Asians (0.1%).\nLanguages.\nEnglish is the official language of Barbados, and is used for communications, administration, and public services all over the island. In its capacity as the official language of the country, the standard of English tends to conform to the vocabulary, pronunciations, spellings, and conventions akin to, but not exactly the same as, those of British English.\nA regional variant of English referred to locally as Bajan is spoken by most Barbadians in everyday life especially in informal settings. In its full-fledged form, Bajan sounds markedly different from the Standard English heard on the island. The degree of intelligibility between Bajan and general English depends on the level of creolised vocabulary and idioms. A Bajan speaker may be completely unintelligible to an English speaker from another country. Bajan is influenced by other Caribbean English dialects.\nReligion.\nAccording to the 2010 census, 75.6% of the population of Barbados are considered Christian, 2.6% have a non-Christian religion and 20.6% have no religion.\nAnglicanism constitutes the largest religious group, with 23.9% of the population. It is represented by the Church in the Province of the West Indies, within which the island belongs to the Diocese of Barbados. Pentecostals are the second largest group (19.5%).\nThe next largest group are Seventh-day Adventists, 5.9% of the population, followed by Methodists (4.2%). 3.8% of the population are Roman Catholics. Other Christians include Wesleyans (3.4%), Nazarenes (3.2%), Church of God (2.4%), Jehovah's Witnesses (2.0%), Baptists (1.8), Moravians (1.2%), Brethren Christian (0.5%), the Salvationists (0.4%) and Latter-day Saints ( 0.1%).\nThe number of non-Christians is small. 0.7% of the population are Muslims, most of whom are immigrants or descendants of Indian immigrants from the Indian state of Gujarat. There are three mosques and an Islamic centre. Other religious groups include the Rastafarians (1.0% of the population), which was introduced to Barbados in 1975, Hindus (0.5%), Jews (0.05%), the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00eds (0.04%) and Buddhists.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "68936", "revid": "51054709", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68936", "title": "Politics of Barbados", "text": " \nThe politics of Barbados function within a framework of a parliamentary republic with strong democratic traditions; constitutional safeguards for nationals of Barbados include: freedom of speech, press, worship, movement, and association.\nExecutive power is vested in the President of Barbados, and is exercised by the President on the advice of the prime minister and Cabinet, who together, form the government. Legislative power is vested in both the government and the two chambers of the Parliament. The political system is dominated by two main parties, the Barbados Labour Party and the Democratic Labour Party. The judiciary of Barbados is independent of the executive and the legislature. Jurisprudence is based on English common law.\nMany of the country's legislative practices derive from the unwritten conventions of, and precedents set by, the United Kingdom's Westminster Parliament; however, Barbados has evolved variations.\nGovernment of Barbados.\nHead of state.\nThe president of Barbados is the head of state and serves as the repository of executive power, as expressed in the Constitution: \"The executive authority of Barbados is vested in the President.\" In practice, the president rarely exercises this power on his own volition due to the fact that the Constitution obliges the president to follow the advice of his ministers. As a consequence, the president is not held personally responsible for the decisions of the government.\nHead of government.\nThe prime minister is the head of government. The prime minister is appointed by the president of Barbados, but to ensure the continuity of a stable government this person will always be the one who has the confidence of the House of Assembly to lead the government. In practice, the position usually goes to the leader of the political party that has the most seats in the lower house. In no Barbadian election has a single party obtained less than an absolute majority in the House of Assembly (a situation which would have entailed the formation of a minority or coalition government).\nThe prime minister holds office until he resigns is effectively subject to a winning vote of no confidence or is removed by the president; therefore, the party that was in government before the election may attempt to continue to govern if they so desire, even if they hold fewer seats than another party. Coalition governments have never occurred.\nPolitical parties are private organisations that are not mentioned in the constitution. The prime minister and the Cabinet are constitutionally required to be Members of Parliament so they can answer to Parliament for their actions. The prime minister selects ministers to head the various government departments and form a cabinet. The members of the Cabinet remain in office at the pleasure of the President.\nIf the Assembly passes a motion of no confidence in the government, the prime minister and the rest of Cabinet are expected either to resign their offices or to ask for Parliament to be dissolved so that a general election can be held. To avoid a non-confidence motion from passing, parties enforce strong party discipline, in which members of a party \u2013 especially from the ruling party \u2013 are strongly urged to vote the \"party line\" or face consequences. While a member of a governing party is free to vote their conscience, they are constrained by the fact that voting against the party line (especially in confidence votes) might lead to expulsion from their party. Such an expulsion would lead to loss of election funding and the former party backing an alternate candidate. While the government likes to keep control in these circumstances, in unwritten practice, the only time the government can fall is if a money bill (financial or budget) is defeated. However, if a government finds that it can not pass any legislation it is common (but not required) that a vote of confidence should be held. The exception is if the prime minister or the government declared that they consider a given bill to be a matter of confidence (hence how backbenchers are often held to strict party voting). Members can be elected as independents. Most independent members are elected under a party, but either chose to leave the party or are expelled from it.\nWhen there are enough seats for another party to form a government after the resignation of a government, the president may ask the other party to try to form the government.\nLegislative power.\nBarbados' Parliament consists of the President and a bicameral legislature: an elected House of Assembly and an appointed Senate. In practice, legislative power rests with the party that has the majority of seats in the House of Assembly, which is elected for a period not to exceed five years. The senate remains a body which is mainly filled by the decision of the official party in the role of being the ruling party, and the member(s) officially in the role of being an official opposition also submit a cadre for membership to the Senate as well.\nPolitical parties and elections.\nSummary of the 2022 Barbadian General Election\nThe parishes of Barbados are usually further divided into one or more constituencies for candidates seeking election to the House of Assembly. As of 1967, there are no longer any Local Government Councils at the parish level, as issues such as schools, public works, government health facilities and other institutions are administered at the national level. However, local representatives to the House of Assembly will usually be responsible for local causes and may take up issues with the respective Ministers of the Crown.\nThere are two major and long-standing parties in Barbados: the Barbados Labour Party (BLP) and the Democratic Labour Party (DLP). The 1990s have seen the dissolution of a third party: the National Democratic Party (NDP), and in recent times the creation of other parties such as the People's Empowerment Party (PEP), United Progressive Party and the People's Party for Democracy and Development.\nDespite initial historical disparity (the BLP was once conservative and the DLP liberal), their modern incarnations are all moderate and largely have no major ideological differences. Electoral contests and political disputes often have personal overtones and voter sway tends to be based on tradition. The major political problems facing Barbados today are in promoting economic growth: creating jobs, encouraging agricultural diversification, attracting small industry, and promoting tourism.\nThe BLP decisively returned to power, after the DLP ruled from 2008 to 2018, after winning 2018 Barbadian general election in May, 2018. The BLP won all 30 seats in the Parliament, leaving the DLP for the first time since its creation as an Extra-Parliamentary party, and Mia Mottley becoming the first female prime minister of Barbados. This historic landslide victory occurred again for the 2022 Barbadian general election with the BLP retaining power under the Mottley Administration, which was the first election following Barbados' transition to a republic.\nParty eras.\nPolitical pressure groups.\nThe main political pressure groups are:\nJudiciary.\nBarbados has an independent judiciary composed of Magistrates' Courts, which are statutorily authorized, and a Supreme Court, which is constitutionally mandated. The Supreme Court consists of the High Court and the Court of Appeal, each having four judges. The Chief Justice serves on both the high court and the court of appeal. The court of last resort is the Caribbean Court of Justice (CCJ) in Port of Spain, Trinidad and Tobago (which replaced the British-based Judicial Committee of the Privy Council). The CCJ's decisions are binding on all parties. Judges of the Supreme Court are appointed by the president on the recommendation of the prime minister after consultation with the leader of the opposition.\nSupreme Court of Judicature judges are appointed by the Service Commissions for the Judicial and Legal Service.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "68937", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68937", "title": "Trichotillomania", "text": "Compulsive hair-pulling disorder\nMedical condition&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nTrichotillomania (TTM), also known as hair-pulling disorder or compulsive hair pulling, is a mental disorder characterized by a long-term urge that results in the pulling out of one's own hair. A brief positive feeling may occur as hair is removed. Efforts to stop pulling hair typically fail. Hair removal may occur anywhere; however, the head and around the eyes are most common. The hair pulling is to such a degree that it results in distress and can cause visible hair loss.\nAs of 2023, the specific cause or causes of trichotillomania are unclear. Trichotillomania is probably due to a combination of genetic and environmental factors. The disorder may run in families. It occurs more commonly in those with obsessive compulsive disorder (OCD). Episodes of pulling may be triggered by anxiety. People usually acknowledge that they pull their hair, and broken hairs may be seen on examination. Other conditions that may present similarly include body dysmorphic disorder; however, in that condition people remove hair to try to improve what they see as a problem in how they look.\nThe disorder is typically treated with cognitive behavioral therapy. Trichotillomania is estimated to affect one to four percent of people. Trichotillomania most commonly begins in childhood or adolescence. Women are affected about 10 times more often than men. The name was created by Fran\u00e7ois Henri Hallopeau in 1889, from the Greek , (meaning 'hair'), along with , (meaning 'to pull'), and , \"mania\" (meaning 'madness').\nSigns and symptoms.\nTrichotillomania is usually confined to one or two sites, but can involve multiple sites. The scalp is the most common pulling site, followed by the eyebrows, eyelashes, face, arms, and legs. Some less common areas include the pubic area, underarms, beard, and chest. The classic presentation is the \"Friar Tuck\" form of crown alopecia (loss of hair at the \"crown\" of the head, also known as the \"vertex\"). Children are less likely to pull from areas other than the scalp.\nPeople with trichotillomania often pull only one hair at a time and these hair-pulling episodes can last for hours at a time. Some individuals may experience more satisfaction after pulling an anagen phase hair with the gel-like inner root sheath still surrounding the base of the hair. Trichotillomania can go into remission-like states where the individual may not experience the urge to \"pull\" for days, weeks, months, or even years.\nIndividuals with trichotillomania exhibit hair of differing lengths; some are broken hairs with blunt ends, some new growth with tapered ends, some broken mid-shaft, or some uneven stubble. Scaling on the scalp is not present, overall hair density is normal, and a hair pull test is negative (the hair can not be pulled out easily). Hair is often pulled out, leaving an unusual shape. Individuals with trichotillomania may be secretive of their hair pulling behavior, which is often associated with shame.\nAn additional psychological effect can be low self-esteem, often associated with being shunned by peers and the fear of socializing, due to one's appearance and negative attention they may receive. Some people with trichotillomania wear hats, wigs, false eyelashes, use makeup such as an eyebrow pencil, or style their hair in an effort to avoid such attention. There seems to be a strong stress-related component. In low-stress environments, some exhibit no symptoms (known as \"pulling\") whatsoever, and this \"pulling\" often resumes upon leaving this environment. Some individuals with trichotillomania may feel isolated, as if they are the only person with this problem, due to low rates of reporting.\nFor some people, trichotillomania is a mild, if frustrating, problem. But for many, embarrassment about hair pulling causes isolation and results in a great deal of emotional distress, placing them at risk for a co-occurring psychiatric disorder, such as a mood or anxiety disorder. Hair pulling can lead to tension and strained relationships with family members and friends. Family members may need professional help in coping with this problem.\nOther medical complications include infection, permanent loss of hair, repetitive stress injury, carpal tunnel syndrome, and gastrointestinal obstruction as a result of trichophagia. In trichophagia, people with trichotillomania also ingest the hair that they pull; in extreme (and rare) cases this can lead to a hair ball (trichobezoar). Rapunzel syndrome is an extreme form of trichobezoar in which the \"tail\" of the hair ball extends into the intestines and can be fatal if misdiagnosed.\nEnvironment is a large factor which affects hair pulling. Sedentary activities such as being in a relaxed environment are conducive to hair pulling. A common example of a sedentary activity promoting hair pulling is lying in a bed while trying to rest or fall asleep. An extreme example of automatic trichotillomania is \"sleep-isolated\" trichotillomania, where patients pull their hair out while asleep.\nCauses.\nAnxiety, depression and obsessive\u2013compulsive disorder are more frequently encountered in people with trichotillomania. Trichotillomania has a high overlap with post traumatic stress disorder, and some cases of trichotillomania may be triggered by stress. Another school of thought emphasizes hair pulling as addictive or negatively reinforcing, as it is associated with rising tension beforehand and relief afterward. A neurocognitive model \u2014 the notion that the basal ganglia play a role in habit formation and that the frontal lobes are critical for normally suppressing or inhibiting such habits \u2014 sees trichotillomania as a habit disorder.\nIn several MRI studies, it has been found that people with trichotillomania have more gray matter on average than those who do not have the disorder. One study found that individuals with trichotillomania have decreased cerebellar volume on average, which suggests some differences between OCD and trichotillomania. An fMRI study reported decreased activation in the basal ganglia, dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, and dorsal anterior cingulate cortex in people with trichotillomania. Abnormalities in the caudate nucleus are noted in OCD, but there is no evidence to support that these abnormalities can also be linked to trichotillomania.\nIt is likely that a combination of multiple genes confers vulnerability to trichotillomania. Mutations in the SLITRK1, 5HT2A, SAPAP3, and FOXP1 genes have been associated with trichotillomania. In addition, HOXB8 knockout mice display pathological grooming behavior similar to trichotillomania, although associations between trichotillomania and the HOXB8 gene have not been demonstrated in humans.\nDiagnosis.\nPatients may be ashamed or actively attempt to disguise their symptoms. This can make diagnosis difficult as symptoms are not always immediately obvious, or have been deliberately hidden to avoid disclosure. If the patient admits to hair pulling, diagnosis is not difficult; if patients deny hair pulling, a differential diagnosis must be pursued. The differential diagnosis will include evaluation for alopecia areata, iron deficiency, hypothyroidism, tinea capitis, traction alopecia, alopecia mucinosa, thallium poisoning, and loose anagen syndrome. In trichotillomania, a hair pull test is negative.\nA biopsy can be performed and may be helpful; it reveals traumatized hair follicles with perifollicular hemorrhage, fragmented hair in the dermis, empty follicles, and deformed hair shafts. Multiple catagen hairs are typically seen. An alternative technique to biopsy, particularly for children, is to shave a part of the involved area and observe for regrowth of normal hairs.\nDiagnostic criteria from the DSM-5 provides the following criteria for trichotillomania:\nClassification.\nTrichotillomania is defined as a self-induced and recurrent loss of hair. It includes the criterion of an increasing sense of tension before pulling the hair and gratification or relief when pulling the hair. However, some people with trichotillomania do not endorse the inclusion of \"rising tension and subsequent pleasure, gratification, or relief\" as part of the criteria because many individuals with trichotillomania may not realize they are pulling their hair, and patients presenting for diagnosis may deny the criteria for tension prior to hair pulling or a sense of gratification after hair is pulled.\nTrichotillomania may lie on the obsessive-compulsive spectrum, also encompassing obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD), body dysmorphic disorder (BDD), nail biting (onychophagia) and skin picking (dermatillomania), tic disorders and eating disorders. These conditions may share clinical features, genetic contributions, and possibly treatment response; however, differences between trichotillomania and OCD are present in symptoms, neural function and cognitive profile. In the sense that it is associated with irresistible urges to perform unwanted repetitive behavior, trichotillomania is akin to some of these conditions, and rates of trichotillomania among relatives of OCD patients is higher than expected by chance. However, differences between the disorder and OCD have been noted, including: differing peak ages at onset, rates of comorbidity, gender differences, and neural dysfunction and cognitive profile. When it occurs in early childhood, it can be regarded as a distinct clinical entity.\nBecause trichotillomania can be present in multiple age groups, it is helpful in terms of prognosis and treatment to approach three distinct subgroups by age: preschool age children, preadolescents to young adults, and adults.\nIn preschool age children, trichotillomania is considered benign. For these children, hair-pulling is considered either a means of exploration or something done subconsciously, similar to nail-biting and thumb-sucking, and almost never continues into further ages.\nThe most common age of onset of trichotillomania is between ages 9 and 13. In this age range, trichotillomania is usually chronic, and continues into adulthood. Trichotillomania that begins in adulthood most commonly arises from underlying psychiatric causes.\nTrichotillomania is often not a focused act, but rather hair pulling occurs in a \"trance-like\" state; hence, trichotillomania is subdivided into \"automatic\" versus \"focused\" hair pulling. Children are more often in the automatic, or unconscious, subtype and may not consciously remember pulling their hair. Other individuals may have focused, or conscious, rituals associated with hair pulling, including seeking specific types of hairs to pull, pulling until the hair feels \"just right\", or pulling in response to a specific sensation. Knowledge of the subtype is helpful in determining treatment strategies.\nTreatment.\nTreatment is based on a person's age. Most pre-school age children outgrow the condition if it is managed conservatively. In young adults, establishing the diagnosis and raising awareness of the condition is an important reassurance for the family and patient. Non-pharmacological interventions, including behavior modification programs, may be considered; referrals to psychologists or psychiatrists may be considered when other interventions fail. When trichotillomania begins in adulthood, it is often associated with other mental disorders, and referral to a psychologist or psychiatrist for evaluation or treatment is considered best. The hair pulling may resolve when other conditions are treated.\nPsychotherapy.\nHabit reversal training (HRT) has the highest rate of success in treating trichotillomania. HRT has also been shown to be a successful adjunct to medication as a way to treat trichotillomania. With HRT, the individual is trained to learn to recognize their impulse to pull and also teach them to redirect this impulse. In comparisons of behavioral versus pharmacologic treatment, cognitive behavioral therapy (including HRT) have shown significant improvement over medication alone. It has also proven effective in treating children. Biofeedback, cognitive-behavioral methods, and hypnosis may improve symptoms. Acceptance and commitment therapy (ACT) is also demonstrating promise in trichotillomania treatment. A systematic review from 2012 found tentative evidence for \"movement decoupling\".\nMedication.\nThe United States Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has not approved any medications for trichotillomania treatment.\nHowever, some medications have been used to treat trichotillomania, with mixed results. Treatment with clomipramine, a tricyclic antidepressant, was shown in a small double-blind study to improve symptoms, but results of other studies on clomipramine for treating trichotillomania have been inconsistent. Naltrexone may be a viable treatment. Fluoxetine and other selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) have limited usefulness in treating trichotillomania, and can often have significant side effects. Behavioral therapy has proven more effective when compared to fluoxetine. There is little research on the effectiveness of behavioral therapy combined with medication and robust evidence from high-quality studies is lacking. N-acetylcysteine treatment stemmed from an understanding of glutamate's role in regulation of impulse control.\nA study found that memantine, a drug typically used to treat symptoms of Alzheimer's disease, was effective in reducing trichotillomania behaviour. Similar to N-acetylcysteine mentioned above, memantine acts to regulate glutamate levels.\nDifferent medications, depending on the individual, may increase hair pulling.\nDevices.\nTechnology can be used to augment habit reversal training or behavioral therapy. Several mobile apps exist to help log behavior and focus on treatment strategies. There are also wearable devices that track the position of a user's hands. They produce sound or vibrating notifications so that users can track rates of these events over time.\nPrognosis.\nWhen it occurs in early childhood (before five years of age), the condition is typically self-limiting and intervention is not required. In adults, the onset of trichotillomania may be secondary to underlying psychiatric disturbances, and symptoms are generally more long-term.\nSecondary infections may occur due to picking and scratching, but other complications are rare. Individuals with trichotillomania often find that support groups are helpful in living with and overcoming the disorder.\nEpidemiology.\nAlthough no broad-based population epidemiologic studies had been conducted as of 2009, the lifetime prevalence of trichotillomania is estimated to be between 0.6% and 4.0% of the overall population. With a 1% prevalence rate, 2.5 million people in the U.S. may have trichotillomania at some time during their lifetimes.\nTrichotillomania is diagnosed in all age groups; onset is more common during preadolescence and young adulthood, with mean age of onset between 9 and 13 years of age, and a notable peak at 12\u201313. Among preschool children the genders are equally represented; there appears to be a female predominance among preadolescents to young adults, with between 70% and 93% of patients being female. Among adults, females typically outnumber males by 3 to 1.\n\"Automatic\" pulling occurs in approximately three-quarters of adult patients with trichotillomania.\nHistory.\nHair pulling was first mentioned by Aristotle in the fourth century B.C., was first described in modern literature in 1885, and the term \"trichotillomania\" was coined by the French dermatologist Fran\u00e7ois Henri Hallopeau in 1889.\nIn 1987, trichotillomania was recognized in the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of the American Psychiatric Association, third edition-revised (DSM-III-R).\nSociety and culture.\nSupport groups and internet sites can provide recommended educational material and help persons with trichotillomania in maintaining a positive attitude and overcoming the fear of being alone with the disorder.\nMedia.\nA documentary film exploring trichotillomania, \"Bad Hair Life\", was the 2003 winner of the International Health &amp; Medical Media Award for best film in psychiatry and the winner of the 2004 Superfest Film Festival Merit Award.\nTrichster is a 2016 documentary that follows seven individuals living with trichotillomania, as they navigate the complicated emotions surrounding the disorder, and the effect it has on their daily lives.\nFiction.\nThe trichotillomania of a prominent character is a key plot element in the 1999 novel \"Whatever Love Means\" by David Baddiel.\nAshley Barret, a character portrayed by Colby Minifie in the superhero fiction series \"The Boys\", is shown suffering from it.\nBeth, a character portrayed by Amy Schumer is shown to have it in the comedy-drama series Life &amp; Beth. This is primarily in flashbacks, where she is portrayed by Violet Young.\nSkye Riley, a character portrayed by Naomi Scott in the supernatural horror film \"Smile 2\", is shown with trichotillomania.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "68939", "revid": "37005538", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68939", "title": "Economy of Barbados", "text": "Since the island country's independence in 1966, the economy of Barbados has been transformed from a low-income economy dependent upon sugar production into a high-income economy based on tourism and the offshore sector. Barbados went into a deep recession in the 1990s after 3 years of steady decline brought on by fundamental macroeconomic imbalances. After a painful re-adjustment process, the economy began to grow again in 1993. Growth rates have averaged between 3%\u20135% since then. The country's three main economic drivers are: tourism, the international business sector, and foreign direct-investment. These are supported in part by Barbados operating as a service-driven economy and an international business centre.\nIn June 2018 Barbados announced the default on its bonds, after revealing that its debt amounted to $7.5 billion (the fourth highest debt in debt-to-GDP ratio in the world).\nHistory.\nPre-independence.\nSince the first settlement by the British in 1625, through history the economy of Barbados was primarily dependent on agriculture. It had been recorded that minus the marshes and gully regions, during the 1630s much of the desirable land had been deforested across the entire island. In the 1640s, Barbados shifted from small-scale mixed crop farming using indentured labor to large-scale sugar production, introduced by the Jewish community that immigrated to Barbados when exiled from Dutch Brazil. Land was divided into large estate-plantations, with a labor-force that was almost entirely made up of enslaved men and women.\nSugar cane became the driving force in the economy of Barbados. Barbados soon had built so many windmills that the island had the second highest density of windmills per square mile in the world, after the Netherlands. For about the next 100 years Barbados remained the richest of all the European colonies in the Caribbean region due to sugar. The prosperity in the colony of Barbados remained regionally unmatched until sugar cane production caught up in geographically larger countries such as Jamaica and elsewhere. Despite being eclipsed by larger makers of sugar, Barbados continued to produce the crop well into the 20th century.\nWhile the emancipation of African slaves in the British Empire in 1833,\nnominally liberated the slaves, limited access to education and land kept the freed as a disenfranchised underclass. As such, emphasis began to be placed on increased labour rights as well as upward mobility and strong education to combat plantation living.\nDuring the 1920s, politicians in Barbados started a push for more self-government. As the 1940s\u20131950s rolled around, Barbados moved towards developing political ties with neighbouring Caribbean islands. By 1958 the West Indies Federation was proposed by the British government for Barbados and nine other Caribbean territories. The Federation was first led by the Premier of Barbados, however the experiment ended by 1962. Later, Barbados tried to negotiate several other unions with other islands, yet it became likely that Barbados needed to move on. Subsequently, the island peacefully negotiated its independence with the British Government and the island became independent at midnight on November 30, 1966.\nPost-independence.\nAfter the country became independent of the United Kingdom on 30 November 1966 sugar cane still remained a chief money-maker for Barbados. The island's politicians tried to diversify the economy from just agriculture. During the 1950s\u20131960s visitors from both Canada and the United Kingdom started transforming tourism into a huge contributor for the Barbadian economy. The man-made Deep Water Harbour port at Bridgetown had been completed in 1961, and thereafter the island could handle most modern oceangoing ships for shipping sugar or handling cargoes at the port facility.\nAs the 1970s progressed, global companies started to recognise Barbados for its highly educated population. In May 1972 Barbados formed its own Central Bank, breaking off from the East Caribbean Currency Authority (ECCA). By 1975 the Barbadian dollar was changed to a new fixed / constant rate of exchange rate with the US$ with the rate being changed to present day US$1 = BBD$1.98 (BBD$1.00 = ~US$0.50).\nBy the 1980s a growing manufacturing industry was seen as a considerable earner for the Barbados economy. With manufacturing then being led by companies such as Intel Corporation and others, the Manufacturing industry contributed greatly to the economy during the 1980s and early 1990s.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nUnder the 1993 Wage and Price Protocol, workers and unions assented to a one-time cut in real wages of about 9 percent and agreed to keep their demands for future pay raises in line with increases in productivity. Firms promised to moderate their price increases, the government maintained the parity of the currency, and all parties agreed to the creation of a national productivity board to provide better data on which to base future negotiations.\nIn the early 1990s the country's economy was hit hard when real GDP per capita declined by 5.1% per year between 1989 and 1992 partly due to the 1990 oil price spike. Barbados entered into an agreement with the International Monetary Fund financial assistance after a long and hard period of negotiations between the IMF, the government of Barbados, labour unions and employers. This led to a protocol on wages and prices in 1993. This helped prevent an inflationary spiral and restored the island's international competitiveness thereby leading to a period of long-term economic growth of 2.7% between 1993 and 2000.\nAs one of the founding members, Barbados joined the World Trade Organization (WTO) on 1 January 1995. Following this, the Government of Barbados aggressively tried to make the Barbados economy fully WTO compliant. This led to the collapse of much of the manufacturing industry of Barbados during the late 1990s in favour of many companies like Intel and others moving to lower cost Asian economies. During the late 1990s more companies started to become interested in Barbados's offshore sector, until it over took sugar as the new chief money maker. In 1999\u20132000 the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) \"blacklist\" was circulated with Barbados listed in error. The negative fallout stymied new investment into Barbados's offshore sector for nearly two years as Barbadian authorities acted swiftly successfully proving that Barbados's economy was regulated sufficiently to ward off financial criminal activity and that it was not a \"tax haven\" as charged, but instead a low-tax regime.\nAs the global recession hit in 2001, the offshore sector in Barbados slightly contracted further, thereby making tourism the new chief money maker, after having earlier eclipsed manufacturing and sugar cane. The Government of Barbados further changed legislation to transform the Barbados economy into one which fosters investment. This led to several new hotel developments. The government continues to try maintaining constraint from personal involvement in the Hotel activity and instead seeks private investment into the Barbados economy for future growth.\nSeveral large hotel projects like the Port Charles Marina project in Speightstown helped the tourism industry continue to expand in 1996\u201399, and more recently the new Hilton Hotel on Needhams Point, Saint Michael in 2005.\nVarious firms from Wall Street in New York provide routine economic analysis of the Barbadian economy. This has included such firms as Standard &amp; Poor's and Moody's.\nData.\nThe following table shows the main economic indicators in 1980\u20132021 (with IMF staff estimates in 2022\u20132027). Inflation below 5% is in green.\nCurrent.\nIn 2008, Barbados had a GDP (PPP) of $5.466 billion, a GDP (official exchange rate) of $3.777 billion, a GDP real growth rate of 1.5%, and a per capita PPP of $19,300. The GDP was composed of the following sectors: agriculture 6%, industry 16%, and services 78% (2000 est.) In 2001, it had a labor force of 128,500, of which 10% were in agriculture, 15% in industry, and 75% in services (1996 est.). The unemployment rate in 2003 was 10.7%, and the inflation rate in 2007 was 5.5%. The Barbadian government had estimated revenues of $847 million (including grants) in 2000, and expenditures of $886 million. The industrial production growth rate was -3.2%.\nOffshore finance and informatics are important foreign exchange earners, and there is also a light manufacturing sector. The government continues its efforts to reduce the unacceptably high unemployment rate, which it met in the 1990s, encourage direct foreign investment, and privatise remaining state owned Crown corporations of Barbados.\nThe main factors responsible for the improvement in economic activity include an expansion in the number of tourist arrivals, an increase in manufacturing, and an increase in sugar production. Recently, offshore banking and financial services also have become an important source of foreign exchange and economic growth.\nEconomic growth has led to net increases in employment in the tourism sector, as well as in construction and other services sub-sectors of the economy. The public service remains Barbados's largest single employer. Total labour force has increased from 126,000 in 1993 to 140,000 persons in 2000, and unemployment has dropped significantly from over 20% in the early 1990s to 9.3% at the end of 2000.\nThe Barbados government encourages the development in: financial services, informatics, e-commerce, tourism, educational and health services, and cultural services for the future. In 2000, based on Barbados's level of growth\u00a0\u2013 (at the time) Barbados was supposed to become the world's smallest developed country by 2008. This had then been restated as being achievable by around 2025.\nIn May 2018 The Prime Minister Mia Mottley disclosed previously uncovered financial obligations of the state. The Prime Minister said that the new government inherited 15 billion Barbados dollars of debt (about 7.5 billion US dollars). Disclosure of information about the current level of debt has led to an increase in the debt-to-GDP ratio from 137% to 175%. This is the fourth value in the world after Japan, Greece, and Sudan. Mia Mottley announced that new government had no other choice than to ask the IMF to facilitate debt restructuring. On 5 June 2018 Barbados didn't fulfill its obligation to pay the 26th coupon on Eurobonds maturing in 2035. According to Cbonds, excluding the disclosure of the true level of debt, on 7 June 2018 the country had 47 debt issues in circulation totaling 4.425 billion US dollars.\nWages.\nAlthough Barbadians have been ranked as being on the high end of wages compared to those in the Americas, prices for food, goods and services are also extremely high. The national minimum wage in Barbados, where wages can be no less than BBD$8.50 (~ US$4.21) per hour.\nIn October 2009, Dr. DeLisle Worrell, who later become the replacement governor of Barbados's Central Bank of Barbados and was executive director of the Centre for Money and Finance at the UWI Cave Hill Campus revealed that \"the average Barbadian now earns between BBD$200 and BBD$499 per week...\"\nIn 2010 Barbados's population was tabulated at some 281,968 with 80% at working age yet less than half (106,241 or 38%) were actually registered as employed.\nOf these the overall estimates of his finds showed that:\nTaxation.\nGeneral.\nIn 1997 Barbados implemented a general taxation that covers most items. Known as the Value-Added Tax (\"VAT\") it covers almost all items at a 17.5% tax rate and an 8.75% for hotel accommodations. Exported goods and services, prescription drugs and a few other specific items are zero rated under the legislation. The VAT replaced several other taxes such as: the Consumption Tax, Surcharge, Excise Tax and an Environmental Levy. People operating under Barbados's VAT regime must be registered for VAT and from 1 December 2010, the threshold for VAT registration has been BBD$80,000 (previously BBD$60,000).\nThe island continues to wean off of taxes outside of the VAT system. In 2002 the Barbados government increased the level of people in Barbados who are exempt from having to pay taxes on their homes. This has steadily grown with the island heading for a possible rate of 0% taxation in all other areas.\nThe government has also toyed with the idea of making retirement savings as tax exempt, to encourage Barbadians to spend less on goods and to encourage Barbadians to save more income as they once used to.\nBuilding and land owners are liable to land tax on the market value of their property at rates currently ranging from 0.1 per cent (for valuations from BBD$150,000) to 0.75 per cent (BBD$1,000,000) on all properties (revalued on a three-year basis) and there are approximately 115,000 parcels listed. Exemptions include crown land; University of the West Indies; religious and benevolent organizations (of which there are many thousands); cemeteries; etc.\nPersonal income tax was lowered from 20% to 17.5% in 2012 and applied on income of less than BBD$30,000 with a rate of 35% apply on income over BBD$30,000 and individuals who are both resident and domiciled in Barbados are taxed on their worldwide income. Generally, persons paying salaries or wages or other emoluments must withhold tax from remuneration paid to employees (PAYE). Every individual between the ages of 16 and 65, who is employed in Barbados must be insured under the National Insurance and Social Security Act and contributions are determined as a percentage of insurable earnings up to a maximum of $4,090 per month or $944 per week up to 13.5% (6.5% from employee and 6.5% from employer).\nA new tax, called the Municipal Solid Waste Tax, was introduced and took effective in 2014.\nTax on Income, Profits and Capital Gains include: Income Tax, Corporate Tax, Withholding Tax, and Insurance Premium Tax.\nTax on Goods and Services include: Consumption Tax, Excise Taxes, Value Added Tax, Hotel &amp; Restaurant Tax, Other Taxes on Goods and Services (includes Licenses, Motor Vehicle Tax, and Selective Taxes on Services).\nCorporation tax rates charge 'Regular' companies 25% and 'Small' companies 15%. Employers must remit tax withheld from employees' emoluments to the Department of Inland Revenue by the 15th day of the next month after they deducted the tax.\nStamp duty tax is still levied on sale of shares of companies listed on the Barbados Stock Exchange; on sale of real estate, leases and shares in public companies; and on mortgages.\nBilateral treaties.\nBarbados has several bilateral tax treaties, mostly aimed at removing double taxation on companies that operate in the Barbados economy. Since Barbados is at times considered an expensive place to conduct business, the treaties are mainly a measure to provide some savings to international businesses that operate in Barbados. Countries that Barbados has taxation agreements with include:\n\"Source:\" https://\nThe bilateral tax treaty negotiated with Canada in particular has been a political-football for the government of that country. The treaty was made to allow the profits for IBCs and offshore banking companies to be repatriated to Canada tax-free after paying taxes in Barbados. The aim was mainly for companies like the Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce (CIBC), Royal Bank of Canada (RBC), and Scotiabank, which (along with Barclays of the United Kingdom), when-combined control a healthy majority of Barbados's local Commercial Banking sector. In essence the treaty makes the economy of Barbados almost an unofficial part of the Canadian economy and it was aimed at allowing Canadian companies to extract profits back to Canada more easily.\nPrimary industries.\nAgriculture.\nAbout , or 37.2% of the total land area, are classified as arable. At one time, nearly all arable land was devoted to sugarcane, but the percentage devoted to ground crops for local consumption has been increasing. In 1999, 500,000 tons of sugarcane were produced, down from the annual average of 584,000 tons in 1989\u201391. In 2001, sugar exports amounted to US$22 million, or 8.4% of total exports. Major food crops (\"Ground provisions\") are yams, sweet potatoes, corn, eddoes, cassava, and several varieties of beans. Inadequate rainfall and lack of irrigation has prevented the development of other agricultural activity, although some vegetable farming takes place on a commercial scale. Some cotton is also grown in drier parts of the island, but until cotton can be picked by machine it is unlikely that output will rise to its former level.\nAnimal husbandry.\nLivestock rearing isn't a major occupation in Barbados, chiefly because good pasture has always been scarce &amp; imported animal feed is expensive. The island must import large quantities of meat and dairy products. Most livestock is owned by individual households. Estimates for 1999 showed 23,000 head of cattle, 41,000 sheep, 33,000 hogs, 5,000 goats, and 4,000,000 chickens. Poultry production in 1999 included 9,000 tons of meat and 1,000 tons of hen eggs. Apart from self-sufficiency in milk and poultry, the limited agricultural sector means that Barbados imports large amounts of basic foods, including wheat and meat.\nFishing.\nThe fishing industry employs about 2,000 persons, and the fleet consists of more than 500 powered boats. The catch in 2000 was 3,100 metric tons. Flying fish, dolphin fish, tuna, turbot, kingfish, and swordfish are among the main species caught. A fisheries terminal complex opened at Oistins in 1983.\nForestry.\nFewer than of original forests have survived the 300 years of sugar cultivation. There are an estimated of forested land, covering about 12% of the total land area. Roundwood production in 2000 totalled 5,000 cu m (176,500 cu ft), and imports amounted to 3,000 cu m (106,000 cu ft). In 2000, Barbados imported $35.3 million in wood and forest products.\nMining.\nDeposits of limestone and coral were quarried to meet local construction needs. Production of limestone in 2000 amounted to 1.5 million tons. Clays and shale, sand and gravel, and carbonaceous deposits provided limited yields. Hydraulic cement production totalled 267,659 tons in 2000, up from 106,515 in 1996.\nOil production is also undertaken in Barbados, with much of the on-shore activity taking place in Woodbourne, Saint Philip. As of 2025, Barbados was said to have about 257 onshore oil wells, although just 50 to 55 of them were operational. The oil and gas industry in the country is under Barbados National Oil Company (BNOC). As for gas production, BNOC CEO said that production covered about 30 percent of domestic need in 2025. BNOC was (2025) considering ways to enhance gas and oil production and extract more gas and oil resources from older wells.\nSecondary industries.\nManufacturing.\nThe manufacturing sector in Barbados has yet to recover from the recession of the late 1980s when many bankruptcies occurred and almost one-third of the workforce lost their jobs. Today, approximately 10,000 Barbadians work in manufacturing. The electronics sector in particular was badly hit when the U.S. semi-conductor company, Intel, closed its factory in 1986. Except for traditional manufacturing\u2014such as sugar refining and rum distilling\u2014Barbados's industrial activity is partly aimed at the local market, which produces goods such as tinned food, drinks, and cigarettes. Many industrial estates are located throughout the island. A cement factory is located in St. Lucy.\nExport markets have been severely damaged by competition from cheaper Caribbean and Latin American countries. But domestic manufacturing also faces serious potential problems, as trade liberalisation means that the government can no longer protect national industries by imposing high tariffs on imported goods. Thus, Barbadian manufacturers must compete with other regional economies with lower wage costs and other overhead. The other significant industrial employer is the petroleum sector. Oil deposits are located in the southern parishes, but oil has not been produced in commercial quantities. The island's one small oil refinery closed in 1998 and moved refining to Trinidad and Tobago, where labour and other costs are cheaper.\nConstruction.\nA construction boom, linked to tourism and residential development, has assisted the recovery of a large cement plant in the north of the island that was closed for some years and reopened in 1997.\nTertiary industries.\nTourism.\nTourism is Barbados's crucial economic activity and has been since the 1960s. At least 10 per cent of the working population (some 13,000 people) are employed in this sector, which offers a range of tourist accommodations from luxury hotels to modest self-catering establishments. After the recession years, tourism picked up again in the mid-1990s, only to face another slowdown in 1999. This drop was in part due to increasing competition from other Caribbean countries such as the Dominican Republic, and in part to a reduction in visits from cruise ships as they shifted to non-Caribbean routes or shorter routes such as the Bahamas. Cruise ship visitors totalled 445,821 in 1999, a reduction from 517,888 in 1997, but stay-over visitors rose to 517,869 in 1999, setting a new record. Overall, the country witnessed over US$700 million in tourism receipts in 1999.\nA problem in Barbados is that tourist facilities are too densely concentrated on the south coast, which is highly urbanised, while the Atlantic coast\u2014with a rugged shoreline and large waves\u2014is not suitable for beach tourism. There are few large brand-name hotels, which makes marketing the island in the United States difficult. On the other hand, the absence of conglomerates and package tours results in more direct tourist spending among the general population.\nBarbados has numerous internationally known hotels. Time-shares are available, and many smaller local hotels and private villas that dot the island have space available if booked in advance. The southern and western coasts of Barbados are popular, with the calm light-blue Caribbean Sea and their white and pinkish sandy beaches. Along the island's east coast, which faces the Atlantic Ocean, there are tumbling waves that are perfect for light surfing. Some areas remain risky to swimmers due to under-tow currents. The Crane beach was named one of the top 10 best beaches in the world.\nShopping districts are popular in Barbados, with ample duty-free shopping. There is also a festive night-life in mainly tourist areas such as the Saint Lawrence Gap. Other attractions include wildlife reserves (Graeme Hall Nature Sanctuary), jewellery stores, scuba diving, helicopter rides, golf, festivals (the largest being the annual Crop Over festival July/Aug), sightseeing, cave exploration (Harrison's Cave), exotic drinks and fine clothes shopping.\nAttractions, landmarks and points of interest.\nTourism accounts for almost one half of the economy.\nName / Parish Location:\nInformatics.\nInformatics employed almost 1,700 workers in 1999, about the same number as the sugar industry. The island has been involved in data processing since the 1980s and now specialises in operations such as database management and insurance claims processing. Costs in Barbados are higher than elsewhere in the Caribbean (although still only half of costs in the United States), but the island offers strong advantages such as a literate English-speaking workforce and location in the same time zone as the eastern United States. Despite these factors, employment has fallen in recent years, reflecting increasing mobility on the part of foreign companies, which frequently relocate to lower-cost areas.\nFinancial services.\nThe international business and financial services sector continues to be an important contributor to the economy of Barbados. During fiscal year 2010/2011 the sector contributed approximately BBD$186 million in corporate taxes\u00a0\u2013 almost 60% of the total corporate tax intake. At the end of December 2010, there were 45 offshore banks, 242 captive insurance companies, 3,065 international business companies, and 408 international societies with restricted liability.\nThe financial sector is also under threat of sanctions from the EU and the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD), both of which have expressed concerns about money laundering, tax evasion, and other financial improprieties in Caribbean offshore centres.\nCruise industry.\nIn 2006 the Central Bank governor of Barbados urged the Government to consider investing in a Barbadian cruise ship company. The government at that time did not invest in that opportunity but it is unknown if it will in future\nRum.\nBarbados has three commercial rum distilleries: West Indies Rum Distillers Ltd, Mount Gay Rum and Four Square. Mount Gay Eclipse Silver is one of the most recent Rums created back in 2008. There is also St. Nicholas Abbey, a smaller boutique operation.\nRetail.\nRetailing is an important economic activity, especially in Bridgetown where there are large department stores and supermarkets. In the countryside, most stores are small and family-run. Some 18,000 people work in the retail sector.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "68940", "revid": "11487766", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68940", "title": "Telecommunications in Barbados", "text": " \nCommunications in Barbados refers to the telephony, internet, postal, radio, and television systems of Barbados. Barbados has long been an informational and communications centre in the Caribbean region. Electricity coverage throughout Barbados is good and reliable. Usage is high and provided by a service monopoly, Barbados Light &amp; Power Company Ltd. (a division of Canada-based Emera).\nThe International Telecommunication Union (ITU) call sign prefix allocated for all radio and television broadcasts in Barbados is 8P, and this replaced the former ZN and VP6 as a British territory.\nHistory.\nBarbados has had various forms of Communications as early as the 1840s. Some of the earliest expressions of inter-island communication includes a number of signal stations built along the high points of the island to relay acts of transgression towards the island to the Saint Ann's Garrison on the south-west coast. The first telephone network in the country was developed in 1884. As the former British Empire's All Red Line came into existence during the early 1900s, Barbados played an important role as a crucial link in the trans-Atlantic communications network. By 1935 a hard wired cable-based radio network was later deployed throughout the country to broadcast the Rediffusion service directly from London to homes and business across Barbados.\nIn 2001 the Government of Barbados and the local Incumbent Local Exchange Carrier (ILEC) provider, Cable &amp; Wireless signed a MOU beginning a phased process of liberalisation of the international segment of Barbados' telecommunications sector. The process was aimed at bringing Barbados' sector into compliance with the World Trade Organization (WTO). The plan outlined the first phase commencing on 1 December 2001 and the entire process ending with full liberalisation being achieved on 1 August 2003. As these target dates were missed, the Phase I process was later commenced on 1 November 2002, with Phase II and III beginning on 16 November 2003 and 21 February 2004 respectively. Full liberalisation was attained in February, 2005, for the international telecommunications services market.\nTelephone.\nCountry Code: +1.246\nInternational Call Prefix: 011 (outside NANP)\nCalls from Barbados to the US, Canada, and other NANP Caribbean nations, are dialled as 1 + NANP area code + 7-digit number. Calls from Barbados to non-NANP countries are dialled as 011 + country code + phone number with local area code.\nNumber Format: nxx-xxxx\nThe rate of telecommunications penetration in Barbados ranks among the highest in the world. According to the International Telecommunication Union, telephone service for the period 2000\u20132004, stated Barbados had 124 telephones in usage for every 100 people. Telecommunications are virtually universally accessible to all.\n 134,900 (2005)\n\"county comparison to the world:\" 133\n 237,100 (2006)\n\"county comparison to the world:\" 165\n* general assessment: fixed-line teledensity of roughly 50 per 100 persons; mobile-cellular telephone density of about 85 per 100 persons\n* domestic: island-wide automatic telephone system\n* international access code: +1.246 (in the North American Numbering Plan, Area code 246);\n* landing point for:\n*1) the East Caribbean Fiber System (ECFS) submarine cable with links to 13 other islands in the eastern Caribbean extending from the British Virgin Islands to Trinidad;\n*2); the Antilles Crossing Phase 1 link to the US Virgin Islands via Saint Lucia;\n satellite earth stations - 1 (Intelsat - Atlantic Ocean); tropospheric scatter to Trinidad and Saint Lucia (2007)\n* \"Current\": Liberty Latin America (d/b/a Flow), Digicel\n* \"Defunct\": \"Cingular Wireless(divested to Digicel)\", Sunbeach\n AM 2, FM 6, shortwave 0 (2004)\n*(VOB-AM 790 (Gospel), 8PX-AM 900 (CBC)\n*(BBS 90.7FM, PBS 91.9FM, BBC 92.1FM, VOB 92.9FM, CBC 94.7FM, HOTT 95.3FM, Mix 96.9FM, Gospel 97.5FM, The One 98.1FM, WE 99.9FM(SVG), Q 100.7FM, SLAM 101.1FM, Faith 102.1FM, Love 104.1FM, Radio GED 106.1 FM)\n 237,000 (1997)\n 1 (plus two cable channels) (2004)\n* 8PX-TV (C.B.C. TV8)\n* Public Broadcast Service (PBS) -- \"Scheduled for 2009\"\n 76,000 (1997)\n 3+ (1999)\n (Cable &amp; Wireless (CaribSurf), TeleBarbados/Freemotion.bb (frequently reported for malicious phishing practices by users accessing their webmail domain found via mail.free.bb), Sunbeach Communications)\n .BB\n 104 (2008)\n\"county comparison to the world:\" 178\n 160,000 (2005)\n\"county comparison to the world:\" 131\nInternet.\nBroadband Internet access.\nGlobally, the country of Barbados was ranked by the International Telecommunication Union (ITU) and UNICEF to be one of the most wired countries in the world on a per capita basis. The report entitled \"State Of The World's Children 2007\" stated Barbados had rate of Internet usage which was 55 users for every 100 people. This ranking meant that only 13 nations: Australia, Canada, Finland, South Korea, Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, Malta, the Netherlands, San Marino, Singapore, Sweden, Britain and the United States had a higher ratios per head of population. In so scoring this placed Barbados in the lead for the Caribbean and Latin America regions.\nTelephone services in Barbados are provided by: LIME (\"Incumbent\"), Digicel, Sunbeach, WIISCOM,\nInternet services in the country are provided by: CariAccess, CaribSurf, Neptune Communications, Sunbeach Communications, TeleBarbados/Freemotion.bb, WI-NET INC.\nADSL services are widely available, as are Frame Relay and other more advanced services.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "68941", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68941", "title": "Transvestic Fetishism", "text": ""}
{"id": "68942", "revid": "5180803", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68942", "title": "Transport in Barbados", "text": " \nBarbados is a relatively small country with a length of and a width of . Barbados has of public paved roads, two active marine ports in (Bridgetown Port and Port Saint Charles), remnants of a railway system, and one airport; the Sir Grantley Adams International Airport, located in Christ Church.\nRoadways.\nAs a former British colony, Barbados was heavily influenced by the English culture and customs, which carried over into the infrastructure of Barbados. Similar to the driving habits in the United Kingdom, people in Barbados also drive on the left side of the road. Barbados has a very dependable highway system of main roads that stem from the country's capital, Bridgetown. The highways are identified by the numbers one to seven. H1 signifies the first highway that runs north. The numbering continues sequentially in a clockwise direction. The most popular highway throughout the island is the A. B. C. Highway (Adams/Barrow/Cummins).\nThroughout the Barbados roadways, the most prominent traffic junctions are the two lane roundabouts. Like roundabouts seen in the United States vehicles in the inner most lane of the roundabout have the right of way, however, in Barbados the traffic moves in clockwise direction. The speed limit on all roads is unless otherwise posted. The speed limit on the ABC Highway and the Spring Garden Highway is .\nIn 2010, an assessment released by the Economist Intelligence Unit (EIU) of the United Kingdom, ranked Barbados 6th in the world, and the top spot in the Western Hemisphere for road network density.\nRoad incidents.\nIn terms of traffic and accidents, the 2010 EIU report found that Barbados had 63.1 vehicles per kilometre of road (101.5/mi) on the island. A rank that placed Barbados as 23rd globally for number of vehicles, by the total surface area of roads. For accident totals, Barbados placed 12th globally for road victims per 100,000 people; and 23rd globally (which was shared with The United States, Greece, Tunisia, Estonia and Georgia), for actual road fatalities per 100,000 people.\nPublic transport.\nThe https:// of Barbados oversees the affairs of the nation's roads, highways, and the public transport system.\nPublic transport services in Barbados include buses, minibuses, share taxis (locally known as ZRs), taxis, and car rentals.\nVehicle registration plates are assigned to different types of vehicles; e.g. BM, B, ZR, Z &amp; H, as shown below.\nBuses (BM).\nThe bus services in Barbados are available to all, however locals are the predominant group that use the public buses. The Barbados Transport Board is a government organization that is responsible for bus transportation. The Board started as an organization on 24 August 1955 and has operated ever since.\nThere are currently three hundred and four (304) buses in use around the island.\nThe government sets the fares (current adult fare (as of November 2025): $3.50 BBD). Adults have to pay the full fare, but the public bus is free for all children in school uniforms, students with an institution ID that are under the age of eighteen and senior citizens with Barbados ID. Public government buses run on an exact fare system and are unable to give change. Payment is made for each one-way journey on a single bus; no transfers are given.\nSome bus services run on a direct route to their destinations, however many services require a connection through Bridgetown.\nMinibuses (B).\nThere are also privately operated Mini- and Midibuses that are yellow with a blue stripe. They operate mainly on the west and south coastline. The most popular routes are Bridgetown\u2013Speightstown and Bridgetown\u2013Sam Lord's Castle.\nMinibus fares are the same as government bus fares, but are usually able to give change.\nZR Buses (ZR).\n The ZRs (pronounced \"Zed-Rs\"), are privately owned mini-vans that run on specific predetermined routes. They are recognized by their white exterior and maroon stripe down the side. ZRs are independently owned\nZR bus fares are the same as government bus fares, but are usually able to give change.\nTaxis (Z).\nTaxi services are also available to all. Taxis, similarly to those in the United States and other first world countries, provide transportation at a predetermined government rate. However, the fares are not metered, and it is advisable to agree on the cost before entering a taxi.\nCar rental (H).\nCar rental in Barbados is provided through any of several local vehicle rental agencies; international rental-agencies are not well represented in Barbados.\nThey offer a wide variety of vehicles from luxury cars to vans, and also smaller open top cars.\nNon-nationals who wish to drive in Barbados must be in possession of a Visitor Driving Permit issued by the Barbados Revenue Authority. Such permits are only issued to persons in possession of a valid foreign driving licence.\nRailway.\nA proposal for a railway system in Barbados was first made in 1845 by Britain. It was not until 1881 that construction began on the new narrow-gauge Barbados Railway by an independent company for the purpose of transporting sugar cane across the island to the seaport of Bridgetown. It was later converted to narrow gauge by Everard Calthrop.\nFrom the early 20th century on, the railway system carried produce to and from factories to the city and also passengers to and from the city. However, complications arose. There was a lack of funding for the maintenance and upkeep of the system. Also, the poor designs of the tracks and cars posed a challenge against the high tides of the Atlantic Ocean. To keep the railway in use, the government of Barbados took over in 1916; however, it continued to decay. By 1937 the railway was shut down due to safety issues.\nThere are still remnants of the railway today and many can be seen by the coastlines. And every year there is a marathon run &amp; walk along the old route from Bridgetown to Carrington on the East Coast.\nIn 1881 a horse-drawn tramway, the Barbados Tramway Company, was constructed around Bridgetown by the Scottish railway engineer Robert Fairlie and ceased operations in 1925.\nWaterways.\nBarbados also provides ports for large cruise ships and transportation of goods into and out of the country. The main ports reside in Bridgetown, Saint Michael (Deep Water Harbour), and in Speightstown, St. Peter (the Port Charles Marina). These are regulated by the Barbados Port Authority. Large cruise ships dock at the Deep Water Harbour at the southwestern end of the island.\nBoating.\nBoating to and from Barbados requires following all International and local laws. If arriving in Barbados it is important to remember that legally you must enter an approved port of entry, which means stopping by the Harbour-master first at Bridgetown. Laws also protect the coral reefs, and boaters should be careful not to drop anchor outside of areas approved by the government of Barbados in order to protect the corals and possibly other undersea infrastructure that might be present around the island.\nBarbados currently no longer has the Schooner vessel that once operated between Speightstown and Bridgetown. However, in recent years, with many heavy traffic problems on the island, there have been calls to revive it.\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "68943", "revid": "37991216", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68943", "title": "Military history of Barbados", "text": "The military history of Barbados comprises hundreds of years of military activity on the island of Barbados, as well as international military and peacekeeping operations in which Barbadians took part.\nColonial history.\nThroughout the colonial history of Barbados, Britain routinely stationed large segments of its West India regimental troops on the island of Barbados. The troops acted principally as a force to secure the island against any invasion by other European powers as well as to help protect other neighbouring British territories in the Eastern Caribbean from invasion. Militia numbers were substantially increased after a series of slave revolts in the West Indies\u2014including Barbados\u2014during the first quarter of the 19th century. So successful were British colonial troop deployments to Barbados, it has been said that Barbados is the only country in the Caribbean region never to have changed hands since the British first landed and established the city of Jamestown (around the first quarter century of the 17th century) until independence.\nWorld War II.\nTwelve Barbados men made up the Second Barbados Contingent of Volunteers for the Armed Forces. They were recruited for the Royal Air Force. They left Barbados for England in November 1940 to fight against Germany. One pilot was Errol Walton Barrow, later the first Prime Minister of Barbados, who became an officer in the Royal Air Force. By 1945 Barrow had risen to the rank of flying officer and was appointed as personal navigator to the Commander in Chief of the British Zone of occupied Germany.\nOn 11 September 1942 German submarine U-514 was patrolling the waters of Barbados where it torpedoed the Canadian steam merchant ship \"Cornwallis\" off the coastline of the capital city. The ship was brought ashore in Barbados before it was released and was torpedoed a second time and sank. The shipwreck was later turned into a reef and marine park. The prize winning Barbadian novelist Austin Clarke writes in detail surrounding this attack in his novels \"Pig Tails'n Breadfruit: A Culinary Memoir\" and Giller Prize-winning \"The Polished Hoe\". The books talk about the economic hardship felt in Barbados after it was cut off from global trade by Germany.\nPost-independence history.\nAs an independent country, Barbados has a moderate sized military command. Its force is made up of the Barbados Defence Force (BDF), which consists of the Barbados Regiment, the Barbados Coast Guard, and the Barbados Air Wing, in addition to other governmental commands within the country. These forces together are administered under the office of the Prime Minister of Barbados. These forces often act in concert to maintain law and order in the country as well as to root out illegal activity and other threats. With the backing of the Eastern Caribbean's Regional Security System (RSS) Barbados has a framework for calling in a follow-on military command from other Caribbean islands, and in the most severe of cases, from the larger international community. The Barbados Air Wing consists of one Cessna 402 aircraft based at Grantley Adams International Airport.\nIn 2009 the \"Barbados Defence Force\" contributed to USSOUTHCOM-maneuver \"Fuerzas Commando 2009\" in Brazil.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "68945", "revid": "49380818", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68945", "title": "Demographics of Belarus", "text": "&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe demographics of Belarus is about the demographic features of the population of Belarus, including population growth, population density, ethnicity, education level, health, economic status, religious affiliations, and other aspects of the population.\nPopulation.\nThe population of Belarus suffered a dramatic decline during World War II, dropping from more than 9 million in 1940 to 7.7 million in 1951. It then resumed its long-term growth, rising to 10 million in 1999. After that the population began a steady decline, dropping to 9.7 million in 2006\u20132007. Originally a highly agrarian country with nearly 80% of its population in rural areas, Belarus has been undergoing a process of continuous urbanization. The rural population saw its share of the total population decrease from 70% in 1959 to less than 30% in the 2000s.\n&lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;/includeonly&gt;\n9,109,280 (2025 est.)\n\"country comparison to the world:\" 98 \n0\u201314 years: 16.78% (male 791,170/female 414,450)\n15\u201324 years: 9.59% (male 404,500/female 375,750)\n25\u201354 years: 43.94% (male 2,058,648/female 2,105,910)\n55\u201364 years: 14.45% (male 605,330/female 763,972)\n65 years and over: 17.66% (male 327,300/female 355,163) (2022 est.)\n\"Total:\" 40.9 years\n\"Male:\" 39.5 years\n\"Female:\" 43.9 years (2022 est.)\nAt birth: 1.06 male(s)/female\n0\u201314 years: 87.266 male(s)/female\n15\u201324 years: 87.266 male(s)/female\n25\u201354 years: 0.98 male(s)/female\n55\u201364 years: 0.79 male(s)/female\n65 years and over: 0.48 male(s)/female\nTotal population: 87.266 male(s)/female (2024 est.)\n\"Total population:\" 72.15 years\n\"country comparison to the world:\" 138\n\"Male:\" 66.53 years\n\"Female:\" 78.1 years (2014 est.)\n\"Total:\" 4.0 deaths/1,000 live births for 429 death. (2010)\n\"Total:\" 3.9 deaths/1,000 live births for 422 death. (2011)\n\"Total:\" 3.4 deaths/1,000 live births for 386 death. (2012)\n\"Total:\" 3.5 deaths/1,000 live births for 407 death. (2013)\n\"Total:\" 3.5 deaths/1,000 live births for 415 death. (2014)\n\"Total:\" 3.5 deaths/1,000 live births for 321 death. (January\u2013September 2014)\n\"Total:\" 3.2 deaths/1,000 live births for 283 death. (January\u2013September 2015)\nVital statistics.\nBelarusian provinces of the Russian Empire.\nThe figures below refer to the uyezds of the five governorates of the Russian Empire (Grodno, Vitebsk, Minsk, Mogilev, Vilna) whose administrative centers are now part of modern-day Belarus.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"template:sticky header/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Sort under/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Table alignment/tables.css\" /&gt;\nAfter WW2.\nPopulation and migration statistics:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"template:sticky header/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Sort under/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Table alignment/tables.css\" /&gt;\nCurrent vital statistics.\nBelStat did not provide official birth data between 2020 and 2024. However, according to BelStat the number of inhabitants age 0-4 has declined from 550,147 in January 1, 2019 to 388,693 in January 1st, 2024, a 29.3% decline in five years. BelStat issued official statistics in 2025 for the first time since 2020 showing that there were 58,938 births in 2024.\nStructure of the population.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Hidden begin/styles.css\"/&gt;Population by Sex and Age Group (Census 04.X.2019):\n Belarusians 84.9%, Russians 7.5%, Poles 3.1%, Ukrainians 1.7%, Jews 0.1%, Armenians 0.1%, Lipka Tatars 0.1%, Ruska Roma 0.1%, Lithuanians 0.1%, Azerbaijanis 0.1%, others 2.2% (2019 census).\nEthnic groups.\nPrior to the Second World War.\nPrior to World War II, Jews were the second largest ethnic group in Belarus, and at 400,000 in the 1926 and 1939 censuses they even exceeded the number of Russians (although admittedly by a small margin). Jews accounted for 7%\u20138% of the total population at that time, comprising more than 40% of the population in cities and towns, where Jews and Poles were the majority, while Belarusians mostly lived in rural areas.\nThe Poles were the fourth largest ethnic group in Byelorussian SSR (current Eastern portion of Belarus), before World War II, comprising 1\u20132% of the population in the pre-war censuses (less than 100,000).\nAfter the Second World War.\nThe Holocaust decimated the Jewish population in Belarus, and after World War II, in 1959, Jews accounted for only 1.9% of the population. Since then, Jewish emigration to Israel and other countries reduced the number of Jews to 0.1% of the population (13,000 in 2009).\nAfter the war, a large number of Poles were forced to move to Poland. In exchange, Belarusians from the former Belastok Region, which was returned to Poland in 1945, after being occupied in 1939 were displaced to Belarus. Due to changes in the western border of Belarus and Poland after World War II (see territorial changes of Poland), the number of Poles in Belarus increased to more than 500,000 according to the first post-war census (1959) and to about 400,000 according to the 1999 census. Poles are now the third largest ethnic group in Belarus (see Polish minority in Belarus). There are around 15,000 of Lipka Tatars and about 10,000 of Ruska Roma (Russian Gypsies).\nIn the post-war period Belarus experienced an influx of workers from other parts of the Soviet Union, for example Russians and Ukrainians. The decade after independence saw a decline in the population of most of these minority groups, either by assimilation or emigration. The most significant exception to this trend has been a continued (if small-scale) net immigration of Armenians and Azerbaijanis, whose numbers increased from less than 2,000 in 1959 to around 10,000 in 1999.\nLanguages.\nBelarusian and Russian are the official languages according to the Constitution of Belarus (Article 17). The constitution guarantees preservation of the cultural heritage of all ethnic minorities, including their languages (Article 15). Russian, and not Belarusian, is the dominant language in Belarus, spoken normally at home by 71.3% of the population (2019 census). Major cities such as Minsk and Brest are overwhelmingly Russian-speaking.\nReligion.\nAccording to 1997 estimates, 80% of the religious population belonged to the Eastern Orthodox Church and the others are mainly Roman Catholic, Greek Catholic, Protestants, Muslims, and Jews.\nFigures for 2020 state that 78% of the population have a Christian background (this includes 60% Orthodox and 10% Catholic). Of the rest, almost 22% are non-religious, with a very small number of Jews and Sunni Muslims.\n\"Urban population:\" 75% of total population (2011)\n\"Rate of urbanization:\" 0.21% annual rate of change (2010\u20132015 est.)\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "68946", "revid": "35381260", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68946", "title": "Born\u2013Oppenheimer approximation", "text": "Assumption that motions of nuclei and electrons can be separated\nIn quantum chemistry and molecular physics, the Born\u2013Oppenheimer (BO) approximation is the assumption that the wave functions of atomic nuclei and electrons in a molecule can be treated separately, based on the fact that the nuclei are much heavier than the electrons. Due to the larger relative mass of a nucleus compared to an electron, the coordinates of the nuclei in a system are approximated as fixed, while the coordinates of the electrons are dynamic. The approach is named after Max Born and his 23-year-old graduate student J. Robert Oppenheimer, the latter of whom proposed it in 1927 during a period of intense foment in the development of quantum mechanics.\nThe approximation is widely used in quantum chemistry to speed up the computation of molecular wavefunctions and other properties for large molecules. There are cases where the assumption of separable motion no longer holds, which make the approximation lose validity (it is said to \"break down\"), but even then the approximation is usually used as a starting point for more refined methods.\nIn molecular spectroscopy, using the BO approximation means considering molecular energy as a sum of independent terms, e.g.: formula_1 These terms are of different orders of magnitude and the nuclear spin energy is so small that it is often omitted. The electronic energies formula_2 consist of kinetic energies, interelectronic repulsions, internuclear repulsions, and electron\u2013nuclear attractions, which are the terms typically included when computing the electronic structure of molecules.\nExample.\nThe benzene molecule consists of 12 nuclei and 42 electrons. The Schr\u00f6dinger equation, which must be solved to obtain the energy levels and wavefunction of this molecule, is a partial differential eigenvalue equation in the three-dimensional coordinates of the nuclei and electrons, giving 3 \u00d7 12 = 36 nuclear plus 3 \u00d7 42 = 126 electronic, totalling 162 variables for the wave function. The computational complexity, i.e., the computational power required to solve an eigenvalue equation, increases faster than the square of the number of coordinates.\nWhen applying the BO approximation, two smaller, consecutive steps can be used:\nFor a given position of the nuclei, the \"electronic\" Schr\u00f6dinger equation is solved, while treating the nuclei as stationary (not \"coupled\" with the dynamics of the electrons). This corresponding eigenvalue problem then consists only of the 126 electronic coordinates. This electronic computation is then repeated for other possible positions of the nuclei, i.e. deformations of the molecule. For benzene, this could be done using a grid of 36 possible nuclear position coordinates. The electronic energies on this grid are then connected to give a potential energy surface for the nuclei. This potential is then used for a second Schr\u00f6dinger equation containing only the 36 coordinates of the nuclei.\nSo, taking the most optimistic estimate for the complexity, instead of a large equation requiring at least formula_3 hypothetical calculation steps, a series of smaller calculations requiring formula_4 (with \"N\" being the number of grid points for the potential) and a very small calculation requiring formula_5 steps can be performed. In practice, the scaling of the problem is larger than formula_6, and more approximations are applied in computational chemistry to further reduce the number of variables and dimensions.\nThe slope of the potential energy surface can be used to simulate molecular dynamics, using it to express the mean force on the nuclei caused by the electrons and thereby skipping the calculation of the nuclear Schr\u00f6dinger equation.\nDetailed description.\nThe BO approximation recognizes the large difference between the electron mass and the masses of atomic nuclei, and correspondingly the time scales of their motion. Given the same amount of momentum, the nuclei move much more slowly than the electrons. In mathematical terms, the BO approximation consists of expressing the wavefunction (formula_7) of a molecule as the product of an electronic wavefunction and a nuclear (vibrational, rotational) wavefunction. formula_8. This enables a separation of the Hamiltonian operator into electronic and nuclear terms, where cross-terms between electrons and nuclei are neglected, so that the two smaller and decoupled systems can be solved more efficiently.\nIn the first step, the nuclear kinetic energy is neglected, that is, the corresponding operator \"T\"n is subtracted from the total molecular Hamiltonian. In the remaining electronic Hamiltonian \"H\"e the nuclear positions are no longer variable, but are constant parameters (they enter the equation \"parametrically\"). The electron\u2013nucleus interactions are \"not\" removed, i.e., the electrons still \"feel\" the Coulomb potential of the nuclei clamped at certain positions in space. (This first step of the BO approximation is therefore often referred to as the \"clamped-nuclei\" approximation.)\nThe electronic Schr\u00f6dinger equation\n formula_9\nwhere formula_10, the electronic wavefunction for given positions of nuclei (fixed R), is solved approximately. The quantity r stands for all electronic coordinates and R for all nuclear coordinates. The electronic energy eigenvalue \"E\"e depends on the chosen positions R of the nuclei. Varying these positions R in small steps and repeatedly solving the electronic Schr\u00f6dinger equation, one obtains \"E\"e as a function of R. This is the potential energy surface (PES): formula_11. Because this procedure of recomputing the electronic wave functions as a function of an infinitesimally changing nuclear geometry is reminiscent of the conditions for the adiabatic theorem, this manner of obtaining a PES is often referred to as the \"adiabatic approximation\" and the PES itself is called an \"adiabatic surface\".\nIn the second step of the BO approximation, the nuclear kinetic energy \"T\"n (containing partial derivatives with respect to the components of R) is reintroduced, and the Schr\u00f6dinger equation for the nuclear motion\n formula_12\nis solved. This second step of the BO approximation involves separation of vibrational, translational, and rotational motions. This can be achieved by application of the Eckart conditions. The eigenvalue \"E\" is the total energy of the molecule, including contributions from electrons, nuclear vibrations, and overall rotation and translation of the molecule. In accord with the Hellmann\u2013Feynman theorem, the nuclear potential is taken to be an average over electron configurations of the sum of the electron\u2013nuclear and internuclear electric potentials.\nDerivation.\nIt will be discussed how the BO approximation may be derived and under which conditions it is applicable. At the same time we will show how the BO approximation may be improved by including vibronic coupling. To that end the second step of the BO approximation is generalized to a set of coupled eigenvalue equations depending on nuclear coordinates only. Off-diagonal elements in these equations are shown to be nuclear kinetic energy terms.\nIt will be shown that the BO approximation can be trusted whenever the PESs, obtained from the solution of the electronic Schr\u00f6dinger equation, are well separated:\n formula_13.\nWe start from the \"exact\" non-relativistic, time-independent molecular Hamiltonian:\n formula_14\nwith\n formula_15\nThe position vectors formula_16 of the electrons and the position vectors formula_17 of the nuclei are with respect to a Cartesian inertial frame. Distances between particles are written as formula_18 (distance between electron \"i\" and nucleus \"A\") and similar definitions hold for formula_19 and formula_20.\nWe assume that the molecule is in a homogeneous (no external force) and isotropic (no external torque) space. The only interactions are the two-body Coulomb interactions among the electrons and nuclei. The Hamiltonian is expressed in atomic units, so that we do not see the Planck constant, the dielectric constant of the vacuum, electronic charge, or electronic mass in this formula. The only constants explicitly entering the formula are \"ZA\" and \"MA\" \u2013 the atomic number and mass of nucleus \"A\".\nIt is useful to introduce the total nuclear momentum and to rewrite the nuclear kinetic energy operator as follows:\n formula_21\nSuppose we have \"K\" electronic eigenfunctions formula_22 of formula_23; that is, we have solved\n formula_24\nThe electronic wave functions formula_25 will be taken to be real, which is possible when there are no magnetic or spin interactions. The \"parametric dependence\" of the functions formula_25 on the nuclear coordinates is indicated by the symbol after the semicolon. This indicates that, although formula_25 is a real-valued function of formula_28, its functional form depends on formula_29.\nFor example, in the molecular-orbital-linear-combination-of-atomic-orbitals (LCAO-MO) approximation, formula_25 is a molecular orbital (MO) given as a linear expansion of atomic orbitals (AOs). An AO depends visibly on the coordinates of an electron, but the nuclear coordinates are not explicit in the MO. However, upon change of geometry, i.e., change of formula_29, the LCAO coefficients obtain different values and we see corresponding changes in the functional form of the MO formula_25.\nWe will assume that the parametric dependence is continuous and differentiable, so that it is meaningful to consider\n formula_33\nwhich in general will not be zero.\nThe total wave function formula_34 is expanded in terms of formula_35:\n formula_36\nwith\n formula_37\nand where the subscript formula_38 indicates that the integration, implied by the bra\u2013ket notation, is over electronic coordinates only. By definition, the matrix with general element\n formula_39\nis diagonal. After multiplication by the real function formula_40 from the left and integration over the electronic coordinates formula_28 the total Schr\u00f6dinger equation\n formula_42\nis turned into a set of \"K\" coupled eigenvalue equations depending on nuclear coordinates only\n formula_43\nThe column vector formula_44 has elements formula_45. The matrix formula_46 is diagonal, and the nuclear Hamilton matrix is non-diagonal; its off-diagonal (\"vibronic coupling\") terms formula_47 are further discussed below. The vibronic coupling in this approach is through nuclear kinetic energy terms.\nSolution of these coupled equations gives an approximation for energy and wavefunction that goes beyond the Born\u2013Oppenheimer approximation.\nUnfortunately, the off-diagonal kinetic energy terms are usually difficult to handle. This is why often a diabatic transformation is applied, which retains part of the nuclear kinetic energy terms on the diagonal, removes the kinetic energy terms from the off-diagonal and creates coupling terms between the adiabatic PESs on the off-diagonal.\nIf we can neglect the off-diagonal elements the equations will uncouple and simplify drastically. In order to show when this neglect is justified, we suppress the coordinates in the notation and write, by applying the Leibniz rule for differentiation, the matrix elements of formula_48 as\n formula_49\nThe diagonal (formula_50) matrix elements formula_51 of the operator formula_52 vanish, because we assume time-reversal invariant, so formula_25 can be chosen to be always real. The off-diagonal matrix elements satisfy\n formula_54\nThe matrix element in the numerator is\n formula_55\nThe matrix element of the one-electron operator appearing on the right side is finite.\nWhen the two surfaces come close, formula_56, the nuclear momentum coupling term becomes large and is no longer negligible. This is the case where the BO approximation breaks down, and a coupled set of nuclear motion equations must be considered instead of the one equation appearing in the second step of the BO approximation.\nConversely, if all surfaces are well separated, all off-diagonal terms can be neglected, and hence the whole matrix of formula_57 is effectively zero. The third term on the right side of the expression for the matrix element of \"T\"n (the \"Born\u2013Oppenheimer diagonal correction\") can approximately be written as the matrix of formula_57 squared and, accordingly, is then negligible also. Only the first (diagonal) kinetic energy term in this equation survives in the case of well separated surfaces, and a diagonal, uncoupled, set of nuclear motion equations results:\n formula_59\nwhich are the normal second step of the BO equations discussed above.\nWe reiterate that when two or more potential energy surfaces approach each other, or even cross, the Born\u2013Oppenheimer approximation breaks down, and one must fall back on the coupled equations. Usually one invokes then the diabatic approximation.\nBorn\u2013Oppenheimer approximation with correct symmetry.\nTo include the correct symmetry within the Born\u2013Oppenheimer (BO) approximation, a molecular system presented in terms of (mass-dependent) nuclear coordinates formula_60 and formed by the two lowest BO adiabatic potential energy surfaces (PES) formula_61 and formula_62 is considered. To ensure the validity of the BO approximation, the energy \"E\" of the system is assumed to be low enough so that formula_62 becomes a closed PES in the region of interest, with the exception of sporadic infinitesimal sites surrounding degeneracy points formed by formula_61 and formula_65 (designated as (1,\u20092) degeneracy points).\nThe starting point is the nuclear adiabatic BO (matrix) equation written in the form\n formula_66\nwhere formula_67 is a column vector containing the unknown nuclear wave functions formula_68, formula_69 is a diagonal matrix containing the corresponding adiabatic potential energy surfaces formula_70, \"m\" is the reduced mass of the nuclei, \"E\" is the total energy of the system, formula_71 is the gradient operator with respect to the nuclear coordinates formula_60, and formula_73 is a matrix containing the vectorial non-adiabatic coupling terms (NACT):\n formula_74\nHere formula_75 are eigenfunctions of the electronic Hamiltonian assumed to form a complete Hilbert space in the given region in configuration space.\nTo study the scattering process taking place on the two lowest surfaces, one extracts from the above BO equation the two corresponding equations:\n formula_76\n formula_77\nwhere formula_78 (\"k\" = 1, 2), and formula_79 is the (vectorial) NACT responsible for the coupling between formula_61 and formula_65.\nNext a new function is introduced:\n formula_82\nand the corresponding rearrangements are made:\nIn order for this equation to yield a solution with the correct symmetry, it is suggested to apply a perturbation approach based on an elastic potential formula_90, which coincides with formula_61 at the asymptotic region.\nThe equation with an elastic potential can be solved, in a straightforward manner, by substitution. Thus, if formula_92 is the solution of this equation, it is presented as\n formula_93\nwhere formula_94 is an arbitrary contour, and the exponential function contains the relevant symmetry as created while moving along formula_94.\nThe function formula_96 can be shown to be a solution of the (unperturbed/elastic) equation\n formula_97\nHaving formula_98, the full solution of the above decoupled equation takes the form\n formula_99\nwhere formula_100 satisfies the resulting inhomogeneous equation:\n formula_101\nIn this equation the inhomogeneity ensures the symmetry for the perturbed part of the solution along any contour and therefore for the solution in the required region in configuration space.\nThe relevance of the present approach was demonstrated while studying a two-arrangement-channel model (containing one inelastic channel and one reactive channel) for which the two adiabatic states were coupled by a Jahn\u2013Teller conical intersection. A nice fit between the symmetry-preserved single-state treatment and the corresponding two-state treatment was obtained. This applies in particular to the reactive state-to-state probabilities (see Table III in Ref. 5a and Table III in Ref. 5b), for which the ordinary BO approximation led to erroneous results, whereas the symmetry-preserving BO approximation produced the accurate results, as they followed from solving the two coupled equations.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nResources related to the Born\u2013Oppenheimer approximation:"}
{"id": "68948", "revid": "41840956", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68948", "title": "Politics of Belarus", "text": " \nThe politics of Belarus takes place in a framework of a presidential republic with a bicameral parliament. The President of Belarus is the head of state. Executive power is nominally exercised by the government, at its top sits a ceremonial prime minister, appointed directly by the President. Legislative power is \"de jure\" vested in the bicameral parliament, the National Assembly, however the president may enact decrees that are executed the same way as laws, for undisputed time.\nDuring Soviet times, present day Belarus had a communist political system that was constitutionally defined as a Marxist\u2013Leninist single party socialist republic guided in part by the political ideas of Karl Marx, one of the fathers of historical materialism, as well as by Friedrich Engels and Vladimir Lenin. The sole legal governing party was the Communist Party of Byelorussia (CPB), which was permitted according to the constitution.\nBelarus' declaration of sovereignty on 27 July 1990 did not stem from long-held political aspirations, but from reactions to domestic and foreign events. In particular, Ukraine's declaration of independence led the leaders of then Belarusian SSR to realize that the Soviet Union was on the brink of dissolving.\nAfter the establishment of a Republic on August 25, 1991, Stanislav Shushkevich was selected to be the first Belarusian leader and held this position until 1994. Shushkevich hoped to guide the country away from its Soviet past and supported social democratic reforms. His successor, Alexander Lukashenko, upon assuming office in 1994, began to re-instate Soviet-era functions and reintroduced the symbols from Soviet Belarus.\nLukashenko heads an authoritarian government and has often been referred to as \"Europe's last dictator\". Elections are not considered to be free and fair by international monitors, opponents of the regime are repressed, and the media is not free.\nPolitical background.\nIndependence from the Russian Empire.\nThe first attempt to establish a sovereign Belarusian state in modern history came in early 1918 with the declaration of independence of the Belarusian Democratic Republic. The short-lived state was destroyed by the Soviet invasion in 1919. The Rada of the Belarusian Democratic Republic exists as a government in exile since then.\nThe Bolsheviks created a puppet Soviet government of Belarus in Smolensk. In 1924, the Soviet Socialist Republic of Belarus joined the USSR together with Soviet-controlled Russia, Ukraine and Transcaucasia.\nIndependence from the USSR.\nThe March 4, 1990, elections to the republic's Supreme Soviet gave the country a legislature that was little different from previous legislatures: only 10 percent of the deputies were members of the opposition. But for the most part, the populace seemed satisfied with the new deputies (see List of Members of the Belarusian Parliament, 1990\u20131995), and the Belarusian Popular Front's (BPF) calls for independence and efforts at nation-building failed to stir up the same strong emotions as movements in neighboring Ukraine and the Baltic States. Although the Supreme Soviet of the Byelorussian SSR adopted the Declaration of State Sovereignty of the Belarusian Soviet Socialist Republic on July 27, 1990 (some two weeks after Russia had declared its own sovereignty), the March 1991 referendum held throughout the Soviet Union showed that 83 percent of Belarusians wanted to preserve the Soviet Union.\nPolitical change in Belarus came about only after the August 1991 coup d'\u00e9tat in Moscow, and the subsequent reaction by the Central Committee of the Communist Party of Belarus: the CPB displayed its satisfaction at the coup attempt by abstaining from issuing a condemnation of the coup plotters. Following the coup's collapse and the full restorations of independence of Estonia and Latvia, and the declaration of independence by Ukraine, Belarus declared its own independence on August 25 by giving its existing declaration of sovereignty the status of a constitutional document. On August 28, Prime Minister Vyacheslav Kebich declared that he and his entire cabinet had \"suspended\" their CPB membership. The next day, both the Russian and the Belarusian governments suspended the activities of the communist party.\nPolitical parties.\nStanislav Shushkevich observed at the beginning of 1993 that almost 60 percent of Belarusians did not support any political party, only 3.9 percent of the electorate backed the communist party, and only 3.8 percent favored the BPF. The influence of other parties was much lower.\nThe Communist Party of Belarus (CPB), part of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union (CPSU), claimed to rule the Belarusian SSR in the name of the proletariat for the entire duration of the republic's existence. For most of this period, it sought to control all aspects of government and society and to infuse political, economic, and social policies with the correct ideological content. By the late 1980s, however, the party watched as CPSU leader Mikhail Gorbachev attempted to withdraw the CPSU from day-to-day economic affairs.\nAfter the CPB was banned in the wake of the August 1991 coup d'\u00e9tat, Belarusian communists regrouped and renamed themselves the Party of Communists of Belarus (PCB), which became the umbrella organization for Belarus's communist parties and pro-Russian groups. The PCB was formally registered in December 1991. The Supreme Soviet lifted the ban on the CPB in February 1993.\nThe most active and visible of the opposition political groups in Belarus in the first half of the 1990s was the Belarusian Popular Front (BPF), founded in October 1989 with Zianon Pazniak as chairman. The BPF declared itself a movement open to any individual or party, including communists, provided that those who joined shared its basic goal of a fully independent and democratic Belarus. The BPF's critics, however, claimed that it was indeed a party, pointing out the movement's goal of seeking political power, having a \"shadow cabinet,\" and being engaged in parliamentary politics.\nThe United Democratic Party of Belarus was founded in November 1990 and was the first political party in independent Belarus other than the communist party. Its membership is composed of technical intelligentsia, professionals, workers, and peasants. It seeks an independent Belarus, democracy, freedom of ethnic expression, and a market economy.\nThe Belarusian Social Democratic Assembly (Hramada) emerged in March 1991. Its members include workers, peasants, students, military personnel, and urban and rural intelligentsia. Its program advocates an independent Belarus, which does not rule out membership in the CIS, and a market economy with state regulation of certain sectors. The assembly cooperates with other parties and considers itself part of the worldwide social democratic movement.\nThe Belarusian Peasant Party, founded in February 1991, is headquartered in Minsk and has branches in most voblasts. The party's goals include privatization of land, a free market, a democratic government, and support of Belarusian culture and humanism.\nThe Belarusian Christian Democratic Union, founded in June 1991, was a continuation of the Belarusian Christian-Democratic Party, which was disbanded by the Polish authorities in western Belarus in the 1930s. Its membership consists mainly of the intelligentsia, and it espouses Christian values, nonviolence, pluralism, private property, and peaceful relations among ethnic groups.\nThe \"Belaya Rus'\" Slavic Council was founded in June 1992 as a conservative Russophile group that defends Russian interests in all spheres of social life, vociferously objects to the status of Belarusian as the republic's sole official language, and demands equal status for the Russian language.\nIn 1995 other parties included the Belarusian Ecological Party, the National Democratic Party of Belarus, the Party of People's Accord, the All-Belarusian Party of Popular Unity and Accord, the Belarusian United Agrarian Democratic Party, the Belarusian Scientific Industrial Congress, the Belarusian Green Party, the Belarusian Humanitarian Party, the Belarusian Party of Labor, the Belarusian Party of Labor and Justice, the Belarusian Socialist Party, the Liberal Democratic Party of Belarus, the Polish Democratic Union, and the Republican Party.\nLukashenko's administration.\nAlexander Lukashenko has been the president since 1994. Lukashenko has been quoted as saying that he has an \"authoritarian ruling style\" that he uses to run the country. The Council of Europe has barred Belarus from membership since 1997 for numerous voting irregularities in the November 1996 constitutional referendum and parliament by-elections. According to the Venice Commission of the Council of Europe, Belarus's constitution is \"illegal and does not respect minimum democratic standards and thus violates the principles of separation of powers and the rule of law\". The Belarusian government has also been criticized by Human Rights Watch for human rights violations and its actions against NGOs, independent journalists, national minorities and opposition politicians.\nIn testimony to the U.S. Senate Committee on Foreign Relations, Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice labeled Belarus, among six other states, as part of the US's list of \"outposts of tyranny.\" The Belarusian Foreign Ministry announced that the statement from Secretary Rice \"are a poor basis\" to form a good Belarusian-American alliance.\nThe EU sanctioned 21 more Belarusian officials in early 2012. After Belarus expelled the EU and Polish ambassadors in response, EU nations jointly withdrew their ambassadors from Belarus, citing tremendous concern over the political oppression in the nation. It is no secret that \"Poland has taken the strongest lead against the ongoing repression in Belarus, hosting broadcasting stations for opposition forces\" like Belsat, and \"giving asylum to a number of exiled figures.\"\nDuring the rule of Lukashenko there have been several cases of persecution, including the disappearance or death of prominent opposition leaders Yury Zacharanka and Viktar Hanchar and independent journalists Dzmitry Zavadski and Veronika Cherkasova.\nAs of 2017, Belarus is also the only nation in Europe that retains the death penalty for certain crimes. The most recent execution was in 2019.\nSpeech, assembly, media, and opposition.\nGovernment restrictions on freedom of speech and the press, peaceful assembly, religions, and movement all increased in 2001. Despite the constitutional provisions, a 1998 government decree limited citizens' right to express their own opinion. Although independent media remains widely available in Minsk, as part of a continuing crackdown on opposition activity, the authorities stepped up their campaign of harassment against the independent media. The authorities continued to severely restrict the right to a free press through near-monopolies on the means of production of newsprint; means of distribution on national level broadcast media, such as television and radio, and by denying accreditation of journalists critical of the government.\nFreedom of assembly is restricted under former Soviet law, which is still valid. It requires an application at least 15 days in advance of the event. The local government must respond positively or negatively at least 5 days prior to the event. Public demonstrations occurred frequently in 2001, but always under government oversight.\nThe constitution provides for freedom of religion; however, the authorities restrict this right in practice. Although Article 16 of the 1996 amended constitution, see the above referendum, reaffirms the equality of religions and denominations before the law, it also contains restrictive language that stipulated that cooperation between the state and religious organizations \"is regulated with regard for their influence on the formation of spiritual, cultural, and country traditions of the Belarusian people.\"\nThe authorities issue internal passports to all adults, which serve as primary identity documents and are required to travel, obtain permanent housing, and for hotel registration.\nThe constitution provides for the right of workers\u2014except state security and military personnel\u2014to voluntarily form and join independent unions and to carry out actions in defense of workers' rights, including the right to strike. In practice, however, these rights are limited. The Belarusian Free Trade Union (BFTU) was established in 1991 and registered in 1992. Following the 1995 Minsk metro workers strike, the President suspended its activities. In 1996 BFTU leaders formed a new umbrella organization, the Belarusian Congress of Democratic Trade Union (BCDTU), which encompasses four leading independent trade unions and is reported to have about 15,000 members.\nIn May 2001, a complaint was lodged with the ILO by several trade union organizations. A trade union campaign was carried out to raise international awareness and put pressure on the Belarus government. On July 27, 2001, they continued to \"create problems for him on the international stage.\" On several occasions, warnings were given to trade unions considered too political and not sufficiently constructive. Twice, on July 27 and September 27, the bank accounts of the FTUB were frozen by the authorities. FTUB leaders were threatened with prosecution. Investigations were carried out, but with no result. The accounts were then reopened.\nIn 2005, the Lukashenko government launched a campaign against the Union of Poles in Belarus (UPB) which represents the Polish minority in Belarus and was the largest civil organization uncontrolled by the government at that time. The Belarusian authorities claimed that their pro-western Polish neighbors were trying to destabilize the government of Belarus. In May and in summer, they closed a Polish-language newspaper, replaced the democratically elected leadership of the UPB with their own nominees and launched a media campaign against Poland; both parties expelled each other's diplomats.\nIn 2013, Amnesty International characterized Belarusian legislation on registration of NGOs as \"over-prescriptive\".\nBelarusian Ministry of justice has denied all attempts to register new political parties since 2000. Belarusian Christian Democracy made 7 attempts to register, Party of freedom and progress \u2014 4 attempts; People's Hramada party was also prevented from registration. The ministry justified all refusals by the reasons that are thought to be artificial and flimsy. For example, the ministry refused to register a local branch of BPF Party in Hrodna Region because of \"incorrect line spacing\" in the documents. During another attempt to register this branch, the ministry requested the additional documents that are not mentioned in the law.\nOne of the refusals got by the Belarusian Christian Democracy cited the lack of home or work phones information for some of the party founders as the reason. Another refusal was based on a statement in the BCD's charter that its members should be \"supporters of a Christian worldview\". In 2009, the ministry declared that the registration process was simplified, but the legal experts of political parties doubted this statement claiming that only insignificant issues were affected.\nAmnesty International reported cases of pressure to withdraw signatures needed to register a political party by the local authorities and managers (in state organizations).\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Given the difficulties of registering as a political party, and the risks of prosecution for acting in the name of an unregistered party, political parties seek registration as associations or institutions, but even so many experience difficulty in registering.\u2014\u200a\nAdministrative divisions.\nBelarus is divided into six \"oblasts\" (\"voblasts\" or regions). The city of Minsk has a special status as the capital of Belarus. Minsk is also the capital of Minsk Region.\nThe regions are divided into \"raions\" (districts).\nForeign relations.\nRussia remains the largest and most important partner for Belarus both in the political and economic fields. Almost half of Belarusian exports goes to Russia. Due to the structure of Belarusian industry, Belarus relies heavily on Russia both for export markets and for the supply of raw materials and components.\nAfter Alexander Lukashenko became Belarusian leader in 1994, the relationship between Minsk and the EU deteriorated and has remained cold and distant. The EU has condemned the government of Belarus several times for authoritarian and anti-democratic practices, and has imposed sanctions on Belarus.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "68949", "revid": "44402255", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68949", "title": "Mass media in Belarus", "text": " \nThe mass media in Belarus consists of TV, radio, newspapers, magazines, cinema, and Internet-based websites/portals. The media is monopolized by the government, which owns all TV channels, most of the radio and print media. Broadcasting is mostly in Russian, and Russian media are widely present. After 2020, all independent media were pushed out of the country. The Law on Mass Media has been repeatedly amended and tightened, making it virtually impossible for independent journalists and publications to operate. European, Ukrainian and news websites were blocked in Belarus. The Constitution of Belarus guarantees freedom of speech, but this is contradicted in practice by repressive and restrictive laws. Arbitrary detention, arrests, and harassment of journalists are frequent in Belarus. Anti-extremism legislation targets independent journalism, including material considered unfavourable to the president. As of 2024, Belarus ranks 167th in the World Press Freedom Index. BBC describes the Belarusian media environment as one of the most repressive in Europe.\nLegislative framework and regulatory authorities.\nUnlike other post-Soviet states after the dissolution of the Soviet Union in the early 1990s, Belarus preserved state control and ownership over most national media. De jure, the constitution of Belarus guarantees the rights of citizens to freedom of speech, prohibits censorship and monopolization of mass media. De facto, any criticism of president Lukashenko and his government is considered a criminal offense, the country is in a state of \u2018legal default\u2019, bureaucracy uses politicized court rulings to oppress independent media and any voices except ones that are completely loyal to the regime. No special laws require transparency in media ownership, and there are no legal guarantees of public access to government records.\nBack in 2008 the government approved a Law on Mass Media that secured state control over media and made the Ministry of Information of Belarus (MIB) its main regulator. \nSince 2009, all media outlets (including websites) must register to avoid being blocked. On 5 January 2015, the Law of the Republic of Belarus made all information published on the Internet be subject to the Criminal Code. Further amendments to the Mass Media Law adopted in June 2018 introduced tighter accreditation rules, allowed an extrajudicial shutting down online and social media, made website owners legally responsible for the content of their comments sections and obliged them to provide the technical possibility to identify the authors of these comments. Though unregistered web media were obliged to fulfill the obligations for the registered media, they were deprived of corresponding rights such as the right to journalist accreditation and a right to keep their sources in secret. For many years, strict accreditation rules and denials have been one of the authorities' tools to keep independent media out of public and official events, impose fines and ensure that only publications loyal to the government cover events.\n2021 became the record year regarding law amendments aimed to control and repress the media market and its employees. Among the rest, MIB was allowed to shut down media outlets without court decision, news media were banned from live reporting on unauthorized mass gatherings, and results of opinion polls that weren't approved by the government were prohibited to publish. Any person or news organization was barred from opening a new media outlet within five years of authorities\u2019 closing any of its other affiliated outlets.\nA new set of restrictive amendments to the Law on Mass Media was adopted in 2023. It allowed authorities to ban foreign media outlets from \"unfriendly\" countries, specified the functioning of news aggregators and the legal status of their owners, expanded the list of grounds for cancelling a certificate of State registration of a mass media outlet and restricting access to an Internet resource.\nCensorship and media freedom.\nReporters Without Borders ranked Belarus 154th out of 178 countries in its 2010 Press Freedom Index. In 2011, Belarus scored 92 on a scale from 10 (most free) to 99 (least free) in \"Freedom of the Press\" report. The score placed Belarus ninth from the bottom of the 196 countries included in the report. The situation continued to deteriorate, in 2022 the country had only 8 points out of 100. On the scale of Internet freedom, Freedom House's 2022 report described Belarus as \u2018not free\u2019 country with only 25 points out of 100. The authorities dominate the information sphere, the ongoing crackdown on independent media goes on since the 2020 presidential election. As of 2023, Belarus ranks 157th in the World Press Freedom Index, almost no independent media outlets still work inside the country.\nIn 2021, the Belarusian Association of Journalists reported more than 60 cases of criminal prosecution of journalists and bloggers. BelaPAN, Nasha Niva and TUT.by, as well as 410 Telegram and 20 YouTube channels were declared \u2018extremist\u2019 in 2021. As of 2023, 33 journalists were in jail, including chief editor of Tut.by Marina Zolotova, chief editor of Nasha Niva Jahor Marcinovi\u010d, \"Belsat\" reporters Katerina Andreeva and Darya Chultsova, Ksenia Lutskina (\"Press Club Belarus\"), Denis Ivashin (\"Novy Chas\"), Andrzej Poczobut, Alexander Ivulin (\"Tribuna.com\"), Valeriya Kostyugova (\"Belarusian Yearbook\"), Irina Levshina (BelaPAN), Gennady Mozheyko (\"Komsomolskaya Pravda v Belarusi\"), Andrei Kuznechik (\"Radio Liberty\"), Serhiy Satsuk (\"Yezhednevnik\"), Oleg Gruzdilovich (\"Narodnaia Volia\"), Ihar Losik (\"Radio Free Europe\", \"Belarus Golovnogo Mozga\" Telegram channel), Eduard Palchys (\"PALCHYS\" Telegram news channel), and many more.\nIn 2023, BBC called the Belarusian media environment one of the most repressive in Europe.\nMedia landscape.\nBelarus hosts state and privately owned media, however, the latter sector keeps decreasing due to the repressive media environment. In 2009 there were 1,314 media outlets in the country, 414 of them were state-owned and 900 privately owned. As of 1 September 2023, there were 921 printed publications including 371 newspapers and 561 magazines (400 state-run), 7 news agencies (2 state-run), 52 online media outlets (45 state-run), 99 radiostations (63 state-run), and 93 TV channels (41 state-run).\nMost media outlets are Russian-language, since, according to rough estimates, more than 70% of Belarusians use the Russian language. Under Lukashenko, the state policy was to promote the Russian language, gradually the Belarusian language was pushed out of use. Thus it turned into the language of the opposition and independent publications.\nThe largest national mass media outlets are Belteleradio, the All-National TV, \"STV\" (\"Stolichnoye Televideniye\"), publishing houses \"Belarus Segodnya\" and \"Zvyazda\", and the BelTA agency. State media are mostly commercially unprofitable and survive on subsidies and grants from the government, despite the fact that they operate under a favorable tax regime.\nThe country has a monopoly of terrestrial broadcasting infrastructure, and does not allow cable companies to carry channels without prior approval. State-owned postal and kiosk distribution systems and state-owned print facilities and advertising contracts are mostly off-limits for independent media. State-run media in Belarus praise President Alexander Lukashenko and vilify the opposition. Self-censorship is pervasive in private outlets. The Belarusian government maintains a monopoly of domestic broadcast media; in 2014 foreign ownership was restricted to a maximum of 20%. Back in 2010, OSCE Representative on Freedom of the Media Dunja Mijatovi\u0107 \"said [that] pluralism was non-existing in the broadcasting sector, restricted in the print media and vulnerable on the Internet\". Five years later, UN Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights in Belarus Mikl\u00f3s Haraszti said: \"Media pluralism is absent. Belarus is the only country in Europe with no privately owned nationwide broadcasting outlets\". \nIn October 2020, the accreditations of all foreign journalists in Belarus were canceled by the authorities. Among those who reapplied successfully, the overwhelming majority are Russian journalists employed by state-run media.\nOutlets.\nAgencies.\nBy 2015, Belarus hosted nine news agencies, two state-owned and seven private. The most important were BelTA (Belarus' largest news agency, and the official state news agency for nearly 90 years), BelaPAN (a private news agency founded in 1991), and Interfax-West (part of Interfax, that operated in Belarus since 1994 and catered primarily to national and local media). \nAs of 2023, only 7 agencies remained. Interfax-West ceased operations in Belarus on 1 January 2022, due to amendments made to the Law on Mass Media of the Republic of Belarus in May 2021. BelaPAN was declared extremist by the KGB, its editor-in-chief Irina Levshina and deputy director Andrey Aleksandrov were sentenced to 4 and 14 years in prison, respectively.\nPrint media.\nAs of September 2023, 921 printed publications were registered in Belarus. The majority of them are printed entirely in Russian, Russian newspapers Komsomolskaya Pravda (circulation of 203,000) and Argumenty i Fakty (120,000) are one of the most popular in Belarus.\nThe state-run \"Belarus Segodnya Publishing House\" is a media holding that publishes the five largest circulation newspapers: \"Belarus Segodnya\" (circulation of 400,000), \"Respublika\" (published since 1991), \"Selskaya Gazeta\" (1921), \"Znamya Yunosti\" (1938), and \"Narodnaya Gazeta\" (1990).\nThe state-run \"Zvyazda Publishing House\" was founded in 2012. The list of its publications includes the \"Zvyazda\" daily (circulation of 20,000), \"LiM\" newspaper, \"Alesya\", \"Polymya\", \"Nyoman\", \"Maladosts\", \"Rodnaya Pryroda\", and \"Vozhyk\" magazines.\nAmong other state-controlled newspapers there are Holas Radzimy, Vo Slavu Rodiny, Zhodzinskiya Naviny, Vecherniy Brest, Vechernii Minsk, BelTA's \"7 dnej\" (circulation of 40,000), etc. \nMany popular independent publications were closed by the authorities, including several that were truly independent: Belorusskaya Delovaya Gazeta, Belorusy i rynok, Hazeta Slonimskaya, Narodnaja Volya. Though even in 2018, before the infamous 2020 elections and subsequent crackdown of all independent media, the circulation of these newspapers hardly reached 8000. Between 2020 and 2023, numerous newspapers were declared extremist: Novy Chas, Rehianalnaya Gazeta (\"Regional Newspaper\"), Nasha Niva, Intex-Press.\nPublishing houses.\nState-run publishers are: \"Belarus Segodnya Publishing House\" (operates newspapers, Alfa Radio, etc.), Vysheysha shkola (academic books), \"Mastatskaya Litaratura\", \"Narodnaya Asveta\", \"Belkartografia\", \"Aversev\" (academic books), the \"Belsoyuzpechat\" (national distributor), \"Four Quarters\" (books on the arts, history and geography), \"Belorusskaya Nauka\" (science), \"Tekhnologiya\", \"Belovagroup\", etc.\nIndependent publishers include \"Janushkevich\", \"Knigazbor\", \"Goliaths\", \"Medisont\", \"Limarius\", \"Knihauka\". All of them experience pressure from the authorities, obstruction of their activities, employees of some have been arrested.\nRadio.\nIn 2009, 158 radio stations were registered in the country, 137 state-owned and 21 private. By 2023, only 99 remained, 63 of them state-run. \nBelteleradio, the state TV and radio service, operates five radio stations: \"Radius-FM\", \"First National Channel\", \"Stolitsa\", and \"Radio Belarus\" for foreign audiences. \"Alfa Radio\" is operated by the state \"Belarus Segodnya Publishing House\".\nRadio 101.2 was a Minsk-based independent station which was closed by the government in 1996 and transferred to the Belarusian Republican Youth Union. The independent Autoradio was shut down in 2010. Declared extremist in Belarus, Euroradio and Radio Racja work in exile. In 2024, the \"RockRadioBY\" was launched in Ukraine.\nTV.\nIn 2018, TV served as a source of information for 72.0% of citizens, outperforming the Internet, which was a source for 60.4%. Daily TV viewership among Belarusians was 67.5%. It is monopolized by the government and managed by three biggest operator companies: STV, ONT, and BT-1. In the early 2000s, while the Russian mass media dominated in Belarus, it frequently invited Belarusian oppositioners and allowed criticism of Lukashenko. To avoid its influence, in 2002 a special presidential decree established the Second National Channel (BT-2) intending to replace Channel One Russia and also the amount of broadcast time allocated for the hugely popular Russian channels. Nowadays, the Media Law establishes a requirement for all editors of TV programs to ensure that the volume of TV programs of Belarusian (national) production is not less than 30%. Still, according to 2023 BBC analytics, Russian TV channels show higher viewership figures than Belarusian ones.\nBy June 2015, Belarus had completed the switch from analog to digital TV. There is no private or commercial TV in the country.\nThe Belteleradio operates channels Belarus-1, Belarus 2, Belarus 3, Belarus 4, Belarus 5, Belarus 24, NTV Belarus (the national version of NTV Russia with programmes from NTV Russia and other Russian channels).\nThe second largest state-run TV company is All-National TV, nowadays, it mostly broadcasts content of the Channel One Russia. Third leading channel is \"STV\" (\"Stolichnoye Televideniye\"), founded in 2000, rebroadcasts Russian REN TV.\nBelsat TV, the first independent TV channel in Belarus, is in exile and bases in Poland. Svetlahorsk private TV and Radio company \"Ranak\" was closed by authorities in 2023 merely for coverage of the accident at the Svetlahorsk pulp and cardboard mill that caused the death of three factory workers.\nInternet media.\nIn 2009, 31% of the population of Minsk had Internet access; the percentage in other major cities was 12%. One hundred and eighty ISPs served 3.1\u00a0million users (470,000 broadband users). By different estimates, in 2022, the number of users amounted to 8-9.1 mln. According to the officials, 4G covers more that 76% of the territory and 97% of the population, while fixed broadband penetration rate is around 34%. The Internet in the country is controlled by Beltelecom and the republican company \"National Center for Traffic Exchange\", both have the technical means to shut down Internet connections in the country and effectively block media outlets. News sites from Central and Western Europe, Ukraine, and Russia, are not available in Belarus. \nThe repressive landscape of traditional media and the simultaneous expansion of Internet penetration resulted in an explosive growth of independent media resources on the Internet. All media centres also started to run their activities via the Internet. Although state-owned publications also tried to increase their presence on the Internet, independent publications dominated it and enjoyed incomparably greater trust of the audience. Projects, such as Charter 97, Naviny.by, Belarusian Partisan, Svaboda, functioned relatively free up until 2020. Sergei Tikhanovsky, for example, became famous for his YouTube channel \"Country for Life\" (). \nIn mid-2021, the Belarusian government sharply tightened control over media publications on the Internet and unleashed a repressive campaign against independent publications and bloggers. As of 2024, all major independent news outlets inside Belarus were shut down. Social media and messaging platforms remain available, though individual bans are widely practised. Such websites as belaruspartisan.by and belsat.eu are available only via VPNs and TOR connections. popular Telegram channels like \"NEXTA Live\" (see Roman Protasevich) or \"Belarus Golovnogo Mozga\" were declared extremists. According to the current laws in Belarus web users and other media are held legally liable for reposting materials by media that was declared extremist.\nCinema.\nThe country's main film studio is Belarusfilm, founded in 1924. Nowadays it has a full production cycle and produces up to 15 feature films yearly, as well as documentaries and animation.\nDuring the Soviet era, Belarusfilms was nicknamed \"Partizanfilm\" due to its large number of films portraying the Soviet partisans' struggle against Nazi occupation. The studio, also noted for its children's films, has made over 130 animation films (most in Russian). Belarusfilm has produced about 10 feature films and four animated films per year since 1997. It is a co-organiser of the annual November Listapad film festival (Minsk International Film Festival) in Minsk.\nUnions and organizations.\nBelarus Union of Journalists was established in 1958 as a professional, independent organization of Belarusian mass-media workers. However, nowadays the Union is pro-governmental, in 2021 it suspended its participation in the International Federation of Journalists and its cooperation with the executive structures of the IFJ. \nBelarusian journalists adopted two ethical codes in 1995: the \"Code of Professional Etiquette of the Journalist of the Belarus Union of Journalists\" and the \"Code of Journalistic Ethics of the Belarus Association of Journalists\". \nThe Belarusian Association of Journalists, established in 1995, united professionals from independent media and strived to defend freedom of speech, freedom of information, promote the professional standards of journalism, conduct monitoring of Belarusian press, and offer legal support to all media workers. The Association experienced significant pressure from the authorities since the 2000s. It was closed by the officials in 2021. On 28 February 2023, the KGB has designated the Association as an 'extremist formation' meaning that a participation in it can be punished with a prison sentence.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\nhttp://"}
{"id": "68950", "revid": "1310025235", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68950", "title": "Belgium facts", "text": ""}
{"id": "68951", "revid": "50934513", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68951", "title": "Belgian Armed Forces", "text": "Combined military forces of Belgium\nThe Belgian Armed Forces (; , ) are the combined national military forces of Belgium. The King of the Belgians is the commander-in-chief of the Armed Forces. The Belgian Armed Forces was established after Belgium became independent in October 1830. Since then, the Belgian armed forces have fought in World War I, World War II, the Cold War (Korean War and the Belgian occupation of the Federal Republic of Germany), Kosovo, Rwanda, Somalia and Afghanistan. The Armed Forces comprise five branches: the Belgian Army, the Belgian Air Force, the Belgian Navy, the Belgian Medical Service and the Belgian Cyber Force.\nHistory.\nEstablishment.\nWhen Belgium broke away from the Netherlands in 1830 it was initially expected that a neutral buffer state, with its borders guaranteed by France, Britain and Prussia, could avoid the need for an expensive permanent military force, relying instead on the part-time militia of the existing \"Garde Civique\" (Civil Guard). The need for a regular army was however soon acknowledged. The basis for recruitment was one of selective conscription under which exemptions could be purchased by obtaining substitutes. In practice this meant that only about a quarter of each year's eligible intake actually served, with the burden falling on the poorer classes.\nEarly history.\nAs part of the national policy of even-handed neutrality, the 19th century Belgian Army was deployed as an essentially defensive force in fortifications facing the Dutch, German and French borders. Mobilisation plans simply required reservists to report to their depots, without arrangements being made in advance for deployment in a particular direction or against a particular enemy. Recruitment difficulties caused the army to remain below its intended strength of 20,000 men, although new legislation in 1868 tightened the basis for conscription. The Franco-Prussian War of 1870 required full mobilisation for nearly a year, a process which showed up serious training and structural weaknesses. The presence of Belgian forces in strength along the country's borders, supported by intelligence provided by the Belgian civil security service, did however ensure that the combat at no time spilled over into Belgian territory.\nAs late as the 1890s the Belgian Army still retained a system of selective service, at a time when most European states were moving to a principle of universal obligation, according to the Prussian model. In Belgium conscripts were selected through the drawing of ballots, but individuals could escape service by paying for substitutes. This system favored the well-off and had been discarded elsewhere as inefficient and unpatriotic. For those conscripted the terms of service required eight years in the regular army (of which part might be spent on \"unlimited leave\"), followed by five years as a reservist. Various categories of volunteer enjoyed such privileges as being able to specify their branch of service, bounties and higher pay.\nThe Papal Army based in Rome included from 1860 a battalion-sized unit known as the \"Tirailleurs Franco-Belges\" (Franco-Belgian Sharpshooters). Recruited amongst volunteers from both countries, this became the Pontifical Zouaves in 1861 and fought as an allied force on the French side in 1871 during the Franco-Prussian War.\nIn 1864 a \"Corps Expeditionnaire Belge\" (Belgian Expeditionary Corps) was raised for service in Mexico. Originally intended to serve as the Guard of the Belgian-born Empress Charlotte this 1,500 strong force was largely drawn from volunteers seconded from the Belgian Army. Known popularly as the Belgian Legion, it saw active service in Mexico as part of the Imperial forces, before returning to Belgium for disbandment in March 1867.\nFrom 1885 the Force Publique was established as the military garrison and police force in the Belgian Congo, then under the direct rule of King Leopold II. Initially led by a variety of European mercenaries, this colonial force was subsequently officered by Belgian regulars after 1908.\nFrom December 1904 a small detachment of Belgian troops was permanently based in China as the \"Guard of the Belgian Legation in Beijing\".\nReforms undertaken in the early years of the 20th century included the abolition in 1909 of the system of drawing lots for the selection of the annual intake of conscripts. In 1913, compulsory and universal military service for men was established in Belgium. While this enabled actual peacetime strength to be increased to 33,000 men (increased to 120,500 on mobilisation), this was only sufficient to provide a basis for the creation of seven under-strength divisions (one of cavalry) plus artillery and fortress troops. The Belgian military was also affected by political and popular reliance on the supposedly certain protection of the country's internationally guaranteed neutrality. In the words of the historian Barbara W. Tuchman \"the army was considered superfluous and slightly absurd\". Training and discipline were slack, equipment inadequate and even field uniforms for active service were old fashioned and impractical.\nAlthough improvements in the Belgian Army had been uneven during the 19th and early 20th centuries, one area of successful reform had been that of increasing the professionalism of the officer corps. The Royal Military Academy had been established in 1834, to be followed by the \"Ecole d'Application\" for technical training, and the \"Ecole de Guerre\" for staff training in 1868. The Belgian Army pioneered the practice of training a corps of finance, personnel and general administration specialist officers instead of leaving such functions to civil servants without military experience or inadequately prepared line officers. There was however a serious shortage of trained officers in the rapidly expanding army of 1913.\nArmy in 1914.\nOn the eve of World War I, the Belgian Army comprised 19 infantry regiments (line, Chasseurs \u00e0 pied, Grenadier and Carabinier), 10 cavalry (Guides, Lancers and Chasseurs \u00e0 cheval) and 8 artillery (mounted, field and fortress). Support forces included engineers, gendarmerie, fortress troops, train and civil guards. The seven divisions of the Field Army were intended to provide a mobile force while the 65,000 fortress troops provided garrisons for the substantial forts constructed around Antwerp, Li\u00e8ge and Namur. These fortifications had been built in several stages beginning in 1859, though a number were still incompleted in 1914. While well-designed and built by 19th century standards, these fixed defences with their sunken artillery turrets had been rendered obsolete by recent advances in heavy siege artillery howitzers.\nWorld War I.\nAt the start of World War I in August 1914, the Belgian armed forces were being restructured, due to this measure and the rapid occupation of Belgium only 20% of men were mobilised and incorporated into the armed forces. Ultimately, 350,000 men were incorporated into the Belgian armed forces, although one third of these did not participate directly in combat.\nInvaded by surprise by the Imperial German Army, which was approximately 600,000 men strong, the small, ill-equipped, 117,000-strong Belgian army succeeded, for ten days, in holding the German army in front of Li\u00e8ge in 1914. They fought between the emplaced forts in the area and with their support. This strategy was based on the Napoleonic concept of fighting the advance force and preventing a portion of the enemy forces joining the main body. At the time, the authorities and the public celebrated a determined Belgian resistance that the Germans did not expect.\nFor four years, under the command of King Albert I, the Belgian army guarded the important sector of the Allied left wing between Nieuwpoort, on the coast, and Ypres with the help of the forces of the Entente but did not participate in any of the major Allied offensives, which were deemed unnecessarily expensive in terms of cost and manpower by the King of the Belgians.\nIn 1916, a body of Belgian armoured cars were moved from the IJzer front to help the Russian Empire. The force found itself alongside an identical body sent by the British on the Eastern Front.\nIn Africa a company-sized unit of Belgian colonial troops participated in the occupation of the German colony of Togoland, The Force Publique subsequently played a major role in the East African Campaign against German forces in German East Africa, providing over 12,000 askaris under Belgian officers for the Allied offensive of February 1916. The most significant Belgian action was the capture of Tabora in September 1916, by a force under the command of General Charles Tombeur.\nIn Belgium, after four years of war, as of 26 May 1918, the army had 166,000 men of which 141,974 were combatants, forming twelve infantry divisions and one cavalry division. It had 129 aircraft and 952 guns of all calibres. From September, the Belgian army was involved in the Allied offensive until the final victory of 11 November 1918.\nBetween the Wars.\nAfter the Armistice with Germany of 1918, the Belgian government sought to retain the strategy of 1914. Little effort was made to acquire tanks and aircraft for the Belgian armed forces, while instead the Government strengthened the fortifications of Li\u00e8ge and Antwerp. This was despite the fact that during World War I the forts had proved ineffective despite strong support from artillery and infantry. Until 1936, Belgium remained allied to France and the United Kingdom.\nThe Belgian Army underwent a series of reductions from 12 divisions in 1923 to only four after 1926. The rank and file consisted almost entirely of conscripts serving full-time for only 13 months, before entering the reserves.\nWorld War II.\nOn 1 September 1939, when the Wehrmacht invaded Poland, King Leopold III of Belgium ordered a general mobilisation, in which 600,000 Belgians were mobilised. Despite warnings from the French and British governments, the King refused an alliance. Belgium was invaded, defeated, and occupied in an 18 Days' Campaign after 10 May 1940. Later, 163 Belgian troops were rescued during the Dunkirk evacuation, and Belgium's new navy, the \"Corps de Marine\", only reformed in 1939, also participated.\nAfter the defeat in 1940, significant numbers of Belgian soldiers and civilians escaped to Britain to join the Belgian forces in exile. The Belgian government, under Hubert Pierlot, evacuated to London where it remained until the liberation in 1944.\nBelgian soldiers formed the 1st Belgian Infantry Brigade (which also included an artillery battery of soldiers from Luxembourg) more often known as the \"Brigade Piron\" after its commanding officer, Jean-Baptiste Piron. The Brigade Piron was involved in the Normandy Invasion and the battles in France and the Netherlands until liberation.\nBelgians also served in British special forces units during the war, forming a troop of No.10 Commando which was involved in the Italian Campaign and Landings on Walcheren. The British 5th Special Air Service (SAS) was entirely made up of Belgians.\nTwo Belgian fighter units, the 349th and 350th Squadrons, were formed in the Royal Air Force, with over 400 pilots. The 350th Squadron alone claimed over 50 \"kills\" between its formation in November 1941 and the end of the war.\nTwo corvettes and a group of minesweepers were also operated by the Belgians during the Battle of the Atlantic, numbering some 350 men by 1943. Most military Belgian vessels of the Belgian navy were interned in Spain, except for the patrol craft \"P16\", which managed to escape to the United Kingdom, where it became HMS \"Kernot\".\nThe Force Publique also participated in the East African Campaign and were instrumental to forcing the Italian surrender in Abyssinia.\nPost-1945.\nThe harsh lessons of World War II made collective security a priority for Belgian foreign policy. In March 1948 Belgium signed the Treaty of Brussels, and then joined NATO in 1948. However the integration of the armed forces into NATO did not begin until after the Korean War, to which Belgium (in co-operation with Luxembourg) sent a detachment known as the Belgian Volunteer Corps for Korea. Later Belgium contributed a corps to NATO's Northern Army Group. Defence expenditure grew along with the force size. In 1948 the army was 75,000 strong which grew to 150,000 by 1952. A major defence review in 1952 set a target of three active and two reserve divisions, a 400-aircraft air force and a fifteen-ship navy. Forty anti-aircraft defence battalions were created, linked with radar and a centralised command-and-control system.\nAs a safeguard against Belgium being invaded again, two major bases, Kitona and Kamina, were established in the Belgian Congo. They were almost viewed as a 'national redoubt,' permitting the survival and rebuilding of forces if Belgium were again invaded.\nFollowing a change in government in 1954 conscript service was reduced to 18 months. The Belgian Army gained nuclear capability in the 1950s with Honest John missiles initially and then with nuclear-capable tube artillery. It also adopted the U.S. Pentomic organization, but then switched to a triangular division structure by the early 1960s. Just after independence in the Congo, a Metropolitan Command (Cometro) was active to control the Belgian forces there.\nFrom October 1993 to March 1996, Belgium participated in UNAMIR, a UN Peacekeeping mission meant to end the Rwandan genocide. While protecting the Rwandan prime minister, 10 soldiers from the 2nd Commando Battalion were tortured and executed by the Rwandan Presidential Guard. Rwandan Major Bernard Ntuyahaga was later convicted for the murders in 2007.\nFuture.\nThe future of the Belgian armed forces under the leadership of Defence Minister Ludivine Dedonder involves a significant rebuilding and expansion effort. After years of budgetary cuts, Belgium aims to boost its defense budget and capabilities to meet the challenges of a changing security landscape, particularly in the wake of the Russian invasion of Ukraine.\nThe key aspects of the plan include:\nOverall, Dedonder's vision is to ensure that Belgium's defense is well-prepared, adequately funded, and capable of operating within European, NATO, or United Nations frameworks to contribute to collective defense and respond to emerging security challenges effectively.\nStructure.\nSince July 2024 the Belgian Armed Forces are structured as follows:\nSpecial Operations Command or SOCOM, does not have direct command over special operations, but is an intermediary center for coordination and communication of special operations between the armed forces components. The command provides advice and expertise and is also tasked with acquisition and distributions of equipment for SOF units. SOCOM is managed by ACOS Readiness and Operations.\nCurrently, SOCOM is responsible for setting up the new Composite Special Operations Command Center or C-SOCC. This new command center is an international project between Special Operations units of Belgium, The Netherlands and Denmark.\nThe Belgian Army, Air Force, Medical Services, and Cyber Force all use the same military ranks. The Navy's ranks are unique in the Belgian Armed Forces.\nBelgian Army.\nThe Belgian Army is the ground arm of the Belgian Armed Forces. The Army Commander is Major-General Pierre G\u00e9rard.(since 18 October 2019). The Army consists of one staff (COMOPSLAND), one motorized brigade, one special operations regiment supported by an artillery battalion, two engineer battalions and a reconnaissance (ISTAR) battalion. It is also supported by three logistical units, three telecommunication units, four training camps and a center for the training of ground troops.\nThe Army has around 10,000 troops (as of 2023) and trained for foreign operations in a multinational environment. \nAround 7500 of them are part of the Motorized Brigade (Belgium) and ~1500 part of Special Operations Regiment (Belgium) and around ~1000 are part of other branches such as military police, Explosive Removal and Destruction Service (DOVO) and more.\nBelgian Air Force.\nThe Belgian Air Force is the air arm of the Belgian Armed Forces. The history of the Belgian Air Force began in 1910 when the Minister of War, General Hellebout, decided after his first flight to acquire aeroplanes. On 5 May 1911 a Farman type 1910 was delivered, followed by a second on 24 May and two other in August of the same year. The air force commander is Major-General aviator Thierry Dupont. (04/07/2023)\nThe air force consists of two fighter aircraft wing, the second tactical wing in Florennes, operating the F-16 Fighting Falcon and a unit (80 UAV squadron) flying the B-Hunter reconnaissance UAV, the 10 tactical wing in Kleine Brogel, operating the F-16 Fighting Falcon, the 15 air transport wing in Melsbroek operating 10 Lockheed C-130 Hercules transport aircraft and 2 out of 8 Airbus A400M Atlas modern transport aircraft which will replace the C-130s. Two of the new A400Ms are currently operable (CT-01, shared with the Luxembourg Air Force and CT-02), four more are scheduled to arrive in 2021. The 15th Wing also operates a small fleet of troop transport and VIP aircraft. The first wing in Beauvechain operates training aircraft and helicopters (A-109 and NH-90 helicopters). Aside from these flying units, the air force is supported by several support units, such as an air traffic control center, an air defense center (Control and Reporting Center), a meteorological wing and an aviation safety directorate.\nBelgian Navy.\nThe Belgian Navy is the naval arm of the Belgian Armed Forces. It currently has 1,200 personnel and 10 vessels. The Navy Commander is Rear Admiral Jan De Beurme, since 28 September 2020. Current vessels are:\nFrigates:\nMinesweepers:\nPatrol Boats:\nAuxiliary Vessels:\nBelgian Medical Service.\nThe Medical Services is commanded by a Major General and is composed of 1,700 active personnel. Providing medical support to all personnel of the Belgium Armed forces, it consists of a Military Hospital and 2 Medical Battalions as well as a Medical Supply Unit.\nIntelligence.\nA Belgian military intelligence service was founded on 1 April 1915. The Belgian General Information and Security Service, known as ADIV (Dutch) or SGRS (French) and part of the organisational chart of Belgian Defence as ACOS-IS (Assistant Chief of Staff Intelligence and Security) provides security intelligence for the Armed Forces as well as strategic intelligence for the Belgian government. Its focus is on counterespionage.\nThe Jagers te Paard Battalion (ISTAR) also conducts military intelligence with a tactical goal of preparing and supporting operations abroad.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "68952", "revid": "1315767158", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68952", "title": "Tribe of Judah", "text": "One of the 12 Tribes of Israel\nAccording to the Hebrew Bible, the tribe of Judah (&lt;templatestyles src=\"Script/styles_hebrew.css\" /&gt;\u05e9\u05b5\u05c1\u05d1\u05b6\u05d8 \u05d9\u05b0\u05d4\u05d5\u05bc\u05d3\u05b8\u05d4\u200e, \"Shevet Yehudah\") was one of the twelve Tribes of Israel, named after Judah, the son of Jacob. Judah was one of the tribes to take its place in Judea, occupying its southern part. Jesse and his sons, including King David, belonged to this tribe.\nJudah played a central role in the Deuteronomistic history, which encompasses the books of Deuteronomy through II Kings. After the death of King Solomon, the Tribe of Judah, the Tribe of Benjamin, the Tribe of Dan, and the Levites formed the Southern Kingdom of Judah, with Jerusalem and Hebron as its capital. The kingdom lasted until its conquest by Babylon in c.\u2009586 BCE.\nThe tribe's symbol was the lion, which was often represented in Jewish art. After the Babylonian captivity, the distinction between the Tribes was largely lost, but the term \"Judah\", via \"Yehudi\" (), gave rise to the word \"Jew\" (pl. , \"Yehudim\"). In later traditions, including Christianity and Ethiopian Judaism, the \"Lion of the Tribe of Judah\" became a messianic symbol.\nBiblical account.\nThe tribe of Judah, its conquests, and the centrality of its capital in Jerusalem for the worship of Yahweh featured prominently in the Deuteronomistic history, encompassing the books of Deuteronomy through II Kings, which most scholars agree was reduced to written form, although subject to exilic and post-exilic alterations and emendations, during the reign of the Judahite reformer Josiah from 641\u2013609 BCE.\nAccording to the account in the Book of Joshua, following a partial conquest of Canaan by the Israelite tribes (the Jebusites still held Jerusalem), Joshua allocated the land among the twelve tribes. Judah's portion is described in Joshua 15 as encompassing all the Southern Land of Israel, specially the Negev, the Wilderness of Zin and Jerusalem. However, the consensus of modern scholars is that this conquest never occurred. Other scholars point to extra-biblical references to Israel and Canaan as evidence for the potential historicity of the conquest.\nIn the opening words of the Book of Judges, following the death of Joshua, the Israelites \"asked the Lord\" which tribe should be first to go to occupy its allotted territory, and the Tribe of Judah was identified as the first tribe. According to the narrative in the Book of Judges, the Tribe of Judah invited the Tribe of Simeon to fight with them in alliance to secure each of their allotted territories. However, many scholars do not believe that the Book of Judges is a reliable historical account.\nThe Book of Samuel describes God's repudiation of a monarchic line arising from the Southern Tribe of Benjamin due to the sinfulness of King Saul, which was then bestowed onto the tribe of Judah for all time in the person of King David. In Samuel's account, after the death of Saul, all the tribes other than Judah remained loyal to the House of Saul, while Judah chose David as its king. However, after the death of Ish-bosheth, Saul's son and successor to the throne of Israel, all the other Israelite tribes made David, who was then the King of Judah, king of a single Re-United Kingdom of Israel. The Book of Kings follows the expansion and unparalleled glory of the United Monarchy under King Solomon. A majority of scholars believe that the accounts concerning David and Solomon's territory in the \"united monarchy\" are exaggerated, and a minority believe that the \"united monarchy\" never existed at all. Disagreeing with the latter view, Old Testament scholar Walter Dietrich contends that the biblical stories of circa 10th-century BCE monarchs contain a significant historical kernel and are not simply late fictions.\nOn the accession of Rehoboam, Solomon's son, in c. 930\u00a0BCE, the Ten Northern Tribes of Israel under the leadership of Jeroboam from the Tribe of Ephraim split from the House of David to create the Northern Kingdom in Samaria. The Book of Kings is uncompromising in its low opinion of its larger and richer neighbor to the north and understands its conquest by Assyria in 722 BCE as divine retribution for the Kingdom's return to idolatry.\nThe Tribes of Judah, Southern Dan and Benjamin remained loyal to the House of David. These tribes formed the Kingdom of Judah, which existed until Judah was conquered by Babylon in c. 586\u00a0BCE and the population was deported.\nWhen the Jews returned from Babylonian exile, residual tribal affiliations were abandoned, probably because of the impossibility of reestablishing previous tribal land holdings. However, the special religious roles decreed for the Levites and Kohanim were preserved, but Jerusalem became the sole place of worship and sacrifice among the returning exiles, northerners and southerners alike.\nTerritory and main cities.\nAccording to the biblical account, at its height, the tribe of Judah was the leading tribe of the Kingdom of Judah, and occupied most of the territory of the kingdom, except for a small region in the northeast occupied by Benjamin, and an enclave towards the south-west which was occupied by Simeon. Bethlehem and Hebron were initially the main cities within the territory of the tribe.\nThe size of the territory of the tribe of Judah meant that in practice it had four distinct regions:\nJudah had assigned him by lot the upper part of Judea, reaching as far as Jerusalem, and its breadth extended to the Lake of Sodom. Now in the lot of this tribe there were the cities of Askelon and Gaza.\nOrigin.\nAccording to the Torah, the Tribe consisted of Descendants of Judah, the fourth son of Jacob and of Leah. Some biblical scholars view this as an etiological myth created in hindsight to explain the tribe's name and connect it to the other tribes in the Israelite confederation. With Leah as a matriarch, biblical scholars regard the tribe as having been believed by the text's authors to have been part of the original Israelite confederation.\nLike the other tribes of the Kingdom of Judah, the Tribe of Judah is entirely absent from the ancient Song of Deborah. Traditionally, this has been explained as being due to the southern kingdom being too \"far away\" to be involved in the battle, but Israel Finkelstein et al. claim the alternative explanation that the southern kingdom was simply an insignificant rural backwater at the time the poem was written.\nProfessor Aaron Demsky argues that the genealogical record of Shelah and his sons was an allegory of the history of Shelanite clans in Shephelah (i.e. Judean foothills). These clans established cities such as Lecah (or Lachish) and Mareshah. They also worked as potters and craftsmen for the king, particularly Hezekiah. After the Assyrians destroyed their cities, survivors fled to Jerusalem and fully assimilated with the inhabitants by 538 BC, when the Babylonian exiles returned to Jerusalem.\nCharacter.\nMany of the Jewish leaders and prophets of the Hebrew Bible claimed membership in the tribe of Judah. For example, the literary prophets Isaiah, Amos, Joel, Micah, Obadiah, Zechariah, and Zephaniah, all belonged to the tribe.\nThe genealogies given in Matthew 1:1\u20136 and Luke 3:23\u201334 in the New Testament describe Jesus as a Descendant of David, Matthew through Solomon and Luke through Nathan.\nFate.\nAs part of the Kingdom of Judah, the tribe of Judah survived the destruction of Israel by the Assyrians, and instead was subjected to the Babylonian captivity; when the captivity ended, the distinction between the tribes were lost in favour of a common identity. Since Simeon and Benjamin had been very much the junior partners in the Kingdom of Judah, it was Judah that gave its name to the identity\u2014that of the \"Jews\".\nAfter the fall of Jerusalem, Babylonia (modern-day Iraq), would become the focus of Judaism for 1,000 years. The first Jewish communities in Babylonia started with the exile of the tribe of Judah to Babylon by Jehoiachin in 597 BCE as well as after the destruction of the Temple in Jerusalem in 586 BCE. Many more Jews migrated to Babylon in CE 135 after the Bar Kokhba revolt and in the centuries after.\nThe triumph or victory of \"the Lion of the Tribe of Judah\", who is able to open the scroll and its seven seals, forms part of the vision of the writer of the Book of Revelation in the New Testament.\nEthiopia's traditions, recorded and elaborated in a 14th-century treatise, the \"Kebre Negest\", assert descent from a retinue of Israelites who returned with the Queen of Sheba from her visit to King Solomon in Jerusalem, by whom she had conceived the Solomonic dynasty's founder, Menelik I. Both Christian and Jewish Ethiopian tradition has it that these immigrants were mostly of the Tribes of Dan and Judah; hence the Ge'ez motto \"Mo`a 'Anbessa Ze'imnegede Yihuda\" (\"The Lion of the Tribe of Judah has conquered\"), one of many names for Jesus of Nazareth.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "68953", "revid": "10500908", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68953", "title": "Foreign relations of Belgium", "text": " \nBelgium is a country in Europe and member of major international organizations like the European Union and NATO which are both headquartered in Brussels, Belgium.\nAs a federal state, the Communities and Regions have their own foreign relations and are able to conclude treaties themselves.\nInitial neutrality.\nBecause of its location at the crossroads of Western Europe, Belgium has historically been the route of invading armies from its larger neighbours. With virtually defenceless borders, Belgium has traditionally sought to avoid domination by the more powerful nations which surround it through a policy of mediation. The Concert of Europe sanctioned the creation of Belgium in 1831 on the condition that the country remain strictly neutral.\nThis policy of neutrality ended after the experience of German occupation during World War I. In the years preceding World War II, Belgium tried to return to a policy of neutrality, but once again, Germany invaded the country. In 1948, Belgium signed the Treaty of Brussels with the United Kingdom, France, the Netherlands, and Luxembourg, and one year later became one of the founding members of the Atlantic Alliance.\nBelgium's federalism and international relations.\nA peculiar feature of Belgian federalism is the fact that the country's Communities and Regions maintain their own international relations, including the conclusion of treaties. Thus, there are a number of bilateral Dutch-Flemish international institutions, such as the Dutch Language Union or the institutions for the control of the river Scheldt, in which only Flanders takes part. Likewise, only the French Community of Belgium takes part in La Francophonie. For instance, UNV's Online Volunteering service received a financial contribution from the Federal Public Service (FPS) Foreign Affairs, Foreign Trade and Development Cooperation of the Kingdom of Belgium for the years 2013 and 2014 to support the outreach to the francophone world and the promotion of volunteerism.\nInternational disputes.\nBelgium has resorted several times to international dispute settlement, notably in cases at both the International Court of Justice and the Permanent Court of Arbitration with the Netherlands concerning the diversion of water from the Meuse (1937) the frontier at the enclave of Baarle-Hertog (1959) and the revitalisation of the so-called Iron Rhine railroad (2005). There have been other points of contention with the Netherlands, such as the deepening of the river Scheldt or the route for the high-speed rail link between Brussels and Amsterdam. This does however not influence the overall amicable character of Belgo-Dutch relationship.\nOther former cases at international courts between Belgium and other countries are\u00a0\u2014 in chronological order\u00a0\u2014 the Oscar Chinn Case of 1934 (with the United Kingdom, the Borghgrave Case of 1937 (with Spain), the cases of the electricity company of Sofia of 1939 (with Bulgaria), the case of the \"soci\u00e9t\u00e9 commerciale de Belgique\" of 1939 (with Greece), the case concerning the Barcelona Traction Company of 1970 (with Spain), the arrest warrant case of 2002 (with the Democratic Republic of the Congo) and the case concerning legality of use of force of 2004 (with Serbia and Montenegro).\nThe arrest warrant case of 2002 was caused by the application of Belgium's so called genocide law, providing for universal jurisdiction over the gravest international crimes. The same law stirred relations with, amongst others, Israel and the United States, since complaints were filed against high-ranking politicians and officials of both countries. The law was therefore repealed in 2003.\nDiplomatic relations.\nList of countries which Belgium maintains diplomatic relations with:\nProtocol.\nThe kingdom of Belgium recognises 4 types of incoming visits in Belgium. They are ranked in precedence and protocol.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "68954", "revid": "13006032", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68954", "title": "Nostril", "text": "Nose orifice that enables the entry and exit of air\nA nostril (or naris , pl.: nares ) is either of the two orifices of the nose. They enable the entry and exit of air and other gasses through the nasal cavities. In birds and mammals, they contain branched bones or cartilages called turbinates, whose function is to warm air on inhalation and remove moisture on exhalation. Fish do not breathe through noses, but they do have two small holes used for smelling, which can also be referred to as nostrils (with the exception of Cyclostomi, which have just one nostril).\nIn humans, the nasal cycle is the normal ultradian cycle of each nostril's blood vessels becoming engorged in swelling, then shrinking.\nThe nostrils are separated by the septum. The septum can sometimes be deviated, causing one nostril to appear larger than the other. With extreme damage to the septum and columella, the two nostrils are no longer separated and form a single larger external opening.\nLike other tetrapods, humans have two external nostrils (anterior nares) and two additional nostrils at the back of the nasal cavity, inside the head (posterior nares, posterior nasal apertures or choanae). They also connect the nose to the throat (the nasopharynx), aiding in respiration. Though all four nostrils were on the outside of the head of the aquatic ancestors of modern tetrapods, the nostrils for outgoing water (excurrent nostrils) migrated to the inside of the mouth, as evidenced by the discovery of \"Kenichthys campbelli\", a 395-million-year-old fossilized lobe-finned fish which shows this migration in progress. It has two nostrils between its front teeth, similar to human embryos at an early stage. If these fail to join up, the result is a cleft palate.\nEach external nostril contains approximately 1,000 strands of nasal hair, which function to filter foreign particles such as pollen and dust.\nIt is possible for humans to smell different olfactory inputs in the two nostrils and experience a perceptual rivalry akin to that of binocular rivalry when there are two different inputs to the two eyes. Furthermore, scent information from the two nostrils leads to two types of neural activity with the first cycle corresponding to the ipsilateral and the second cycle corresponding to the contralateral odor representations. In some cultures the extreme wide flaring of the nostrils accompanied by the baring of the upper teeth is often referred to as \"doing the nostrils.\"\nThe Procellariiformes are distinguished from other birds by having tubular extensions of their nostrils.\nWidely-spaced nostrils, like those of the hammerhead shark, may be useful in determining the direction of an odour's source.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "68957", "revid": "50487669", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68957", "title": "Tribe of Ephraim", "text": "One of the two Half-Tribes of Joseph\nAccording to the Hebrew Bible, the Tribe of Ephraim (, \"\u02beEp\u0304rayim,\" in pausa: , \"\u02beEp\u0304r\u0101yim\") was one of the Twelve Tribes of Israel. The Tribe of Manasseh, together with Ephraim, formed the Tribe of Joseph. It is one of the Ten Lost Tribes. The etymology of the name is disputed.\nEphraim as portrayed in biblical narrative.\nAccording to the Bible, the Tribe of Ephraim is descended from a man named Ephraim, who is recorded as the son of Joseph, the son of Jacob, and Asenath, the daughter of Potiphera. The descendants of Joseph formed two of the tribes of Israel, whereas the other sons of Jacob were the founders of one tribe each.\nThe Bible records that the Tribe of Ephraim entered the land of Canaan during its conquest by Joshua, a descendant of Ephraim himself. However, many archeologists have abandoned the idea that Joshua carried out a conquest of Canaan similar to that described in the Book of Joshua, seeing Jews instead as indigenous Canaanites who developed a monotheistic religion over time. \nFrom Joshua to the formation of the first Kingdom of Israel, the Tribe of Ephraim was a part of a loose confederation of Israelite tribes. No central government existed, and in times of crisis the people were led by ad hoc leaders known as the Judges, or \"shofe\u1e6dim\", which are known from related societies from Canaan and their colonies in Carthage\nWith the growth of the threat from Philistine incursions, the Israelite tribes decided to form a strong centralised monarchy to meet the challenge. The Tribe of Ephraim joined the new kingdom with Saul as the first king. The widely accepted date for Saul's reign is approximately 1025\u20131005\u00a0BCE. Some scholars dispute this date range and place Saul later, perhaps as late as \"the second half of the tenth century B.C.E.\"\nAfter the death of Saul, the Bible records that all the tribes except Judah remained loyal to the House of Saul. After the death of Ish-bosheth, Saul's son and successor to the throne of Israel, the Tribe of Ephraim joined the other northern Israelite tribes in making David, who was then the king of Judah, the king of a reunited kingdom. According to archaeologist Israel Finkelstein, there is doubt about whether the biblical ordering of the reigns of the early monarchs is reliable, and that the sequence preserved in the Bible, in which David follows Saul as king of Israel, may not be historically accurate.\nHowever, on the accession of Rehoboam, David's grandson, in c. 930 BCE, the northern tribes split from the House of David to form the Northern Kingdom, known as both \"Israel\" and \"Samaria\". The first northern king of Israel was an Ephraimite, Jeroboam, who likely ruled in 931\u2013909.\nThe accents of the tribes were distinctive enough even at the time of the confederacy so that when the Israelites of Gilead, under the leadership of Jephthah, fought the Tribe of Ephraim, their pronunciation of \"shibboleth\" as \"sibboleth\" was considered sufficient evidence to single out individuals from Ephraim, so that they could be subjected to immediate death by the Israelites of Gilead.\nEphraim was a member of the Northern Kingdom until the kingdom was conquered by the Neo-Assyrian Empire in c. 723\u00a0BCE and the population deported, an event known as the Assyrian captivity. From that time, the Tribe of Ephraim has been counted as one of the Ten Lost Tribes.\nEphraim is often seen as the tribe that embodies the entire northern kingdom and the House of Omri resided in the tribe's territory just as Judah is the tribe that embodies the Kingdom of Judah and provided its royal family.\nTribal territory.\nIn the biblical account, following the completion of the conquest of Canaan by Joshua allocated the land among the Twelve Tribes. Kenneth Kitchen, a well-known Biblical maximalist, dated this event to slightly after 1200 BC. However, the consensus of modern scholars is that the conquest of Joshua as described in the Book of Joshua never occurred.\nAs recorded in the Book of Joshua, the territory allocated to the Tribe of Ephraim was at the center of Canaan, west of the Jordan, south of the territory of Manasseh, and north of the Tribe of Benjamin. The region later named Samaria, which was distinct from Judea and Galilee, consisted mostly of Ephraim's territory. The area was mountainous, giving it protection, and also highly fertile, giving prosperity,\nThe territory of Ephraim contained the early centers of Israelite religion: Shechem and Shiloh. These factors contributed to making Ephraim the dominant tribe in the United Kingdom of Israel, and led to \"Ephraim\" becoming a synonym for the entire kingdom. Joshua 16:1-4 outlines the borders of the lands allocated to the \"children of Joseph\", i.e. Ephraim and Manasseh combined, and Joshua 16:5-8 defines the borders of the land allocated to the tribe of Ephraim in more detail.\nBethel was allocated by Joshua to the Tribe of Benjamin. However, even by the time of the prophetess Deborah, Bethel is described as being in the land of the Tribe of Ephraim. Some twenty years after the breakup of the United Monarchy, King Abijah of Judah, the second king of the Kingdom of Judah, defeated Jeroboam, king of Israel-Samaria, and took back Bethel, Jeshanah and Ephron with their surrounding villages. Ephron is believed to be the Ophrah that was also allocated to the Tribe of Benjamin by Joshua.\nThe wadi Q\u0101n\u0101 () of Joshua 17:9 divided Ephraim's territory to the south and Manasseh's territory to the north. The illegal Israeli settlement of Karnei Shomron is built near this gulch, which runs in an easterly-westerly direction.\nThe border of Ephraim extended from the Jordan in the east to the Mediterranean Sea in the west. It incorporated within it the cities of Bethel (now Beitin), \u02bbAtarot, Lower Beth-\u1e24oron (now Lower Bayt \u02bbUr), extending as far as Gezer (now Abu Shusha, formerly known as \"Tell el Jezer\") and the Mediterranean Sea. Gezer was said to have been inhabited by Canaanites long after Joshua had either killed or expelled the other Canaanites. According to French archaeologist, Charles Simon Clermont-Ganneau, who identified the site in 1871 and later carried out excavations there, Gezer marked the extreme western point of the territory of Ephraim, and was \"situated at the actual intersection of the boundaries of Ephraim, Dan and Judah.\" This view, however, does not seem to be supported by the Scriptures themselves which place the extent of Ephraim's border at the sea. Josephus noted, \"The tribe of Ephraim had by lot the land that extended in length from the river Jordan to Gezer; but in breadth as far as from Bethel, till it ended at the Great Plain.\"\nThe traveller Benjamin of Tudela, a Jew from the Kingdom of Navarre, wrote that the southernmost bounds of the territory of Ephraim extended in a southwesterly direction as far as the town of Ibelin (now Yibna).\nOrigin.\nAccording to the Torah, the tribe consisted of descendants of Ephraim a son of Joseph, from whom it took its name; however some critical scholars view this also as postdiction, an eponymous metaphor providing an aetiology of the connectedness of the tribe to others in the Israelite confederation. In the Biblical account, Joseph is one of the two children of Rachel and Jacob, a brother to Benjamin, and father to both Ephraim, and his first son, Manasseh; although Manasseh was the eldest, Jacob foresaw that Ephraim's descendants would be greater than his brother's.\nThough the biblical descriptions of the geographic boundary of the House of Joseph are fairly consistent, the descriptions of the boundaries between Manasseh and Ephraim are not, and each is portrayed as having exclaves within the territory of the other. Furthermore, in the Blessing of Jacob, and elsewhere ascribed by textual scholars to a similar or earlier time period, Ephraim and Manasseh are treated as a single tribe, with \"Joseph\" appearing in their place. From this it is regarded as probable that originally Ephraim and Manasseh were considered one tribe\u00a0\u2014 that of Joseph. According to several biblical scholars, Benjamin was also originally part of the \"House of Joseph\", but the biblical account of this became lost; Benjamin being differentiated by being that part of Ephraim (House of Joseph) which joined the Kingdom of Judah rather than that of Israel.\nA number of biblical scholars suspect that the \"Joseph tribes\" (including Benjamin) represent a second migration of Israelites to Israel, later than the main tribes, specifically that it was only the \"Joseph tribes\" which went to Egypt and returned, while the main Israelite tribes simply emerged as a subculture from the Canaanites and had remained in Canaan throughout; in the narrative in the Book of Joshua, which concerns the arrival in (and conquest of) Canaan by the Israelites from Egypt, the leader is Joshua, who was a member of the Ephraim tribe. According to this view, the story of Jacob's visit to Laban to obtain a wife began as a metaphor for the second migration, with Jacob's new family, possessions, and livestock, obtained from Laban, being representations of the new wave of migrants;\nProfessor David Frankel believes that ancient traditions regarding pre-conquest Ephraimite settlement in Canaan were unintentionally preserved in biblical passages such as 1 Chronicles 7:20-24. In 1 Chronicles 7:20-24, Ephraim's descendants, Ezer and Elead, were Canaanite residents who were killed by the Philistines, which was mourned by Ephraim and his brethren. This Ephraim was believed to be different from the more famous Ephraim and his brethren were believed to be the heads of other Israelite tribes. Professor Nili Wazana connects this with Prime Minister David Ben-Gurion's argument for why the Jews were indigenous to Canaan, which was affirmed in the Israeli Declaration of Independence. Ben-Gurion argued that Abraham's migration to Canaan was a \"renuion with indigenous Hebrews who shared his theological belief\" and that not all Hebrews joined Jacob's family when they migrated to Egypt.\nCharacter.\nIn the account of the deuteronomic history, Ephraim is portrayed as domineering, haughty, discontented, and jealous, but in classical rabbinical literature, the biblical founder of the tribe is described as being modest and not selfish. These rabbinical sources allege that it was on account of modesty and selflessness, and a prophetic vision of Joshua, that Jacob gave Ephraim precedence over Manasseh, the elder of the two; in these sources, Jacob is regarded as sufficiently just that God upholds the blessing in his honour, and makes Ephraim the leading tribe. Nevertheless, other classical rabbinical texts mock the tribe for the character it has in the deuteronomic history, claiming that Ephraim, being headstrong, left Egypt 30 years prior to the Exodus, and on arrival in Canaan was subjected to a disastrous battle with the Philistines; in the Midrashic Jasher this is portrayed as a rebellion of Ephraim against God, resulting in the slaying of all but 10, and the bleached bones of the slaughtered being strewn across the roads, so much so that the circuitous route of the Exodus was simply an attempt by God to prevent the Israelites from having to suffer the sight of the remains.\nThough from the point of view of an increasing majority of archaeologists, there were always two distinct cultures in Canaan, a strong and prosperous northern kingdom and a weaker and poorer southern one, in the Biblical account the Israelite tribes were initially united in a single kingdom, and only later fractured into the northern and southern kingdoms; this fracture is blamed by the Bible on the jealousy of Ephraim over the growing power of Judah. In the Book of Chronicles, Ephraim's act of splintering from Judah is denounced as forsaking God, and Ephraim is portrayed as becoming highly irreligious, particularly in their resistance to the reforms enacted by Hezekiah and Josiah.\nIt was not until the close of the first period of Jewish history that God 'refused the tabernacle of Joseph (Hebrew Bible), and chose not the tribe of Ephraim, but chose the tribe of Judah, the Mount Zion which he loved'. When the Ark was removed from Shiloh to Zion the power of Ephraim was sequestered.\nDestiny.\nAs part of the Kingdom of Israel, the territory of Ephraim was conquered by the Assyrians, and the tribe was mostly exiled; some in the tribe managed to flee to the Kingdom of Judah, which lay just south of the territory of Ephraim. In any case, the manner of their exile and/or dispersal led to their further history being lost. However, several modern day groups claim descent, with varying levels of academic and rabbinical support. The Samaritans claim that some of their adherents are descended from this tribe, and many Persian Jews claim to be descendants of Ephraim. Further afield, in India the Telugu Jews claim descent from Ephraim, and call themselves \"Bene Ephraim\", relating similar traditions to those of the Mizo Jews, whom the modern state of Israel regards as descendants of Manasseh.\nThe Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints teaches that a significant portion of its members are descended from or adopted into the tribe of Ephraim, believing that they are charged with restoring the lost tribes in the latter days, as prophesied by Isaiah. Along with members of the tribe of Judah, members of the tribe of Ephraim are believed to be playing important leadership roles for covenant Israel in the last days. They also believe that the main groups of the Book of Mormon (Nephites and Lamanites) were parts of the tribes of Ephraim and Manasseh, as part fulfilment of the blessing of Jacob: \"Joseph is a fruitful bough, even a fruitful bough by a well; whose branches run over the wall\", interpreting the \"wall\" as the ocean).\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "68959", "revid": "665998", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68959", "title": "Obsessive compulsive disorder", "text": ""}
{"id": "68960", "revid": "3736169", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68960", "title": "Object\u2013relational database", "text": "Database management system\nAn object\u2013relational database (ORD), or object\u2013relational database management system (ORDBMS), is a database management system (DBMS) similar to a relational database, but with an object-oriented database model: objects, classes and inheritance are directly supported in database schemas and in the query language. Also, as with pure relational systems, it supports extension of the data model with custom data types and methods.\nAn object\u2013relational database can be said to provide a middle ground between relational databases and object-oriented databases. In object\u2013relational databases, the approach is essentially that of relational databases: the data resides in the database and is manipulated collectively with queries in a query language; at the other extreme are OODBMSes in which the database is essentially a persistent object store for software written in an object-oriented programming language, with an application programming interface API for storing and retrieving objects, and little or no specific support for querying.\nOverview.\nThe basic need of object\u2013relational database arises from the fact that both Relational and Object database have their individual advantages and drawbacks. The isomorphism of the relational database system with a mathematical relation allows it to exploit many useful techniques and theorems from set theory. But these types of databases are not optimal for certain kinds of applications. An object oriented database model allows containers like sets and lists, arbitrary user-defined datatypes as well as nested objects. This brings commonality between the application type systems and database type systems which removes any issue of impedance mismatch. But object databases, unlike relational do not provide any mathematical base for their deep analysis.\nThe basic goal for the object\u2013relational database is to bridge the gap between relational databases and the object-oriented modeling techniques used in programming languages such as Java, C++, Visual Basic (.NET) or C#. However, a more popular alternative for achieving such a bridge is to use a standard relational database systems with some form of object\u2013relational mapping (ORM) software. Whereas traditional RDBMS or SQL-DBMS products focused on the efficient management of data drawn from a limited set of data-types (defined by the relevant language standards), an object\u2013relational DBMS allows software developers to integrate their own types and the methods that apply to them into the DBMS.\nThe ORDBMS (like ODBMS or OODBMS) is integrated with an object-oriented programming language. The characteristic properties of ORDBMS are 1) complex data, 2) type inheritance, and 3) object behavior. \"Complex data\" creation in most SQL ORDBMSs is based on preliminary schema definition via the user-defined type (UDT). Hierarchy within structured complex data offers an added property, \"type inheritance\". That is, a structured type can have subtypes that reuse all of its attributes and contain additional attributes specific to the subtype. Another advantage, the \"object behavior\", is related with access to the program objects. Such program objects must be storable and transportable for database processing, therefore they usually are named as persistent objects. Inside a database, all the relations with a persistent program object are relations with its object identifier (OID). All of these points can be addressed in a proper relational system, although the SQL standard and its implementations impose arbitrary restrictions and additional complexity\nIn object-oriented programming (OOP), object behavior is described through the methods (object functions). The methods denoted by one name are distinguished by the type of their parameters and type of objects for which they attached (method signature). The OOP languages call this the polymorphism principle, which briefly is defined as \"one interface, many implementations\". Other OOP principles, inheritance and encapsulation, are related both to methods and attributes. Method inheritance is included in type inheritance. Encapsulation in OOP is a visibility degree declared, for example, through the codice_1, codice_2 and codice_3 access modifiers.\nHistory.\nObject\u2013relational database management systems grew out of research that occurred in the early 1990s. That research extended existing relational database concepts by adding object concepts. The researchers aimed to retain a declarative query-language based on predicate calculus as a central component of the architecture. Probably the most notable research project, Postgres (UC Berkeley), spawned two products tracing their lineage to that research: Illustra and PostgreSQL.\nIn the mid-1990s, early commercial products appeared. These included Illustra (Illustra Information Systems, acquired by , which was in turn acquired by International Business Machines (IBM), Omniscience (Omniscience Corporation, acquired by Oracle Corporation and became the original Oracle Lite), and UniSQL (UniSQL, Inc., acquired by KCOM Group). Ukrainian developer Ruslan Zasukhin, founder of Paradigma Software, Inc., developed and shipped the first version of Valentina database in the mid-1990s as a C++ software development kit (SDK). By the next decade, PostgreSQL had become a commercially viable database, and is the basis for several current products that maintain its ORDBMS features.\nComputer scientists came to refer to these products as \"object\u2013relational database management systems\" or ORDBMSs.\nMany of the ideas of early object\u2013relational database efforts have largely become incorporated into SQL:1999 via structured types. In fact, any product that adheres to the object-oriented aspects of SQL:1999 could be described as an object\u2013relational database management product. For example, IBM Db2, Oracle Database, and Microsoft SQL Server, make claims to support this technology and do so with varying degrees of success.\nComparison to RDBMS.\nAn RDBMS might commonly involve SQL statements such as these:\n CREATE TABLE Customers (\n Id CHAR(12) NOT NULL PRIMARY KEY,\n Surname VARCHAR(32) NOT NULL,\n FirstName VARCHAR(32) NOT NULL,\n DOB DATE NOT NULL # DOB: Date of Birth\n SELECT InitCap(C.Surname) || ', ' || InitCap(C.FirstName)\n FROM Customers C\n WHERE Month(C.DOB) = Month(getdate())\n AND Day(C.DOB) = Day(getdate())\nMost current[ [update]] SQL databases allow the crafting of custom functions, which would allow the query to appear as:\n SELECT Formal(C.Id)\n FROM Customers C\n WHERE Birthday(C.DOB) = Today()\nIn an object\u2013relational database, one might see something like this, with user-defined data-types and expressions such as codice_4:\n CREATE TABLE Customers (\n Id Cust_Id NOT NULL PRIMARY KEY,\n Name PersonName NOT NULL,\n DOB DATE NOT NULL\n SELECT Formal( C.Id )\n FROM Customers C\n WHERE BirthDay ( C.DOB ) = TODAY;\nThe object\u2013relational model can offer another advantage in that the database can make use of the relationships between data to easily collect related records. In an address book application, an additional table would be added to the ones above to hold zero or more addresses for each customer. Using a traditional RDBMS, collecting information for both the user and their address requires a \"join\":\n SELECT InitCap(C.Surname) || ', ' || InitCap(C.FirstName), A.city\n FROM Customers C JOIN Addresses A ON A.Cust_Id=C.Id -- the join\n WHERE A.city=\"New York\"\nThe same query in an object\u2013relational database appears more simply:\n SELECT Formal( C.Name )\n FROM Customers C\n WHERE C.address.city=\"New York\" -- the linkage is 'understood' by the ORDB\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "68962", "revid": "28481209", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68962", "title": "Geography of Belize", "text": "Belize is a small Central American nation, located at 17\u00b015' north of the equator and 88\u00b045' west of the Prime Meridian on the Yucat\u00e1n Peninsula. It borders the Caribbean Sea to the east, with 386\u00a0km of coastline. It has a total of 542\u00a0km of land borders\u2014Mexico to the north-northwest (272\u00a0km) and Guatemala to the south-southwest (266\u00a0km). Belize's total size is , of which is land and is water.\nBelize is the only country in Central America without a Pacific coastline. Many coral reefs, cays, and islands to the east\u2014such as Ambergris Caye, Lighthouse Reef, Glover's Reef, and the Turneffe Islands\u2014are part of Belize's territory, forming the Belize Barrier Reef, the longest in the western hemisphere stemming approximately and the second longest in the world after the Great Barrier Reef. Belize's largest river is the eponymous Belize River. Belize's lowest elevation is at sea level. Its highest point is Doyle's Delight at .\nThe climate in Belize is tropical, with a rainy season from June to November and a dry season from January to May. Natural hazards include hurricanes (mostly in the late Atlantic hurricane season, September to December) and coastal flooding, especially in the south.\nEarthquakes also occurred in southern Belize but infrequent despite located beyond North American plate\u2013circum-Caribbean plate at the southeastern edge.\nPhysical features.\nTopographical feature divide the Belizean landscape into two main physiographic regions. The most visually striking of these regions is distinguished by the Maya Mountains and the associated basins and plateaus that dominate all but the narrow coastal plain in the southern half of the country. The mountains rise to heights of about 1,100 metres, with the highest point being Doyle's Delight (1,124 m) in the Cockscomb Range, a spur of the Maya Mountains in Western Belize. Covered with shallow, highly erodible soils of low fertility, these heavily forested highlands are very sparsely inhabited.\nThe second region comprises the northern lowlands, along with the southern coastal plain. Eighteen major rivers and many perennial streams drain these low-lying areas. The coastline is flat and swampy, with many lagoons, especially in the northern and central parts of the country. Westward from the northern coastal areas, the terrain changes from mangrove swamp to tropical pine savanna and hardwood forest. The country's largest lake is the approximately New River Lagoon.\nBelize claims an exclusive economic zone of with and a territorial sea of . From the mouth of the Sarstoon River to Ranguana Cay, Belize's territorial sea is ; according to Belize's Maritime Areas Act, 1992, the purpose of this limitation is to provide a framework for the negotiation of a definitive agreement on territorial differences with Guatemala.\nBelize is the only country in Central America without a coastline on the North Pacific Ocean.\nRivers.\nThe interlocking networks of rivers, creeks, and lagoons have played a key role in the historical geography of Belize. The largest and most historically important river is the Belize River, which drains more than one-quarter of the country as it winds along the northern edge of the Maya Mountains across the center of the country to the sea near Belize City. Also known as the Old River, the Belize River is navigable up to the Guatemalan border and served as the main artery of commerce and communication between the interior and the coast until well into the twentieth century.\nOther historically important rivers include the Sibun River, which drains the northeastern edge of the Maya Mountains, and the New River, which flows through the northern sugar-growing areas before emptying into Chetumal Bay. Both of these river valleys possess fertile alluvial soils and have supported considerable cultivation and human settlement.\nForests.\nIn Belize forest cover is around 56% of the total land area, equivalent to 1,277,050 hectares (ha) of forest in 2020, down from 1,600,030 hectares (ha) in 1990. In 2020, naturally regenerating forest covered 1,274,670 hectares (ha) and planted forest covered 2,390 hectares (ha). Of the naturally regenerating forest 0% was reported to be primary forest (consisting of native tree species with no clearly visible indications of human activity) and around 59% of the forest area was found within protected areas.\nClimate.\nBelize has a tropical climate with pronounced wet and dry seasons, although there are significant variations in weather patterns by region. Temperatures vary according to elevation, proximity to the coast, and the moderating effects of the northeast trade winds off the Caribbean. Average temperatures in the coastal regions range from in January to in July. Temperatures are slightly higher inland, except for the southern highland plateaus, such as the Mountain Pine Ridge, where it is noticeably cooler year round. Overall, the seasons are marked more by differences in humidity and rainfall than in temperature.\nAverage rainfall varies considerably, ranging from in the north and west to over in the extreme south. Seasonal differences in rainfall are greatest in the northern and central regions of the country where, between January and April or May, fewer than of rain fall per month. The dry season is shorter in the south, normally only lasting from February to April. A shorter, less rainy period, known locally as the \"little dry,\" usually occurs in late July or August, after the initial onset of the rainy season.\nHurricanes.\nHurricanes have played a devastating role in Belizean history. In 1931 an unnamed hurricane destroyed over two-thirds of the buildings in Belize City and killed more than 1,000 people. In 1955 Hurricane Janet leveled the northern town of Corozal. Six years later, Hurricane Hattie struck the central coastal area of the country, with winds in excess of and storm tides. The devastation of Belize City for the second time in thirty years prompted the relocation of the capital some inland to the planned city of Belmopan. A hurricane that devastated Belize was Hurricane Greta, which caused more than US$25 million in damages along the southern coast in 1978.\nThere was a period of 20 years that Belize was considered as a hurricane-free zone by many until Hurricane Mitch (October 1998) gave rise to hurricane awareness and the National Emergency Management Organization (NEMO). One year later Hurricane Keith hit Belize, followed the following year by Tropical Storm Chantal.\nIn 2001, Hurricane Iris swept through the southern part of Belize causing damage that ranged in the hundreds of millions due largely to wiping away the banana industry, crippling the citrus and tourism in the area. Six years later, the fury of Category Five Dean landed on the Yucat\u00e1n coast at Mahahual and Corozal in northern Belize, was not spared the brunt of reportedly Category 3 to 4 winds. Hurricane Dean did tens of millions in damages, especially to the infantile papaya industry and to a lesser extent to the endemic sugar cane industry.\nGeology.\nBelizean geology consists largely of varieties of limestone, with the notable exception of the Maya Mountains, a large uplifted block of intrusive Paleozoic granite and sediments running northeast to southwest across the south-central part of the country. Several major faults rive these highlands, but much of Belize lies outside the tectonically active zone that underlies most of Central America. During the Cretaceous Period, what is now the western part of the Maya Mountains stood above sea level, creating the oldest land surface in Central America, the Mountain Pine Ridge plateau.\nThe hilly regions surrounding the Maya Mountains are formed from Cretaceous limestone. These areas are characterized by a karst topography that is typified by numerous sinkholes, caverns, and underground streams. In contrast to the Mountain Pine Ridge, some of the soils in these regions are quite fertile and have been cultivated during at least the past 4,000 years.\nMuch of the northern half of Belize lies on the Yucat\u00e1n Platform, a tectonically stable region. Although mostly level, this part of the country also has occasional areas of hilly, karst terrain, such as the Yalbac Hills along the western border with Guatemala and the Manatee Hills between Belize City and Dangriga. Alluvial deposits of varying fertility cover the relatively flat landscapes of the coastal plains.\nEnvironmental issues.\nEnvironmental degradation issues in Belize include deforestation, water pollution from sewage, industrial effluents, agricultural runoff, and solid waste disposal.\nBelize is party to the Basel Convention, Convention on Biological Diversity, Ramsar Convention, CITES, Convention on the Prevention of Marine Pollution by Dumping of Wastes and Other Matter, International Convention for the Regulation of Whaling, Montreal Protocol, MARPOL 73/78, United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea, United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification, and United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change.\nClimate change.\nBelize is highly vulnerable to climate change due to its low-lying coastal areas, diverse ecosystems, and economic reliance on tourism and agriculture. Rising sea levels and coastal erosion threaten coastal communities and coral reefs. Warming ocean temperatures are causing coral bleaching, which impacts biodiversity and fisheries. Extreme weather events, such as hurricanes and floods, have become more frequent and intense, damaging infrastructure and livelihoods.\nAs a country, Belize's 2023 greenhouse gas emissions are relatively low (7.46 million tonnes), however, it ranks as the 13th highest country for per capita emissions, at 18.13 tonnes per person. Land use change and forestry together is the highest source of emissions in Belize. The government has committed to net zero emissions by 2050 and has developed climate resilience and adaptation plans.\nNatural resources.\nAlthough a number of economically important minerals exist in Belize, none has been found in quantities large enough to warrant their mining. Those minerals include dolomite, barite (source of barium), bauxite (source of aluminum), cassiterite (source of tin), and gold. In 1990 limestone, used in road building, was the only mineral resource being exploited for either domestic or export use.\nThe similarity of Belizean geology to that of oil-producing areas of Mexico and Guatemala prompted oil companies, principally from the United States, to explore for petroleum at both offshore and on-land sites in the early 1980s. Initial results were promising, but the pace of exploration slowed later in the decade, and production operations never commenced. As a result, Belize remains almost totally dependent on imported petroleum for its energy needs.\nBelize has considerable potential for hydroelectric and other renewable energy resources, such as solar and biomass. In the mid-1980s a Belizean businessman proposed the construction of a wood-burning power station for the production of electricity, but the idea foundered in the wake of ecological concerns and economic constraints. In late 2005, a company named Belize Natural Energy found oil in commercial quantities in the Spanish Lookout area of Belize.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "68963", "revid": "49380818", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68963", "title": "Demographics of Belize", "text": " \nDemographics of the population of Belize include population density, ethnicity, education level, health of the populace, economic status, religious affiliations and other aspects.\nBelize is the most sparsely populated nation in Central America. It is larger than El Salvador. Slightly more than half of the people live in rural areas. About one-fourth live in Belize City, the principal port, commercial centre, and former capital. About 80% of the population are Christian.\nMost Belizeans are of multiracial descent. About 52.9% of the population is of mixed Indigenous (mostly Maya) and European descent (or Mestizo), 24.9% are Kriols, about 10.6% are Maya, and about 6.1% are Afro-Amerindian (Garifuna). The remaining population includes European, East Indian, Chinese, Middle Eastern, and North American groups. In the case of Europeans, most are descendants of Spanish and British colonial settlers, whether pure-blooded or mixed with each other. Most Spanish left the nation just after it was taken by the British colonists who, in the same way, left after independence. Dutch and Prussian Mennonites settled in Belize, mostly in isolated areas.\nPopulation size and structure.\nAccording to the Statistical Institute of Belize, the current population stands at 441,471.\nIn conjunction with a census of the British Empire, census data was compiled for Belize in 1790, 1816, 1823, 1826, 1829, 1832, 1835, 1861, 1871, 1881, 1891, 1901, 1911, 1921, 1931 and 1946. Belize conducted its own censuses in 1960, 1970, 1980, 1991, 2000, 2010, and 2022.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nStructure of the population.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Hidden begin/styles.css\"/&gt;Structure of the population (01.07.2017) (Estimates)\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Hidden begin/styles.css\"/&gt;Population Estimates by Sex and Age Group (01.VII.2021):\n&lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;/includeonly&gt;\n&lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;/includeonly&gt;\nBelize's largest cities and towns by population.\n- Based on 2010 census.\nVital statistics.\n&lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;/includeonly&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"template:sticky header/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Sort under/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Table alignment/tables.css\" /&gt;\nBirth Rate per 1,000 population by Ethnic Groups (2000 Census)\nLife expectancy at birth.\nSource: \"UN World Population Prospects\"\nEthnic groups.\nMost Belizeans are of multiracial descent. About 52.9% are Mestizo, 25.9% are Creole, 11.3% Maya, 6.1.% Garifuna, 3.9% East Indian, 3.6% Mennonites, 1.2% White, 1% Asian, 1.2% Other and 0.3% Unknown.\nMaya.\nBecause Belize's original Maya peoples were decimated by disease and wars or fled to Mexico and Guatemala, most of the country's Maya today are descended from other groups. The current Maya population consists mainly of three language groups.\nThe Yucatec fled to Belize in the late 1840s to escape the Caste War in Yucat\u00e1n, Mexico. Their descendants live in the Orange Walk and Corozal districts, which border on Mexico. Before the massive migration of Yucatec Maya from Mexico to Belize, a local Yucatec Maya group named the Iciache Maya already inhabited the land. Today most Yucatec Maya work in the sugar cane industry.\nIn the 1870s-1880s, many Q'eqchi' fled from Alta Verapaz, Guatemala, where their communal land were seized for coffee plantations, where they were forced into service. They settled villages in the Toledo district. Living near rivers and streams, they are primarily farmers, though many younger people now work in tourism, and on shrimp, banana and citrus plantations.\nThe Mopans originated in Belize, but most were driven out to Guatemala after the British displaced Spanish in a struggle that took most of the 18th century. They returned to Belize in 1886, running from enslavement and taxation in Pet\u00e9n. The Cayo district and San Antonio in the Toledo district are their homes now.\nQ'eqchi' and Mopan have intermarried, though the two languages remain distinct and mutually unintelligible. Mopan and Yucatec are mutually intelligible.\nLanguages.\nEnglish is the only official language of Belize. It is the main language used in government and education. Although only 5.6% of the population speaks it as the main language at home, 54% can speak it very well, and another 26% can speak some English. 37% of Belizeans consider their primary language to be Kriol, an English-based creole of words and syntax from various African languages (namely Akan, Igbo, and Twi), and other languages (Miskito). \nKriol shares similarities with many Caribbean English Creoles as far as phonology and pronunciations are concerned. Also, many of its words and structures are both lexically and phonologically similar to English, its superstrate language. Because it is English-based, all Kriol speakers can understand English. A number of linguists classify Belizean Kriol as a separate language, while others consider it to be a dialect of English.\nSpanish is the mother tongue of Mestizo and Central American refugees and is commonly spoken at home by 56.6% to 68.8% of the population. Maya dialects such as Q'eqchi', Mopan and Yucatec are spoken. Garifuna (which is Arawakan/Maipurean based, with elements of the Carib language, French, and Spanish) and the Plautdietsch and Pennsylvania German dialects of the Mennonites are spoken as well. Literacy currently stands at nearly 80%. In 2001, UNESCO declared the Garifuna language, dance, and music a \"Masterpiece of the Oral and Intangible Heritage of Humanity\". English is the primary language of public education, with Spanish taught in primary and secondary school as well. Bilingualism is highly encouraged, and therefore, very common.\nReligion.\nAccording to the 2010 census Catholics constitute 40.1% of the population of Belize, down from 49.6% in 2000 and 57.7% in 1991; Protestants constitute 31.7% of the population, with a slight growth in percentage for some groups since 2000 (8.5% Pentecostal; 5.5% Adventist; 4.6% Anglican; 3.8% Mennonite; 3.6% Baptist; 2.9% Methodist; 2.8% Nazarene); Jehovah's Witnesses are 1.7% of the population. 10.2% of Belizeans follow other religions (with a growth in percentage since 2000); amongst these there are followers of the indigenous Maya religion, Garifuna religion, Obeah and Myalism, and minorities of Mormons, Hindus, Buddhists, Muslims, Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00eds, Rastafarians and other. The Mennonites, of German descent, live mostly in the rural districts of Cayo and Orange Walk. 15.6% of the Belizean population do not adhere to any religion, up from 9.4% in 2000.\nBelizean Roman Catholic churches belong to the Diocese of Belize City-Belmopan; Anglican churches belong to the Diocese of Belize, part of the Church in the Province of the West Indies. Hinduism is followed by most Indian immigrants, while Islam is common among Middle Eastern immigrants and has gained a following among some Kriols. Catholics frequently visit the country for special gospel revivals. The Greek Orthodox Church has a presence in Santa Elena.\nThe Constitution of Belize provides for freedom of religion, and other laws and policies contribute to the generally free practice of religion. The Government at all levels protects this right in full against abuse, either by governmental or private actors. The Government generally respects religious freedom in practice. In 2008, the U.S. government received no reports of societal abuses or discrimination based on religious affiliation, belief, or practice.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "68964", "revid": "5795946", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68964", "title": "Politics of Belize", "text": "Belize is a parliamentary representative democratic monarchy, whereby the King of Belize serves as head of state and the prime minister is the head of government, and of a multi-party system. Executive power is exercised by the government. Legislative power is vested in both the government and the Parliament of Belize.\nThe party system is dominated by the centre-left People's United Party and the centre-right United Democratic Party. There have been other small parties that have participated at all levels of governmental elections in the past. Although none of these small political parties has ever won any significant number of seats or offices, their challenge has been growing over the years.\nConstitutional safeguards include freedom of speech, press, worship, movement, and association. The judiciary is independent of the executive and the legislature. Jurisprudence is based on English common law. People in Belize have elections to choose their government.\nExecutive branch.\nAs head of state, King Charles III is represented in Belize by a governor general who acts on the advice of the prime minister and the cabinet.\nBelize is a constitutional monarchy and parliamentary democracy based on the Westminster model. Belize is a member of the Commonwealth of Nations. King Charles III is head of state and is represented in the country by Governor-General Froyla Tzalam, a Belizean and Belize's third governor-general. The primary executive organ of government is the Cabinet led by a prime minister (head of government). Cabinet ministers are members of the majority political party in Parliament and usually hold elected seats in the National Assembly concurrently with their Cabinet positions. Cabinet members can also be drawn from the Senate.\nLegislative branch.\nThe National Assembly of Belize is a bicameral body which consists of a House of Representatives and a Senate. The 31 members of the House of Representatives are popularly elected to a maximum five-year term of office.\nThe Senate consists of 13 senators plus the president of the Senate. The senators are appointed by the governor general as follows: six on the advice of the prime minister, three on the advice of the leader of the opposition, one member on the advice of the Belize Council of Churches and the Evangelical Association of Churches, one on the advice of the Belize Chamber of Commerce and Industry and the Belize Business Bureau, one on the advice of the National Trade Union Congress of Belize and the Civil Society Steering Committee, and one on the advice of non-governmental organizations (NGOs) in good standing. The president of the Senate is then selected by the 13 senators, either from amongst themselves or from the general populace.\nThe president presides over the sessions of the Senate but ordinarily has no voice nor vote in the proceedings (as would an appointed senator). The president may cast the deciding vote on legislation. Where the president is selected from amongst the thirteen, the powers of senator and president of the Senate are vested in this one person. Otherwise, the president has no powers as would ordinarily be vested in a senator. Over the past few years, there has been much debate over whether the members of the Senate should be appointed or elected. This discussion continues as Belizeans continue to weigh the pros and cons of an elected versus appointed senate.\nAs of 2008, the Government of Belize was controlled by the United Democratic Party (Belize) (UDP) which has a confirmed majority in the House of Representatives after general elections of 7 February 2008. The former government, the People's United Party (PUP) is now in opposition, after having governed Belize from 28 August 1998 to 8 February 2008. The UDP previously governed Belize from 30 June 1993 to 27 August 1998; the PUP had governed from 4 September 1989 to 30 June 1993; and the UDP from 14 December 1984 to 4 September 1989. Before 1984, the PUP had dominated the electoral scene for more than 30 years and was the party in power when Belize became independent on 21 September 1981.\nConservative United Democratic Party led Belize 12 years under Prime Minister Dean Barrow, until general election in November 2020 was won by the opposition centre-left PUP party. The leader of the People\u2019s United Party (PUP) Johnny Brice\u00f1o, a former deputy prime minister, became the new prime minister of Belize on 13 November 2021.\nJudicial branch.\nMembers of the independent judiciary are appointed. The judicial system includes local magistrates grouped under the Magistrates' Court which hears less serious cases, the Supreme Court (chief justice) which hears murder and similarly serious cases, and the Court of Appeal, which hears appeals from convicted individuals seeking to have their sentences overturned. Cases may under certain circumstances be appealed to the Privy Council in London.\nIn 2001 Belize joined with most members of CARICOM to campaign for the establishment of the Caribbean Court of Justice. Belize is divided into six districts: Corozal District, Orange Walk District, Belize District, Cayo District, Stann Creek District, and Toledo District. Court cases are also heard in the capital city of Belmopan. The Supreme Court holds hearings from January to December of each year, starting in Belize City and then going to the districts; Magistrates' Court hears cases on most weekdays.\nMichelle Arana has served as the acting chief justice of the Supreme Court since the retirement of Kenneth Benjamin on 20 March 2020.\nA special Family Court has been set up to hear cases regarding child maintenance, domestic violence, and spousal abuse, and other similar cases. This court is located in downtown Belize City. A Quick Trial Court processes selected cases especially speedily.\nLocal government.\nBelize has a system of local government comprising four types of local authorities: city councils, town councils, village councils and community councils. The two city councils (Belize City and Belmopan) and seven town councils cover the urban population of the country, while village and community councils cover the rural population.\nCity and town councils consist of a mayor and a number of councillors (ten in Belize City, six in Belmopan and the towns). Mayors and councillors are directly elected to three-year terms, using the first past the post system. The most recent municipal elections were held in March 2006. The mayor (except in Belize City) acts as the chief executive of the city or town, and allocates portfolios to the other councillors.\nVillage councils consist of a chairperson and six councillors, who are directly elected by registered villagers. Village councils in their current form were established by the Village Councils Act 1999, and the first elections for village councils were held in March and April 2003.\nAccording to the Government of Belize website, \"urban authorities are responsible for street maintenance and lighting, drains, refuse collection and public cemeteries. They also have discretionary powers over other services including infrastructure, parks and playgrounds, markets and slaughter-houses, public libraries, public buildings and the amenities of the city or town center.\" Village and community councils have a more limited range of functions: they \"encourage and assist co-operation on economic and social development and general welfare\", and can run community centers.\nSome rural villages in Belize also have an alcalde: a local magistrate who has both an administrative and a judicial role. In addition to presiding over local courts, alcaldes are responsible for managing communal land and act as school officers. This form of local governance is practiced mainly in Mayan communities in Belize, but any rural community can choose to appoint an alcalde.\nDefence.\nThe Belize Defence Force (BDF), established in January 1973, consists of a light infantry force of regulars and reservists along with small air and maritime wings. The BDF, currently under the command of Brigadier General David Jones, assumed total defence responsibility from British Forces Belize (BFB) on 1 January 1994. The United Kingdom continues to maintain the British Army Training Support Unit Belize (BATSUB) to assist in the administration of the Belize Jungle School. The BDF receives military assistance from the United States and the United Kingdom.\nInternal security is the domain of the Belize Police Department, currently staffed by about 1,200 police officers established in all six districts. The commissioner of police is Crispin Jeffries (since April 2009)\nDrugs in Belize are controlled under the Misuse of Drugs Act.\nHowever, other types of crime are becoming more commonplace, and the murder rate has increased, owing to unsolved gang-related issues and the presence of drugs on the streets.\nIn 2012 the BDF had developed a new unit they call their intelligence cell. \"the Intelligence Cell is the unit that does the gathering of intelligence with respect to both our borders, national security and internal security.\" They travel around the country and to remote areas on Chinese-made Meilun motorbikes that were donated to the BDF.\nForeign relations.\nBelize-United States relations have traditionally been close and cordial. The United States is Belize's principal trading partner and major source of investment funds. It is also home to the largest Belizean community outside Belize, estimated to be 70,000 strong. Because Belize's economic growth and accompanying democratic political stability are important U.S. objectives, Belize benefits from the U.S. Caribbean Basin Initiative. The United States is the largest provider of economic assistance to Belize, contributing via various bilateral economic and military aid programmes.\nBelize is a member of the Commonwealth and was granted independence from the United Kingdom in 1981. The United Kingdom maintains a training centre for the army in Belize.\nIn order to strengthen its potential for economic and political development Belize has sought to build closer ties with the Spanish-speaking countries of Central America to complement its historical ties to the English-speaking Caribbean states.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "68965", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68965", "title": "Telecommunications in Belize", "text": " \nTelecommunications in Belize include radio, television, fixed and mobile telephones, and the Internet.\nInternet.\nInternet censorship and surveillance.\nThere are few government restrictions on access to the Internet and no credible reports that the government monitors e-mail or Internet chat rooms without judicial oversight. Prior to 2012, the government-owned telecommunications company blocked Voice over Internet Protocol (VOIP) services.\nThe law provides for freedom of speech and press and the government generally respects these rights in practice. The constitution prohibits arbitrary interference with privacy, family, home, or correspondence, and government authorities generally respect these prohibitions in practice. Law enforcement agencies may, with judicial oversight, intercept communications to obtain information in the interest of \"national security, public order, public morals, and public safety.\" The law defines communication broadly to encompass the possible interception of communication by post, telephone, facsimile, e-mails, chat, and/or text messages whether encrypted or unencrypted or whether provided by public or private providers.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "68966", "revid": "35437852", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68966", "title": "Covadonga", "text": "Covadonga (Asturian: Cuadonga, from \"cova domnica\" \"Cave of Our Lady\") is one of 11 parishes in Cangas de On\u00eds, a municipality within the province and autonomous community of Asturias, in Northwestern Spain. It is situated in the Picos de Europa mountains. With a permanent population of 55, the parish became a site of pilgrimage and a place of great cultural importance following the 722 Battle of Covadonga, which marked the beginning of the Spanish \"Reconquista\" of the Iberian Peninsula. The battle, which took place near the village in 722, was the first Christian victory in the Iberian Peninsula over the Arabs invading from north Africa under the Umayyad banner, and is often considered to be the beginning of the almost eight century-long effort to expel Muslim rulers governing Iberia during the \"Reconquista\".\nThe two lakes of Covadonga, Enol and Ercina, are located in the mountains above the town, and the road leading to the lakes is often featured in the Vuelta a Espa\u00f1a bicycle race. The Holy Cave of Covadonga is a monument dedicated to Our Lady of Covadonga that commemorates the Battle of Covadonga. It comprises the following:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "68967", "revid": "50077129", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68967", "title": "Tower of Siloam", "text": "Structure spoken about by Jesus of Nazareth according to the Christian Gospel of Luke\nThe Tower of Siloam (, \"ho pyrgos en t\u014d Sil\u014dam\") was a structure which fell upon 18 people, killing them. Siloam is a neighborhood south of Jerusalem's Old City. In the Gospel of Luke, Jesus refers to the tower's collapse and the death of the 18 in a discourse on the need for individual repentance. The incident is mentioned only once in the New Testament, in Luke 13:4, as part of a section with examples inviting repentance contained in verses 13:1\u20135.\nBiblical reference.\n\"Some who were present\" reported to Jesus that Pontius Pilate had killed some Galileans while they were worshiping. Their example was particularly gruesome since at the moment the Galileans were killed, they were worshiping God by offering sacrifices according to their Jewish religious law.\nApparently those making the report were looking for Jesus to offer some explanation of why bad things happen to normal people\u2014in this case even while they were bringing sacrifices to their God. The \"sin and calamity\" issue involves a presumption that an extraordinary tragedy in some way must signify extraordinary guilt. It assumes that a victim must have done something terrible for God to allow something so tragic to happen to them.\nJesus responded to the question, answering that the calamities suffered by the victims of the falling of the tower of Siloam were not related to their relative sinfulness. He then diverted the focus onto the interrogators, wanting them to focus on their own souls. \"Do you think that these Galileans were worse sinners than all the other Galileans, because they suffered in this way? No, I tell you; but unless you repent, you will all likewise perish.\"\n\"Or those eighteen on whom the tower in Siloam fell and killed them: do you think that they were worse offenders than all the others who lived in Jerusalem? No, I tell you; but unless you repent, you will all likewise perish.\u201d \"\nHis mention of the fall of the Tower of Siloam added a nuance to his prior point: accidents happen. Therefore, even in the absence of persecution, death can come unexpectedly to anyone, irrespective of how righteous or how sinful they are. He may have been emphasizing that the time granted by God for repentance is limited.\n\"Repent\" and \"perish\" in the New Testament.\nWhether due to persecution or misadventure, repentance is universally strongly and earnestly required by Jesus. The time is short, and therefore the time for repentance is now. In his response to both tragedies, Jesus dismissed personal guilt or causation as the reason they became victims. Instead, he turned the focus toward those wanting to hear \"why\".\nTwice in this brief passage, Jesus declared, \"...unless \"you\" repent, \"you\" too will all perish.\" Jesus's clear focus is on the need for everyone, individually, to \"repent\" of their sins before God. His answer cannot mean that all unrepentant people will die deservedly. Neither can it mean that people can escape physical death by repenting of their sins since eventually every living person dies. So \"perish\" here is something more than just to die a physical death.\nThe word \"perish\" in the New Testament very often refers to a terrible judgment following one's physical death. Since Jesus connects it directly to sin and says it can be escaped by repentance, \"perish\" here most logically refers to the final judgment. For example, in Jesus says, \"For God so loved the world that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him should not perish, but have everlasting life.\" Perishing is the biblical alternative to having everlasting life. Perishing is what happens to those who do not have eternal life. The same principle appears in John 10:28 where Jesus says, \"I give them eternal life, and they shall not \"perish\" for ever.\"\nIdentification.\nIn the eighteenth century, bible commentator Matthew Henry (1662-1714) referenced contemporary speculation by theologian Dr. Joseph Lightfoot, who identified the Pool of Siloam with the Pool of Bethesda and conjectured that the Tower of Siloam may have been supporting one of the five porches of the Pool of Bethesda mentioned in the fifth chapter of the Gospel of John, and that the 18 victims were killed by the falling porch. This was contested when the real Pool of Bethesda was discovered in north Jerusalem.\nIn 1920, Raymond Weill proposed that one of the towers flanking the Pilaster wall next to the Pool of Siloam could be the \"Tower of Siloam.\" In 2023, Nacshon Szanton demonstrated that indeed both towers were constructed in the Hellenistic period, and were rebuilt in the first century.\nOther Bible commentators have speculated that the Tower of Siloam may have been part of a Roman aqueduct connected to the Pool of Siloam. At least two aqueducts are known to have carried water to the pool from the Gihon Spring, but these aqueducts were built into the ground, not on elevated viaducts requiring towers.\nIt has also been speculated that the tower was a fortress built to defend the city, similar to the Phasael tower.\nArchaeology.\nArchaeological excavation has revealed what some Biblical scholars believe to be the ruins of the tower. If so, it is likely the ruins belong to a second tower that was rebuilt after the first tower collapsed. The ruins are a circular foundation approximately 6 metres across.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "68968", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68968", "title": "Transport in Belize", "text": " \nTransport in Belize mostly consists of bus transportation on Belize's roads. There are some navigable waterways. \nPublic transport.\nMost Belizeans travel the country using public buses as their primary form of transportation. In the larger towns and cities, such as Belize City or Belmopan, there are bus terminals. In smaller places, there are bus stops. However, the most common way of catching a bus is by flagging it down on the road. On the Northern and George Price Highways, bus service is more frequent than on smaller highways and other roads. In some locations, like small towns, buses may run only once a day. Buses are classified as either Regular runs (usual prices) or Express runs (faster, for slightly higher prices). Some Belizeans prefer riding bikes due to traffic, or the time of day.\nMany buses are Greyhounds or school buses, although newer express buses travel the two main highways.\nA new zoning system was implemented on Sunday, October 19, 2008. Accordingly, the country is divided into zones: Northern (highway/rural), Southern (highway/rural), Western (highway/rural).\nBus providers are restricted to assigned zones:\nThe major national bus lines are James, WestLine and BBOC.\nRoads.\nBelize has four major asphalt-paved two-lane roads: the Hummingbird Highway, Thomas Vincent Ramos Highway, George Price Highway, and Philip Goldson Highway. In 2023, upgrading of the Manuel Esquivel Highway to a BST-surface was completed; the road was formerly known as the Coastal Highway. Most other roads are unpaved, rough and in poor condition. Traffic changed to driving on the right-hand side of the road on 1 October 1961.\nMerchant marine.\nBelize is often considered a flag of convenience.\nAirports.\nCommercial aviation in Belize.\nAs of 2008, an estimated 44 airports and airstrips were in operation. The international airport is Philip S. W. Goldson International Airport in Ladyville, 9 miles north of Belize City. Currently, the international airport is served by several international and local carriers. A runway expansion program set to be completed in 2007 may allow larger aircraft to land and may encourage new direct or nonstop service from Europe and Canada. There is a smaller airport with local service in Belize City itself.\nTwo airlines, Tropic Air and Maya Island Air, provide service within the country. Both airlines have service originating both the main airport (Philip S. W. Goldson), and Belize City Municipal Airport in the city. From here they serve San Pedro, Caye Caulker, Dangriga, Placencia, Punta Gorda, and to Flores in Guatemala, and one airline serves Savannah at Big Creek. There is also service from San Pedro to Sarteneja and to Corozal Town. The local airlines generally fly small single-engine equipment, such as the Cessna Caravan.\nRailways.\nBelize has no railways. Dismantled lines include the \"Stann Creek Railway\" that linked Dangriga and Middlesex Estate; it was abandoned in 1937. Some of its bridges remain along the Hummingbird Highway.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "68969", "revid": "6326132", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68969", "title": "Belize Defence Force", "text": "Military of Belize\nThe Belize Defence Force (BDF) is the military of Belize, and is responsible for protecting the sovereignty of the country. The BDF is under the Ministry of National Defence and Border Security, which is currently headed by Hon. Oscar Mira; the BDF itself is commanded by Brigadier General Azariel Loria. In 2012, the Belizean government spent about $17 million on the military, constituting 1.08% of the country's gross domestic product (GDP).\nHistory.\nThe military of Belize dates back to 1817, when the Prince Regent Royal Honduras Militia, a volunteer organization, was founded. \nBetween 1817 and 1978, the military force in Belize has had ten different names:\nThe BDF was founded in 1978 following the disbanding of the Belize Volunteer Guard and the Police Special Force the year before.\nAfter Belize achieved independence in 1981 the United Kingdom maintained the deterrent British Forces Belize in the country to protect it from invasion by Guatemala. During the 1980s this included a battalion and No. 1417 Flight RAF of Harriers. The main British force left in 1994, three years after Guatemala recognised Belizean independence, but the United Kingdom maintained a training presence via the British Army Training and Support Unit Belize (BATSUB) and 25 Flight AAC until 2011 when the last British Forces left Ladyville Barracks, with the exception of seconded advisers. The BDF Maritime Wing became part of the Belize Coast Guard Service in November 2005.\nOn 15 October 2011, the BDF changed their issued military uniforms from American-based to digital versions since October due to concerns that criminals can easily acquire them.\nIn October 2015, due to rising tensions between Belize and Guatemala and the British cutback on military bases worldwide to focus on the war on terror in 2011, Belize asked the UK to bring BATSUB back; the British Government brought BATSUB to Belize once again.\nOrganization.\nThe BDF consists of:\n1st Infantry Battalion.\nThe First Infantry Battalion came into existence in 1993. This was as a direct result of the British Government decision to withdraw British Forces from Belize and handing over the Defence of Belize to Belizeans.\nSince that time, the battalion participated in extensive military exercises in Belize as well a selected part of its staff going abroad to participate in United Nations Peace Operations in Haiti.\nThe battalion consists of three infantry companies and a small HQ staff. It operates in the entire country alternating from the south to the north of the country. Presently, it is stationed at Fairweather Camp, Punta Gorda in the Toledo District with its two companies and in Belize City maintaining a presence to accomplish its task as stipulated in the Defence Act. Every February, the battalions alternate between Ladyville and Punta Gorda. The Battalion is equipped with small arms, a fleet of transportation, its integral logistics slice, and its own signalers. Other support is received from the Logistics unit in Price Barracks. Recruiting for the unit is done by the BDF Headquarters and its leaders are trained by the Logistics Company's sub-unit, Training Company. The leaders then train their subordinates to maintain its training standards. The companies also conduct live firing in the Mountain Pine Ridge Training Area periodically.\n2nd Infantry Battalion.\nSecond Infantry Battalion, a combination of male and female soldiers, was formed on 1 October 1994. The Battalion at that time had three Infantry Companies: Sierra, Alpha and Echo Company. For the period 31 October 2000 to 31 August 2002, the Battalion nomenclature was revoked and redesignated a Land Command. Becoming either Land Command South (LCS) or Land Command North (LCN) depending on the rotation. LCN comprises the Cayo District, a partition of the Hummingbird Highway, Belize, Orange Walk and Corozal Districts. LCS comprises the Toledo and Stann Creek Districts and a portion of the Hummingbird Highway. These are now presently designated Battalion Tactical Areas of Responsibility (Bn TAOR) and Command HQs were based on rotation between Price Barracks and Fairweather Camp in Punta Gorda.\nOn 31 August 2002, LCS and LCN was reverted to being Second Infantry Battalion. This was under the command of Lieutenant Colonel Reynolds Lewis. However, this time the Coys were Hotel, Gulf and Sierra Companies. During the tenure of Lieutenant Colonel R J Lewis, the idea of a Battalion Logo and Flag was originated. The idea was presented out within the Battalion and as a result produced the logo and Bn Emblem. The finished product was the result of the combined efforts of RSM 2 Bn, WO1 D O Castillo then a WO2, Pte August G, Pte Coc J and the artist Pte Cho D, not to overlook the efforts of Sgt L Sho and Sgt A Sho (Button) then Cpl for final graphics.\nThe Battalion Logo depicts all the colours of the Companies in the Battalion. Red and Green for Hotel Company, Red and Orange for Gulf Company and Black and White for Sierra Company. The grey background was the original Battalion colour, which was changed to blue as seen on the Bn Flag. The Cross Rifles signifies that we are Infantry personnel. The Jabiru was chosen as the Battalion Bird. The versatility of the Jabiru is what Second Battalion stands for. She nests high above the others both male and female incubate eggs thereby having an overview of all situations. She has one of the widest wing spans which produces ease in her soaring and a quick and graceful stream line for the attack. Her long legs support her and enable her to work in any terrain and conditions.\n1st Volunteer Battalion.\nIn 1866, the detachment of the 4th West Indian Regiment was defeated in battle by the Indians near Orange Walk. Volunteers were enrolled at Belize and sent to the Hondo to deal with Indian raids locally. In January 1881, the volunteers were formed into four companies, A, B, C and D. In 1897, the Belize Light Infantry Volunteers was formed. On 25 November 1904, a mounted Infantry Company was formed. This Company justified very early its existence by providing the volunteers with a valuable mobile force during the Indian disturbances in the Western District. \nOn 4 August 1914, the astounding news reached Belize that Great Britain had declared war on Germany in defence of Belgium. The force was immediately called out for active service. Later when another offer of men was accepted, 100 men under Lieutenant R. H. Furness was dispatched to England. These men made so good an impression that more men were asked for and a second contingent of over 400 men was sent over.\nMen eager to serve but debarred from going overseas for one reason or another joined the volunteers and swelled the strength to over 1000. Companies were formed in Corozal, Stann Creek, El Cayo and Orange Walk, and detachments at Benque Viejo and Hill Bank.\nIn August 1928, this force was disbanded and a new force of four platoons renamed the British Honduras Defence Force was formed. This force made its first public appearance on 4 February 1929, immediately after the great hurricane of 1931 which destroyed the City of Belize. The defence force rendered most valuable services. Some of the finest examples of discipline, loyalty and esprit de corps were demonstrated when men had lost their homes and in some cases their families quickly made their way to the drill hall before the fury of the devastating winds had abated in answer to the \"Fall in\" call of the bugle. The force was organized into rescue squads and all sorts of services were performed, from rescuing trapped persons, collecting the injured and the dead, to caring and feeding of babies. Men of all walks of life in Belize, members of the legislature, Heads of Government, department clerks and the ordinary laborer, seeing what organization and discipline could do, joined the defence force.\nSupport Battalion.\nThe Support Battalion commands the specialist platoons of the force. They are the Administrative Company, Mortar Platoon, Signal Platoon, Reece Platoon and the Combat Engineer Platoon. The Combat Engineer Platoon, formerly referred to as the Assault Pioneers in the early days of the BDF, has heavy equipment at its disposal and is trained to renovate and erect buildings as well as engage in construction. Part of the engineer unit is an Explosive Ordnance Device Team. Its role is to defuse or destroy bombs and engage in demolition work.\nAir Wing.\nSpecial Boat Unit.\nThe SBU's mandate includes mainly the entire country of Belize, all the rivers and the coast lines, which operates under the Air Wing. The unit is in charge of making sure that no illegal activities occur within the country of Belize in the rivers and the coastline. They have a variety of boats which includes outboards and jet drive, however they are moving more into the riverine capabilities because their mandate includes mostly rivers.\nTo distinguish them from the Belize Coast Guard, because their uniform is similar, people from the special boat unit wear blue digitals whereas the coast guard use full blue. The coast guard are mainly found along the seas whereas they restrict their presence to mainly the riverine areas.\nSpecial Assignment Group.\nThe Belize Special Assignment Group is the BDF's special forces unit. The Special Operations Force is responsible for special reconnaissance, direct actions, and military support.\nBelize Defence Force Band.\nThe BDF Band was formed on 1 January 1978 from the former Belize Volunteer Guard Band, under the mastership of the late Warrant Officer Class 1, Walter P. Lamb. The band was originally formed in 1947 from the North Caribbean Force (Battalion of Belize) fundamentally as a Drum &amp; Bugle Corps, at Mount Pleasant Creek, Central Farm in the Cayo District. In 1952, it added the brass section to the Drums &amp; Bugles Corps that was the nucleus of what would evolve into the existing BDF Band.\nThree reserve companies.\nThe BDF maintains three reserve companies.\nBritish Army Training and Support Unit Belize BATSUB.\nBritish Army Training Support Unit Belize (BATSUB), the successor of the former British Forces Belize, is the name given to the current British Army Garrison in Belize. The garrison is used primarily for jungle warfare training. As of 2012[ [update]], there are also 40 British Army personnel stationed in Belize.\nInternational cooperation.\nIn May 2024, the Belize Defence Force and Belize Coast Guard announced it would send 50 service members to Haiti, working alongside forces from the Bahamas, Jamaica, Benin, and Kenya to help the country deal with its nation-wide gang war. In September of that year, the BDF sent two sent two officers to Jamaica, announcing on Twitter that it \"will be collaborating with the Jamaica Defence Force as part of a multinational task force dedicated to supporting Haiti's restoration efforts.\"\nRanks and insignia.\nOfficers.\nThe rank insignia for commissioned officers for BDF.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "68970", "revid": "3496179", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68970", "title": "Foreign relations of Belize", "text": "Belize maintains 14 embassies to foreign countries, one consulate, and three missions to international organizations. In 1990, Belize became a member of the Organization of American States, and the Commonwealth of Nations in 1981.\nTo strengthen its potential for economic and political development, Belize has sought to build closer ties with the Spanish-speaking countries of Central America to complement its historical ties to the English-speaking Caribbean states. Recent foreign policy initiatives include joining with the other Central American countries in signing the CONCAUSA Agreement on regional sustainable development and becoming a full member of the Central American Integration System (SICA). Belize is a member of CARICOM which was founded in 1973.\nDiplomatic relations.\nList of countries with which Belize maintains diplomatic relations with:\nBelize and the Commonwealth of Nations.\nBelize has been a member state of the Commonwealth since 1981, when it became an independent Commonwealth realm.\nKing Charles III as King of Belize is viceregally represented by the Governor-General of Belize.\nMultilateral membership.\nBelize is a member of the following multilateral bodies.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "68971", "revid": "33145", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68971", "title": "Turtur", "text": "Genus of birds\nTurtur is a small genus of doves native to Sub-Saharan Africa. Species in this genus are known as wood doves.\nThe genus \"Turtur\" was introduced in 1783 by the Dutch naturalist Pieter Boddaert to accommodate the blue-spotted wood dove (\"Turtur afer\"). The word \"Turtur\" is Latin for \"turtle dove\".\nSpecies.\nThe genus contains five species:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "68972", "revid": "23551833", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68972", "title": "Geography of Benin", "text": " \nBenin, a narrow, key-shaped, north\u2013south strip of land in West Africa, lies between the Equator and the Tropic of Cancer. Its latitude ranges from 6\u00b030\u2032 N to 12\u00b030\u2032 N and its longitude from 1\u00b0 E to 3\u00b040\u2032 E. It is bounded by Togo to the west, Burkina Faso and Niger to the north, Nigeria to the east, and the Bight of Benin to the south.\nWith an area of , it is slightly bigger than the nation of Bulgaria. It extends from the Niger River in the north to the Atlantic Ocean in the south, a distance of . Although the coastline measures , the country measures about at its widest point.\nIt is one of the smaller countries in West Africa, about one eighth the size of Nigeria, its neighbor to the east. It is, however, twice as large as Togo, its neighbor to the west. A relief map of Benin shows that it has little variation in elevation, averaging in elevation.\nBiogeography.\nThe country can be divided into four main areas from the south to the north. The low-lying, sandy, coastal plain, which has a highest elevation of is, at most, wide. It is marshy and dotted with lakes and lagoons connected to the ocean. The plateaus of southern Benin, with an altitude ranging between , are split by valleys running north to south along the Couffo, Zou, and Oueme Rivers, an area that has been categorised by the World Wildlife Fund as part of the Guinean forest-savanna mosaic ecoregion. Then an area of flat lands dotted with rocky hills whose altitude seldom reaches extends around Nikki and Sav\u00e9. Finally, the Atacora mountain range extends along the northwest border and into Togo with the highest point, Mont Sokbaro, at .\nBenin has fields lying fallow, mangroves, and remnants of large sacred forests. Forest cover is around 28.% of the total land area, equivalent to 3,135,150 hectares (ha) of forest in 2020, down from 4,835,150 hectares (ha) in 1990. In 2020, naturally regenerating forest covered 3,112,150 hectares (ha) and planted forest covered 23,000 hectares (ha).\nIn the rest of the country, the savanna is covered with thorny scrubs and dotted with huge baobab trees. Some forests line the banks of rivers. In the north and the northwest of Benin the Reserve du W du Niger and Pendjari National Park attract tourists eager to see elephants, lions, antelopes, hippos and monkeys. The country formerly offered habitat for the endangered painted hunting dog, \"Lycaon pictus\", although this canid is considered to have been extirpated from Benin due to human population expansion. Woodlands comprise approximately 31 percent of Benin's land area.\nLocation:\nWestern Africa, bordering the North Atlantic Ocean, between Nigeria and Togo\nGeographic coordinates:\nContinent:\nAfrica\nArea:\n\"total:\"\n112 622\u00a0km2\n \"country comparison to the world:\" 102\n\"land:\"\n110 622\u00a0km2\n\"water:\"\n2 000\u00a0km2\nArea comparative\nLand boundaries:\n\"total:\"\n2 123\u00a0km\n\"border countries:\"\nBurkina Faso 386\u00a0km, Niger 277\u00a0km, Nigeria 809\u00a0km, Togo 651\u00a0km\nCoastline:\n121\u00a0km\nMaritime claims:\n\"territorial sea:\"\n200 nautical miles (370.4\u00a0km)\nClimate:\ntropical; hot, humid in south; semiarid in north\nTerrain:\nmostly flat to undulating plain; some hills and low mountains\nElevation extremes:\n\"lowest point:\"\nAtlantic Ocean 0 m\n\"highest point:\"\nMont Sokbaro 658 m\nNatural resources:\nsmall offshore oil deposits, limestone, marble, timber\nLand use:\n\"arable land:\" 23.94%\n\"permanent crops:\" 3.99%\n\"other:\" 72.06% (2012)\nIrrigated land: 230.4\u00a0km2 (2012)\n\"'Total renewable water resources:\" 26.39\u00a0km3 (2011)\nFreshwater withdrawal (domestic/industrial/agricultural):\n \"total:\" 0.13\u00a0km3/a (32%/23%/45%)\n \"per capita:\" 18.74 m3/a (2001)\nNatural hazards:\nhot, dry, dusty harmattan wind may affect north in December to March\nEnvironment \u2013 current issues:\ninadequate supplies of potable water; poaching threatens wildlife populations; deforestation; desertification\nEnvironment \u2013 international agreements:\n\"party to:\"\nBiodiversity, Climate Change, Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol Desertification, Endangered Species, Environmental Modification, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution, Wetlands, Whaling\nSandbanks create difficult access to a coast with no natural harbors, river mouths, or islands.\nClimate.\nBenin's climate is hot and humid. Annual rainfall in the coastal area averages , not particularly high for coastal West Africa. Benin has two rainy and two dry seasons. The principal rainy season is from April to late July, with a shorter less intense rainy period from late September to November. The main dry season is from December to April, with a short cooler dry season from late July to early September. Temperatures and humidity are high along the tropical coast. In Cotonou, the average maximum temperature is ; the minimum is . Variations in temperature increase when moving north through a savanna and plateau toward the Sahel. A dry wind from the Sahara called the harmattan blows from December to March. Grass dries up, the vegetation turns reddish brown, and a veil of fine dust hangs over the country, causing the skies to be overcast. It is also the season when farmers burn brush in the fields.\nExtreme points.\nThis is a list of the extreme points of Benin, the points that are farther north, south, east or west than any other location.\nLine notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "68974", "revid": "45920194", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68974", "title": "Frederick II, Holy Roman Emperor", "text": "Holy Roman Emperor from 1220 to 1250\nFrederick II (, , , ; 26 December 1194 \u2013 13 December 1250) was King of Sicily from 1198, King of Germany from 1212, King of Italy and Holy Roman Emperor from 1220 and King of Jerusalem from 1225. He was the son of Emperor Henry VI of the Hohenstaufen dynasty (the second son of Emperor Frederick Barbarossa) and Queen Constance I of Sicily of the Hauteville dynasty.\nFrederick was one of the most brilliant and powerful figures of the Middle Ages and ruled a vast area, beginning with Sicily and stretching through Italy all the way north to Germany. Viewing himself as a direct successor to the Roman emperors of antiquity, he was Emperor of the Romans from his papal coronation in 1220 until his death; he was also a claimant to the title of King of the Romans from 1212 and unopposed holder of that monarchy from 1215. As such, he was King of Germany, of Italy, and of Burgundy. At the age of three, he was crowned King of Sicily as co-ruler with his mother, Constance, Queen of Sicily, the daughter of Roger II of Sicily. His other royal title was King of Jerusalem by virtue of marriage and his connection with the Sixth Crusade. Frequently at war with the papacy, which was hemmed in between Frederick's lands in northern Italy and his Kingdom of Sicily (the \"Regno\") to the south, he was \"excommunicated four times between 1227 and his own death in 1250\", and was often vilified in pro-papal chronicles of the time and after. Pope Innocent IV went so far as to declare him \"preambulus Antichristi\" (forerunner of the Antichrist).\nFor his many-sided activities, dynamic personality and talents Frederick II has been called the greatest of all the German emperors, perhaps even of all medieval rulers. In the Kingdom of Sicily and much of Italy, Frederick built upon the work of his Norman predecessors and forged an early absolutist state bound together by an efficient secular bureaucracy. He was known by the appellation ('Wonder of the World'), enjoying a reputation as a Renaissance man and polymath even today: a visionary statesman, an inspired naturalist, scholar, mathematician, architect, poet and composer. Frederick also reportedly spoke six languages: Latin, Sicilian, Middle High German, Old French, Greek, and Arabic. As an avid patron of science and the arts, he played a major role in promoting literature through the Sicilian School of poetry. His magnificent Sicilian imperial-royal court in Palermo, beginning around 1220, was the cultural and intellectual hub of the early 13th century and saw the first use of a literary form of an Italo-Romance language, Sicilian. The poetry that emanated from the school had a significant influence on literature and on what was to become the modern Italian language. He was also the first monarch to formally outlaw trial by ordeal, which had come to be viewed as superstitious.\nThough still in a strong position at his death, Frederick's line did not long survive, and the House of Hohenstaufen came to an end. Furthermore, the Holy Roman Empire entered a long period of decline during the Great Interregnum. His complex political and cultural legacy has continued to attract fierce debate and fascination to this day.\nBirth and naming.\nBorn in Jesi, near Ancona, Italy, on 26 December 1194, Frederick was the son of Holy Roman Emperor Henry VI and Queen Constance I of Sicily. He was known as the \"puer Apuliae\" (son of Apulia). Frederick was baptised in Assisi, in the church of San Rufino. At birth, his mother named him Constantine. This name, a masculine form of his mother's name, served to identify him closely with both his Norman heritage and his imperial heritage (through Constantine the Great, the first Christian emperor). It was still his name at the time of his election as King of the Romans. He was only given his grandfathers' names, becoming Frederick Roger (or Roger Frederick), at his baptism when he was two years old. This dual name served the same purpose as Constantine: emphasising his dual heritage.\nFrederick's birth was accompanied by gossip and rumour on account of his mother's advanced age. According to Albert of Stade and Salimbene, he was not the son of Henry and Constance but was presented to Henry as his own after a faked pregnancy. His real father was variously described as a butcher of Jesi, a physician, a miller or a falconer. Frederick's birth was also associated with a prophecy of Merlin. According to Andrea Dandolo, writing at some distance but probably recording contemporary gossip, Henry doubted reports of his wife's pregnancy and was only convinced by consulting Joachim of Fiore, who confirmed that Frederick was his son by interpretation of Merlin's prophecy and the Erythraean Sibyl. A later legend claims that Constance gave birth in the public square of Jesi to silence doubters. Constance took unusual measures to prove her pregnancy and its legitimacy and Roger of Howden reports that she swore on the gospels before a papal legate that Frederick was her son by Henry. It is probable that these public acts of affirmation on account of her age gave rise to some false rumours.\nIn the spring of 1195, a few months after her husband Henry had been crowned king of Sicily and not long after the birth of her son, Empress Constance continued her journey to Palermo. After the unexpected death of his wife's nephew Tancred of Lecce, Henry had hurried over to assume power and to have himself crowned king. Frederick was entrusted to the care of the duchess of Spoleto, whose husband, Conrad I of Urslingen, had been named duke by Frederick Barbarossa. The young Frederick stayed in Foligno, a place located in papal territory and so under papal jurisdiction, until the death of his father, on 28 September 1197.\nMinority.\nIn 1196 at Frankfurt am Main the infant Frederick was elected King of the Romans and thus heir to his father's imperial crown. His rights in Germany were to end up disputed by Henry's brother Philip of Swabia and Otto of Brunswick. At the death of his father Henry VI in 1197, Frederick was in Italy, travelling towards Germany, when the bad news reached his guardian, Conrad of Spoleto. Frederick was hastily brought back to his mother Constance in Palermo, Sicily, where he was crowned King of Sicily on 17 May 1198, at just three years of age. Originally his title had been \"Romanorum et Sicilie rex\" (King of the Romans and Sicily), but in 1198, after Constance (who kept using title of Empress) found out that Philip of Swabia had been recognized by the Staufer supporters in Germany, she had her son renounce the title King of the Romans. She probably agreed with Philip that Frederick's prospects in Germany were hopeless. The decision strengthened Frederick's position in Sicily as this satisfied both Philip of Swabia and the Pope, who did not like the idea of a ruler who had authority in both Sicily and the North Alpine realm.\nConstance of Sicily was in her own right queen of Sicily, and she established herself as regent. Constance sided with the Pope who preferred that Sicily and the Germans were under separate governments. She renounced the authority over the Sicilian state church to the papal side, but only as Sicilian queen and not as empress, seemingly with the intention of keeping options open for Frederick. Upon Constance's death in 1198, Pope Innocent III succeeded as Frederick's guardian. Frederick's tutor during this period was Cencio, who would become Pope Honorius III. Markward of Annweiler, with the support of Henry's brother, Philip of Swabia, reclaimed the regency for himself and soon after invaded the Kingdom of Sicily. In 1200, with the help of Genoese ships, he landed in Sicily and one year later seized the young Frederick. He thus ruled Sicily until 1202, when he was succeeded by another German captain, William of Capparone, who kept Frederick under his control in the royal palace of Palermo until 1206. Frederick was subsequently under tutor Walter of Palearia, until, in 1208, he was declared of age. At that time he spoke five languages, Greek, Arabic, Latin, Proven\u00e7al and Sicilian. His first task was to reassert his power over Sicily and southern Italy, where local barons and adventurers had usurped most of the authority. Pope Innocent was in search of a diplomatic match for his protege Frederick, to enable him successful future alliances. Eventually Constance of Aragon, a widow of the late King of Hungary and double his age was found.\nFrederick\u2019s childhood was turbulent as he passed through the hands of a collection of self-serving, scheming regents while the Sicilian nobility grabbed much of the royal demesne and wealth. Some chroniclers report that the young king was so destitute that he had to seek shelter among the citizens of Palermo. Frederick had no stable intimate relationships apart from, perhaps, the few of his personal household. However, the young king quickly grew to be a formidable and fiercely individualistic personality. He seems to have been highly precocious and insatiably inquisitive, impatient of restraint, with coarse manners, and already convinced of his own sense of royalty. Even in his younger years, Frederick was an avid reader and passionately interested in nature and the study of the universe. Some reports have him freely wandering the streets of cosmopolitan Palermo, talking and arguing with all manner of people, and always devouring knowledge.\nSecuring the Imperial Crown.\nOtto of Brunswick had been crowned Holy Roman Emperor by Pope Innocent III in October 1209. In southern Italy, Otto became the champion of those noblemen and barons who feared Frederick's increasingly strong measures to check their power, such as the dismissal of the pro-noble Walter of Palearia. The new emperor invaded Italy, where he reached Calabria without meeting much resistance.\nIn response, Innocent sided against Otto, and in September 1211 at the Diet of Nuremberg Frederick was elected \"in absentia\" as German King by a rebellious faction backed by the pope. Innocent also excommunicated Otto, who was forced to return to Germany. Frederick sailed to Gaeta with a small following. He agreed with the pope on a future separation between the Sicilian and Imperial titles and named his wife Constance as regent. Passing through Lombardy and Engadin, he reached Konstanz in September 1212, preceding Otto by a few hours.\nFrederick was crowned king on 9 December 1212 in Mainz. Frederick's authority in Germany remained tenuous, and he was recognized only in southern Germany. In the region of northern Germany, the centre of Guelph power, Otto continued to hold the reins of royal and imperial power despite his excommunication. Otto's decisive military defeat at the Bouvines forced him to withdraw to the Guelph hereditary lands where, virtually without supporters, he died in 1218.\nThe German princes, supported by Innocent III, again elected Frederick king of Germany in 1215, and he was crowned king in Aachen in mid-July 1215 by one of the three German archbishops. Frederick then astonished the crowd by taking the cross and calling upon the nobles present to do the same. It was not until another five years had passed, and only after further negotiations between Frederick, Innocent III, and Honorius III \u2013 who succeeded to the papacy after Innocent's death in 1216 \u2013 that Frederick was crowned Holy Roman Emperor in Rome by Honorius III, on 22 November 1220. At the same time, Frederick's oldest son Henry took the title of King of the Romans.\nUnlike most Holy Roman emperors, Frederick spent few years in Germany. In 1218, he helped King Philip II of France and Odo III, Duke of Burgundy, to bring an end to the War of Succession in Champagne (France) by invading Lorraine, capturing and burning Nancy, capturing Theobald I, Duke of Lorraine and forcing him to withdraw his support from Erard of Brienne-Ramerupt. After his coronation in 1220, Frederick remained either in the Kingdom of Sicily or on Crusade until 1235, when he made his last journey to Germany. He returned to Italy in 1237 and stayed there for the remaining thirteen years of his life, represented in Germany by his son Conrad.\nRestoring the Kingdom of Sicily.\nAfter his imperial coronation in Rome, Frederick crossed into southern Italy determined to rebuild the authority of the Sicilian crown which had heavily waned over the preceding two decades. Under his grandfather, Roger II, and successors William I and William II, the Norman kingdom of Sicily was arguably the most centralized state in all of Europe. However, during the years of Frederick's minority, subsequent regents had allowed the nobility to grab much of the Crown's power and domain. The Crown was weak and its effective power did not extend far beyond Palermo. \nIn the first of three great legislative acts, Frederick issued the Assizes of Capua soon after his return to the kingdom in December 1220 which built on the Assizes of Ariano of Roger II. The legislation was already prepared before Frederick's return, down to the last detail, and he seized the earliest opportunity to publish them in the first city of the realm in which he stopped. This shows the Emperor's impatience to immediately bring home to his subjects that the time of lawlessness was at an end. The Assizes of Capua demanded the restoration of all royal lands and castles to the state they were at the death of William II, the last legitimate Norman king. All privileges accorded to anyone whatsoever since the end of William II's reign were ordered to submit for confirmation to the Royal Chancery before Easter 1221 for the mainland provinces and before Whitsun of the same year for the island of Sicily. This sweeping decree covered the entirety of royal grants made during the last thirty years, from the greatest fiefs to the smallest individual holdings, along with the collection of tolls and other perquisites. Spurious legal means and forged documents used to grab land from the royal domain since the death of William II were comprehensively revoked pending revision by the Royal Chancery, creating an ideal means of determining which legal fiefs and privileges really did exist. This proved a shrewd stroke and returned the monopoly on justice to the Crown. The laws promulgated at Capua also regulated the present tenure of fiefs and provided for their future control by the Emperor. Their holders could neither marry, nor could their children inherit directly, without the sovereign's consent, affording Frederick the possibility for constant reversion of fiefs, and a potent means of keeping control over not only the actual holder but his heir as well.\nThe Assizes of the Capua created the legal basis for Frederick's action against opposition to his supremacy and the resumption of crown lands and castles. Frederick used legal trickery to confiscate the lands of some of the most powerful barons and exile them from the kingdom. The Emperor launched a campaign against the barons who did not submit to the decree. The barons who resisted him were besieged in their castles and, when captured, either exiled or sometimes executed and their families sold into slavery. However, the Emperor did not conduct these operations in person. He delegated important barons to subdue opposition then used the lesser nobility against these barons, and resorted to the most Machiavellian of means to break resistance. He wrote to one of his captains:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Pretend some business and warily call the Castellan to you. Seize on him if you can and keep him till he cause the castle to be surrendered to you.\nOver the course of 1221\u20131222, Frederick had subdued most of the resistance on the mainland and restored much of the royal domain. A whole series of further fortresses were conquered, destroyed or newly fortified, amongst them Naples, Gaeta, Aversa, and Foggia. Only Thomas of Celano, Count of Molise offered serious resistance in his redoubts in the Abruzzi. After a long campaign, however, his fortresses of Roccamandolfi and Ovindoli surrendered and he was banished. As punishment for its resistance, the town of Celano was razed and its inhabitants deported to Sicily. The Count of Molise's defeat saw the end of baronial resistance on the mainland and the power of the greater nobility had been utterly broken. Frederick II began to construct fortresses across the mainland to impose order across the region. These fortresses were massive and utilitarian in nature, showing nothing but a mathematically simple design of stern right-angles, with no residential quarters, and garrisoned by state troops at the expense of the local nobility. The loosely-knit framework of a feudal kingdom, fractured by years of decline, was steadily succeeded by the firm \"architecture of a state\".\nIn the spring of 1221, Frederick issued assizes in Messina concerned with\nmunicipal administration. These included regulations for public order, prostitution, and distinctive clothing for Jews. The maritime powers of Genoa and Pisa had long dominated trade in Sicily, taking advantage of the instability during the last decades. Frederick ejected Genoese traders from Syracuse and withdrew all concessions granted to Genoa in Palermo, Messina,\nTrapani, and other ports during the last three decades. Genoese and Pisan warehouses were confiscated by the state. Frederick also reestablished the Sicilian navy with provisions based on older Norman laws whereby certain fief holders, including cities and towns of the realm, were bound to furnish timbers or money for shipbuilding and provide for the maintenance of the fleet. These laws were brought into full force again, while Frederick erected new state wharves. By the end of 1221, the emperor already had two squadrons at sea. In the course of Frederick's reign, the Sicilian fleet again became a formidable force in the Mediterranean, rivalled only by those of the maritime republics.\nWorried by the independent rule the Sicilian Muslim population developed since his departure in 1212, Frederick waged conflict against the enclaves of Muslim resistance which had long refused to recognize royal authority. The campaign against the Muslim resistance in mountain holds was difficult, but several were steadily occupied. According to one account, the leader of the rebels, Amir Ibn Abbad, was compelled to sue for peace to Frederick who, incensed by the former\u2019s mistreatment of imperial messengers, tore open the Amir\u2019s side with his spur, then had both the Amir and his sons hanged. Between 1221 and the 1230s, the Muslim population of Sicily was deported on mainland Italy. The town of Lucera was emptied of its Christian inhabitants and replaced with the deported Muslims of Sicily who were allowed complete religious autonomy in exchange for a special tax. Frederick enlisted six hundred as his personal bodyguards and several thousand as a relatively large standing army. The deportation and resettlement of the Sicilian Muslims revealed the Emperor\u2019s \"rare enlightenment\" and extraordinary objectivity among his contemporaries, proving to be a masterstroke of bold statecraft; Frederick had not only turned the rebellious Muslims of Sicily into obedient and valuable subjects, totally dependent on his protection but also secured a permanent military force whose loyalty could be relied on against his Christian enemies or papal hostility.\nIn the space of a few years, Frederick II had restored royal authority in the kingdom of Sicily and reversed several decades of decline in the realm. The kingdom had been revived and once again stood centre stage in European politics. During this process, the Emperor had shown himself to be an astute and devious politician, as well as an inventive state-builder. His reputation as a driven and energetic monarch spread, adding to his already semi-legendary status. The Capuan Assizes laid the groundwork for the broad reorganization of government which Frederick would expand dramatically with the Constitutions of Melfi in 1231, leaving behind a lasting influence on the history of European statehood. By his actions, Frederick could rely on a formidable power base from which he could launch his grand ambitions. The kingdom of Sicily would provide the bulk of his immense resources and remain the jewel among his vast collection of territories. Over the course of the Emperor's reign, the \"Regno\" would become the most sophisticated European state of the Middle Ages and a vibrant epicentre of culture in the Mediterranean. Frederick's firm grip on his southern kingdom would survive invasion, conspiracy, excommunications, and war with his enemies in Lombardy and the papacy. The strong position he bequeathed to his successors was fundamentally rooted in the \"Regno\" and was a much-coveted prize by the enemies of the Hohenstaufen, but it eventually suffered disintegration and fracture under the Angevins later in the 13th century.\nForeign policy and wars.\nThe Fifth Crusade and early policies in northern Italy.\nAt the time he was elected King of the Romans, Frederick promised to go on a crusade. He continually delayed, however, and, in spite of his renewal of this vow at his coronation as the King of Germany, he did not travel to Egypt with the armies of the Fifth Crusade in 1217. He sent forces to Egypt under the command of Louis I, Duke of Bavaria, but constant expectation of his arrival caused papal legate Pelagius to reject Ayyubid sultan Al-Kamil's offer to restore the Latin Kingdom of Jerusalem to the crusaders in exchange for their withdrawal from Egypt and caused the Crusade to continually stall in anticipation of his ever-delayed arrival. The crusade ended in failure with the loss of Damietta in 1221. Frederick was blamed by both Pope Honorius III and the general Christian populace for this calamitous defeat.\nIn 1225, after agreeing with Pope Honorius to launch a Crusade before 1228, Frederick summoned an imperial Diet at Cremona, the main pro-imperial city in Lombardy: the main arguments for holding the Diet would be to continue the struggle against heresy, to organize the crusade and, above all, to restore the imperial power in northern Italy, which had long been usurped by the numerous communes located there. Those assembled responded with the reformation of the Lombard League, which had already defeated his grandfather Frederick Barbarossa in the 12th century, and again Milan was chosen as the league's leader. The Diet was cancelled, however, and the situation was stabilized only through a compromise reached by Honorius between Frederick and the league. During his sojourn in northern Italy, Frederick also invested the Teutonic Order with the territories in what would become East Prussia, starting what was later called the Northern Crusade.\nFrederick was distracted with the League when in June 1226 Louis VIII of France laid siege to Avignon, an imperial city. The barons of the French army sent a letter to Frederick defending their action as a military necessity, and a few days after the start of the siege Henry (VII) ratified an alliance with France that had been signed in 1223.\nThe Sixth Crusade.\nProblems of stability within the empire delayed Frederick's departure on the crusade. It was not until 1225, when, by proxy, Frederick had married Isabella II of Jerusalem, heiress to the Kingdom of Jerusalem, that his departure seemed assured. Frederick immediately saw to it that his new father-in-law John of Brienne, the current king of Jerusalem, was dispossessed and his rights transferred to the emperor. In August 1227, Frederick set out for the Holy Land from Brindisi but was forced to return when he was struck down by an epidemic that had broken out. Even the master of the Teutonic Knights, Hermann of Salza, recommended that he return to the mainland to recuperate. On 29 September 1227, Frederick was excommunicated by Pope Gregory IX for failing to honour his crusading pledge.\nMany contemporary chroniclers doubted the sincerity of Frederick's illness, and their attitude may be explained by their pro-papal leanings. Roger of Wendover, a chronicler of the time, wrote that Frederick:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;went to the Mediterranean sea, and embarked with a small retinue; but after pretending to make for the Holy Land for three days, he said that he was seized with a sudden illness [...] this conduct of the emperor redounded much to his disgrace, and to the injury of the whole business of the crusade.\nFrederick eventually sailed again from Brindisi in June 1228. The pope, still Gregory IX, regarded that action as a provocation, since, as an excommunicate, Frederick was technically not capable of conducting a crusade, and he excommunicated the emperor a second time. Frederick reached Acre in September. Many of the local nobility, the Templars, and Hospitallers were therefore reluctant to offer overt support. Since the crusading army was already a small force, Frederick negotiated along the lines of a previous agreement he had intended to broker with the Ayyubid sultan, Al-Kamil. The treaty, signed in February 1229, resulted in the restitution of Jerusalem, Nazareth, Bethlehem, and a small coastal strip to the Kingdom of Jerusalem, though there are disagreements as to the extent of the territory returned.\nThe treaty also stipulated that the Dome of the Rock and al-Aqsa Mosque were to remain under Muslim control and that the city of Jerusalem would remain without fortifications. Virtually all other crusaders, including the Templars and Hospitallers, condemned this deal as a political ploy on the part of Frederick to regain his kingdom while betraying the cause of the Crusaders. Al-Kamil, who was nervous about possible war with his relatives who ruled Syria and Mesopotamia, wished to avoid further trouble from the Christians, at least until his domestic rivals were subdued.\nThe crusade ended in a truce and in Frederick's coronation as King of Jerusalem on 18 March 1229, although this was technically improper. Frederick's wife Isabella, the heiress, had died, leaving their infant son Conrad as rightful king. There is also disagreement as to whether the \"coronation\" was a coronation at all, as a letter written by Frederick to Henry III of England suggests that the crown he placed on his own head was in fact the imperial crown of the Romans.\nAt his coronation, he may have worn the red silk mantle that had been crafted during the reign of Roger II. It bore an Arabic inscription indicating that the robe dated from the year 528 in the Muslim calendar (1133-34), and incorporated a generic benediction, wishing its wearer \"vast prosperity, great generosity and high splendour, fame and magnificent endowments, and the fulfilment of his wishes and hopes. May his days and nights go in pleasure without end or change.\" This coronation robe can be found today in the \"Schatzkammer\" of the Kunsthistorisches Museum in Vienna.\nIn any case, Gerald of Lausanne, the Latin Patriarch of Jerusalem, did not attend the ceremony; indeed, the next day the Bishop of Caesarea arrived to place the city under interdict on the patriarch's orders. Frederick's further attempts to rule over the Kingdom of Jerusalem were met by resistance on the part of the barons, led by John of Ibelin, Lord of Beirut. In the mid-1230s, Frederick's viceroy was forced to leave Acre, and in 1244, following a siege, Jerusalem itself was lost again to a new Muslim offensive.\nWhilst Frederick's seeming bloodless recovery of Jerusalem for the cross brought him great prestige in some European circles, his decision to complete the crusade while excommunicated provoked Church hostility. Although in 1230 the Pope lifted Frederick's excommunication, this decision was taken for a variety of reasons related to the political situation in Europe. Of Frederick's crusade, Philip of Novara, a chronicler of the period, said: \"The emperor left Acre [after the conclusion of the truce]; hated, cursed, and vilified.\" Overall this crusade, arguably the first successful one since the First Crusade, was adversely affected by the Church's refusal to support the emperor's settlement as an excommunicate. Because of this and the papal invasion of his Sicilian kingdom, Frederick was compelled to leave behind the kingdom of Jerusalem torn between his agents and the local nobility, a civil war known as the War of the Lombards.\nThe itinerant Joachimite preachers and many radical Franciscans, the Spirituals, supported Frederick. Against the interdict pronounced on his lands, the preachers condemned the Pope and continued to minister the sacraments and grant absolutions. Brother Arnold in Swabia proclaimed the Second Coming for 1260, at which time Frederick would then confiscate the riches of Rome and distribute them among the poor, the \"only true Christians\".\nWar of the Keys.\nDuring Frederick's stay in the Holy Land, his regent, Rainald of Spoleto, had attacked the March of Ancona and the Duchy of Spoleto. Gregory IX recruited an army under John of Brienne and, in 1229, invaded southern Italy. His troops overcame an initial resistance at Montecassino and reached into Campania as far as the Volturno\u2013Irpino. Frederick arrived at Brindisi in June 1229. He quickly recovered the lost territories, and tried and condemned the rebel barons, but avoided crossing the borders of the Papal States.\nThe war came to an end with the Treaty of San Germano in July 1230. On 28 August, in a public ceremony in Ceprano, the papal legates Thomas of Capua and Giovanni Colonna absolved Frederick and lifted his excommunication. The emperor personally met Gregory IX at Anagni, making some concessions to the church in Sicily. He also issued the Constitutions of Melfi (August 1231) to solve the political and administrative problems of the country, which had dramatically been shown by the recent war.\nHenry's revolt.\nWhile he may have temporarily made his peace with the pope, Frederick found the German princes another matter. Frederick's son Henry VII (who was born 1211 in Sicily, son of Frederick's first wife Constance of Aragon) had caused their discontent with an aggressive policy against their privileges. This forced Henry to a complete capitulation, and the \"Statutum in favorem principum\" (\"Statute in favour of the princes\"), issued at Worms, deprived the emperor of much of his sovereignty in Germany. Frederick summoned Henry to a meeting, which was held at Aquileia in 1232. Henry confirmed his submission, but Frederick was nevertheless compelled to confirm the \"Statutum\" at Cividale soon afterwards.\nThe situation for Frederick was also problematic in Lombardy after all the emperor's attempts to restore the imperial authority in Lombardy with the help of Gregory IX (at the time, ousted from Rome by a revolt) turned to nothing in 1233. In the meantime Henry in Germany had returned to an anti-princes policy, against his father's will: Frederick thus obtained his excommunication from Gregory IX (July 1234). Henry tried to muster an opposition in Germany and asked the Lombard cities to block the Alpine passes. In May 1235, Frederick went to Germany, taking with him no army, only a sumptuous entourage as a display of his power and wealth. News of his arrival spread quickly and the rebellion disintegrated. As soon as July, he was able to force his son to renounce the crown and all his lands at Worms, where Henry was tried and imprisoned. Henry remained a prisoner in Apulia for the rest of his life until he reportedly committed suicide. Frederick II skillfully turned the complex challenge of Henry's rebellion into a chance to introduce \"thorough and groundbreaking\" reform of Germany and the way the empire was ruled. The Mainz Landfriede or \"Constitutio Pacis\", decreed at the Imperial Diet of 1235, became one of the basic laws of the empire and provided that the princes should share the burden of local government in Germany. It was a testament to Frederick's considerable political strength, his increased prestige during the early 1230s, and sheer overpowering might that he succeeded in securing their support and rebinding them to Hohenstaufen power.\nIn Germany, the Hohenstaufen and the Guelphs reconciled in 1235. Otto the Child, the grandson of Henry the Lion, had been deposed as Duke of Bavaria and Saxony in 1180, conveying the allodial Guelphic possessions to Frederick, who in return enfeoffed Otto with the same lands and additional former imperial possessions as the newly established Duke of Brunswick-L\u00fcneburg, ending the unclear status of the German Guelphs, who had been left without title and rank after 1180, and encouraging their cooperation.\nThe war for Lombardy and Italy.\nWith peace north of the Alps, Frederick raised an army from the German princes to suppress the rebel cities in Lombardy. Gregory tried to stop the invasion with diplomatic moves but in vain. During his descent to Italy, Frederick had to divert his troops to quell a rebellion of Frederick II, Duke of Austria. At Vienna, in February 1237, he obtained the title of King of the Romans for his 9-year-old son Conrad.\nAfter the failure of the negotiations between the Lombard cities, the pope and the imperial diplomats, Frederick invaded Lombardy from Verona. In November 1237 he won a great victory over the Lombard League at the Battle of Cortenuova, displaying his capability as a strategist and battlefield leader able to manoeuvre and prevail in difficult situations. Frederick celebrated the victory with a triumph in Cremona in the manner of an ancient Roman emperor, with the captured \"carroccio\" (later sent to the commune of Rome) and an elephant. The imperial victory at Cortenuova sent shockwaves around Europe and burnished Frederick\u2019s already legendary status. Now at the zenith of his power, Frederick's political preeminence was seemingly unassailable and his hegemony was recognized across almost all of Latin Christendom. Not since the days of his father and grandfather, or perhaps even since the heyday of the Ottonians or Salians, had imperial sovereignty been in such a strong position. Frederick was the master of Europe. \nWith his imperial supremacy now apparently secure, Frederick rejected any suit for conditional peace from his Lombard enemies, even from Milan, his most implacable foe among the cities, which had sent a great sum of money. Perhaps from sober political calculation in light of years of Milanese opposition or simply hatred of the city, he was convinced that only complete military subjection could finally ensure imperial dominance. The Emperor believed, perhaps, that any peace conducted with the Milanese\u2014which must include the imposition of imperial rule in the city by his official\u2014would fail because the Milanese would quickly overthrow his representatives after his departure from the region. Frederick's demand for total surrender spurred further resistance from Milan, Brescia, Bologna, and Piacenza. In the spring of 1238 Frederick summoned a vast international army to aid in his campaign against the remaining insurgent cities, gathering troops from England, France, Hungary, the Nicene Empire, and even a contingent sent by Muslim sultans in the east. From June, he besieged Brescia. After savage fighting in which the emperor himself was nearly captured, Frederick was surprised at the city's continued defiance in the face of his large army and sent emissaries to negotiate its surrender. Frederick\u2019s chief engineer was captured and forced to work against the besieging imperial forces. The Brescians rejected the emperor's terms and the siege continued into September when torrential rains prevented any assault. After a last unsuccessful attack in October, Frederick was forced to raise the siege. Frederick's prestige suffered a blow and the \"legend of the emperor's invincibility\" had been damaged. Regrouping as the year closed, it was not Frederick's political nous which failed him but a combination of bad luck and his incorrect assessment of the military resources required to subjugate the last few holdouts against imperial authority in northern Italy.\nGregory IX sensed vulnerability and Frederick received the news of his excommunication by the pope in the first months of 1239 while his court was in Padua. The emperor responded by expelling the Franciscans and the Dominicans from Lombardy, taking hostages from important northern Italian families, and electing his son Enzo as Legate General and Imperial vicar of Lombardy. Enzo soon annexed the Romagna, Marche, and the Duchy of Spoleto, nominally part of the Papal States. The emperor ordered Enzo to destroy the Republic of Venice, which had sent some ships against Sicily. In the \"Regno\" itself, Frederick remorselessly purged the clergy of any of Gregory\u2019s supporters: expelling mendicant friars, arresting suspect priests, replacing wavering bishops with loyal supporters, and filling vacant bishoprics with trusted allies. The Sicilian church effectively became independent of Rome and Frederick\u2019s close advisor, Berard of Castagna, Archbishop of Palermo, was appointed its nominal head. In December of that year, Frederick entered Tuscany and spent Christmas in Pisa. In January 1240, Frederick triumphantly entered Foligno followed by Viterbo, whence he aimed to finally conquer Rome to restore the ancient splendours of the Empire. Frederick's plan to attack Rome at that time, however, did not come to fruition as he chose to leave for southern Italy where a papal-incited rebellion flared in Apulia. In southern Italy, Frederick attacked and razed the papal enclaves of St Angelo and Benevento. The Emperor remained at the very apex of his power.\nIn the meantime, the Ghibelline city of Ferrara had fallen, and Frederick swept his way northwards capturing Ravenna and, after another long siege, Faenza. The people of Forl\u00ec, which had kept its Ghibelline stance even after the collapse of Hohenstaufen power, offered their loyal support during the capture of the rival city: as a sign of gratitude, they were granted an augmentation of the communal coat-of-arms with the Hohenstaufen eagle, together with other privileges. This episode shows how the independent cities used the rivalry between the Empire and the Pope as a means to obtain maximum advantage for themselves.\nAt this time, Gregory considered yielding. A truce occurred and peace negotiations began. Direct peace negotiations ultimately failed and Gregory called for a General Council. Frederick and his allies, however, dashed Gregory's plan for a General Council when they intercepted a delegation of prelates travelling to Rome in a Genoese fleet at the crushing Battle of Giglio (1241), capturing almost all of the high dignitaries and taking thousands of prisoners along with most of the fleet. The emperor proclaimed his victory to be divine judgment and a symbol against the illegality of his persecution by Gregory. \nFrederick then directed his army toward Rome and the Pope, burning and destroying Umbria as he advanced. Then, just as the Emperor's forces were ready to attack Rome, Gregory died on 22 August 1241. Recognizing that an assault on Rome could prove both unsuccessful and detrimental to broader European perception of his cause, Frederick attempted to show that the war was not directed against the Church of Rome but against the Pope by withdrawing his troops and freeing from prison in Capua two cardinals he had captured at Giglio, Otto of Tonengo\u2014whom he had befriended and made into a staunch ally\u2014and James of Pecorara. Frederick then travelled to the \"Regno\" to await the election of a new pope. Even so, his supposedly withdrawal from a direct attack on Rome and the Curia proved a cynical ploy. Based in the south, Frederick proactively interfered in the papal election. During the \"sede vacante\", the imperial armies continued to surround Rome, blocking the arrival of some cardinal electors known to be hostile to the Emperor\u2019s interests. Unable to reach a consensus, the cardinals were locked in a monastery called the Septasolium by the Roman civic officials, eventually settling on one of their oldest and most feeble members, Goffredo da Castiglione, in late October 1241. The new pope, Celestine IV, was more amenable to the imperial cause. However, the conditions within the monastery seemed to have contributed to his death soon after the election the following November. After Celestine IV's death, the war on the peninsula resumed and the cardinals dispersed for over a year and a half before coming together in Anagni to elect a new pope. The Emperor took advantage of the papal vacancy to press his supremacy across most of Italy, except for some of the hold-out Lombard cities, and refine his newly unified imperial Italo-Sicilian regime. Frederick was still at the height of his power and his willingness to pointedly prolong the papal election process marked an important milestone. This episode was the first of many protracted \"sede vacantes\" of the later Middle Ages and demonstrated how, during the struggle between empire and papacy, the overt polarization of the latter steadily increased\u2014this culminated in the effective subsuming of the papacy to the French monarchy by the 14th century.\nMongol raids.\nIn 1241\u20131242, the forces of the Mongol Empire decisively defeated the armies of Hungary and Poland and devastated their countryside and all their unfortified settlements. King B\u00e9la IV of Hungary appealed to Frederick for aid, but Frederick, being in dispute with the Hungarian king for some time (as Bela had sided with the Papacy against him) and not wanting to commit to a major military expedition so readily, refused. He was unwilling to cross into Hungary, and although he went about unifying his magnates and other monarchs to potentially face a Mongol invasion, he specifically took his vow for the defence of the empire on \"this side of the Alps\".\nFrederick was aware of the danger the Mongols posed, and grimly assessed the situation, but also tried to use it as leverage over the Papacy to frame himself as the protector of Christendom. While he called them traitorous pagans, Frederick expressed admiration for Mongol military prowess after hearing of their deeds, in particular their able commanders and fierce discipline and obedience, judging the latter to be the greatest source of their success. He called a levy throughout Germany while the Mongols were busy raiding Hungary. In mid-1241, Frederick dispersed his army back to their holdfasts as the Mongols preoccupied themselves with the lands east of the Danube, attempting to smash all Hungarian resistance. He subsequently ordered his vassals to strengthen their defences, adopt a defensive posture, and gather large numbers of crossbowmen.\nA chronicler reports that Frederick received a demand of submission from Batu Khan at some time, which he ignored. Frederick II apparently kept up to date on the Mongols' activities, as a letter from the emperor dated June 1241 comments that the Mongols were now using looted Hungarian armour. On 20 June in Faenza, the emperor issued the \"Encyclica contra Tartaros\", an encyclical letter announcing the fall of Kiev, the invasion of Hungary and the threat to Germany, and requesting each Christian nation to devote its proper quota of men and arms to the defense of Christendom. According to Matthew of Paris's copy of the encyclical, it was addressed to the Catholic nations\u2014France, Spain, Wales, Ireland, England, Swabia, Denmark, Italy, Burgundy, Apulia, Crete, Cyprus, Sicily, Scotland and Norway\u2014each addressed according to its own national stereotype. Richard of San Germano states that copies were sent to all the princes of the West and quotes the start of the letter to the French king. In the encyclical, Frederick indicated he had accepted Hungarian submission as emperor. Another letter written by Frederick, found in the Regesta Imperii, dated 20 June 1241, and intended for all his vassals in Swabia, Austria, and Bohemia, included a number of specific military instructions. His forces were to avoid engaging the Mongols in field battles, hoard all food stocks in every fortress and stronghold, and arm all possible levies as well as the general populace.\nThomas of Split comments that there was a frenzy of fortifying castles and cities throughout the Holy Roman Empire, including Italy. Either following the Emperor's instructions or on their own initiative, Frederick II, Duke of Austria paid to have his border castles strengthened at his own expense. King Wenceslaus I of Bohemia had every castle strengthened and provisioned, as well as providing soldiers and armaments to monasteries in order to turn them into refuges for the civilian population.\nMongol probing attacks materialised on the Holy Roman Empire's border states: a force was repulsed in a skirmish near K\u0142odzko, 300\u2013700 Mongol troops were killed in a battle near Vienna to 100 Austrian losses (according to the Duke of Austria), and a Mongol raiding party was destroyed by Austrian knights in the district of Theben after being backed to the border of the River March. As the Holy Roman Empire seemed now the target of the Mongols, Frederick II sent letters to Henry III of England and Louis IX of France in order to organise a crusade against the Mongol Empire.\nA full-scale invasion never occurred, as the Mongols spent the next year pillaging Hungary before withdrawing. After the Mongols withdrew from Hungary back to Russia, Frederick turned his attention back towards Italian matters. The danger represented by the presence of the Mongols in Europe was debated again at the First Council of Lyon in 1245, but Frederick II was excommunicated by that very diet in the context of his struggle with the Papacy and ultimately abandoned the possibility of a crusade against the Mongol Empire.\nConflict with Innocent IV.\nA new pope, Innocent IV, was elected on 25 June 1243. He was a member of a noble Imperial family and had some relatives in Frederick's camp, so the Emperor was initially happy with his election. Innocent, however, was to become his fiercest enemy who, with his legal background from Bologna, showed himself to be a fanatical enemy of the Hohenstaufen. Negotiations began in the summer of 1243, but the situation changed as Viterbo rebelled, instigated by the intriguing local cardinal Ranieri Capocci. Frederick could not afford to lose his main stronghold near Rome, so he besieged Viterbo.\nInnocent IV convinced the rebels to sign a peace but, after Frederick withdrew his garrison, Ranieri had them slaughtered on 13 November. Frederick was enraged but signed a peace treaty, which was soon broken. The new pope was opposed to Frederick. Together with many of the Cardinals, most of whom were newly appointed by himself, Innocent fled via Genoese galleys to Liguria, arriving on 7 July. His aim was to reach Lyon, where a new church council had been held since 24 June 1245.\nThe council was under-attended and despite initially appearing that it could end with a compromise, the intervention of Ranieri, who had a series of scurrilous pamphlets published against Frederick (in which, among other things, he defined the emperor as a heretic and an Antichrist), led the prelates towards a less accommodating solution. Frederick seemed inclined to go to Lyon and argue his case in person but, because of the Emperor\u2019s charismatic reputation, power and influence, Innocent would not allow this for fear of Frederick swaying the council. One month later, before Frederick's representatives even reached Lyon, Innocent IV declared Frederick to be deposed as emperor, characterizing him as a \"friend of Babylon's sultan\", \"of Saracen customs\", \"provided with a harem guarded by eunuchs\", like the schismatic emperor of Byzantium, and in sum a \"heretic\". The illegitimate \"deposition\" of the emperor provoked consternation from other European monarchs and, weary of the interference of an overweening pope, none offered any meaningful support to Innocent. Louis IX, sympathetic to the emperor, refused Innocent's requests to enter France and Henry III of England, pushed by English discontent with increased church fundraising to finance a papal war with Frederick, rebuffed Innocent's entreaties to move to Gascony. Even within some of the clergy in France, Germany, England, and Italy itself, unrest with Frederick's \"deposition\" and the preaching of a crusade against the emperor grew. Nevertheless, Innocent IV had made the struggle between pope and emperor an all-or-nothing one, which would doom first the power of the Empire (after Frederick\u2019s death) then, eventually, the power of the papacy as well. The papacy raised its intractable standard. Frederick himself was, more than any other figure since late Antiquity, the singular \"personal imperative\" of the empire and Romanity itself. Hardened by the struggle, everything in his rulership was now intrinsically bound to him. The strain of the coming years would show him at his most despotic, absolutist and ruthless. In retaliation to the partisan deposition at Lyon, Frederick brutally purged the clergy in Sicily and Italy of Innocent\u2019s supporters wherever he found them. Across Italy, he waged a campaign of terror to target any hint of opposition, papal-backed or otherwise. His reprisals were brutal and Frederick was supposed to have declared, \"I have been the anvil long enough\u2026 now I shall be the hammer.\"\nIn 1246 Innocent allegedly set in motion a plot to kill Frederick and Enzo, with the support of the pope's brother-in-law Orlando de Rossi, another friend of Frederick. The assassination of Frederick would be the signal for a general uprising against imperial rule across Italy. However, while the emperor was staying in Grosseto, the plotters were unmasked by Riccardo Sanseverino, Count of Caserta, after one of their number, Giovanni da Presenzano, betrayed them. The chief conspirators were some of the Emperor\u2019s closest friends and officials. Among them was the former Imperial vicar of Tuscany, Pandolfo Fasanella, Jacobo di Morra\u2014son of Frederick's long-serving minister Henry of Morra, Ruggero de Amicis\u2014a justiciar and ambassador of the emperor, Teobaldo di Francesco\u2014imperial podest\u00e0 of Parma, and the hitherto loyal Andrew of Cicala, one of Frederick's chief lieutenants in the Kingdom of Sicily. Frederick dealt ruthlessly with the plot. His lieutenants hunted down the conspirators, destroying their strongholds of Cilento, Sala Consilina, and Altavilla where they had found refuge. The last of the conspirators held out against Frederick's forces in the castle of Capaccio for most of the summer of 1246 but were forced to surrender for lack of water. Hundreds of the conspirators were captured, including Teobaldo di Francesco and Tommaso Sanseverino, Count of Marsico. They were blinded, mutilated, and burnt alive or hanged, and their families were imprisoned or sold into slavery. Much of the holdings of Sanseverino family along with those of other conspirators were seized by the crown. The conspiracy had been utterly crushed and the Sicilian crown had enlarged its already sizable domain. An attempt to invade the Kingdom of Sicily, under the command of Cardinal Ranieri, was halted at Spello by Marino of Eboli, Imperial Vicar of Spoleto. For his fidelity in unmasking the plot, Frederick betrothed his illegitimate daughter Violante (leg. 1248) to Riccardo Sanseverino. Despite the papal-backed conspiracy against his life, Frederick was now an even more powerful autocrat in the \"Regno\" and his grip on central Italy and much of Lombardy remained strong. However, the conspiracy was a personal blow to the Emperor, leaving him deeply suspicious of his subordinates and he increasingly relied on his sons. Enzo was already his father's chief representative in Lombardy while Frederick of Antioch was appointed Imperial vicar of Tuscany.\nInnocent also sent a flow of money to Germany to dislodge Frederick's power there. The archbishops of Cologne and Mainz also declared Frederick deposed, and in May 1246 Henry Raspe, Landgrave of Thuringia was chosen as papal-backed anti-king. On 5 August 1246 Henry Raspe, thanks to the Pope's money, managed to defeat an army of Conrad, son of Frederick, in the Battle of Frankfurt. Frederick strengthened his position in Southern Germany, however, acquiring the Duchy of Austria, whose duke had died without heirs, along with the sizable treasury of the now bereft House of Babenberg. A year later Henry Raspe died, and Innocent selected William II of Holland as the new pro-papal anti-king but support for the latter remained minimal in Germany until the Emperor\u2019s death. \nBetween February and March 1247 Frederick settled the situation in Italy a diet in Terni, naming his relatives or friends as vicars of the various lands, including one of his illegitimate sons, Richard of Chieti, as Imperial vicar of Spoleto. He married his son Manfred to the daughter of Amedeo di Savoia to secure the Alpine passes to Lyon and compelled the submission of the marquis of Monferrato. A papal army under the command of Ottaviano degli Ubaldini never reached Lombardy, and the Emperor, accompanied by a massive army, held another diet at Turin. Innocent once again asked for protection from the King of France, Louis IX, but the king consistently refused, hoping instead to broker a peace which left Frederick free to support crusading plans in the Levant. However, Louis also warned that he would not accept any direct attack by Frederick against Innocent in Lyon. Despite this, Lyon was technically an imperial city and Frederick stood poised to lead an expedition across the Alps to confront Innocent directly.\nSetbacks, recovery, and death.\nAn unexpected event was to change the situation dramatically. In June 1247 the important Lombard city of Parma expelled the Imperial functionaries and sided with the Guelphs. Enzo was not in the city and could do nothing more than ask for help from his father, who came back to lay siege to the rebels, together with his friend Ezzelino III da Romano, tyrant of Verona. The besieged languished as the Emperor waited for them to surrender from starvation. He had a wooden city, which he called \"Vittoria\", built around the walls.\nOn 18 February 1248, while Frederick was hunting, the camp was suddenly assaulted and taken, and in the ensuing Battle of Parma the Imperial side was routed. Taddeo da Suessa, Great Justiciar of Sicily and an important imperial-royal advisor, was killed in the battle. Frederick also lost the Imperial treasure and with it his offensive momentum against the rebellious communes in the immediate future, forcing him to forgo any assault against Lyon again\u2014at least for the rest of the year. Sensing this, Innocent began plans for a crusade against Sicily. Frederick soon recovered and rebuilt his army, but the defeat outside Parma encouraged resistance in many cities that could no longer bear the fiscal burden of his regime: parts of the Romagna, Marche and Spoleto were lost for a time. In May 1248, Frederick's illegitimate son Richard of Chieti defeated a papal army led by Hugo Novellus, a papal partisan, near Civitanova Marche and recaptured some areas of the Marche and Spoleto. Basing himself in Piedmont in June, Frederick hosted many nobles of northern Italy and ambassadors from foreign kings in his court, and energetically set about rebuilding imperial authority in Lombardy. The scope of his activity demonstrated that neither his deposition nor the defeat at Parma, it seems, had diminished his fame or preeminence. Frederick\u2019s relatively rapid recovery showed that the defeat at Parma was far from decisive, and the war in Lombardy remained fundamentally spasmodic and localized. Nevertheless, it was only by strenuous, even unrelenting effort that Frederick was able to stabilize the situation by the close of 1248 and replenish his coffers, raising some 130,000 gold ounces. Frederick remained confident but after several years of war and conspiracy, he was increasingly suspicious and wearied. Bianca Lancia, Frederick\u2019s mistress, seems to have died at some point during 1248. Frederick reportedly married her while she was dying, both at her request and, probably, to legitimize his children by her to increase the number of his legitimate descendants and possible successors.\nIn February 1249 Frederick dismissed his advisor and chief minister, the famous jurist and poet Pier delle Vigne, on charges of peculation and embezzlement. Some historians suggest that Pier was planning to betray the Emperor, who, according to Matthew of Paris, cried when he discovered the plot. Pier, blinded and in chains, died in Pisa, possibly by his own hand. Even more shocking for Frederick was the defeat and capture of Enzo by the Bolognese at the Battle of Fossalta in May 1249. Earlier in the spring, the emperor gathered a large army hoping to finally subdue the last few holdouts of Lombard resistance, and move against Innocent at Lyon. Frederick planned a pincer movement, with Enzo taking a portion of the army to defeat the Bolognese while the main force continued northward into central Lombardy. Even as the main army under the emperor subdued large swathes of Emilia-Romagna and much of central Lombardy remained imperial, the campaign was halted by Enzo\u2019s defeat at Fossalta. Enzo was held in a palace in Bologna where he remained captive until his death in 1272. Richard of Chieti was also killed in 1249, likely in the same battle. However, though the battle did not noticeably alter the political situation and the emperor still remained relatively dominant, the capture of Enzo and the death of the Richard of Chieti, both whom had proved able lieutenants, were significant personal setbacks for Frederick. He named Manfred as Legate General of Italy to replace the now captive Enzo. The Bolognese refused all attempts by the emperor to ransom his son and Bologna, along with Milan, remained one of the staunchest Guelph cities in northern Italy. All in all, the year 1249 was the nadir of the Emperor\u2019s fortunes, and made clear how reliant the imperial position was on his person. Wearied but characteristically defiant, Frederick left a portion his army in central Lombardy under the command of his captains, and returned to the south where he would remain until his death.\nThe struggle continued. Como was lost and Modena was temporarily overtaken by a Guelph faction. Yet, even from late 1249 into early 1250, the situation progressively favoured Frederick. The Ghibelline Manfredi family held Faenza and the Counts of Bagnacavallo recovered Ravenna for the Imperial cause. In the first month of the year, the indomitable Ranieri of Viterbo died, depriving pro-papal leadership in Italy of an implacable foe of Frederick. An army sent to invade the Kingdom of Sicily under the command of Cardinal Pietro Capocci was crushed in the Marche at the Battle of Cingoli by Frederick\u2019s lieutenant Walter of Palearia, Count of Manopello and Imperial \"condottieri\" again reconquered the almost all of the Romagna, the Marche and Spoleto. Conrad, King of the Romans, scored several victories in Germany against William of Holland and forced the pro-papal Rhenish archbishops to sign a truce. Innocent IV was increasingly isolated as support for the papal cause dwindled rapidly in Germany, Italy, and across Europe generally. Frederick of Antioch, as imperial vicar of Tuscany and podest\u00e0 of Florence, had relatively stabilized the region by heavy-handed but effective means (although the loyalty of the Tuscan Ghibellines was pragmatic and Florence\u2019s allegiance remained fluid). Piacenza changed allegiances to Frederick and Oberto Pallavicino, Imperial vicar of Lombardy, defeated Parma, expelled its Guelph faction, and recaptured a swathe of central Lombardy. Ezzelino da Romano held Verona, Vicenza, Padua and the Trevisan March along with most of eastern Lombardy, and seized Belluno and Este. Of the League\u2019s cities, only Milan, Brescia, and Bologna held out. \nSeveral cities, such as Modena, who had shifted sides in the previous year, were ripe for recapture by Ghibelline partisans and many changed allegiances again. Genoa was threatened by Frederick's allies after a defeat at sea by imperial forces near Savona and Venice's support for Innocent and the League waned. The forces of the League had never truly recovered from the defeat at Cortenuova in 1237 and resistance was more confined to its major cities like Milan and Bologna. However, the Emperor\u2019s rapid success during the year compelled even the Bolognese, in begrudging discouragement, to sue for peace. It appeared that all over Italy, the links of the imperial chain were restored and tightening. Major defections stopped and the papacy had been shown incapable of sustaining the war against the emperor in Italy. Even with imperial prospects brightening however, large areas of Italy had been ravaged by years of war and the League\u2019s defensive works made assaulting some of its cities difficult. The demands of war had forced the Emperor to levy increasingly higher taxation over the past few years. Even the resources of the wealthy and prosperous Kingdom of Sicily were strained. Frederick's newly unified regime in Italy and Sicily was despotic and brutal, imposing harsh taxes and ruthlessly suppressing dissent wherever it could. Nevertheless, that his administrative system consistently recovered in the face of the setbacks of the previous few years remains an impressive feat and a testament to his skillful statecraft.\nFrederick, however, did not participate in any of the campaigns of 1250 in-person apart from general strategic command. He had been ill and likely felt tired, withdrawing to the Kingdom of Sicily where he remained for much of the year. Suddenly on 13 December 1250, however, after a persistent attack of dysentery, Frederick died in Castel Fiorentino (territory of Torremaggiore), in Apulia. Despite the betrayals, setbacks, and flux of fortune he had faced in his last years, Frederick died peacefully, reportedly wearing the habit of a Cistercian monk. Of his father's death, Manfred wrote to Conrad in Germany, \"The sun of justice has set, the maker of peace has passed away.\"\nAt the time of Frederick's death, his preeminent position in Europe was challenged but certainly not lost. Indeed, quite the reverse since it was not the emperor\u2019s fortunes which were waning, but his enemies\u2019. No monarch in Europe had accepted his deposition, much less offer any meaningful support for Innocent IV. The Emperor\u2019s immense prestige, even after the setbacks of the last two years, remained relatively undimmed. Beside this, Frederick\u2019s power in the \"Regno\" remained solid. His hold over most of Italy and Germany was still quite strong. The political situation remained fluid and the victories of 1250 had put Frederick in the ascendant once again. Everywhere Innocent\u2019s fortunes seemed dire: the papal treasury was depleted, his anti-king William of Holland had been routed by Conrad in Germany\u2014though Staufen support and its power base in southern Germany suffered disintegration after Frederick\u2019s death and the demise of his heirs. In Italy, Frederick's lieutenants and partisans had recaptured much of the territories lost in the last two years; he was in a strong position and he prepared to march on Lyon in the new year. Despite the economic strains placed on the \"Regno\", support from the Emperor of Nicaea, John III Doukas Vatatzes, enabled Frederick to relatively refill his coffers and resupply his forces. After the failure of Louis IX's crusade in Egypt, Frederick had skillfully imaged himself as the aggrieved party against the papacy, hindered by Innocent's machinations from supporting the campaign. Support for his deposition had never been widespread and Frederick won growing support on the wider diplomatic stage. Only his death halted this seemingly irresistible momentum. His testament left Conrad the Imperial and Sicilian crowns, as well as 100,000 gold ounces to be used at Conrad\u2019s discretion for the maintenance of the Holy Land. Manfred received the principality of Taranto, 10,000 gold ounces, and regency over Sicily and Italy with full imperial authority while his half-brother remained in Germany. Henry Charles Otto, Frederick's son by Isabella of England, received 10,000 gold ounces and the Kingdom of Arles or that of Jerusalem, while the emperor\u2019s namesake grandson, Frederick\u2014the son of Henry VII\u2014was entrusted with the Duchy of Austria and the March of Styria. Perhaps aiming to lay stones for a potential peace settlement between Conrad and Innocent\u2014or a final crafty scheme to further demonstrate papal prejudice against him, Frederick's will stipulated that all the lands he had taken from the Church were to be returned to it, all the prisoners freed except those guilty of high treason, and the taxes reduced, provided this did not damage the Empire's prestige. In peacefully passing on his realms to his sons Frederick accomplished perhaps the main goal of any ruler. At his death, the Hohenstaufen empire remained the leading power in Europe and its security seemed assured in the persons of his sons.\nFrederick II died one of the greatest, most energetic, imaginative and capable rulers of the entire Middle Ages, bestriding the European stage like a colossus and dying in the \"full glory\" of imperial power. Yet, for all the grandeur of his reign, his \"herculean\" efforts to bind together first Sicily, then Italy, and Germany in closer imperial unity within an absolutist superstructure proved futile with the eventual collapse of his dynasty. Frederick had attempted the impossible and achieved the improbable, and his achievements remain astonishing. The extent of what he accomplished, despite the ultimate failure of his dynasty and grand imperial vision, showed his extraordinary ability, tenacity and pronounced individuality among all medieval rulers. \nYet, his towering personal reputation alone was not enough to sustain his heirs, especially against a papacy hell-bent on the complete annihilation of his dynasty. Upon Conrad's death a mere four years later, the Hohenstaufen dynasty fell from power in Germany, inaugurating the Great Interregnum which lasted until 1273, one year after the last Hohenstaufen, Enzo, had died in his prison. Manfred would succeed to the Sicilian throne in 1258 and enjoyed a good deal of success against the papacy and its Guelph allies in Italy. Over several years, Manfred managed to achieve a hegemonic grip over the Italian peninsula, and he looked like he could reach for his father\u2019s illustrious status until his death at the Battle of Benevento. Conradin, the only son of Conrad IV, made an attempt to reclaim Sicily after Manfred's death but was defeated and captured at the Battle of Tagliacozzo in 1268 and executed by Charles I of Anjou soon after, ending the Hohenstaufen line. Much of Europe was shocked by the sudden death of Frederick II and a legend developed that Frederick was not truly dead but merely sleeping in the Kyffh\u00e4user Mountains and would one day awaken to reestablish his empire. Over time, this legend largely transferred itself to his grandfather, Frederick I, also known as \"Barbarossa\" (\"Redbeard\").\nFrederick's sarcophagus (made of red porphyry) lies in the cathedral of Palermo beside those of his parents (Henry VI and Constance) as well as his grandfather, the Norman king Roger II of Sicily. He is wearing a funerary alb with a Thuluth-style inscribed cuff. A bust of Frederick sits in the Walhalla temple built by Ludwig I of Bavaria. His sarcophagus was opened in the nineteenth century and various items can be found in the British Museum's collection, including a small piece of funerary crown.\nPersonality and religion.\nFrederick's contemporaries called him \"stupor mundi\", the \"astonishment\" or the \"wonder of the world\", and \"immutator mirabilis\" or the \"marvellous transformer [of the world]\" for his charismatic personality and his political designs and achievements. This carried with it a tinge of messianism from some of Frederick's supporters and a sense of the demonic from his opponents. Many of his contemporaries were astonished, even transfixed by his audacity, stubbornness, and extraordinary ambitions. However, they were also sometimes repelled and terrified by the pronounced unorthodoxy of the Hohenstaufen emperor, his cruelty and despotism. Even so, the famous English chronicler Matthew of Paris still acclaimed Frederick as the \"greatest of the princes of the earth.\"\nFrederick II's multifaceted personality remains securely attached to his legacy. Even from a young age, he showed precocity and knowledge beyond his years, deeply conscious of his imperial lineage and defiant of any constraint on his free will. He seemed to be insatiably curious about everything: science, naturalism, mathematics, architecture, and poetry, and welcomed many of the most learned figures of his time to his court. He was a conversationalist with an \"inexhaustible streak\", equal to Voltaire or Oscar Wilde, and a keen polymath, comparable to Leonardo Da Vinci, who \"wanted to know everything\". He enjoyed lively intellectual debates, and though he could be amiable, even enchanting, he was often passionate and intense. The emperor was a highly energetic and proactive ruler, ceaselessly traveling around Italy and the \"Regno\", with a zeal for governing perhaps unmatched in the whole of the Middle Ages. His \"speciality\" was being a despot and a \"dirigiste technocrat\" who aimed to command every aspect of his Italian realms. Frederick's statecraft, though inventive or perhaps even ingenious, indicates an intolerantly absolutist disposition. If the emperor allowed himself personal heterodoxy, he nevertheless enforced strict orthodoxy elsewhere as the preeminent monarch of Christendom, who saw himself as the supreme source of peace, order, and justice\u2014for whom the interests of the state superseded everything. \nFor all his undeniable charisma and genius, Frederick was at heart a mercurial intellectual who lacked the \"common touch\" of his grandfather, Frederick Barbarossa, and seemed inclined to more \"Oriental attractions.\" From a childhood of constant emotional insecurity and inhibited relationships, what emerged was personality that was singular impressive to contemporaries. Frederick II preferred a select company of intimates with whom he could share his seemingly endless intellectual interests and upon whom he could impress his dominating and protean personality. Fundamentally, he was character of inward discord whose stark paradoxes were more pronounced, perhaps, because of his preeminent status and the scope of his personality. He was industrious, farsighted and shrewd, but he could also be megalomaniacal, turbulent, temperamental, impulsive and utterly ruthless; in Frederick, roguish playfulness and gaiety was paired with cruelty, harshness with magnanimity, rigid idealism and megalomania with an acute sense of political reality, tolerance with intolerance, and sardonic religious indifference with episodes of outward piety. Frederick was cerebral and tended towards a life of isolation and, despite his reputed great charm and reputed acerbic humor\u2014he couldn\u2019t resist a jibing joke or a sly witticism, he seemed unable to break through the barrier separating him from others. Because of the \"isolated splendour\" of his position as emperor and the innate suspicion implanted in him by his early years, instead of the more \"normal pursuits\" of men of his age, Frederick found respite from the cares of state in the study of science and mathematics, in philosophy and dialectic, in the violent exercise of the chase, and in an \"unrestrained abandonment\" to sensual pleasures. Frederick was apparently gracious to each of his wives but he seems to have only had passionate romantic affection for Bianca Lancia. The emperor's wives likely lived in secluded environments per the semi-oriental customs of Sicilian royalty. The emperor clearly had an amorous side and a voracious sexual appetite, siring probably a dozen or more illegitimate children. Unlike some other contemporary monarchs though, Frederick always openly acknowledged his many illegitimate offspring and he seems to have been fond of most of his children, particularly Enzo and Manfred. Whether because of his audacity, towering status or intellectual brilliance and the breadth of his personality, Frederick's contemporaries\u2014supporters and enemies alike\u2014seem to have found him an incredible enigma. Salimbene di Adam, generally a critic of the emperor, wrote that Frederick was alternatively witty, consoling, and delightful, but also cunning, greedy, and malicious, lacking any religious faith.\nMaehl argues that Frederick inherited German, Norman, and Sicilian blood, but by training, lifestyle, and temperament, he was \"most of all Sicilian.\" \"To the end of his life he remained above all a Sicilian \"grand signore\", and his whole imperial policy aimed at expanding the Sicilian kingdom into Italy rather than the German kingdom southward.\" And according to Cantor, \"Frederick had no intention of giving up Naples and Sicily, which were the real strongholds of its power. He was, in fact, uninterested in Germany.\" Cantor\u2019s view notwithstanding, historians generally agree that Frederick was a gifted and subtle politician who instinctively understood the need to balance his overarching imperial status with the realities of his power-base in the \"Regno\". If, as Maehl contends, Frederick prioritized expanding his Sicilian kingdom northward, that strategy proved more viable for securing wider Staufen hegemony than the earlier and later attempts by German emperors to project imperial power south across the Alps. \nFrederick was a religious sceptic to an extent unusual for his era. His papal enemies used this against him at every turn and accused him of claiming that Moses, Jesus, and Muhammad were the three greatest deceivers who ever lived in a long-rumoured book called the \"Treatise of the Three Impostors\". The actual existence of this book is doubtful (and Frederick himself denied all knowledge of it), but its supposed sentiment seemed to align with Frederick's perceived religious skepticism and indifference to personal faith. Innocent IV declared him \"preambulus Antichristi\" (predecessor of the Antichrist) on July 17, 1245. As Frederick allegedly did not respect the \"privilegium potestatis\" of the Church, he was excommunicated. His rationalistic mind took pleasure in the strictly logical character of Christian dogma. For all that his naturalist and intellectual pursuits may have pointed towards empiricism, the emperor was not a champion of rationalism, nor had he any sympathy with the mystico-heretical movements of the time; in fact, he viewed them as dissidents against the state and he joined in suppressing them. It was not the Roman Church of the Middle Ages that he antagonized, but its representatives. This notwithstanding, Frederick seemed to be personally ambivalent to religion. Once, when riding through a field of grain, Frederick is reported to have mocked the Christian doctrine of transubstantiation, remarking to his companions, \"How many Gods will be made from this corn in my lifetime? How long will this deception last?\" The question of Frederick\u2019s personal attitude to religion, whether he was a conventional Christian or privately more deistic, perhaps even atheistic, remains a persistent topic of debate.\nFor his supposed Epicureanism (paganism), Frederick II is listed as a representative member of the sixth region of Dante's \"Inferno\", that of the heretics, who are burned in tombs. Contemporaries were both awed and scornful of Frederick's \"orientalism\" and defiance of the conventional bounds of morality.\nLiterature and science.\nFrederick had a great thirst for knowledge and learning. Frederick employed Jews from Sicily, who had migrated there from the holy land, at his court to translate Greek and Arabic works. He also introduced paper into a European court.\nHe played a major role in promoting literature through the Sicilian School of poetry. His Sicilian royal court in Palermo, saw the first use of a literary form of an Italo-Romance language, Sicilian. Through the mix of Arabic, Hebrew, Latin, Greek, and Sicilian language poems and art at the court, Arabic \"muwashshahat\" or \"girdle poems\" influenced the birth of the sonnet. The language developed by Giacomo da Lentini and Pier delle Vigne in the Sicilian School of Poetry gathering around Frederick II of Swabia in the first half of the thirteenth century had a decisive influence on Dante Alighieri and then on the development of Italian language itself. Dante even regarded Frederick as the father of Italian poetry. The school and its poetry were saluted by Dante and his peers and predate by at least a century the use of the Tuscan idiom as the elite literary language of Italy.\nFrederick II is the author of the first treatise on the subject of falconry, \"De Arte Venandi cum Avibus\" (\"The Art of Hunting with Birds\"). In the words of the historian Charles Homer Haskins:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;It is a scientific book, approaching the subject from Aristotle but based closely on observation and experiment throughout, \"Divisivus et Inquisitivus\", in the words of the preface; it is at the same time a scholastic book, minute and almost mechanical in its divisions and subdivisions. It is also a rigidly practical book, written by a falconer for falconers and condensing a long experience into systematic form for the use of others.\nFor this book, he drew from sources in the Arabic language. Frederick's pride in his mastery of the art is illustrated by the story that, when he was ordered to become a subject of the Great Khan (Batu) and receive an office at the Khan's court, he remarked that he would make a good falconer, for he understood birds very well. He maintained up to fifty falconers at a time in his court, and in his letters he requested Arctic gyrfalcons from L\u00fcbeck and even from Greenland. One of the two existing versions was modified by his son Manfred, also a keen falconer.\nDavid Attenborough in \"Natural Curiosities\" notes that Frederick fully understood the migration of some birds at a time when all sorts of now improbable theories were common.\nFrederick loved exotic animals in general: his menagerie, with which he impressed the cold cities of Northern Italy and Europe, included hounds, giraffes, cheetahs, lynxes, leopards, exotic birds and an elephant.\nHe was also alleged to have carried out a number of experiments on people. These experiments were recorded by the monk Salimbene di Adam in his \"Chronicles\". Among the experiments were shutting a prisoner up in a cask to see if the soul could be observed escaping through a hole in the cask when the prisoner died; feeding two prisoners, having sent one out to hunt and the other to bed and then having them disembowelled to see which had digested his meal better; imprisoning children and then denying them any human contact to see if they would develop a natural language.\nIn the language deprivation experiment young infants were raised without human interaction in an attempt to determine if there was a natural language that they might demonstrate once their voices matured. It is claimed he was seeking to discover what language would have been imparted unto Adam and Eve by God. In his \"Chronicles\" Salimbene wrote that Frederick bade \"foster-mothers and nurses to suckle and bathe and wash the children, but in no ways to prattle or speak with them; for he would have learnt whether they would speak the Hebrew language (which had been the first), or Greek, or Latin, or Arabic, or perchance the tongue of their parents of whom they had been born. But he laboured in vain, for the children could not live without clappings of the hands, and gestures, and gladness of countenance, and blandishments\".\nFrederick was also interested in the stars, and his court was host to many astrologers and astronomers, including Michael Scot and Guido Bonatti. He often sent letters to the leading scholars of the time (not only in Europe) asking for solutions to questions of science, mathematics and physics.\nIn 1224 he founded the University of Naples, the world's oldest state university: now called Universit\u00e0 Federico II. Frederick chose Naples for its strategic position and its already strong role as a cultural and intellectual centre. The university focused on law and rhetoric, meant to train a new generation of jurists and officials to staff Frederick's burgeoning bureaucracy. Its students and faculty were state-sponsored and forbidden from attending other universities outside the kingdom. Perhaps the university's most famous student and lecturer was the philosopher and theologian Thomas Aquinas.\nAppearance.\nA Damascene chronicler, Sibt ibn al-Jawzi, left a physical description of Frederick based on the testimony of those who had seen the emperor in person in Jerusalem: \"The Emperor was covered with red hair, was bald and myopic. Had he been a slave, he would not have fetched 200 dirhams at market.\" Frederick's eyes were described variously as blue, or \"green like those of a serpent\". Lionel Allshorn reports that Frederick was usually clean-shaven with hair of reddish hue, of medium stature and stoutly built. Even to his contemporaries, the emperor appeared as a man of masks, able to shift between them at ease. At times he was the peripatetic intellectual, clad in rough huntsman\u2019s clothes, driven by an insatiable taste for inquiry\u2014and sensuality. At others, he was the energetic autocrat, robed in grandeur and gravitas, his \u201cpiercing, almost hypnotic gaze\u201d showing a mix of cold detachment and audacious, even caustic irreverence. In public appearances, he maintained a stern and remote hieratic pose\u2014vigorous and diligent, wily, severe and ruthless\u2014yet beneath this was a restless and passionate inner nature. Always, though, his countenance revealed the same obsession: a mind ceaselessly codifying and classifying the world as he saw it, in law and politics, nature and philosophy. As the cynosure of his time, the Emperor was always conscious of his preeminent imperial status. Frederick felt that, in everything, the stakes for which he was playing were no less than the general peace and security of Europe. His countenance tended to reflect this personal conception of supremacy.\nLaw reforms and Imperial policy.\nFrederick II's most profound and revolutionary legal legacy remains the Constitutions of Melfi or \"Constitutiones Regni Siciliarum\" (English: Constitutions of the Kingdom of the Sicilies), promulgated in 1231 in the Kingdom of Sicily. The sophistication of the Constitutions, also known as the \"Liber Augustalis\", and his involvement in their formulation sets Frederick apart as perhaps the supreme lawgiver of the Middle Ages. Under the direction of a group of jurists headed by Frederick himself, including Roffredo Epifanio, Pier della Vigna, and archbishops Giacomo Amalfitano of Capua and Andrea Bonello of Barletta, the Constitutions harmonized decades of Siculo-Norman legal tradition stretching back to Roger II. Almost every aspect of Frederick's tightly-governed kingdom was regulated, from a rigorously centralized judiciary and bureaucracy to commerce, coinage, financial policy, legal equality for all citizens, protections for women and prostitutes, and even provisions for the environment and public health. The kingdom was divided into eleven territorial districts called justiciaries governed by justiciars appointed by Frederick.\nThe purview of the justiciars reached across administrative, judicial, and even religious fields and each was subordinate to a Master Justiciar responsible for the respective region, who themselves maintained direct contact with Frederick within a pyramid-like hierarchical structure. The magistrates were elected for a year pending reappointment and received a salary from the state. This made them loyal to the king-emperor and his administration, for without it they were nothing. Any official who misused his power faced the severest penalties, threatened with confiscation of estate and even death. Every official could be sure that the emperor was actively monitoring their actions. The judiciary was relatively impartial, a fact of which Frederick was jealously proud, and the crown even lost cases in the common courts. The great officers of the \"Regno\" were the ancient \"ammiratus ammiratorum\", the grand protonotary (or logothete), great Chamberlain, great seneschal, great chancellor, great constable, and master justiciar. The last was the head of the \"Magna Curia\", the court of the king (his \"curia regis\") and the final court of appeal. The \"Magna Curia Rationum\", a division of the \"curia\", acted as an auditing department on the great bureaucracy. Frederick also established a secret police service whose function was to prepare dossiers on the activities of subjects suspected of hostility to the state. These were compiled in state registers and presented to those who were objects of suspicion, creating an atmosphere of fear in view of the Emperor's reputation for \"implacable cruelty\" towards enemies of the state. Frederick's network of spies and informants seems to have been quite efficient and often he was as well-informed on what went on in a province as the local officials.\nFrederick was the first European monarch to summon the Third Estate and allow civil society access to the Sicilian Parliament which now consisted of not only the barons, but the University of Naples, the medical school at Salerno, and landed commoners. It did not debate or even rubber-stamp legislation, which was the Emperor\u2019s to make and unmake, but merely received it and promulgated it, giving its advice where it could. However, it did retain the power to advise the emperor on taxation and its function likely influenced Simon de Montfort when he visited the imperial court. State monopolies were imposed on silk, iron, and grain while tariffs and import duties on trade within the kingdom were abolished. A new gold coin called an augustalis was introduced and became widely circulated in Italy, admired even today for its splendid proto-Renaissance style and fine quality. The state monopolies on wheat and corn swelled Frederick's coffers with hefty returns. One sale of corn in Tunis during the 1230s alone netted at least \u00a375,000, while Frederick collected direct revenue by extraordinary taxes, later levied annually and accompanied by explanations of state necessity. Before the outbreak of the war with Gregory IX and subsequently Innocent IV, Frederick was reckoned to be the wealthiest European monarch since the days of Charlemagne. The annual revenue of the \"Regno\" alone ranged between 100,000-300,000 ounces of gold (approximately \u00a3300,000-1,000,000 contemporary English pounds), probably well exceeding the combined revenues of all other Western European monarchs. \nPer the Constitutions, Frederick II was \"lex animata\" and ruled as an absolute monarch. Since the Emperor\u2019s court was the political, cultural, and intellectual epicentre of its day, Frederick\u2019s legislative reforms likely influenced travelling jurists and legalists from all over Europe who must have returned to their native countries imbued with something of Frederick\u2019s unique brand of absolutism. It is, arguably, no accident that the 13th century saw an explosion of legislative activity across Europe. The Constitutions have been regarded as perhaps the \"birth certificate\" of the modern continental European state and, as such, Frederick's influence remains enormous and indelible. Something of an indirect lineage is traceable from Frederick to the structure, policies and problems of absolutism several centuries later. In many ways, Frederick II was perhaps the first archetypal state absolutist in Europe, supported by an autocratic, semi-bureaucratized regime in Sicily which would eventually overheat and fragment under his Angevin successors. \nFrom 1240, in an edict issued at Foggia, Frederick II was determined to push through far-reaching reforms to establish the Sicilian kingdom and Imperial Italy as a unified state bound by a centralized administration. He had already appointed Enzo as Legate General for all of Italy in the previous year and he now appointed several imperial vicars and captains-general to govern the provinces. The function of the imperial vicars as military commanders and regional governors chosen for their loyalty and competence has been compared to Napoleonic marshals, and Frederick proactively supervised his cadre of officials. Frederick also placed loyal Sicilian barons as podest\u00e0s over the subject cities of northern and central Italy. The unified administration was taken over directly by the Emperor and his highly trained Sicilian officials whose jurisdiction now ranged across all of Italy. Henceforth, the new High Court of Justice would be supreme in both the Kingdom of Sicily and Imperial Italy. A central exchequer was established at Melfi to oversee financial management. Frederick also made efforts towards regulating education, commerce, and even medicine, similar to his earlier reforms in Sicily. For the rest of his reign, there was a continuous movement toward the extension and perfection of this new unified administrative system, with the Emperor himself as the driving force. Despite his mighty efforts however, Frederick's newly unified Italian state ultimately proved ephemeral. Robbed of his genius for state-building in its formative years, and struck by crises in the reigns of his successors, Frederick's work did not long survive him and Italian unification stalled until the 19th century. Nevertheless, the vicars and captains-general provided the prototype for the great Signori who dominated Italy in later generations and centuries. Each, such as Charles of Anjou, the Angevin Neapolitan kings Robert and Ladislaus, Ferrante of Naples later in the 15th century, or the Visconti in Milan and the della Scala in Verona, were in many ways aspiring Italian hegemons in Frederick's image, claiming for themselves a measure of his awesome prestige and might\u2014some even continued to claim the title of imperial vicar. Not until the eras of Emperor Charles V and, later, Napoleon would a single ruler so dominate all of Italy.\nIn 1241 Frederick introduced the Edict of Salerno (sometimes called the \"Constitution of Salerno\") which made the first legally fixed separation of the occupations of physician and apothecary. Physicians were forbidden to double as pharmacists and the prices of various medicinal remedies were fixed. This became a model for regulation of the practice of pharmacy throughout Europe.\nDespite his efforts in Sicily and Italy, Frederick II was not able to extend his more absolutist legal reforms to Germany. In 1232, Henry (VII) was forced by the German princes to promulgate the \"Statutum in favorem principum\". Frederick, embittered but aiming to promote cohesion in Germany in preparation for his campaigns in northern Italy, pragmatically agreed to Henry's confirmation of the charter. It was a charter of liberties for the leading German princes at the expense of the lesser nobility and the entirety of the commoners. The princes gained whole power of jurisdiction, and the power to strike their own coins. The emperor lost his right to establish new cities, castles and mints over their territories. For many years, the \"Statutum\" was thought in German historiography to have severely weakened central authority in Germany. However, it is now viewed as more a confirmation of political realities which did not necessarily denude royal power or prevent imperial officials from enforcing Frederick's prerogatives. Rather, the \"Statutum\" affirmed a division of labour between the emperor and the princes and laid much groundwork for the development of particularism and, perhaps even federalism in Germany. Even so, from 1232 the vassals of the emperor had a veto over imperial legislative decisions and any new law established by the emperor had to be approved by the princes. These provisions notwithstanding, royal power in Germany remained strong under Frederick.\nBy the 1240s the crown was almost as rich in fiscal resources, towns, castles, enfeoffed retinues, monasteries, ecclesiastical advocacies, manors, tolls, and all other rights, revenues, and jurisdictions as it had ever been at any time since the death of Henry VI. It is unlikely that a particularly \"strong ruler\" such as Frederick II would have even pragmatically agreed to legislation that was concessionary rather than cooperative, neither would the princes have insisted on such. Frederick II used the political loyalty and practical jurisdictions \"granted\" to the higher German aristocracy to support his kingly duty of imposing peace, order, and justice upon the German realm. This is shown clearly in the imperial Landfriede issued at Mainz in 1235, which explicitly enjoined the princes as loyal vassals to exercise their own jurisdictions in their own localities. The jurisdictional autarky of the German princes was favoured by the crown itself in the twelfth and thirteenth centuries in the interests of order and local peace. The inevitable result was the territorial particularism of churchmen, lay princes, and interstitial cities. The transference of jurisdiction was a practical solution to secure the further support of the German princes. Frederick was a ruler of vast territories who \"could not be everywhere at once\". He was pragmatic enough to realize that for all his ability and power, his time and focus could only be fully concentrated either north or south of the Alps, where the bulk of his resources lay. Although the Staufen core domain in southern Germany was strongly governed, the kingdom of Sicily offered a distinctly more fertile base for Frederick's grander imperial ambitions. \nFrederick II's chief preoccupation was not with the advancement of German sovereignty but with a broader imperial sovereignty that transcended any local principality or national kingship. Frederick conceived of Europe as a unique corporate body of individual secular sovereigns headed by himself as emperor. Other monarchs, such as Louis IX of France and Henry III of England, tended to accept imperial supremacy, bound up in Frederick's personality and prestige as the preeminent sovereign in Christendom among a community of equal nations. Above all Frederick's aim was the restoration of the rights of the Empire, and himself as a Roman Emperor. It was to this ultimate end that all his policies were consistently directed. His design was to encompass this through a series of steps by which absolute sovereignty, in the Roman fashion, would be established first in Sicily, secondly in Central and Northern Italy, and finally, in Germany. Sicily certainly afforded the most favorable conditions for more complete absolutism, while the rest of Italy, never wholly separated from the classical tradition, might conceivably yield, in the course of time, to imperial authority. With the imperium thus restored to the heartland of the old Roman Empire, Germany itself could ultimately be brought into the framework of the restored Empire using the resources from south of the Alps to engraft German principalities to the Staufen domain. This bore fruit during Frederick's sojourn in 1235 and his acquisition of the Babenberg lands in 1246. As long as he was alive, even in the face of setbacks, Frederick\u2019s determination, the power of his personality, and inability of his foes to decisively dent his power made his vision seem a reality. Only after the Emperor\u2019s death did his imperial project conclusively fail. Nevertheless, taken in proper view, contrary to the received view of the supposedly inevitable shift away from broad imperial sovereignty, Frederick's policy reveals his grasp of political realities and strategic recognition of how to accomplish his vision step by step. Frederick showed himself capable of playing different roles across his vast territories, each tailored to what he judged more advantageous to pressing his policy in those specific regions: in Sicily, he was the vigorous autocrat; in Germany, he was the pragmatic consensus-seeker; in imperial Italy, the ruthless power-player and warlord. The ultimate failure of Frederick\u2019s larger imperial project stemmed not from any lack of political ability on the Emperor\u2019s part nor, even, from the combined opposition of the papacy and his enemies in northern Italy. Rather, it was the specific crises which arose in the reigns of his successors, Conrad and Manfred, which mired and eventually destroyed his dynasty, and prevented his successors from grasping the prestige of Frederick\u2019s immense imperial status. Fundamentally though, it was also the inherently monumental, multi-generational parameters of the task. While Frederick lived, he was the ultimate expression of \u2018Romanity\u2019 in the medieval world, and his imperial project was alive and viable. But, his death signaled the end of the Roman model of universal empire. His vision was, perhaps, too much for the lifespan of any single individual, even a monarch of such a forceful personality and manifold genius as Frederick II.\nSignificance and legacy.\nHistorians rate Frederick II as a highly significant and consequential European monarch of the Middle Ages. This reputation was present even among his contemporaries, many of whom viewed him in proto-Napoleonic hues as an almost cosmic figure capable of monumental things. This sense, even in the refraction of more abstemious treatments, has cascaded down the centuries and Frederick has retained the enduring fascination of historians. In his influential work \"The Civilization of the Renaissance in Italy\" 19th-century German historian and philosopher Jacob Burckhardt called Frederick the \"first modern man on the throne.\" Ernst Kantorowicz's biography, \"Frederick the Second\", original published in 1927, is a very influential work in the historiography of the emperor. Kantorowicz praises Frederick as a genius, who created the \"first western bureaucracy\", an \"intellectual order within the state\" that acted like \"an effective weapon in his fight with the Church\u2014bound together from its birth by sacred ties in the priestly-Christian spirit of the age, and uplifted to the triumphant cult of the Deity Justitia.\" For Kantorowicz, Frederick was a trans-European ruler \"deeply imbued\" with the idea of a \"renovatio imperii\". While Kantorowicz endorsed Burckhardt's thinking that Frederick was the prototypical modern ruler, whose \"Gewaltstaat\" (tyrannical state) later became the model of tyrannies for all Renaissance princes, Kantorowicz primarily saw Frederick as the last and greatest Christian emperor who embraced \"Medieval World Unity\". Coupled with this, Kantorowicz also saw Frederick as a \"supremely versatile man\" and the \"Genius of the Renaissance\"\u2014a harbinger by which later figures would be measured against. Seen through these lens, the relatively absolutist statecraft of Frederick II has sometimes been viewed as the forerunner of the enlightened despots of the 18th century. \nFor the famous 19th-century English historian Edward Augustus Freeman, in sheer genius and ability, Frederick II was \"surely the greatest prince who ever wore a crown\", superior to Alexander, Constantine or Charlemagne, who failed to grasp nothing in the \"compass of the political or intellectual world of his age\". Freeman even considered Frederick to have been the last true \"Emperor of the West\". Lionel Allshorn wrote in his 1912 biography of the emperor that Frederick surpassed all of his contemporaries and introduced the only enlightened concept of the art of government in the Middle Ages. For Allshorn, Frederick II was the \"redoubtable champion of the temporal cause\" and human freedom itself, who, unlike Emperor Henry IV, Frederick Barbarossa, or any other European monarch until him, never humiliated himself before the papacy and steadfastly maintained his independence. Dr. M. Schipa, in the \"Cambridge Medieval History\", considered Frederick II the greatest singular human force of the entire European Middle Ages; a \"creative spirit\" who had \"no equal\" in the centuries between Charlemagne and Napoleon, forging in Sicily and Italy \"the state as a work of art\" and laying the \"fertile seeds of a new era.\" The noted Austrian cultural historian Egon Friedell saw Frederick as the greatest of the \u2018four great rulers' in history, embodying the far-seeing statecraft of Julius Caesar, the intellectuality of Frederick the Great, and the enterprise and \"artist's \"gaminerie\"\" of Alexander the Great. For Friedell, Frederick's \"free mind\" and \"universal comprehension\" of everything human stemmed from the conviction that no one was right. W. K\u00f6hler wrote that Frederick's \"marked individuality\" made him the \"ablest and most mature mind\" of the Hohenstaufen who towered above his contemporaries. For Frederick, knowledge was power, and because of his knowledge, he wielded despotic power. Though the \"sinister facts\" of his despotism should not be ignored, the greatness of his mind and his energetic will compel admiration.\nModern medievalists generally no longer accept the notion, sponsored by the popes, of Frederick as an anti-Christian. They argue that Frederick understood himself as a Christian monarch in the sense of a Byzantine emperor, thus as God's \"viceroy\" on earth. Whatever his personal feelings toward religion, certainly submission to the pope did not enter into the matter in the slightest. This was in line with the Hohenstaufen \"Kaiser-Idee\", the ideology claiming the Holy Roman Emperor to be the legitimate successor to the Roman Emperors. As his father Henry VI, Frederick established a famous reputation for his cosmopolitan court but on a scale of almost unparalleled grandeur. His court has drawn interest as, perhaps, a precursor comparable to those of later centuries. It seemed to match the flair of the Renaissance, the \"elegance of Paris, gaiety of old imperial Vienna\", and had the \"zest for life\" of the Elizabethans. Hosting figures such as the mathematician Fibonacci, the scholar Michael Scot, the astrologer Guido Bonatti, the translator John of Palermo, the physician John of Procida, the Syrian philosopher Theodore of Antioch, the poet Giacomo da Lentini, and exotic servants such as the black treasury custodian Johannes Morus, the vibrant reputation of Frederick's court persisted throughout the rest of the Late Middle Ages and into the Renaissance.\n20th-century treatments of Frederick vary from the sober (Wolfgang St\u00fcrner) to the dramatic (Ernst Kantorowicz). However, all agree on Frederick II's significance as Holy Roman Emperor and as a forerunner, perhaps, for succeeding generations of a conception of the \"modern\" state emancipated from papal claims of supremacy. Thomas Curtis Van Cleve's 1972 \"The Emperor Frederick II of Hohenstaufen, Immutator Mundi\" acknowledges the emperor's genius, as a ruler, lawgiver and scientist, and also as an extraordinary figure. For Van Cleve, Frederick has \"no counterpart nor near counterpart in history.\" In this way, even leaving aside his cultural influence or intellectual sophistication, Frederick II can perhaps be seen as a pivot point between the Middle Ages and the Renaissance. The modern approach to Frederick II tends to be focused on the continuity between Frederick and his predecessors as Kings of Sicily and Holy Roman Emperors, and the similarities between him and other thirteenth-century monarchs. David Abulafia, in his biography subtitled \"A Medieval Emperor\", argues that Frederick's reputation as an enlightened figure ahead of his time is undeserved, and that Frederick was mostly a conventionally Christian monarch who sought to rule in a conventional medieval manner. Nevertheless, Frederick II still commands a lasting popular reputation as a polyhedral monarch who transcended his time. Even today, the general memory of Frederick is of a personality of astonishing breadth and ability: a polymath and polyglot, statesman and lawgiver, poet, mathematician, and naturalist; a brilliant proto-enlightened despot and consummate politician at the head of a sophisticated state, surrounded by his vibrant court which seemed to presage the Renaissance.\nLansing and English, two British historians, argue that medieval Palermo has been overlooked in favour of Paris and London:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;One effect of this approach has been to privilege historical winners, [and] aspects of medieval Europe that became important in later centuries, above all the nation state... Arguably the liveliest cultural innovation in the 13th century was Mediterranean, centered on Frederick II's polyglot court and administration in Palermo... Sicily and the Italian South in later centuries suffered a long slide into overtaxed poverty and marginality. Textbook narratives therefore focus not on medieval Palermo, with its Muslim and Jewish bureaucracies and Arabic-speaking monarch, but on the historical winners, Paris and London.\nFriedrich Nietzsche, a prominent German philosopher, mentioned Frederick in his book \"Beyond Good and Evil\" (Part V, aphorism 200). Nietzsche seems to admire Frederick as an archetypal \"\u00fcbermensch\" who resisted the conventional morals of his time and had the courage to create his own moral code to live by. He compares Frederick to figures like Caesar and Leonardo da Vinci, both of whom he sees as embodying strong individualism and, most importantly, the will to power\u2014which Nietzsche believed to be the very core of human greatness.\nFamily.\nFrederick left numerous children, legitimate and illegitimate:\nLegitimate issue.\nFirst wife: Constance of Aragon (1179 \u2013 23 June 1222). Marriage: 15 August 1209, at Messina, Sicily.\nSecond wife: Isabella II of Jerusalem (1212 \u2013 25 April 1228). Marriage: 9 November 1225, at Brindisi, Apulia.\nThird wife: Isabella of England (1214 \u2013 1 December 1241). Marriage: 15 July 1235, at Worms, Germany.\nMistresses and illegitimate issue.\nFrederick had a relationship with Bianca Lancia (c. 1200/10 \u2013 1230/46), possibly starting around 1225. One source states that it lasted 20 years. They had three children:\nMatthew of Paris relates the story of a marriage \"confirmatio matrimonii in articulo mortis\" (on her deathbed) between them when Bianca was dying, but this marriage was never recognized by the Church. Nevertheless, Bianca's children were apparently regarded by Frederick as legitimate, \"legitimatio per matrimonium subsequens\", evidenced by his daughter Constance's marriage to the Nicaean Emperor, and his own will, in which he appointed Manfred as Prince of Taranto and Regent of Sicily.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "68975", "revid": "125972", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68975", "title": "Demographics of Benin", "text": " \nThe demographics of Benin include population density, ethnicity, education level, health of the populace, economic status, religious affiliations and other aspects of the population.\nThe majority of Benin's 13.3 million people live in the south. The population is young, with a life expectancy of 62 years.\nAbout 42 African ethnic groups live in this country; these various groups settled in Benin at different times and have also migrated within the country. Ethnic groups include:\nFrench is the official language but is spoken more in urban than in rural areas. The literacy rate is 54% among adult males and 31% among adult females as of 2018; these rates are slowly growing. Recent migrations have brought other African nationals to Benin, including Nigerians, Togolese and Malians. The foreign community also includes many Lebanese and Indians involved in trade and commerce. The personnel of the many European embassies, foreign aid missions, nongovernmental organizations and missionary groups account for much of the 5,500 European population.\nSeveral religions are practiced in Benin. Traditional African religions are widespread (50%), and their practices vary from one ethnic group to the other. Arab merchants introduced Islam in the north and among the Yoruba. European missionaries brought Christianity to the south and central areas of Benin. Muslims account for 20% of the population and Christians for 30%. Many nominal Muslims and Christians continue to practice traditional African religion traditions. It is believed that West African Vodun originated in Benin and was introduced to Brazil and the Caribbean Islands by slaves taken from this particular area of the Slave Coast.\nPopulation.\nAccording to the total population of Benin was in , compared to only 2,255,000 in 1950. The proportion of children below the age of 15 in 2010 was 43.7%; 53.3% were between 15 and 65 years of age, while 3% were of 65 years or older.\n&lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;/includeonly&gt;\n&lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;/includeonly&gt;\n&lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;/includeonly&gt;\n&lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;/includeonly&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Hidden begin/styles.css\"/&gt;Population Estimates by Sex and Age Group (01.VII.2011) (Data refer to national projections.): \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Hidden begin/styles.css\"/&gt;Population Estimates by Sex and Age Group (01.VII.2019) (Projections based on the 2013 Population Census.): \nVital statistics.\nBenin's registration of vital events is incomplete. The Population Department of the United Nations has prepared the following estimates. Population estimates account for under numeration in population censuses.\nSource: UN DESA, World Population Prospects, 2022\nDemographic and Health Surveys.\nTotal Fertility Rate (TFR) (Wanted Fertility Rate) and Crude Birth Rate (CBR):\nFertility data as of 2011-2012 (DHS Program):\nEthnic groups.\nThere are several dozen ethnolinguistic groups in Benin, representing three of Africa's language families: Niger\u2013Congo, Nilo-Saharan, and Afroasiatic. The latter is represented by Hausa, living mostly as merchants in the north, while Nilo-Saharan is represented by the D\u025bndi people, descending from the Songhai Empire. The Songhay language D\u025bndi predominates along the Niger River in the far north, and is used as a lingua franca in Muslim areas throughout the north, in Alibori, Borgou, and Donga provinces. Of the Niger\u2013Congo family, five branches are represented:\nThe largest ethnic group are the Fon, with 1.7 million speakers of the Fon language (2001), followed by the various Yoruba groups (1.2 million), the Aja (600,000), the Bariba (460,000), the Ayizo (330,000), the Fulani (310,000), and the Gun (240,000). Near the ports in the south can be found many people who are descended from returned Brazilian slaves.\nLanguages.\nOver 50 languages are spoken in Benin. The official language is French. Of the many indigenous African languages, Fon and Yoruba are the most important in southern Benin. In the north there are at least six major languages, including Baatonum and Fulani.\nReligion.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Pie chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nIslam 27.7%, Roman Catholic 25.5%, Protestant 13.5% (Celestial 6.7%, Methodist 3.4%, other Protestant 3.4%), Vodoun 11.6%, other Christian 9.5%, other traditional religions 2.6%, Other 2.6%, None 5.8%, (2013 est.) \nPew Forum estimated that, in 2010, that Roman Catholics constituted 30% of the country, Protestants 23.2%, and other Christians 0.3%, with all Christians making up 53.4% of the population.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n and the 2003 U.S. Department of State website."}
{"id": "68976", "revid": "36254462", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68976", "title": "Politics of Benin", "text": " \nThe Politics of Benin take place in the framework of a presidential representative democratic republic, where in the President of Benin is both head of state and head of government, and of a multi-party system. Executive power is exercised by the government. Legislative power is vested in both the government and the legislature. The Judiciary is independent of the executive and the legislature. The current political system is derived from the 1990 Constitution of Benin and the subsequent transition to democracy in 1991. The Economist Intelligence Unit rated Benin a \"hybrid regime\" in .\nDevelopment of political system.\nFrom the 17th century until the colonial period, the Kingdom of Dahomey (whose borders encompassed more than present day Benin) was ruled by an \"Oba\". The French were the colonial power from 1892 to 1960, when independence was finally achieved. Between 1960 and 1972, a series of military coups in Benin (known until 1975 as the Republic of Dahomey) brought about many changes of government. The last of these brought Major Mathieu K\u00e9r\u00e9kou to power as the head of a regime professing strict Marxist-Leninist principles. The Revolutionary Party of the People of Benin (PRPB) remained in complete power until the beginning of the 1990s. K\u00e9r\u00e9kou, encouraged by France and other democratic powers, convened a National Conference that introduced a new democratic constitution and held presidential and legislative elections. K\u00e9r\u00e9kou's principal opponent at the presidential poll, and the ultimate victor, was Prime Minister Nic\u00e9phore Soglo. Supporters of Soglo also secured a majority in the National Assembly.\nThus, Benin was the first African country to successfully complete the transition from dictatorship to a pluralistic political system. In the second round of National Assembly elections held in March 1995, Soglo's political vehicle, the Parti de la Renaissance du Benin, was the largest single party, but it lacked an overall majority. The success of a party formed by supporters of ex-president K\u00e9r\u00e9kou, who had officially retired from active politics, encouraged him to stand successfully at both the 1996 and 2001 presidential elections.\nConstitution.\nSpurred in part by the collapse of the Soviet Union and the resultant lack of donor support from the superpower, as well as an economic crisis within the country, Benin adopted a new constitution in 1990 in order to open up and liberalise the political system and economy. Its chief aims are to enshrine in law accountability, transparency, freedom of religion, freedom of the press, separation of governmental powers, the right to strike, universal suffrage (at age 18) and independence of the judiciary\nThese developments have created economic growth in Benin, but some of the bold ideals of the constitution have yet to be fully realised. Lack of accountability and transparency, failure to separate the judiciary from the political system, and high levels of illiteracy are the main stumbling blocks. Additionally, state employees are poorly paid, which makes them susceptible to bribery and corruption. There are unresolved issues with many pre-constitution laws which contradict the constitution. Many of the older laws derive from French legal norms as France was the former colonial power. Critics have also complained that the constitution makes no mention of the right to an adequate standard of living.\nSince being written, the constitution has been translated into eight of the national languages of Benin. Broadcasts on local radio stations, in both in urban and rural areas, have publicised the constitution across the country.\nExecutive branch.\nThe President of Benin is elected for a five-year term. An individual can serve only two terms, whether successive or separated. Election is by absolute majority, after a second round if necessary.\nCandidates must be:\nIn 2006, Mathieu K\u00e9r\u00e9kou was not constitutionally permitted to run for re-election since he had already served two terms and was over 70 years old. Despite speculation, this was not changed and he stood down after the election of his successor, Yayi Boni.\nThe Cabinet of Benin is under the authority of the President, and serves to advise and help formulate strategies. It also liaises with ministries and other government institutions. The Beninese government's website has a https:// and a https:// of senior ministers.\nLegislative branch.\nThe National Assembly is the Parliament of Benin - the primary legislative body. Deputies are elected every four years, in contrast to the five-year term of the president. There are 109 available seats. It exercises the legislative power and oversight authority over Government action. Members of the army are not allowed to stand unless they resign from their military position.\nElections and political parties.\nDuring the 2001 presidential elections, alleged irregularities led to a boycott of the run-off poll by the main opposition candidates. The four top-ranking contenders following the first round of presidential elections were Mathieu K\u00e9r\u00e9kou (incumbent) 45.4%, Nicephore Soglo (former president) 27.1%, Adrien Houngb\u00e9dji (National Assembly Speaker) 12.6%, and Bruno Amoussou (Minister of State) 8.6%. The second round balloting, originally scheduled for March 18, 2001, was postponed for days because both Soglo and Houngb\u00e9dji withdrew, alleging electoral fraud. This left K\u00e9r\u00e9kou to run against his own Minister of State, Amoussou, in what was termed a \"friendly match\". The next presidential elections were held in March 2006; with both K\u00e9r\u00e9kou and Soglo constitutionally unable to stand, political newcomer Yayi Boni was elected, defeating Houngb\u00e9dji in a second round of voting. Yayi Boni and his parliamentary allies also won the elections of 2011.\nTalon ran as an independent candidate in the March 2016 presidential election. Although he finished second to Prime Minister Lionel Zinsou of the Cowry Forces for an Emerging Benin in the first round of voting, he won the second round with 65% of the vote. Talon said that he would \"first and foremost tackle constitutional reform\", discussing his plan to limit presidents to a single term of five years in order to combat \"complacency\". He also said that he planned to slash the size of the government from 28 to 16 members. He was sworn in on 6 April 2016. The composition of his government was announced later in the day.\nOn September 1, 2025, Talon and the Ruling Coalition in the National Assembly, made up of the Progressive Union for Renewal &amp; Republican Bloc, nominated Finance Minister Romuald Wadagni as a Candidate for the 2026 Elections, with Talon confirming he would not seek a third term.\nJudicial branch.\nThe \"Constitutional Court\" allows private citizens to challenge the government. This has been used particularly in cases of workplace discrimination. The \"Supreme Court\" has the highest level of jurisdiction in legal matters. It is designed as a check on the executive, and also acts in a consultative role. The \"High Court of Justice\", which cannot include the President, is made up of members of the Constitutional Court, Parliament and the president of the Supreme Court. It alone can judge the President.\nAudiovisual and Communication Authority.\nThis institution guarantees the freedom of the press and access to the media. It is also charged with ensuring all citizens have access to official information.\nInternational organizations.\nACP, AfDB, ECA, ECOWAS, Entente, FAO, FZ, G-77, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICCt, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IDB, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, ILO, IMF, IMO, Interpol, IOC, IOM, ITU, MIPONUH, MONUC, NAM, OAU, OIC, OPCW, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UNMEE, UPU, WADB (regional), WAEMU, WCL, WCO, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "68977", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68977", "title": "Torches", "text": ""}
{"id": "68978", "revid": "44974353", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68978", "title": "Telecommunications in Benin", "text": " \nTelephones - main lines in use:\n110,300 (2007)\n&lt;br&gt;\"country comparison to the world:\" 137\nTelephones - mobile cellular:\n1,895 million (2007)\n&lt;br&gt;\"country comparison to the world:\" 114\nTelephone system:\n&lt;br&gt;\"general assessment:\"\ninadequate; fixed-line network characterized by aging, deteriorating equipment with fixed-line teledensity stuck at 1 per 100 persons; mobile-cellular telephone subscribership is increasing\n&lt;br&gt;\"domestic:\"\nsystem of open-wire, microwave radio relay, and cellular connections; multiple mobile-cellular providers\n&lt;br&gt;\"international:\"\ncountry code - 229; landing point for the SAT-3/WASC fiber-optic submarine cable that provides connectivity to Europe and Asia; satellite earth stations - 7 (Intelsat-Atlantic Ocean) (2007)\nRadio broadcast stations:\nAM 1, FM 34, shortwave 1 (2007)\nRadios:\n620,000 (1997)\nTelevision broadcast stations:\n6 (2007)\nTelevisions:\n60,000 (1997)\nInternet Hosts:\n848 (2008)\n&lt;br&gt;\"country comparison to the world:\" 157\nInternet Users:\n150,000 (2007)\n&lt;br&gt;\"country comparison to the world:\" 137\nCountry codes: .bj"}
{"id": "68979", "revid": "43252809", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68979", "title": "Transport in Benin", "text": "Benin possesses railway and road infrastructure, as well as two seaports. Benin currently does not have rail connections to other countries, but new proposals seek to change this.\nRailways.\nBenin has a total of of single track, railway. Benin does not, at this time, share railway links with adjacent countries - Niger possesses no railways to connect to, and while the other surrounding countries, Nigeria, Togo and Burkina Faso, do have railway networks, no connections have been built. In 2006, an Indian proposal appeared, which aims to link the railways of Benin with Niger and Burkina Faso. Benin will be a participant in the AfricaRail project.\nRoads.\nBenin possesses a total of 6,787\u00a0km of highway, of which 1,357\u00a0km are paved. Of the paved highways in the country, there are 10 expressways. This leaves 5,430\u00a0km of unpaved road.\nThe Trans\u2013West African Coastal Highway crosses Benin, connecting it to Nigeria to the east, and Togo, Ghana and Ivory Coast to the west. When construction in Liberia and Sierra Leone is finished, the highway will continue west to seven other Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) nations. A paved highway also connects Benin northwards to Niger, and through that country to Burkina Faso and Mali to the north-west.\nWith the exception of the road linking Cotonou in the south to Malanville on the border with Niger in the north, and from Parakou in central Benin to Natitingou in the northwestern part of the country, roads in Benin are generally in poor condition and are often impassable during the rainy season. Benin's unpaved roads vary widely in quality; deep sand and potholes are common. During the rainy season from mid-June to mid-September, dirt roads often become impassable. Four-wheel drive vehicles with full spare tires and emergency equipment are recommended.\nMost of the main streets in Cotonou are paved, but side streets are often dirt with deep potholes. Traffic moves on the right, as in the United States. Cotonou has no public transportation system; many Beninese people rely on bicycles, mopeds, motorbikes, and z\u00e9midjans (moped taxis). Buses and bush taxis offer service in the interior.\nGasoline smuggled from Nigeria is widely available in glass bottles and jugs at informal roadside stands throughout Cotonou and much of the country. This gasoline is of unreliable quality, often containing water or other contaminants that can damage or disable vehicles. There are periodic gas shortages, which can be particularly acute in the north of the country where there are few service stations.\nPoorly maintained and overloaded transport and cargo vehicles frequently break down and cause accidents. Drivers often place branches or leaves in the road to indicate a broken down vehicle is in the roadway. Undisciplined drivers move unpredictably through traffic. Construction work is often poorly indicated. Speed bumps, commonly used on paved roads in and near villages, are seldom indicated. Drivers must be on guard against people and livestock wandering into or across the roads. Nighttime driving is particularly hazardous as vehicles frequently lack headlights and/or taillights, and brake lights are often burned out.\nWith few exceptions, Cotonou and other cities lack any street lighting, and lighting on roads between population centers is non-existent. There have been numerous carjackings and robberies on roads in Benin after dark, several of which resulted in murder when the driver refused to comply with the assailants' demands. The National Police periodically conduct vehicle checks at provisional roadblocks in an effort to improve road safety and reduce the increasing number of carjackings.\nWater.\nBenin's waterways are navigable along small sections, but are only locally important. There are two ports in Benin, Cotonou, a railhead, and Porto-Novo. The country does not have a merchant marine.\nAirports.\nThe civil aviation authority in Benin is the \"Agence Nationale de l'Aviation Civile du B\u00e9nin\" (ANAC).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "68980", "revid": "49468898", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68980", "title": "Benin Armed Forces", "text": "Military of Benin\nThe Benin Armed Forces (; FAB) constitutes the army, navy, air force, and national gendarmerie of Benin. For a number of years, the Belgian Armed Forces have had an active programme of co-operation with Benin, offering training and coaching, donating redundant military equipment and using the country for limited military exercises.\nHistory.\nThe constitution of 11 December 1990 ordered the Benin Armed Forces to ensure effective, permanent and efficient security coverage of the territory, as well as border vigilance.\nThe national gendarmerie no longer exists since 2018. It has been merged with the national police.\nBranches.\nArmy.\nAs of 2012[ [update]], the Army had a strength of 4,300. It includes 1 armoured squadron, 3 infantry battalions, 1 commando/airborne battalion, 1 artillery battery, and 1 engineer battalion, and 1 National Fire Brigade. The army has the following units:\nAir Force.\nAfter achieving independence from France in 1960 the Benin Air Force was transport equipped with seven French-supplied Douglas C-47s, four MH.1521 Broussards and two Agusta-Bell 47Gs. Two F-27s entered service in 1978 for transport duties before being transferred to Air Benin. Also during the same era, two AN-26s were acquired. In late 1985 two Dornier Do-28s entered service to replace the C-47s. A single DHC-6 Twin Otter was acquired in 1989.\nNavy.\nAs of 2012, the navy has a strength of approximately 200 personnel. It operates two ex-Chinese patrol boats, which are designated the \"Matelot Brice Kpomasse\" class.\nRepublican Guard.\nThe Republican Guard is responsible for the security of the President of the Republic, ministers, members of the government, institutions of the Republic and their leader.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "68981", "revid": "7447121", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68981", "title": "Foreign relations of Benin", "text": " \nAfter seizing power in the 1972 coup d'\u00e9tat, Major Mathieu K\u00e9r\u00e9kou declared the People's Republic of Benin a Marxist-Leninist state and sought financial support from communist governments in Eastern Europe and Asia. To distance the modern state from its colonial past, the country became the People's Republic of Benin in 1975. However, Benin dropped the socialist ideology in 1989 following pressure from creditors and domestic unrest related to economic hardship.\nIn recent years Benin has strengthened ties with France, the former colonial power, as well as the United States and the main international lending institutions. Benin has also adopted a mediating role in the political crises in Liberia, Guinea-Bissau, and Togo and provided a contribution to the United Nations force in Haiti, all of which were indications of the country's growing confidence in the international community. Some of the allies of Benin are France, India, US, UK, Netherlands, Ghana, and China.\nDiplomatic relations.\nList of countries which Benin maintains diplomatic relations with:"}
