{"id": "57691", "revid": "1754504", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57691", "title": "Outline of ancient Rome", "text": "Overview of and topical guide to ancient Rome\nThe following outline is provided as an overview of and topical guide to ancient Rome:\nAncient Rome \u2013 former civilization that thrived on the Italian Peninsula as early as the 8th century BC. Located along the Mediterranean Sea and centered on the city of Rome, it expanded to become one of the largest empires in the ancient world.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nGeography of ancient Rome.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nGovernment and politics of ancient Rome.\nPolitical institutions of ancient Rome.\nPolitical institutions of ancient Rome\nMagistrates.\nRoman magistrate\nOrdinary magistrates.\nOrdinary magistrate\nExtraordinary magistrates.\nExtraordinary magistrate\nRoman law.\nRoman law\nMilitary of ancient Rome.\nMilitary of ancient Rome\nMilitary history of Rome.\nMilitary history of ancient Rome\nGeneral history of ancient Rome.\nRoman era\nRoman Republic\nRoman historiography.\nRoman historiography\nCulture of ancient Rome.\nCulture of ancient Rome\nArchitecture of ancient Rome.\nAncient Roman architecture\nTypes of buildings and structures\nArt in ancient Rome.\nRoman art\nReligion in ancient Rome.\nReligion in ancient Rome\nRoman mythology.\nRoman mythology\nLanguage in ancient Rome.\nLatin\nLanguages of the Roman Empire\nEconomy of ancient Rome.\nRoman economy\nScholars.\nAncient.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAncient Roman lists.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "57693", "revid": "116035", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57693", "title": "Cognitive behaviour therapy", "text": ""}
{"id": "57694", "revid": "51012040", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57694", "title": "Dover, Delaware", "text": "Dover ( ) is the capital and the second-most populous city of the U.S. state of Delaware, after Wilmington. It is also the county seat of Kent County and the principal city of the Dover metropolitan statistical area, which encompasses all of Kent County and is part of the Philadelphia\u2013Wilmington\u2013Camden, PA\u2013NJ\u2013DE\u2013MD, combined statistical area. It is located on the St. Jones River in the Delaware River coastal plain. It was named by William Penn for Dover in Kent, England (for which Kent County is named). As of 2020, its population was 39,403.\nEtymology.\nThe city is named after Dover, in Kent, England. First recorded in its Latinised form of \"Portus Dubris\", the name derives from the Brythonic word for waters (\"dwfr\" in Middle Welsh). The same element is present in the town's French (Douvres) and Modern Welsh (Dofr) forms.\nHistory.\nDover was founded as the court town for newly established Kent County in 1683 by William Penn, the proprietor of the territory generally known as the \"Lower Counties on the Delaware.\" Later, in 1717, the city was officially laid out by a special commission of the Delaware General Assembly. The capital of the state of Delaware was moved here from New Castle in 1777 because of its central location and relative safety from British raiders on the Delaware River. Because of an act passed in October 1779, the assembly elected to meet at any place in the state they saw fit, meeting successively in Wilmington, Lewes, Dover, New Castle, and Lewes again, until it finally settled down permanently in Dover in October 1781. The city's central square, known as The Green, was the location of many rallies, troop reviews, and other patriotic events. To this day, The Green remains the heart of Dover's historic district and is the location of the Delaware Supreme Court and the Kent County Courthouse.\nDover was most famously the home of Caesar Rodney, the popular wartime leader of Delaware during the American Revolution. He is known to have been buried outside Dover, but the precise location of his grave is unknown. A cenotaph in his honor is erected in the cemetery of the Christ Episcopal Church near The Green in Dover.\nDover and Kent County were deeply divided over the issue of slavery, and the city was a \"stop\" on the Underground Railroad because of its proximity to slave-holding Maryland and free Pennsylvania and New Jersey. It was also home to a large Quaker community that encouraged a sustained emancipation effort in the early 19th century. There were very few slaves in the area, but the institution was supported, if not practiced, by a small majority, who saw to its continuation.\nThe Bradford-Loockerman House, Building 1301, Dover Air Force Base, John Bullen House, Carey Farm Site, Christ Church, Delaware State Museum Buildings, John Dickinson House, Dover Green Historic District, Eden Hill, Delaware Governor's Mansion, Greenwold, Hughes-Willis Site, Loockerman Hall, Macomb Farm, Mifflin-Marim Agricultural Complex, Old Statehouse, Palmer Home, Town Point, Tyn Head Court, and Victorian Dover Historic District are listed on the National Register of Historic Places.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Stack/styles.css\"/&gt;\nOn August 4, 2020, Hurricane Isaias produced an EF2 tornado that struck the city. Trees were significantly damaged, including some that fell on homes, roofing was blown off a middle school, a warehouse had metal walls torn off, some tractor trailers were blown over and a garage was severely damaged. Damage in Dover was rated EF1. The tornado would be on the ground for tracked , becoming the longest-tracked tornado in the state, but there were no casualties.\nGeography.\nAccording to the United States Census Bureau, the city has a total area of , of which is land and , or 1.32%, is water.\nClimate.\nDover has a warm temperate climate or humid subtropical climate (K\u00f6ppen \"Cfa\"). Summers are hot and humid, with 25 days per year reaching or surpassing . Brief, but heavy summer thunderstorms are common. Winters are moderated by the Delaware Bay and the partial shielding of the Appalachians, though there are normally 8\u22129 days when the daily high remains below freezing and 15 nights with lows below . Snow is typically light and sporadic, averaging only per year, and does not usually remain on the ground for long. The hardiness zone is 7b. Spring and autumn provide transitions of reasonable length and are similar, though spring is wetter. The monthly mean temperature ranges from in January to in July. The annual total precipitation of around is spread rather evenly year-round.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\nIn 2010, Dover had a population of 36,047 people. During the census of 2000, there were 32,135 people, 12,340 households, and 7,502 families residing in the city. The population density was . There were 13,195 housing units at an average density of . According to the 2020 United States census, its population grew to 39,403 people.\nIn 2010, the racial makeup of the city was 48.3% White, 42.2% African American, 2.7% Asian, 0.5% Native American, 0.1% Pacific Islander, 2.1% from other races, and 4.1% from two or more races; 6.6% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race. In 2000, the racial makeup of the city was 54.9% White, 37.2% African American, 0.5% Native American, 3.2% Asian, &lt;0.1% Pacific Islander, 1.6% from other races, and 2.6% from two or more races; 4.1% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race. By 2021, the American Community Survey estimated its racial makeup was 41.5% non-Hispanic white, 40.5% African American, 0.6% Native American, 2.4% Asian, 9.7% two or more races, and 8.1% Hispanic or Latino of any race.\nAs of 2000, there were 12,340 households, out of which 30.0% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 40.4% were married couples living together, 16.7% had a female householder with no husband present, and 39.2% were non-families. 31.4% of all households were made up of individuals, and 10.6% had someone living alone who was 65\u00a0years of age or older. The average household size was 2.35 and the average family size was 2.98. In the city of Dover the age distribution of the population shows 23.5% under the age of 18, 15.7% from 18 to 24, 27.9% from 25 to 44, 19.5% from 45 to 64, and 13.3% who were 65\u00a0years of age or older. The median age was 33\u00a0years. For every 100 females, there were 88.9 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 85.1 males.\nIn 2000, the median income for a household in the city was $38,669, and the median income for a family was $48,338. Males had a median income of $34,824 versus $26,061 for females. The per capita income for the city was $19,445. About 11.5% of families and 13.8% of the population were below the poverty line, including 19.6% of those under age 18 and 10.4% of those age 65 or over. In 2021, the median household income for a household in the city was $51,073 (~$ in 2024) and 20.5% of the population lived at or below the poverty line.\nEconomy.\nDelaware's largest employer is also Dover's: the state government. A large portion, but not all, of the state's bureaucracy is in and around Dover. Wilmington, in northern Delaware and the state's largest city, has many state offices and employees one might expect to find in the state capital, including the headquarters of the Office of the Attorney General, especially as many large American corporations maintain nominal offices in that city to register their Delaware corporation.\nDover is one of the fastest-growing areas in Delaware, due in large part to the relatively low cost of living. As a consequence, the Kent County government is a major employer in the area. Apart from the state and county governments, Dover's significant employers include Dover Air Force Base, in the southeast corporate limits of the city. The base houses two airlift wings as well as the U.S. military's only mortuary in the continental U.S., which accepts and processes the remains of soldiers killed in battle. In addition, Kraft Foods and Procter &amp; Gamble have manufacturing facilities in Dover. Kraft Foods' Dover plant has been the plant that manufactures Jell-O since 1964, when it relocated from LeRoy, New York. The P&amp;G plant makes Pampers Baby Fresh wipes. ILC Dover, in nearby Frederica, produces fabrics for military and aerospace uses and is the primary contractor for production of the Apollo and Skylab spacesuits, as well as the spacesuit assembly for the Space Shuttle's Extravehicular Mobility Unit (EMU). Several local and national retailers and restaurants line US 13 through Dover, with the Dover Mall situated along this corridor and serving as the area's only shopping mall.\nOne weekend a year in the spring, NASCAR races are held at Dover Motor Speedway, attracting about 65,000 spectators. Attendance at the races is much lower than in the 1990s and 2000s, when 140,000 spectators sometimes came. The races bring in increased patronage for local businesses, and hotels and motels sell out weeks in advance. Many race fans camp in RVs and tents adjacent to the track. These races, and in recent years adjacent slot machine gambling at Bally's Dover, contribute millions of dollars to Dover's economy.\nFirefly Music Festival has been held in the Woodlands of Dover Motor Speedway every summer since 2012.\nEducation.\nColleges and universities.\nDover is home to Delaware State University, a land-grant university and Delaware's only historically black university. The city was also home to Wesley College, which is now the Delaware State University Downtown campus. Campus Community School, a public charter school, is located on the Wesley College grounds. It is also home to the Terry Campus of the Delaware Technical Community College and that college's administrative offices. Dover also has satellite locations of the University of Delaware and Wilmington University.\nK-12 education.\nThree public school districts serve Dover residents. The majority of the city is served by the Capital School District, which includes Dover High School. The southern portion of Dover is served by the Caesar Rodney School District, which includes Caesar Rodney High School located just outside the city in Camden. The Polytech School District, which includes Polytech High School located in Woodside, serves as an overlay district for vocational-technical students.\nThe Dover Air Force Base Middle School is located on the premises of the Dover Air Force Base. This school is unusual in that it is run not by the Department of Defense Education Activity (DoDEA), but by the Caesar Rodney School District.\nDover Academy, which incorporated in 1810, was a private school. On April 14, 1919, the Delaware General Assembly created the Dover Special School District. The Delaware State Board of Education counted Dover's segregated school for black children as its own school district in minutes recorded during the 1919-1920 school year. The Dover special school district merged into the Capital School District on July 1, 1969.\nCulture.\nThe former Dover Opera House, built in 1904, was renovated and converted to the Schwartz Center for the Arts, which hosted performances by the Dover Symphony Orchestra, ballet, and classic films. The Schwartz Center for the Arts closed on June 30, 2017, due to financial issues.\nThe Kent County Theatre Guild was founded in 1953 and presents a five-show season at the organization's theater, the Patchwork Playhouse. It is run solely by volunteers, who handle everything from governance and building maintenance to set construction, acting and directing. It is open to anyone interested in participating in or learning about live theater.\nDover is also home to The Children's Theatre, Inc. of Dover and Kent County, a non-profit organization.\nThe Delaware State Library, the Delaware State Museum, and the Delaware State Archives are in downtown Dover and are open to the public for research and browsing.\nIn Dover's historical district is the Sewell C. Biggs Museum of American Art, featuring collections from the Colonial days to the present.\nAn Amish community resides to the west of Dover, consisting of 11 church districts and about 1,650 people. The Amish first settled in Kent County in 1915, with the settlement almost dying out in the '20s and '30s, but rebounding from the 60's to present. The area is home to several Amish businesses selling items such as Amish food, furniture, quilts, and handmade crafts. Every September, the http://, the largest bike ride in Delaware, takes place in the area. In recent years, increasing development has led to the decline in the number of Amish living in the community, with some moving to areas with cheaper farmland and less traffic, such as Michigan, Upstate New York, Illinois, Kentucky, and southern Virginia.\nParks and recreation.\nThe City of Dover Parks &amp; Recreation Department maintains several parks in the city, consisting of three larger parks and 27 smaller parks. Silver Lake Park is a 182-acre park located along Silver Lake and offers fishing, boating, a walking/jogging path that provides views of the lake, a playground, benches, and pavilions. Schutte Park offers a variety of athletic facilities including 10 multipurpose fields, four lighted softball fields, a pavilion, a playground, a cross country course, waking paths, the Dover Little League baseball fields, and the John W. Pitts Recreation Center. The recreation center at Schutte Park has meeting rooms, a gym with two basketball courts and three volleyball courts, and an indoor walking track; it is home to a variety of fitness classes, sports, and sport leagues. Dover Park offers three tennis courts, a softball field, multipurpose field, two basketball courts, a disc golf course, and two pavilions. Dover is home to several smaller neighborhood parks including City Hall Plaza, Continental Park, Crossgates Park, Division &amp; Kirkwood Streets Park, Kirkwood &amp; Mary Streets Park, Hamlet, Heatherfield East, Mallard Pond, Mayfair Park, Millcreek Park, New &amp; Dover Streets Park, Orville Myers, Paul's Property, Richardson Park, Saulsbury Park, The Green, Turner Drive, Westfield, Westwind Meadows, Williams Park, and Woodbrook.\nMedia.\nTwo newspapers are headquartered in Dover, the \"Dover Post\", printed weekly and online, and the daily \"Delaware State News\".\nKent County is within the , with the local Xfinity cable system carrying most channels from that city, alongside Salisbury stations WBOC-TV 16 (CBS), WMDT 47 (ABC), WCPB 28 (PBS), and low-powered NBC affiliate WRDE-LD 31. WBOC-TV maintains a bureau in Dover, and WHYY-TV 12, the PBS member station in Philadelphia, maintains a studio and broadcasting facility in Dover. WHYY programming is seen locally on WDPB-TV channel 64 from Seaford (part of the Salisbury television market).\nWDDE, Delaware's first NPR station, launched in August 2012. It broadcasts on 91.1 FM. Delaware was the last state in the nation to have an NPR station located within its borders.\nSports.\nDover Motor Speedway is home to a NASCAR race weekend in July. The race weekend features the ARCA Menards Series on Friday, the NASCAR Xfinity Series on Saturday, and the NASCAR Cup Series on Sunday. Located with Dover Motor Speedway is Bally's Dover, a harness horse racing track, hotel and casino. The harness track is located within the NASCAR track.\nThe two colleges in town are both active in sports. The Wesley College Wolverines are a perennial powerhouse in NCAA Division III football, where they began play in the New Jersey Athletic Conference in 2015, while other sports compete in the Capital Athletic Conference. The Delaware State Hornets compete in NCAA Division I, with football competing at the FCS level of Division I, as a member of the Mid-Eastern Athletic Conference made up of other historically black colleges and universities.\nFor one week during the middle of July every year, Dover also hosts the Big League (Little League 16\u201318) Eastern Regionals, attracting teams from all of New England and the Mid-Atlantic.\nThere are several golf courses located near Dover. They include the Maple Dale Country Club in Dover, Wild Quail Country Club near Camden, Jonathan's Landing Golf Course near Magnolia, Dover Center Par 3 and Driving Range in Dover, and the Eagle Creek Golf Course (Must have military I.D.) on the Dover Air Force Base.\nHistorically, Dover hosted a farm team of the Philadelphia Phillies in the Eastern Shore Baseball League. It also served as an affiliate of the minor-league Baltimore Orioles. The teams were variously known as the Senators, Dobbins, Orioles, and Phillies.\nIn 2008, there was high attendance for the NASCAR races and Delaware State's football team making its first FCS tournament appearance.\nCombat Zone Wrestling held its yearly Tournament of Death in Dover twice.\nGovernment.\nDover is governed via the council-manager system with an elected mayor, currently Robin R. Christiansen since 2014. The council consists of nine members, eight of whom are elected from four districts with each district having two members. One member of the council is elected at large. Municipal elections, which are nonpartisan, are held on the third Tuesday in April in odd-numbered years. The mayor is elected directly by the city voters for a four-year term. City council members are elected to staggered four-year terms.\nThere have been four full-time Mayors of Dover to date: James \"Hutch\" Hutchison from 1994 to 2004; Stephen Speed from 2004 to 2007; Carleton Carey from 2007 to 2014; Robin R. Christiansen since 2014.\nThe Dover Police Department provides police services to the city of Dover. The police department is led by a Chief of Police, currently Thomas Johnson, and consists of 101 officers, responding to 43,000 calls a year. The Dover Police Department is composed of several sworn police units along with civilian units. Fire protection in Dover is provided by the Dover Fire Department, a volunteer fire department which has served the city since 1882 and operates two stations in Dover. Station 1 is the department's headquarters and houses Engines 4, 6, and 7; Ladder 2; Rescue 1; Brush 9; and Marine 1. The Dover Fire Department Museum is also located at the headquarters. Station 2 houses Engines 2 and 3; Ladder 1; Utility 1; and the foam trailer. \nDover is the only state capital in the United States with a volunteer fire department.\nFederally, Dover is part of Delaware's at-large congressional district, represented by Democrat Sarah McBride, elected in 2024. The state's senior member of the United States Senate is Democrat Chris Coons, first elected in 2010. The state's junior member of the United States Senate is Democrat Lisa Blunt Rochester, elected in 2024. The governor of Delaware is Democrat Matt Meyer, elected in 2024.\nInfrastructure.\nTransportation.\nThe most prominent highway serving Dover is the Delaware Route 1 toll road, which is the main route to Wilmington and the Delaware Beaches. It passes east of downtown, with the toll portion ending near the Dover Air Force Base and DE 1 continuing south on Bay Road. U.S. Route 113 formerly ran along Bay Road from Milford to US 13 near the State Capitol Complex, but was decommissioned north of Milford in 2004 to avoid the concurrency with DE 1 between the Dover Air Force Base and Milford.\nThe main north\u2013south highway through central Dover is U.S. Route 13, which runs through the main commercial strip of Dover on the multi-lane, divided Dupont Highway. An alternate route of U.S. Route 13, U.S. Route 13 Alternate, passes through downtown Dover on Governors Avenue. Delaware Route 8 is the main east\u2013west route through Dover, passing through downtown on Division Street and West Dover on Forrest Avenue. It continues west toward Maryland to provide access to the Chesapeake Bay Bridge. Delaware Route 15 passes north\u2013south through the western part of Dover along Hazlettville Road, West North Street, Saulsbury Road, and McKee Road. Dover is one of only four state capitals not served by an Interstate highway. Pierre, South Dakota; Jefferson City, Missouri; and Juneau, Alaska are the other three state capitals with this distinction.\nParking in the downtown area of Dover consists of free on-street two-hour parking and five off-street parking lots offering a total of 440 spaces. Parking lots in downtown Dover contain a mix of permit parking, parking meters, and free two-hour, 15-minute, and handicapped parking spaces along with spaces reserved for tenants and apartments. Parking is free on evenings and weekends.\nDover Air Force Base is located within the southeast corporate limits of Dover. Airports near Dover with commercial air service include the Wilmington Airport in Wilmington, the Wicomico Regional Airport in Salisbury, Maryland, the Baltimore-Washington International Thurgood Marshall Airport in Baltimore, and the Philadelphia International Airport in Philadelphia. Other general aviation airports near Dover include Chandelle Estates Airport to the northeast of the city, Delaware Airpark near Cheswold, and Jenkins Airport near Wyoming.\nDover is located on a former Pennsylvania Railroad line, later operated by Penn Central, Conrail, and Norfolk Southern and now operated by the Delmarva Central Railroad as its Delmarva Subdivision. Into the 1950s multiple PRR passenger trains daily, on a Philadelphia-Cape Charles, Virginia circuit, made stops in Dover, including the \"Del-Mar-Va Express\" and the night train, the \"Cavalier.\" Passenger service ended when the \"Blue Diamond\" was discontinued on December 31, 1965. In later years, Dover was served by special Amtrak trains to NASCAR races at Dover International Speedway and the Delaware State Fair in Harrington. Today, the rail line is just used for local freight. The closest passenger rail station is the Wilmington station in Wilmington, served by Amtrak's Northeast Corridor and SEPTA Regional Rail's Wilmington/Newark Line.\nDART First State provides local bus service throughout Dover and Kent County, radiating as a hub-and-spoke system from the Dover Transit Center in downtown. They also provide inter-county service to Wilmington on the Route 301, Middletown on the Route 302, Georgetown on the Route 303, and Lewes on the Route 307 and seasonal service to Lewes on the Route 305 \"Beach Connection\".\nGreyhound Lines are provided as intercity bus transportation along a route running between the Port Authority Bus Terminal in New York City and Richmond, Virginia, with a bus stop at the 7-Eleven store along U.S. Route 13 in the northern part of Dover.\nUtilities.\nThe city of Dover provides various utility services to businesses and residents. The Department of Public Works provides trash collection, recycling, water, and sewer service to the city. Republic Services provides recycling collection under contract to the city. The City of Dover Electric Department provides electricity to the city and some surrounding areas to the south and east, including the town of Little Creek. The city's electric department is a member of the Delaware Municipal Electric Corporation, a wholesale electric utility that represents municipal electric departments in the state of Delaware. The City of Dover Electric Department generates some of its electricity from the Van Sant Generating Station, which consists of one natural gas-powered unit that is used on a limited basis. The city also generates electricity from solar power at the Dover SUN Park, a 10 MW solar power farm on 103 acres at the Garrison Oak technology park owned by SunPower. The remainder of the city's electricity is purchased. Natural gas service in Dover is provided by Chesapeake Utilities.\nHealth care.\nBayhealth Medical Center operates the Bayhealth Hospital, Kent Campus in Dover. The hospital offers various inpatient services including a birthing room and cardiovascular and cancer services. The Kent Campus also offers numerous outpatient services, patient and family support services, community outreach, and imaging services. The hospital has a 24-hour emergency room with a Level III trauma center.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "57696", "revid": "2322585", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57696", "title": "Cognitive-behavioural therapy", "text": ""}
{"id": "57697", "revid": "2322585", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57697", "title": "Cognitive-behaviour therapy", "text": ""}
{"id": "57698", "revid": "2322585", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57698", "title": "Cognitive Behaviour Therapy", "text": ""}
{"id": "57699", "revid": "2322585", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57699", "title": "Cognitive-behavioural Therapy", "text": ""}
{"id": "57700", "revid": "50916781", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57700", "title": "Tallahassee, Florida", "text": "Capital city of Florida, United States\nTallahassee ( ) is the capital city of the U.S. state of Florida. It is the county seat of and the only incorporated municipality in Leon County. Tallahassee became the capital of Florida, then the Florida Territory, in 1824. In 2024, the estimated population was 205,089, making it the eighth-most populous city in the state of Florida. It is the principal city of the Tallahassee, Florida Metropolitan Statistical Area, which had an estimated population of 397,675 as of 2024[ [update]]. Tallahassee is the largest city in the Florida Big Bend and Florida Panhandle regions.\nWith a student population exceeding 70,000, Tallahassee is a college town, home to Florida State University, Florida A&amp;M University, and Tallahassee State College (a large state college that serves mainly as a feeder school to FSU and FAMU).\nAs the capital, Tallahassee is the site of the Florida State Capitol, Supreme Court of Florida, Florida Governor's Mansion, and nearly 30 state agency headquarters. The city is also known for its large number of law firms, lobbying organizations, trade associations and professional associations, including The Florida Bar and the Florida Chamber of Commerce. It is a recognized regional center for scientific research, and home to the National High Magnetic Field Laboratory. In 2025, Tallahassee was awarded the All-America City Award by the National Civic League for the third time.\nHistory.\nIndigenous peoples occupied this area for thousands of years before European encounter. Around 1200, the large and complex Mississippian culture had built earthwork mounds near Lake Jackson which survive today; they are preserved in the Lake Jackson Archaeological State Park.\nThe Spanish founded St. Augustine in 1565, establishing the oldest continuously occupied European-established settlement in the continental United States. In the 17th century, they developed a network of missions in Apalachee territory to supply food and labor for the colony and to convert Indigenous peoples to Roman Catholicism. The largest, Mission San Luis de Apalachee in Tallahassee, has been partially reconstructed by the state of Florida. The Narv\u00e1ez expedition encountered the Apalachee people but did not reach the site of Tallahassee. In 1539\u201340, Hernando de Soto\u2019s expedition occupied the Apalachee town of Anhaica (in present-day Tallahassee) over the winter. Based on archaeological excavations, the Anhaica site was about east of the present Florida State Capitol. The De Soto encampment is often cited as the first place that Christmas was celebrated in the continental United States.\nThe name \"Tallahassee\" is a Muskogean word often translated as \u201cold fields\u201d or \u201cold town\u201d. It was likely an expression used by Creek migrants from Georgia and Alabama who moved into the region in the late 18th and early 19th centuries as U.S. settlement expanded into their homelands, where they found large areas of cleared land previously occupied by the Apalachee. The Creek and later refugees who joined them developed as the Seminole people of Florida. The Talimali Band of Apalachee Indians in Louisiana identify as present-day descendants of the Apalachee.\nDuring the First Seminole War, General Andrew Jackson conducted operations in and around Tallahassee against the Seminoles and other Native people. On November 12, 1817, after Chief Neamathla of the village of Fowltown (just west of present-day Tallahassee) refused orders to relocate, U.S. forces entered the village, burned it, and drove off its inhabitants. The Indians retaliated, killing soldiers and civilians. Jackson reentered Florida in March 1818. According to Jackson\u2019s adjutant, Colonel Robert Butler, they \u201cadvanced on the Indian village called Tallahasse [sic] [where] two of the enemy were made prisoner\u201d.\nState capital.\nFlorida became an American territory in September 1821, in accordance with the Adams-On\u00eds Treaty of 1819.\nThe first session of the Legislative Council of the Territory of Florida met on July 22, 1822, at Pensacola, the former capital of West Florida. Members from St. Augustine, the former capital of East Florida, traveled 59 days by water to attend. The second session was in St. Augustine, and western delegates needed 28 days to travel perilously around the peninsula to reach St. Augustine. During this session, delegates decided to hold future meetings at a halfway point. Two appointed commissioners selected Tallahassee, then an Apalachee settlement (Anhaica) virtually abandoned after Andrew Jackson burned it in 1818, as a halfway point. In 1824, the third legislative session met there in a crude log building serving as the capitol.\nFrom 1821 through 1845, during Florida's territorial period, the rough-hewn frontier capital gradually developed as a town. The Marquis de Lafayette, French hero of the American Revolution, returned to the United States in 1824 for a tour. The U.S. Congress voted to give him $200,000 (the same amount he had given the colonies in 1778), US citizenship, and the Lafayette Land Grant, of land that today includes large portions of Tallahassee. In 1845, a Greek revival masonry structure was erected as the Capitol building in time for statehood. Now known as the \"old Capitol\", it stands in front of the high-rise Capitol building built in the 1970s.\nTallahassee was in the heart of Florida's Cotton Belt\u2014Leon County led the state in cotton production\u2014and was the center of the slave trade in Florida. During the American Civil War, Tallahassee was the only Confederate state capital east of the Mississippi River not captured by Union forces, and the only one not burned. A small engagement, the Battle of Natural Bridge, was fought south of the city on March 6, 1865, just a month before the war ended.\nDuring the 19th century, the institutions that later developed into Florida State University were established in Tallahassee; it became a university town. These included the Tallahassee Female Academy (founded 1843) and the Florida Institute (founded 1854). In 1851, the Florida legislature decreed two seminaries be built on either side of the Suwannee River, East Florida Seminary and West Florida Seminary. In 1855, West Florida Seminary was transferred to the Florida Institute building (which had been established as an inducement for the state to place the seminary in Tallahassee). In 1858, the seminary absorbed the Tallahassee Female Academy and became coeducational. Its main building was near the northwest corner of South Copeland and West Jefferson streets, approximately where FSU's Westcott Building is today.\nIn 1887, the Normal College for Colored Students, the ancestor of today's FAMU, opened its doors. The legislature decided Tallahassee was the best location in Florida for a college serving African-American students; the state had segregated schools. Four years later, its name was changed to State Normal and Industrial College for Colored Students, to teach teachers for elementary school children and students in industrial skills.\nAfter the Civil War, much of Florida's industry moved south and east, a trend that continues today. The end of slavery and the rise of free labor reduced the profitability of the cotton and tobacco trades, at a time when world markets were also changing. The state's major industries shifted to citrus, lumber, naval stores, cattle ranching, and tourism. The latter was increasingly important by the late 19th century. In the post-Civil War period, many former plantations in the Tallahassee area were purchased by wealthy northerners for use as winter hunting preserves. This included the hunting preserve of Henry L. Beadel, who bequeathed his land for the study of the effects of fire on wildlife habitat. Today the preserve is known as the Tall Timbers Research Station and Land Conservancy, nationally recognized for its research into fire ecology and the use of prescribed burning.\n1900\u201399.\nUntil World War II, Tallahassee remained a small Southern town with virtually the entire population living within one mile (1.6\u00a0km) of the Capitol. The main economic drivers were the colleges and state government, where politicians met to discuss spending money on grand public improvement projects to accommodate growth in places such as Miami and Tampa Bay, hundreds of miles away from the capital.\nTallahassee was also active in protest during the civil rights era. The Tallahassee bus boycott was a citywide boycott in Tallahassee, Florida that sought to end racial segregation in the employment and seating arrangements of city buses. On May 26, 1956, Florida A&amp;M University students Wilhelmina Jakes and Carrie Patterson were arrested by the Tallahassee Police Department for \"placing themselves in a position to incite a riot\". Robert Saunders, representing the NAACP, and Rev. C. K. Steele began talks with city authorities while the local African-American community started boycotting the city's buses. The Inter-Civic Council ended the boycott on December 22, 1956. On January 7, 1957, the City Commission repealed the bus-franchise segregation clause because of the United States Supreme Court ruling \"Browder v. Gayle\" (1956). In the 1960s, there was a movement to transfer the capital to Orlando, closer to the state's growing population centers. That movement was defeated; the 1970s saw a long-term commitment by the state to the capital city, with the construction of the new capitol complex and preservation of the old Florida State Capitol building.\nIn 1970, the Census Bureau reported the city's population as 74.0% white and 25.4% black. In 1971, the city elected James R. Ford to the 5-member City Commission, and he became the city's first African-American mayor in 1972 (commissioners rotated into the position serving a one-year term).\nBobby Bowden became the head coach of Florida State Seminoles football in 1976, and turned Tallahassee into a city dominated by college football. Bowden became very successful very quickly at Florida State. By his second year, Bowden had to deny rumors that he would leave for another job; the team went 9\u20132, compared to the four wins total in the three seasons before Bowden. During 34 years as head coach he had only one losing season\u2013his first, in 1976.\nIn 1977, the 22-story high-rise Capitol building, designed by architect Edward Durell Stone, was completed. Since 2021, it has been the third-tallest state capitol building in the United States. In 1978, the Old Capitol, directly in front of the new Capitol, was scheduled for demolition, but state officials decided to keep it as a museum. In 1986, Jack McLean served as mayor, the second African-American to hold the position.\n2000\u2013present.\nTallahassee was the center of world attention for six weeks during the 2000 United States Presidential election recount, which involved numerous rulings by the Florida Secretary of State and the Florida Supreme Court.\nTallahassee has been impacted by many natural disasters, including a direct hit by Hurricane Hermine, which caused about 80% of the city proper to lose power, including Florida State University; Hurricane Michael in 2018; and two EF2 tornadoes in 2024.\nGeography.\nThe approximate coordinates for the City of Tallahassee is located at .\nTallahassee has an area of , of which is land and , or 2.59%, is water.\nTallahassee's terrain is hilly by Florida standards, being at the southern end of the Red Hills Region, just above the Cody Scarp. The elevation varies from near sea level to just over , with the state capitol on one of the highest hills in the city. The city includes two large lake basins, Lake Jackson and Lake Lafayette, and borders the northern end of the Apalachicola National Forest.\nThe flora and fauna are similar to those found in the mid-south and low country regions of South Carolina and Georgia. The palm trees are the more cold-hardy varieties like the state tree, the \"Sabal palmetto\". Pines, magnolias, hickories, and a variety of oaks are the dominant trees. The Southern Live Oak is perhaps the most emblematic of the city.\nNearby cities and suburbs.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nCityscape.\nNeighborhoods.\nTallahassee has many neighborhoods inside the city limits. Some of the most known and defined include All Saints, Apalachee Ridge, Betton Hills, Buck Lake, Callen, Frenchtown (the oldest historically black neighborhood in the state), Killearn Estates, Killearn Lakes Plantation, Lafayette Park, Levy Park, Los Robles, Midtown, Holly Hills, Jake Gaither/University Park, Indian Head Acres, Myers Park, Smokey Hollow, SouthWood, Seminole Manor and Woodland Drives.\nTallahassee is also home to some gated communities, including Golden Eagle, Ox Bottom, Lafayette Oaks, and The Preserve at San Luis; the Tallahassee Ranch Club is to the southeast of the city.\nUrban planning and expansion.\nThe first plan for the Capitol Center was the 1947 Taylor Plan, which consolidated several government buildings in one downtown area. In 1974, the Capitol Center Planning Commission for the City of Tallahassee, Florida responded to growth of its urban center with a conceptual plan for the expansion of its Capitol Center. Hisham Ashkouri, working for The Architects' Collaborative, led the urban planning and design effort. Estimating growth and related development for approximately the next 25 years, the program projected the need for 2.3\u00a0million square feet (214,000\u00a0m2) of new government facilities in the city core, with 3,500 dwelling units, of new public open space, retail and private office space, and other ancillary spaces. Community participation was an integral part of the design review, welcoming Tallahassee residents to provide input as well as citizens' groups and government agencies, resulting in the creation of six separate design alternatives. \nSprawl and compact growth.\nThe Tallahassee-Leon County Planning Department implements policies aimed at promoting compact growth and development, including the establishment and maintenance of an Urban Service Area. The intent of the Urban Service Area is to \"have Tallahassee and Leon County grow in a responsible manner, with infrastructure provided economically and efficiently, and surrounding forest and agricultural lands protected from unwarranted and premature conversion to urban land use.\" The result of compact growth policies has been a significant overall reduction in the Sprawl Index for Tallahassee between 2000 and 2010. CityLab reported on this finding, stating \"Tallahassee laps the field, at least as far as the Sprawl Index is concerned.\"\nClimate.\nTallahassee has a humid subtropical climate (K\u00f6ppen: \"Cfa\"), with long, tropical summers and short, mild winters, as well as warm to hot, drier springs and autumns. Tallahassee falls in USDA hardiness zone 9a (). Summer maximum temperatures are hotter than locations to the south on the Florida peninsula and it is one of the few cities in the state to occasionally record temperatures above ; there are an average of 11.2 days per year that have temperatures at least that high. The record high of was set on June 15, 2011.\nSummer is characterized by brief intense showers and thunderstorms that form along the afternoon sea breeze from the Gulf of Mexico. The daily mean temperature in July, the hottest month, is . Conversely, the winter is markedly cooler, with a January daily average temperature of . There is an average of 34.6 nights with a minimum at or below freezing, and on average, the window for freezing temperatures is from November 22 thru March 16, allowing a growing season of 250\u00a0days. With the data from the 1991\u20132020 normals, Tallahassee is in a USDA 9a zone by a small margin, the coldest temperature of the year usually being about . Temperature readings below are very rare, having last occurred on January 11, 2010.\nDuring the Great Blizzard of 1899 the city reached on February 13, which remains Florida's only recorded subzero reading. The record cold daily maximum is , set on the same day as the all-time record low. More recently, a daily maximum was recorded in 1985. Conversely, the record warm daily minimum is on July 15, 1980.\nHowever, the city itself is considerably warmer than the airport where the National Weather Service records its data from, even though the National Weather Service does not record data from it. This is due to an urban heat island, which creates an average disparity of 5.8\u00a0\u00b0F (3.2\u00a0\u00b0C) and is especially pronounced during winter.\nSnow and ice are rare in Tallahassee, not occurring during most winters. Historically, snow flurries are recorded every three to four years, but measurable snowfall of or more has only happened once in the 1991\u20132020 time period. Tallahassee has recorded a few very small accumulating snowfalls over the last 100 years; the greatest amount was on February 13, 1958. Tallahassee's other recorded measurable snowfalls were on February 12\u201313, 1899, and December 22\u201323, 1989; on March 28, 1955, and February 10, 1973; on February 2, 1951; on January 3, 2018; and 1.9 inches on January 21\u201322, 2025.\nAlthough several hurricanes have brushed Tallahassee with their outer rain and wind bands, in recent years only Hurricane Kate, in 1985, and Hurricane Hermine, in 2016, have struck Tallahassee directly. Hurricane Michael passed to the west after making landfall near Mexico Beach, Florida in October 2018 as a Category 5 storm, resulting in 95% of Leon County being without power.\nThe Big Bend area of North Florida sees several tornadoes each year during the season, but they are generally weak, cause little structural damage, and rarely hit the city. On April 19, 2015, a tornado touched down in Tallahassee. The tornado was rated EF1, and created a path as wide as for almost near Maclay Gardens. Damage included numerous downed tree limbs and a car crushed by a falling tree. During extremely heavy rains, some low-lying parts of Tallahassee may flood, notably the Franklin Boulevard area adjacent to the downtown and the Killearn Lakes subdivision, outside the Tallahassee city limits, on the north side.\nThe most recent tornadoes to hit the city were EF2s on May 10, 2024. One of them hit downtown Tallahassee, being wide.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\n2020 census.\nAs of the 2020 United States census, there were 196,169 people, 78,283 households, and 34,639 families residing in the city.\n2010 census.\nAs of the 2010 United States census, there were 181,376 people, 73,289 households, and 34,516 families residing in the city.\nIn the 2010 census, 16.7% of which had children under 18 living in them. 27.7% were married couples living together, 14.4% had a female householder with no husband, and 53.7% were non-families. 34.1% of all households were made up of individuals living alone and 6.7% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.23 and the average family size was 2.33. Children under the age of 5 were 4.9% of the population, persons under 18 were 16.7% and persons 65 years or older were 10.3%. The median age was 26 years. For every 100 females, there were 89.5 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 86.7 males.\nFor 2009\u20132013, the estimated median household income was $39,524, and the per capita income was $23,778. In 2010, the percentage of persons below the poverty level was estimated at 30.2%.\nLanguages.\nAs of 2000[ [update]], 92.0% of residents spoke English as their first language, while 4.1% spoke Spanish, 0.6% spoke French, and 0.6% spoke German as their mother tongue. In total, 8.0% of the total population spoke languages other than English.\nHigher learning.\nEducationally, the population of Leon County is the most highly educated population in Florida with 54.4% of the residents over the age of 25 holding a Bachelor's, Master's, professional or doctorate degree. The Florida average is 37.4% and the national average is 33.4%.\nLaw, government and politics.\nPolitics.\nTallahassee has traditionally been a Democratic city, but the party has been supported by different ethnic groups over time, with a major shift in the late 20th century. Leon County has voted Democratic in 24 of the past 29 presidential elections since 1904. But until the late 1960s, most African Americans were disenfranchised from the political system, dating from Jim Crow laws passed by Democrats in Florida (and in all other Southern states) at the turn of the century. At that time, most African Americans were affiliated with the Republican Party, and their disenfranchisement resulted in that party being non-competitive in the region for decades. Subsequently, these demographic groups traded party alignments in the 1960s and 1970s.\nSince passage of the Voting Rights Act of 1965 and enforcement of constitutional rights for African Americans, voters in Tallahassee have elected black mayors and black state representatives. It has become a city in the Southern U.S. that is known for progressive activism. This is likely due to the fact that Tallahassee and Leon County have the highest level of college graduates in the state. In addition, in the realignment of party politics since the late 20th century, most of the African-American population in the city now support Democratic Party candidates.\nAs of December 2, 2018, there were 112,572 Democrats, 58,083 Republicans, and 44,007 voters who were independent or had other affiliations among the 214,662 voters in Leon County.\nLeon County's voter turnout percentage has consistently ranked among the highest of Florida's 67 counties, with a record-setting 86% turnout in the November 2008 general election. The county voted for Barack Obama in the presidential election.\nStructure of city government.\nTallahassee has a form of government with an elected mayor of Tallahassee, elected commissioners, and an at-will employed city manager, city departments, and staff.\nThe city commissioners as of November 9, 2020 were:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Hidden begin/styles.css\"/&gt;List of intendants/mayors of Tallahassee, Florida\nFederal representation and offices.\nTallahassee is part of Florida's 2nd congressional district.\nThe United States Postal Service operates post offices in Tallahassee. The Tallahassee Main Post Office is at 2800 South Adams Street. Other post offices in the city limits include Centerville Station, Leon Station, Park Avenue Station, and Westside Station.\nThe National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration maintains a National Weather Service in Tallahassee. Their coverage-warning area includes the eastern Florida Panhandle and adjacent Gulf of Mexico waters, the north-central Florida peninsula, and parts of southeastern Alabama and southwestern Georgia.\nThe 81st Regional Support Command of the United States Army Reserve (USAR) has an Army Reserve Center at 4307 Jackson Bluff Road.\nThe Naval and Marine Corps Reserve Center (NMCRC) is at 2910 Roberts Avenue host the United States Navy Reserve Navy Operational Support Center Tallahassee (NOSC Tallahassee) and the United States Marine Corps Reserve 2nd Platoon, Company E, Anti-Terrorism Battalion and 3rd Platoon, Company E, Anti-Terrorism Battalion.\nConsolidation.\nVoters of Leon County have gone to the polls four times to vote on consolidation of Tallahassee and Leon County governments into one jurisdiction combining police and other city services with already shared (consolidated) Tallahassee Fire Department and Leon County Emergency Medical Services. Tallahassee's city limits would increase from to . Roughly 36 percent of Leon County's 265,714 residents live outside the Tallahassee city limits.\nEach time, the measure was rejected:\nThe proponents of consolidation have stated the new jurisdiction would attract business by its size. Merging governments would cut government waste, duplication of services, etc. However, Professor Richard Feiock of the Department of Public Administration of Korea University and the Askew School of Public Administration and Policy of Florida State University states that no discernible relationship exists between consolidation and the local economy.\nFlag.\nThe former flag of Tallahassee was vaguely similar to the flag of Florida, a white saltire on a blue field, with the city's coat of arms, featuring the cupola of the old capitol building, at the center. The flag is an homage to the Scottish and Ulster-Scots Presbyterian heritage of the original founders of the city, most of whom were settlers from North Carolina whose ancestors had either come to America directly from Scotland, or were Presbyterians of Scottish descent from County Down and County Antrim in what has since become Northern Ireland. The current flag incorporates a stylized 5-point star and the city name on a white background.\nEducation.\nPrimary and secondary.\nTallahassee anchors the Leon County School District. As of the 2009 school year Leon County Schools had an estimated 32,796 students, 2209 teachers and 2100 administrative and support personnel. The superintendent of schools is Rocky Hanna. Leon County public school enrollment continues to grow steadily (up approximately 1% per year since the 1990\u201391 school year). The dropout rate for grades 9\u201312 improved to 2.2% in the 2007\u20132008 school year, the third time in the past four years the dropout rate has been below 3%.\nTo gauge performance the State of Florida rates all public schools according to student achievement on the state-sponsored Florida Comprehensive Assessment Test (FCAT). Seventy-nine percent of Leon County Public Schools received an A or B grade in the 2008\u20132009 school year. The overall district grade assigned to the Leon County Schools is \"A\". Students in the Leon County School District continued to score favorably in comparison to Florida and national averages in the SAT and ACT student assessment tests. The Leon County School District has consistently scored at or above the average for districts statewide in total ACT and SAT mean composite scores.\nHigher education.\nFlorida State University.\nFlorida State University (commonly referred to as Florida State or FSU) is an American public space-grant and sea-grant research university. Florida State is on a 1,391.54-acre (5.631 km2) campus in the state capital of Tallahassee, Florida, United States. It is a senior member of the State University System of Florida. Founded in 1851, it is on the oldest continuous site of higher education in the state of Florida.\nThe university is classified as a Research University with Very High Research by the Carnegie Foundation for the Advancement of Teaching. The university comprises 16 separate colleges and more than 110 centers, facilities, labs and institutes that offer more than 360 programs of study, including professional school programs. The university has an annual budget of over $1.7\u00a0billion. Florida State is home to Florida's only National Laboratory \u2013 the National High Magnetic Field Laboratory and is the birthplace of the commercially viable anti-cancer drug Taxol. Florida State University also operates The John &amp; Mable Ringling Museum of Art, the State Art Museum of Florida and one of the nation's largest museum/university complexes.\nThe university is accredited by the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools (SACS). Florida State University is home to nationally ranked programs in many academic areas, including law, business, engineering, medicine, social policy, film, music, theater, dance, visual art, political science, psychology, social work, and the sciences.\nFlorida Governor Rick Scott and the state legislature designated Florida State University as one of two \"preeminent\" state universities in the spring of 2013 among the twelve universities of the State University System of Florida.\nFSU's intercollegiate sports teams, commonly known by their Florida State Seminoles nickname, compete in National Collegiate Athletic Association (NCAA) Division I and the Atlantic Coast Conference (ACC). The Florida State Seminoles athletics program are favorites of passionate students, fans and alumni across the United States, especially when led by the Marching Chiefs of the Florida State University College of Music. In their 113-year history, Florida State's varsity sports teams have won 20 national athletic championships and Seminole athletes have won 78 individual NCAA national championships.\nFlorida A&amp;M University.\nFounded on October 3, 1887, Florida A&amp;M University (commonly referred to as FAMU) is a public, historically black university and land-grant university that is part of the State University System of Florida and is accredited by the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools. FAMU's main campus comprises 156 buildings spread over atop the highest geographic hill in Tallahassee. The university also has several satellite campuses, including a site in Orlando where its College of Law is located and sites in Miami, Jacksonville and Tampa for its pharmacy program. Florida A&amp;M University offers 54 bachelor's degrees and 29 master's degrees. The university has 12 schools and colleges and one institute.\nFAMU has 11 doctoral programs which include 10 PhD programs: chemical engineering, civil engineering, electrical engineering, mechanical engineering, industrial engineering, biomedical engineering, physics, pharmaceutical sciences, educational leadership, and environmental sciences. The top undergraduate programs are architecture, journalism, computer information sciences, and psychology. FAMU's top graduate programs include pharmaceutical sciences, public health, physical therapy, engineering, physics, master's of applied social sciences (especially history and public administration), business and sociology.\nTallahassee State College.\nTallahassee State College (TSC) is a member of the Florida College System. Tallahassee State College is accredited by the Florida Department of Education and the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools. Its primary campus is on a 270-acre (1.092 km2) campus in Tallahassee. The institution was founded in 1966 by the Florida Legislature.\nTSC offers Bachelor's of Science, Associate of Arts, Associate of Science, and Associate of Applied Sciences degrees. In 2013, the school (then known as Tallahassee Community College) was listed first in the nation in graduating students with A.A. degrees. TSC is also the No. 1 transfer school in the nation to Florida State University and Florida A&amp;M University. As of Fall 2015, TSC reported 38,017 students. In 2024, Tallahassee Community College was approved to be renamed Tallahassee State College, and the name change took effect on July 1, 2024.\nIn partnership with Florida State University, and Florida A&amp;M University Tallahassee State College offers the \"TSC2FSU\", and \"TSC2FAMU\" program. This program provides guaranteed admission into Florida State University and Florida A&amp;M University for TSC Associate in Arts degree graduates.\nOther colleges.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nEconomy.\nCompanies based in Tallahassee include: Citizens Property Insurance Corporation, the Municipal Code Corporation, the State Board of Administration of Florida (SBA), the Mainline Information Systems, and United Solutions Company.\nEmployment.\nAs of 2024[ [update]], the unemployment rate in Tallahassee was 3.3% and per capita personal income was $55,363; Tallahassee's top employers were:\nArts and culture.\nEntertainment and performing arts.\nTallahassee is home to many entertainment venues, theaters, museums, parks, and performing arts centers, including the Railroad Square Art Park.\nMuseums.\nTallahassee is known for its many museums. It is home to the Museum of Fine Arts at Florida State University, Tallahassee Museum, Goodward Museum &amp; Gardens, Museum of Florida History, Mission San Luis de Apalachee, Tallahassee Automobile Museum, Old Capitol Museum, Knott House Museum, and The Grove.\nMusic.\nThe first notable musician in Tallahassee was Ray Charles, raised in Greenville. Between terms at the Florida School for the Deaf and Blind, he visited family in Tallahassee and performed in Frenchtown.\nGeorge Clinton, founder of Parliament-Funkadelic, has lived in Tallahassee since 1994.\nFaheem Rashad Najm, better known as T-Pain, was born and raised in Tallahassee. He is known for popularizing the creative use of the Auto-Tune pitch correction effect.\nEmo music group Mayday Parade originated in Tallahassee and several members still live there.\nPost-grunge band Creed formed in Tallahassee during 1994.\nSports.\nFlorida State Seminoles.\nIn 2016- 2017, the Florida State Seminoles of Florida State University generated the thirteenth-most revenue in collegiate athletics with $144,514,413 of total revenue.\nMedia.\nRadio.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nPublic safety.\nEstablished in 1826, the Tallahassee Police Department once claimed to be the oldest police department in the Southern United States and the second-oldest in the U.S., preceded only by the Philadelphia Police Department (established in 1758). The Boston Police Department was established in 1838 and larger East Coast cities followed with New York City and Baltimore in 1845. However, this is proven incorrect. Pensacola, Florida, for example, had a municipal police force as early as 1821.\nThere are over 800 sworn law enforcement officers in Tallahassee. Law enforcement services are provided by the Tallahassee Police Department, the Leon County Sheriff's Office, the Florida Department of Law Enforcement, Florida Capitol Police, Florida State University Police Department, Florida A&amp;M University Police Department, the Tallahassee State College Police Department, the Florida Highway Patrol, and the Florida Fish and Wildlife Conservation Commission.\nThe Tallahassee Growth Management Building Inspection Division is responsible for issuing permits and performing inspections of public and private buildings in the city limits. These duties include the enforcement of the Florida Building Codes and the Florida Fire Protection Codes. These standards are present to protect life and property. The Tallahassee Building Department is one of 13 Accredited Building Departments in the United States.\nThe Federal Bureau of Investigation, United States Marshals Service, Immigration and Customs Enforcement, Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives, Secret Service and Drug Enforcement Administration have offices in Tallahassee. The United States District Court for the Northern District of Florida is based in Tallahassee.\nFire and rescue services are provided by the Tallahassee Fire Department and Leon County Emergency Medical Services.\nHospitals in the area include Tallahassee Memorial Healthcare, Capital Regional Medical Center and HealthSouth Rehabilitation Hospital of Tallahassee.\nPlaces of interest.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSister cities.\nTallahassee has 5 sister cities as follows:\nTallahassee groups and organizations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nState associations based in Tallahassee.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "57701", "revid": "382591", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57701", "title": "Buryats", "text": "Siberian ethnic group\nThe Buryats are a Mongolic ethnic group native to southeastern Siberia who speak the Buryat language. They are one of the two largest indigenous groups in Siberia, the other being the Yakuts. The majority of the Buryats today live in their titular homeland, the Republic of Buryatia, a federal subject of Russia which sprawls along the southern border and partially straddles Lake Baikal. Smaller groups of Buryats also inhabit Ust-Orda Buryat Okrug (Irkutsk Oblast) and the Agin-Buryat Okrug (Zabaykalsky Krai) which are to the west and east of Buryatia respectively as well as northeastern Mongolia and Inner Mongolia, China. Traditionally, they formed the major northern subgroup of the Mongols.\nBuryats share many customs with other Mongolic peoples, including nomadic herding, and erecting gers for shelter. Today the majority of Buryats live in and around Ulan-Ude, the capital of the Buryat Republic, although many still follow a more traditional lifestyle in the countryside. They speak a central Mongolic language called Buryat. UNESCO's 2010 edition of the \"Atlas of the World's Languages in Danger\" classifies the Buryat language as \"severely endangered\".\nHistory.\nThe Buryats were formed from various ethnic components of Mongolic, Turkic, Tungusic and Samoyedic origin. The earliest inhabitants of the Baikal region were presumably Tungusic and Samoyedic tribes. It is believed that the ethnogenesis of the Buryats involved such tribes as the Bayirku and the Kurykans , who were part of the tribal union of the Tiele. At the same time, with regard to the Bayyrku and the Kurykans, alongside the Turkic version there are also hypotheses suggesting that they represented Mongolic elements within the Tiele confederation. The hypothesis of the Turkic origin of the Bayirku is shared by a number of researchers, such as N. A. Aristov, \u00c9. Chavannes, A. N. Bernshtam, B. R. Zoriktuev. The version of the Ancient Mongolic origin of the Bayegu/Bay\u00efrku was first put forward in detail by G. N. Rumyantsev. The Mongolic hypothesis of the origin of the Bayegu/Bay\u00efrku was supported by scholars Ts. B. Tsydendambaev, A. Ochir, P. B. Konovalov, S. B. Miyagasheva, G. Tubshinima. The Kurykans were regarded as Turkic-speaking by P. Meliorsky, A. P. Okladnikov, S. E. Malov, S. A. Tokarev, B. O. Dolgikh. A Mongolic affiliation of the Kurykans was proposed by V. V. Bartold, P. Pelliot, L. Hambis, Yu. D. Talko-Gryntsevich, V. L. Kotwicz, A. N. Bernshtam, G. N. Rumyantsev, B. B. Dashibalov.\nThe name \"Buriyad\" is mentioned as one of the forest people for the first time in \"The Secret History of the Mongols\" (possibly 1240). It says Jochi, the eldest son of Genghis Khan, marched north to subjugate the Buryats in 1207. the Buryats lived along the Angara River and its tributaries at this time. Meanwhile, their component, Barga, appeared both west of Baikal and in northern Buryatia's Barguzin valley. Linked also to the Bargas were the Khori-Tumed along the Arig River in eastern Kh\u00f6vsg\u00f6l Province and the Angara. A Tumad rebellion broke out in 1217, when Genghis Khan allowed his viceroy to seize 30 Tumad maidens. Genghis Khan's commander Dorbei the Fierce of the D\u00f6rbeds smashed them in response. The Buryats joined the Oirats challenging the imperial rule of the Eastern Mongols during the Northern Yuan period in the late 14th century.\nHistorically, the territories around Lake Baikal belonged to Mongolia, Buryats were subject to T\u00fcsheet Khan and Setsen Khan of Khalkha Mongolia. When the Russians expanded into Transbaikalia (eastern Siberia) in 1609, the Cossacks found only a small core of tribal groups speaking a Mongol dialect called Buryat and paying tribute to the Khalkha. However, they were powerful enough to compel the Ket and Samoyed peoples on the Kan and the Evenks on the lower Angara to pay tribute. According to Bowles, the ancestors of most modern Buryats were speaking a variety of Turkic-Tungusic dialects at that time. However, according to the Russian researcher Nanzatov, the Tungusic and Turkic groups then lived on the outskirts of the Buryat area. They were small fragments assimilated by the Buryat population. In addition to genuine Buryat-Mongol tribes (Bulagad, Khori, Ekhired, Khongoodor) that merged with the Buryats, the Buryats also assimilated other groups, including some Oirats, the Khalkha, Tungus (Evenks) and others. The Khori-Barga had migrated out of the Barguzin eastward to the lands between the Greater Khingan and the Argun. Around 1594, most of them fled back to the Aga and Nerchinsk in order to escape subjection by the Daurs.\nThe Russians reached Lake Baikal in 1643 but the Buryats resisted them and their forces. The Buryats were defeated, though they attempted to revolt a few times. These revolts were suppressed. The territory and people were formally annexed to the Russian state by treaties in 1689 and 1727, when the territories on both the sides of Lake Baikal were separated from Mongolia.\nConsolidation of modern Buryat tribes and groups took place under the conditions of the Russian state. From the middle of the 17th century to the beginning of the 20th century, the Buryat population increased from 77,000 (27,700\u201360,000) to 300,000. Another estimate of the rapid growth in people referring to themselves as Buryat is based on the clan list names paying tribute in the form of a sable-skin tax. This indicates a population of about 77,000 in 1640 rising to 157,000 in 1823 and more than a million by 1950.\nThe historical roots of the Buryat culture are related to the Mongolic peoples. After Buryatia was incorporated into Russia, it was exposed to two traditions\u00a0\u2013 Buddhism and Orthodox Christianity. Buryats west of Lake Baikal and Olkhon (Irkut Buryats), are more \"Russified\", and they soon abandoned nomadism for agriculture, whereas the eastern (Transbaikal) Buryats are closer to the Khalkha, may live in yurts and are mostly Buddhists. In 1741, the Tibetan branch of Buddhism was recognized as one of the official religions in Russia, and the first Buryat datsan (Buddhist monastery) was built.\nThe second half of the 19th century and the beginning of the 20th century was a time of growth for the Buryat Buddhist religion (48 datsans in Buryatia in 1914). Buddhism became an important factor in the cultural development of Buryatia. Because of their skills in horsemanship and mounted combat, many were enlisted into the Amur Cossacks host. During the Russian Civil War most of the Buryats sided with the White forces of Baron Ungern-Sternberg and Ataman Semenov. They formed a sizable portion of Ungern's forces and often received favorable treatment when compared with other ethnic groups in the Baron's army. After the Revolution, most of the lamas were loyal to Soviet power. In 1925, a battle against religion and clergy in Buryatia began. Datsans were gradually closed down and the activity of the clergy was curtailed. Consequently, in the late 1930s the Buddhist clergy ceased to exist and thousands of cultural treasures were destroyed. Attempts to revive Buddhism started during World War II, and it was officially re-established in 1946. A revival of Buddhism has taken place since the late 1980s as an important factor in the national consolidation.\nIn the 1930s, Buryat-Mongolia was one of the sites of Soviet studies aimed to disprove Nazi race theories. Among other things, Soviet physicians studied the \"endurance and fatigue levels\" of Russian, Buryat-Mongol, and Russian-Buryat-Mongol workers to prove that all three groups were equally able.\nIn 1923, the Buryat-Mongol Autonomous Soviet Socialist Republic was formed and included Baikal province (Pribaykalskaya guberniya) with Russian population. The Buryats rebelled against the communist rule and collectivization of their herds in 1929. The rebellion was quickly crushed by the Red Army with loss of 35,000 Buryats. The Buryat refugees fled to Mongolia and resettled, however, only a few of them joined the Shambala rebellion there. In 1937, in an effort to disperse Buryats, Stalin's government separated a number of counties (\"raions\") from the Buryat-Mongol Autonomous Soviet Socialist Republic and formed Ust-Orda Buryat Autonomous Okrug and Agin-Buryat Autonomous Okrug; at the same time, some raions with Buryat populations were left out. Fearing Buryat nationalism, Joseph Stalin had more than 10,000 Buryats killed. Moreover, Stalinist purge of Buryats spread into Mongolia, known as the incident of L'humbee.\nIn 1958, the name \"Mongol\" was removed from the name of the republic (Buryat ASSR). Also around 1958, the Mongolian script was banned and replaced by Cyrillic. BASSR declared its sovereignty in 1990 and adopted the name Republic of Buryatia in 1992. The constitution of the Republic was adopted by the People's Khural in 1994, and a bilateral treaty with the Russian Federation was signed in 1995.\nIn the context of the Russian invasion of Ukraine since 2022, the Buryats have been reported as one of Russia's ethnic minority groups suffering from a disproportionally large casualty rate among Russian forces, reinforcing the processes of assimilation and Russification. Ethnic Buryats often enlist in the army because of financial reasons.\nCulture and traditions.\nRelationship with nature.\nThe Buryat national tradition is ecological by origin in that the religious and mythological ideas of the Buryat people have been based on a theology of nature. The environment has traditionally been deeply respected by Buryats due to the nomadic way of life and religious culture. The harsh climatic conditions of the region have in turn created a fragile balance between humans, society and the environment itself. This has led to a delicate approach to nature, oriented not towards its conquest but rather towards a harmonious interaction and equal partnership with it. A synthesis of Buddhism and traditional beliefs that formed a system of ecological traditions has thus constituted a major attribute of Buryat eco-culture.\nKinship and marriage.\nPrior to the arrival of the Russians, Buryats lived in semi-nomadic groups scattered across the steppes. Kinship was immensely important in Buryat society, both in spiritual and social terms. All Buryats traced their lineage to a single mythical individual, with the particular ancestor varying based upon geographical region. Kinship also determined proximity, as neighbours were nearly always related. Groups of relatives that inhabited the same grazing land organized themselves into clans based on genealogy. While coalitions between clans did occur, they were infrequent and often relied on looser interpretations of kinship and relations.\nMarriage was arranged by the family, at times occurring as early as one to two years old. A unique aspect of traditional Buryat marriage was the \"kalym\", an exchange that combined both bride wealth and a dowry. \"Kalym\" involved a husband exchanging an agreed number of head of cattle for his bride, while the bride's family would provide dowry in the form of a yurt and other essential household goods. If a husband did not have enough cattle, a period of bride service would be arranged. Polygamy was permitted, however only men of extreme wealth could afford the price of multiple wives. Marriage ceremonies involved rituals such as the bride stoking the fire in the grooms tent with three pieces of fat, and sprinkling fat upon the clothing of the groom's father.\nThe arrival of the Russians saw drastic changes to the way \"kalym\" system worked. Money became a significant part of the exchange. Over time, the price of a bride significantly increased to the point where \"in the 1890s, bride price involved '400 to 600 rubles' in addition to 86\u2013107 head of livestock, when 70 years earlier only the wealthiest Western Buryats gave 100 heads (of cattle).\" As the situation worsened, many men engaged in multi-year work contracts with wealthy herd-owners under the promise their employer would aid them in gaining a wife. Later on, the \"kalym\" system fell out of favour, and was replaced by marriages arrangements based upon courtship and romantic feelings.\nReligion.\nReligion today in the Republic of Buryatia is primarily divided between Russian Orthodoxy, Buddhism, and irreligious. Shamanism has undergone a revival in rural areas, however it is still small. Those involved practise either Yellow shamanism, Black shamanism, or a mixture of the two. Similarly, Buddhism has seen a revival among the Buryats. Construction of monasteries, training of monks, and the increasing piety of the Buryats has seen growth.\nShamanism (Tengrism).\nBuryats traditionally practised shamanism, also called Tengrism, with a focus on worship of nature. A core concept of Buryat shamanism is the \"triple division\" of the physical and spiritual world. There are three divisions within the spirit world: the \"tengeri\", the \"b\u014dxoldoy\", and lower spirits. These spirits are the supreme rulers of mankind, the spirits of commoners, and the spirits of slaves respectively. In parallel to this is the concept that man is divided into three parts: the body (\"beye\"), the \"breath and life\" of a man, and the soul. The soul is further divided into three parts: first, second, and third. The first soul is contained within the entirety of the physical skeleton, and that damage to it damages the soul. Rituals involving the sacrifice of animals involve great care not to damage the bones, lest the deity receiving the offering reject it. The second soul is believed to have the power to leave the body, transform into other beings, and is stored in the organs. The third soul is similar to the second, differing only in that its passing marks the end of one's life.\nThe number three and multiples of it are deeply sacred to the Buryat. Examples of this numerology include three major yearly sacrifices, shamans prolonging the lives of the sick by three or nine years, the total number of \"tengeri\" being 99, and countless other examples.\nShamans are divided into two classes: \"great\" shamans of Arctic regions and \"little\" shamans from the taiga. Shamans often are associated with nervous disorders, and in some cases are prone to seizure. Shamans can also be divided into \"White\" shamans that summon good spirits and \"Black\" shamans that summon malicious ones. Yellow shamanism refers to shamanistic practices that have been heavily influenced by Buddhism. Shamans exist to heal, especially in regards to psychological illnesses. Buryat shamanism is not necessarily hereditary, and other members of the kinship-group can receive the calling (however, shamans do keep records of their lineage, and a descendant is preferred). Shamans could both control and be controlled by spirits.\nThere are variations in belief between different traditional groups, so there is no consensus on beliefs and practices. For example, Western Buryats along the Kuda river believe in reincarnation of the third soul, likely a result of their exposure to Buddhism.\nBuddhism.\nA majority of the Buryats are followers of Buddhism. The Buryats converted to Tibetan Buddhism in the early eighteenth century under the influence of Tibetan and Mongolian missionaries.\nOther religions.\nA small minority of Buryats are converts to Christianity. The earliest Orthodox mission was established in Irkutsk in 1731. Some Buryats converted to Christianity for material incentives while others were forcefully converted. Despite its presence in the area, Christianity is not perceived as a \"Buryat\" religion.\nSubsistence.\nTraditionally, the Buryats were semi-nomadic pastoralists. Buryat nomads tended herds of cattle, sheep, goats, and camels. Buryats also relied greatly on local resources to supplement their diets. Following colonization by Russia, pastoralism was gradually replaced by agriculture. The Buryat of today are largely agrarian but most in rural areas still focus on raising livestock as their main way of surviving.\nThe Buryats located in Siberia are still largely focused on raising livestock due to the shortness of the growing season. They focus on the raising of dairy cattle and the growing of berries to sustain most of their diet. There are also some communities that farm various types of trees and cash crops such as wheat and rye. On the slopes of the Sayan and Altai Mountains, there are communities whose way of life is breeding reindeer.\nMongolian Buryats are farmers as well but are typically semi-settled. They build sheds and fences to keep livestock contained and use hay as their main source of food for the livestock. However, the Buryats located in Buryatia are more focused on the agriculture aspect of farming and not the livestock raising aspect.\nTraditional medicine.\nBuryat healing practices incorporates folk shamanic traditions and Tibeto-Mongolian medicine. Before the adoption of Buddhism, the Buryats relied on shamanic rituals to stop or cure pain and illness which was said to be caused by evil spirits. With the conversion to Tibetan Buddhism, Buryats incorporated Tibetan medical practices to their healing practices. Medical schools were soon established and Buryats studying in these schools learned about medical and prescription techniques. Training in treatment and diagnostics was also given in these schools. Buryats soon contributed to expanding the Tibeto-Mongolian medical literature.\nTraditional Buryat medicine emphasises the use of mineral and thermal springs for healing. A balanced diet (of meat, offal, plants and herbs) and proper nutrition were recommended to cure illness. The use of herbs for medical purposes was minimal because of the lack of vegetation in the semi-deserts and dry steppes. However, Buryat healers were considered skilled in healing wounds, treating head trauma, midwifery and bone-setting. In the modern age, some practices derived from Buryat folk medicine have been incorporated into contemporary settings.\nCuisine.\nBuryat cuisine is very similar to Mongolian cuisine and share many dishes like buuz and khuushuur. Dairy products are an important part of the cuisine, and traditional dishes are often hearty and simple. Most main courses are usually meat based, but fish like omul is common especially around Lake Baikal.\nGenetics.\nMitochondrial DNA haplogroups.\nThe Buryats have a diverse pool of mitochondrial DNA, with about 83.7% (247/295) belonging to haplogroups of Eastern Eurasian origin or affinity and about 16.3% (48/295) belonging to haplogroups of Western Eurasian origin or affinity. The most common Eastern Eurasian mtDNA haplogroups among present-day Buryats are D4 (approximately 29% of the total Buryat population), C (approximately 16.6%), and G2a (approximately 11%). The most common Western Eurasian mtDNA haplogroups among the Buryats are H (approximately 6.8%) and U (approximately 5.4%).\nAnother mtDNA study of Buryats shows they have 24% (6/25) of West Eurasian maternal lineages.\nY-chromosome DNA haplogroups.\nLell et al. (2002) tested a sample of thirteen Buryat males collected in Kushun village, Nizhneudinsk District, Irkutsk Region, representing the Buryats of the Sayan-Baikal upland. The Y-chromosomes of these individuals were assigned to the following haplogroups: 6/13 = 46.2% O-M119, 3/13 = 23.1% N-Tat, 2/13 = 15.4% N-DYS7Cdel(xTat), 1/13 = 7.7% C-M48, 1/13 = 7.7% F-M89(xK-M9). This sample entirely lacks C-M407 and instead has a great proportion of O-M119; thus, it appears very different from published samples of Y-DNA collected from Buryats east of Lake Baikal.\nDerenko et al. (2006) tested a sample of 238 Buryat males and found the following Y-DNA haplogroup distribution: 4/238 = 1.7% P*-92R7(xQ-DYS199/M3, R1-M173), 2/238 = 0.8% R1*-M173(xR1a-SRY1532b), 5/238 = 2.1% R1a1-M17, 3/238 = 1.3% N*-LLY22g(xTat), 45/238 = 18.9% N3-Tat, 152/238 = 63.9% C-RPS4Y/M130, 4/238 = 1.7% F*-M89(xG-M201, H-M52, I-M170, J-12f2, K-M9), 1/238 = 0.4% G-M201, 1/238 = 0.4% I-M170, 21/238 = 8.8% K*-M9(xL-M20, N-LLY22g, P-92R7). Boris Malyarchuk, Miroslava Derenko, Galina Denisova, \"et al.\" (2010) retested 217 of these 238 Buryats and found that they were 148/217 (68.2%) haplogroup C-RPS4Y711/M130, including 117/217 (53.9%) C3d-M407, 18/217 (8.3%) C3\u2217-M217(xC3a-M93, C3b-P39, C3c-M77, C3d-M407, C3e-P53.1, C3f-P62), and 13/217 (6.0%) C3c-M77. Fourteen of the 217 Buryats (6.5%) had STR haplotypes belonging to the \"star cluster\" in C3*, from which it might be inferred that they most likely belonged to C2a1a3-P369/M504.\nKarafet et al. (2006) tested a sample of 81 Buryat males and found that they belonged to the following Y-DNA haplogroups: 45/81 = 55.6% C-M217(xM86), 4/81 = 4.9% C-M86, 1/81 = 1.2% G-M201, 1/81 = 1.2% J-12f2, 2/81 = 2.5% N-P43, 23/81 = 28.4% N-M178, 2/81 = 2.5% O-LINE, 3/81 = 3.7% R-M207. Karafet \"et al.\" (2018) retested the same sample of Buryat males (minus the G-M201 singleton) and found that they belonged to the following haplogroups: 4/80 = 5.0% C2a1a2a-M86, 5/80 = 6.3% C2a1a3-P369, 40/80 = 50.0% C2b1a1a1a-M407, 1/80 = 1.3% J2a1-P354(xJ2a1a-L27), 2/80 = 2.5% N1a2b1-P63(xP362), 23/80 = 28.8% N1a1a1a1a3a-P89, 2/80 = 2.5% O2a1b-JST002611, 1/80 = 1.3% R2a-M124, 1/80 = 1.3% R1a1a1b1a-Z282, 1/80 = 1.3% R1b1a1b1a1a2-P312(xL21).\nKim et al. (2011) reported the following Y-DNA haplogroup distribution in a sample of \"Mongolians (Buryats)\": 16/36 = 44.44% C2-M217, 1/36 = 2.78% D1a1a-M15, 1/36 = 2.78% F-M89(xK-M9), 9/36 = 25.00% N-M231, 1/36 = 2.78% O1b2-SRY465(x47z), 1/36 = 2.78% O2a-M324(xO2a1b-JST002611, O2a2-P201), 6/36 = 16.67% O2a2-P201, 1/36 = 2.78% R-M207.\nKharkov et al. (2014) examined blood samples obtained from a total of 297 ethnic Buryats, separated into eight geographical groups according to the location of sample collection: Okinsky district (N = 53) (southwest of the Republic of Buryatia, ethnoterritorial group of Oka Buryats); Dzhida (N = 31) and Kyakhta (N = 27) (south, ethnoterritorial group of Selenga Buryats); the Kizhinga (N = 64) and Eravninsky (N = 30) regions (east, ethnoterritorial group of Khorin Buryats); Kurumkan village (N = 23) (north, ethnoterritorial group of Barguzin Buryats); Ulan-Ude and Khuramsha (30\u00a0km west of Ulan-Ude) (N = 26) (ethnoterritorial group of Kudarinsk Buryats); and Aginskoe village (N = 44) (Agin\u2013Buryat Autonomous Region of Chita, Agin Buryats). For the statistical treatment, samples from Ulan-Ude and Khuramsha village were united into one group designated as \"Ulan-Ude\". The authors found significant differences among eastern Buryats (Khorin Buryats from Kizhinga and Eravninsky districts of Buryatia plus Agin Buryats from Agin-Buryat Okrug of Zabaykalsky Krai), southern and central Buryats (Selenga Buryats from Dzhida and Kyakhta plus Kudarinsk Buryats from Ulan-Ude and Khuramsha), and southwestern and northern Buryats (Oka Buryats from Okinsky district of Buryatia plus Barguzin Buryats from Kurumkan village). Similar to the Buryat samples examined by Malyarchuk \"et al.\" (2010) and Karafet \"et al.\" (2018), the southwestern and northern Buryat samples of Kharkov \"et al.\" (2014) exhibited an extremely high frequency of haplogroup C2-M407: 48/76 = 63.2% C3d-M407, 14/76 = 18.4% N1c1-Tat, 4/76 = 5.3% O3a3c*-M134(xM117), 3/76 = 3.9% C3*-M217(xM77, M86, M407), 2/76 = 2.6% C3c-M77/M86, 2/76 = 2.6% O3a3c1-M117, 2/76 = 2.6% R1a1a-M17, 1/76 = 1.3% N1b-P43. In contrast, the eastern Buryat samples of Kharkov \"et al.\" (2014) exhibited an extremely high frequency of haplogroup N-Tat: 102/138 = 73.9% N1c1-Tat, 19/138 = 13.8% C3d-M407, 5/138 = 3.6% C3c-M77/M86, 4/138 = 2.9% E, 3/138 = 2.2% C3*-M217(xM77, M86, M407), 2/138 = 1.4% R1a1a-M17, 1/138 = 0.7% O3a*-M324(xM7, M134), 1/138 = 0.7% O3a3c1-M117, 1/138 = 0.7% R2a-M124. The southern and central Buryat samples of Kharkov \"et al.\" (2014) exhibited a significant proportion of C3*-M217(xM77, M86, M407), which may be related to Y-DNA subclades that often have been observed among Mongols in Mongolia, while also exhibiting both N-Tat and C-M407 with moderate frequency: 26/84 = 31.0% N1c1-Tat, 19/84 = 22.6% C3d-M407, 16/84 = 19.0% C3*-M217(xM77, M86, M407), 8/84 = 9.5% R1a1a-M17, 7/84 = 8.3% R2a-M124, 4/84 = 4.8% C3c-M77/M86, 4/84 = 4.8% O3a*-M324(xM7, M134).\nHaplogroup N-M178 is found mainly among the indigenous peoples of northern Eurasia (e.g. Yakuts, Finns). Among Buryats, haplogroup N-M178 is more common toward the east (\"cf.\" 50/64 = 78.2% N1c1 in a sample of Buryat from Kizhinginsky District, 34/44 = 77.3% N1c1 in a sample of Buryat from Aga Buryatia, and 18/30 = 60.0% N1c1 in a sample of Buryat from Yeravninsky District, every one of which regions is located at a substantial distance east of the eastern shore of the southern half of Lake Baikal, \"versus\" 6/31 = 19.4% N1c1 in a sample of Buryat from Dzhidinsky District, which is slightly south of the southwestern end of the lake, and 2/23 = 8.7% N1c1 in a sample of Buryat from Kurumkansky District, which is slightly east of the northeastern end of the lake), and it mostly belongs to a subclade (N-F4205) that reaches its maximal frequency among Buryats, but which also has been found in some other Mongolic peoples as well as in Kazakhstan, Uzbekistan, Turkey, Ukraine, and Poland. N-F4205 is estimated to share a common ancestor with N-B202, which has been found in many present-day inhabitants of Chukotka, approximately 4,600 (95% CI 3,700 &lt;-&gt; 5,500) years before present.\nHaplogroup C3d (M407) is found mainly among the northern and southwestern Buryats, Barghuts, Hamnigans, Soyots, Kazakh Khongirad, and D\u00f6rbet Kalmyks.\nNuclear DNA genetic history.\nA large scale genetic study from 2021 shows that the Buryats, as well as other Mongolic ethnic groups, such as Mongols, have nearly exclusively East-Eurasian (East Asian-related) genetic ancestry (\u224895% to 98%), which can be largely traced back to Neolithic millet agriculturalists of Northeast Asia, but also Paleo-Siberians, and \"Yellow river farmers\" from around the Yellow River region of Northern China. Genetic evidence shows that Northeast Asian like ancestry massively expanded westwards during the Bronze Age and Iron Age in several waves. Although Buryats are closer to their Mongolic and Tungusic-speaking neighbors, out of the major East Asian ethnic groups, they are genetically closest to the Koreans, followed by Northern Han, Japanese and Southern Han, in that order, according to FST genetic distance measurements.\nSubgroups.\nAccording to the Buryat creation myth, there were 11 Buryat tribes or clans. According to the myth, all 11 tribes are descendants of a man and a mysterious but beautiful creature that turns into a swan during the day and a woman during the night. After the two married, the man asked her to give him her wings so that she would not turn into a swan anymore. However, it is said that after some time the woman asked for her wings back and flew away never to return. Today there are a number of different Buryat tribes, or clans.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "57702", "revid": "1631", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57702", "title": "Lake Baykal", "text": ""}
{"id": "57704", "revid": "49221303", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57704", "title": "Ulan-Ude", "text": "City in the Republic of Buryatia, Russia\nUlan-Ude (; , ; , ) is the capital city of Buryatia, Russia, located about southeast of Lake Baikal on the Uda River at its confluence with the Selenga. According to the 2021 Census, 437,565 people lived in Ulan-Ude; up from 404,426 recorded in the 2010 Census, making the city the third-largest in the Russian Far East by population.\nNames.\nUlan-Ude was first called Udinskoye (, ) for its location on the Uda River. It was founded as a small fort in 1666. From around 1735, the settlement was called Udinsk (, ) and was granted town status under that name in 1775. It was renamed Verkhneudinsk (, ; \"Upper Udinsk\") in 1783, to differentiate it from Nizhneudinsk (\"Lower Udinsk\") lying on a different Uda River near Irkutsk which was granted town status that year.\nThe descriptors \"upper\" and \"lower\" refer to the positions of the two cities relative to each other, rather than the location of the cities on their respective Uda rivers. Verkhneudinsk lies at the mouth of its river, while Nizhneudinsk is along the middle stretch. The current name was given to the city on 27 July 1934 and means \"red Uda\" in Buryat, reflecting the ideology of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union.\nGeography.\nUlan-Ude lies east of Moscow and southeast of Lake Baikal. It is above sea level at the foot of the Khamar-Daban and Ulan-Burgas mountain ranges, next to the confluence of the Selenga River and its tributary, the Uda, which divides the city.\nHydrography.\nUlan-Ude is traversed by two rivers, the Selenga and Uda. The Selenga provides the greatest inflow to Baikal Lake, supplying 50% of all rivers in its basin. The Selenga brings about of water into the lake per year, exerting a major influence on the lakewater's renewal and its sanitary condition. Selenga is the habitat of the most valuable fish species such as Omul, Siberian sturgeon, Siberian taimen, Thymallus and Coregonus.\nUda is the right inflow of the Selenga river. The length of the watercourse is .\nHistory.\nThe first occupants of the area where Ulan-Ude now stands were the Evenks and, later, the Buryat Mongols. Ulan-Ude was settled in 1666 by the Russian Cossacks as the fortress of Udinskoye. Due to its favorable geographical position, it grew rapidly and became a large trade center which connected Russia with China and Mongolia and, from 1690, was the administrative center of the Transbaikal region.\nBy 1775, it was known as Udinsk, and in 1783 it was granted city status and renamed Verkhneudinsk. After a large fire in 1878, the city was almost completely rebuilt. The Trans-Siberian Railway reached the city in 1900 causing an explosion in growth. The population, which was 3,500 in 1880, reached 126,000 in 1939.\nFrom 6 April to October 1920, Verkhneudinsk was the capital of the Far Eastern Republic, also known as the Chita Republic. It was a nominally independent state that existed from April 1920 to November 1922 in the easternmost part of the Russian Far East. On 27 July 1934, the city was renamed Ulan-Ude.\nFollowing the dissolution of the Soviet Union, a period of rapid and uncontrolled illegal construction of private houses on officially designated agricultural land began. This phenomenon became known as \"Nakhalovki\". Due to the deteriorating economic situation in the region, the city of Ulan-Ude emerged as a favourable destination for internal migration. However, the growing population was met with an insufficient supply of formal housing, which in turn fuelled the spread of Nakhalovki districts in the city suburbs. The uncontrolled growth of those districts make them suffer from lack of necessary infrastructure.\nAdministrative and municipal status.\nUlan-Ude is the capital of the republic. Within the framework of administrative divisions, it is incorporated as the city of republic significance of Ulan-Ude \u2014 an administrative unit with the status equal to that of the districts. As a municipal division, the city of Ulan-Ude is incorporated as Ulan-Ude Urban Okrug.\nUlan-Ude is divided into three subdivisions.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAccording to the 2021 Census, 437,565 people lived in Ulan-Ude; up from 404,426 recorded in the 2010 Census. In terms of population, it is the third-largest city in eastern Siberia. It ranks 45th among all cities in Russia. Roughly 600,000 people live in the urban agglomeration.\nThe ethnic makeup of Ulan-Ude in 2021 was:\nThe city is the center of Tibetan Buddhism in Russia and the important Ivolginsky datsan is located from the city.\nTransportation.\nUlan-Ude is located on the main line (Trans-Siberian line) of the Trans-Siberian Railway between Irkutsk and Chita at the junction of the Trans-Mongolian line (the Trans-Mongolian Railway) which begins at Ulan Ude and continues south through Mongolia to Beijing in China. \nThe city also lies on the M55 section of the Baikal Highway (part of the Trans-Siberian Highway), the main federal road to Vladivostok. Air traffic is served by the Ulan-Ude Airport (Baikal), as well as the smaller Ulan-Ude Vostochny Airport. Intracity transport includes tram, bus, and \"marshrutka\" (share taxi) lines.\nCulture.\nUntil 1991, Ulan-Ude was closed to foreigners. There are old merchants' mansions richly decorated with wood and stone carving in the historical center of Ulan-Ude, along the river banks which are exceptional examples of Russian classicism. The city has a large ethnographic museum which recalls the history of the peoples of the region. There is a large and highly unusual statue of the head of Vladimir Lenin in the central square: the largest in the world. Built in 1970 for the centennial of Lenin's birth and weighing 42 tons, it continued to tower over the main plaza at .\nSights.\nThe \"Ethnographic Museum of the peoples of Transbaikal\" is one of Russia's largest open-air museums. The museum contains historical finds from the era of the Slab Grave Culture and the Xiongnu until the mid 20th century, including a unique collection of samples of wooden architecture of Siberia.\nOdigitrievsky Cathedral \u2013 Eastern Orthodox Church Diocese of the Buryat, was the first stone building in the city and is a Siberian baroque architectural monument. The cathedral is considered unique because it is built in a zone of high seismic activity in the heart of the city on the banks of the River Uda River where it flows into the Selenga.\nOne of the attractions of Ulan-Ude is a monument in the town square\u00a0\u2014 the square of the Soviets\u00a0\u2014 in the form of the head of Lenin (sculptors G.V. Neroda, J.G. Neroda, architects Dushkin, P.G. Zilberman). The monument, weighing 42 tons and with a height of , was opened in 1971 in honor of the centenary of Lenin's birth.\nClimate.\nUlan-Ude can be described as possessing a humid steppe climate (K\u00f6ppen climate classification \"BSk\"), bordering on a humid continental climate (\"Dwb\") and a subarctic climate (\"Dwc\"). The climate is characterized by long, dry, and very cold winters, with substantial snowfall and persistent snow cover in the city and surrounding areas. Summers are relatively long for the city's latitude and climate zone. Lasting from mid-May to early September, they are warm and bring the majority of the annual precipitation in the form of rain.\nThe record high is on 8 July 2016. The record low is on 6 January 1931. Temperatures have never risen above freezing from 31 December to 1 February, inclusive.\nEconomy.\nThe Ulan-Ude Aviation Plant is based in Ulan-Ude.\nMongol Rally.\nUlan-Ude serves as the endpoint for the Mongol Rally.\nTwin towns - sister cities.\nUlan-Ude is twinned with:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "57706", "revid": "120856", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57706", "title": "Springfield, Illinois", "text": "Capital city of Illinois, United States\nSpringfield is the capital city of the U.S. state of Illinois. Its population was 114,394 at the 2020 United States census, which makes it the state's seventh-most populous city, the second-most populous outside of the Chicago metropolitan area (after Rockford), and the most populous in Central Illinois. Approximately 208,000 residents live in the Springfield metropolitan area, which consists of all of Sangamon and Menard counties. The city lies in a plain near the Sangamon River north of Lake Springfield. Springfield is the county seat of Sangamon County and is located along historic Route 66.\nSpringfield was settled by European-Americans in the late 1810s, around the time Illinois became a state. The most famous historic resident was Abraham Lincoln, who lived in Springfield from 1837 until 1861, when he became President of the United States. Major tourist attractions include multiple sites connected with Lincoln, such as the Abraham Lincoln Presidential Library and Museum, the Lincoln Home, the Old State Capitol, the Lincoln-Herndon Law Offices, and the Lincoln Tomb. Largely on the efforts of Lincoln and other area lawmakers, as well as its central location, Springfield was made the state capital in 1839.\nAs the state capital, the government of Illinois is based in Springfield. Springfield's economy is dominated by government agencies and adjacent firms that work with state and county governance, in addition to healthcare and medicine. State government institutions include the Illinois General Assembly, the Illinois Supreme Court, the office of the Governor of Illinois and historic Illinois Governor's Mansion. The University of Illinois Springfield has its campus near Lake Springfield. Weather is fairly typical for middle-latitude locations, with four distinct seasons. The city has a mayor\u2013council form of government and governs the Capital Township. Public schools in Springfield are operated by District No. 186.\nHistory.\nPre-Civil War.\nSettlers originally named this community \"Calhoun\", after Senator John C. Calhoun of South Carolina, expressing their cultural ties. The land that Springfield now occupies was visited first by trappers and fur traders who came to the Sangamon River in 1818.\nThe first cabin was built in 1820 by John Kelly, after he discovered that the area was plentiful with deer and other wild game. He built his cabin on a hill, overlooking a creek known eventually as the Town Branch. A stone marker on the north side of Jefferson street, halfway between 1st and College streets, marks the location of this original dwelling. A second stone marker at the northwest corner of 2nd St. and Jefferson St., often mistaken for the original home site, marks instead the location of the first county courthouse, which was later built on Kelly's property. In 1821, Calhoun was designated as the county seat of Sangamon County due to its location, fertile soil, and trading opportunities.\nSettlers from Kentucky, Virginia, and North Carolina came to the developing settlement. By 1832, Senator Calhoun had fallen out of the favor with the public, and the town renamed itself as Springfield. According to local history, the name was suggested by the wife of John Kelly, after Spring Creek, which ran through the area known as \"Kelly's Field\".\nKaskaskia was the first capital of the Illinois Territory from its organization in 1809, continuing through statehood in 1818, and through the first year as a state in 1819. Vandalia was the second state capital of Illinois, from 1819 to 1839. In 1839, Springfield was designated as the third capital. The designation was largely due to the efforts of Abraham Lincoln and his associates, who were nicknamed the \"Long Nine\" for their combined height of .\nThe Potawatomi Trail of Death passed through Springfield in 1838. The Native Americans were forced west to Indian Territory by the government's Indian Removal policy.\nAbraham Lincoln arrived in the Springfield area in 1831, but he did not live in the city until 1837. He spent the next six years in New Salem, where he began his legal studies, joined the state militia, and was elected to the Illinois General Assembly.\nIn 1837, Lincoln moved to Springfield, where he lived and worked for the next 24 years as a lawyer and politician. Lincoln delivered his Lyceum address in Springfield. His farewell speech when he left for Washington is a classic in American oratory.\nHistorian Kenneth J. Winkle (1998) examines the historiography concerning the development of the Second Party System (Whigs versus Democrats). He applied these ideas to the study of Springfield, a strong Whig enclave in a Democratic region. He chiefly studied poll books for presidential years. The rise of the Whig Party took place in 1836 in opposition to the presidential candidacy of Martin Van Buren and was consolidated in 1840. Springfield Whigs tend to validate several expectations of party characteristics as they were largely native-born, either in New England or Kentucky, professional or agricultural in occupation, and devoted to partisan organization. Abraham Lincoln's career reflects the Whigs' political rise but, by the 1840s, Springfield began to be dominated by Democratic politicians. Waves of new European immigrants had changed the city's demographics, and they became aligned with the Democrats, who made more effort to assist and connect with them. By the 1860 presidential election, Lincoln was barely able to win his home city.\nPopulation.\nWinkle earlier had studied the effect of migration on residents' political participation in Springfield during the 1850s. Widespread migration in the 19th-century United States produced frequent population turnover within Midwestern communities, which influenced patterns of voter turnout and office-holding. Examination of the manuscript census, poll books, and office-holding records reveals the effects of migration on the behavior and voting patterns of 8,000 participants in 10 elections in Springfield. Most voters were short-term residents who participated in only one or two elections during the 1850s. Fewer than 1% of all voters participated in all 10 elections.\nInstead of producing political instability, however, rapid turnover enhanced the influence of the more stable residents. Migration was selective by age, occupation, wealth, and birthplace. Longer-term or \"persistent\" voters, as Winkle terms them, tended to be wealthier, more highly skilled, more often native-born, and socially more stable than non-persisters. Officeholders were particularly persistent and socially and economically advantaged. Persisters represented a small \"core community\" of economically successful, socially homogeneous, and politically active voters and officeholders who controlled local political affairs, while most residents moved in and out of the city. Members of a tightly knit and exclusive \"core community\", exemplified by Abraham Lincoln, blunted the potentially disruptive impact of migration on local communities.\nBusiness.\nThe case of John Williams illustrates the important role of the merchant banker in the economic development of central Illinois before the Civil War. Williams began his career as a clerk in frontier stores and saved to begin his own business. Later, in addition to operating retail and wholesale stores, he acted as a local banker and organized a national bank in Springfield. He was active in railroad promotion and as an agent for farm machinery.\nReligion.\nDuring the mid-19th century, the spiritual needs of German Lutherans in the Midwest were not being tended. There had been a wave of migration after the 1848 revolutions, but without a related number of clergy. As a result of the efforts of such missionaries as Friedrich Wyneken, Wilhelm Loehe, and Wilhelm Sihler, additional Lutheran ministers were sent to the Midwest, Lutheran schools were opened, and Concordia Theological Seminary was founded in Ft. Wayne, Indiana in 1846.\nThe seminary moved to St. Louis, Missouri, in 1869 and then to Springfield in 1874. During the last half of the 19th century and the first half of the 20th century, the Lutheran Church\u2013Missouri Synod succeeded in serving the spiritual needs of Midwestern congregations by establishing additional seminaries from ministers trained at Concordia and by developing a viable synodical tradition.\nCivil War to 1900.\nSpringfield became a major center of activity during the American Civil War. Illinois regiments trained there, the first ones under Ulysses S. Grant. He led his soldiers to a remarkable series of victories in 1861\u201362. The city was a political and financial center of Union support. New industries, businesses, and railroads were constructed to help support the war effort. The war's first official death was a Springfield resident, Colonel Elmer E. Ellsworth.\nCamp Butler, located northeast of Springfield, Illinois, opened in August 1861 as a training camp for Illinois soldiers. It also served as a camp for Confederate prisoners of war through 1865. In the beginning, Springfield residents visited the camp to take part in the excitement of a military venture, but many reacted sympathetically to mortally wounded and ill prisoners. While the city's businesses prospered from camp traffic, drunken behavior and rowdiness on the part of the soldiers stationed there strained relations. Neither civil nor military authorities proved able to control disorderly outbreaks.\nAfter the war ended in 1865, Springfield became a major hub in the Illinois railroad system. It was a center of government and farming, and by 1900, it had also become involved in coal mining and processing.\n20th century.\nUtopia.\nLocal poet Vachel Lindsay's notions of utopia were expressed in his only novel, \"The Golden Book of Springfield\" (1920), which draws on ideas of anarchistic socialism in projecting the progress of Lindsay's hometown toward utopia.\nThe Dana\u2013Thomas House is a Frank Lloyd Wright design built in 1902\u201303. Wright began work on the house in 1902. Commissioned by Susan Lawrence Dana, a local patron of the arts and public benefactor, Wright designed a house to harmonize with the owner's devotion to the performance of music. Coordinating art glass designs for 250\u00a0windows, doors, and panels as well as over 200 light fixtures, Wright enlisted Oak Park artisans. The house is a radical departure from Victorian architectural traditions. Covering , the house contained vaulted ceilings and 16 major spaces. As the nation was changing, so Wright intended this structure to reflect the changes. Creating an organic and natural atmosphere, Wright saw himself as an \"architect of democracy\" and intended his work to be a monument to America's social landscape.\nIt is the only historic site later acquired by the state exclusively because of its architectural merit. The structure was opened to the public as a museum house in September 1990; tours are available, 9:00\u00a0a.m.\u20134:00\u00a0p.m. Wednesdays through Sundays.\n1908 race riot.\nSparked by the alleged rape of a White woman by a Black man and the murder of a White engineer, supposedly also by a Black man, in Springfield, and reportedly angered by the high degree of corruption in the city, rioting broke out on August 14, 1908, and continued for three days in a period of violence known as the Springfield race riot. Gangs of White youth and blue-collar workers attacked the city\u2019s predominantly Black neighborhoods \u2014 such as the Levee District, where most Black-owned businesses were located, and the Badlands, where many Black residents lived. At least sixteen people died as a result of the riot: nine Black residents, and seven White residents who were associated with the mob, five of whom were killed by state militia and two committed suicide. The riot ended when the governor sent in more than 3,700 militiamen to patrol the city, but isolated incidents of White violence against Black residents continued in Springfield into September.\n21st century.\nOn March 12, 2006, two F2 tornadoes hit the city, injuring 24 people, damaging hundreds of buildings, and causing $150 million in damages.\nOn February 10, 2007, then-senator Barack Obama announced his presidential candidacy in Springfield, standing on the grounds of the Old State Capitol. Senator Obama also used the Old State Capitol in Springfield as a backdrop when he announced Joe Biden as his running mate on August 23, 2008.\nGeography.\nLocated within the central section of Illinois, Springfield is northeast of St. Louis. The Champaign/Urbana area is to the east, Peoria is to the north, and Bloomington\u2013Normal is to the northeast. Decatur is due east.\nTopography.\nThe city is at an elevation of above sea level. According to the 2010 census, Springfield has a total area of , of which (or 90.44%) is land and (or 9.56%) is water. The city is located in the Lower Illinois River Basin, in a large area known as Till Plain. Sangamon County, and the city of Springfield, are in the Springfield Plain subsection of Till Plain. The Plain is underlain by glacial till that was deposited by a large continental ice sheet that repeatedly covered the area during the Illinoian Stage.\nThe majority of the Lower Illinois River Basin is flat, with relief extending no more than in most areas, including the Springfield subsection of the plain. The differences in topography are based on the age of drift. The Springfield and Galesburg Plain subsections represent the oldest drift, Illinoian, while Wisconsinian drift resulted in end moraines on the Bloomington Ridged Plain subsection of Till Plain.\nLake Springfield is a human-made reservoir owned by City Water, Light &amp; Power, the largest municipally owned utility in Illinois. It was built and filled in 1935 by damming Lick Creek, a tributary of the Sangamon River which flows past Springfield's northern outskirts. The lake is used primarily as a source for drinking water for the city of Springfield, also providing cooling water for the condensers at the power plant on the lake. It attracts approximately 600,000\u00a0visitors annually, and its of shoreline is home to over 700\u00a0lakeside residences and eight public parks.\nThe term \"full pool\" describes the lake at above sea level and indicates the level at which the lake begins to flow over the dam's spillway, if no gates are opened. Normal lake levels are generally somewhere below full pool, depending upon the season. During the drought from 1953 to 1955, lake levels dropped to their historical low, AMSL. The highest recorded lake levels were in December 1982, when the lake crested at .\nClimate.\nUnder the K\u00f6ppen climate classification, Springfield falls within either a hot-summer humid continental climate (\"Dfa\") if the isotherm is used or a humid subtropical climate (\"Cfa\") if the isotherm is used. In recent years, winter temperatures have increased substantially while summer temperatures have remained equal to the period 30 years before. Hot, humid summers and cold, rather snowy winters are the norm. Springfield is located on the farthest reaches of Tornado Alley, and as such, thunderstorms are a common occurrence throughout the spring and summer. From 1961 to 1990 the city of Springfield averaged of precipitation per year. During that same period the average yearly temperature was , with a summer maximum of in July and a winter minimum of in January.\nFrom 1971 to 2000, NOAA data showed that Springfield's annual mean temperature increased slightly to . During that period, July averaged , while January averaged .\nFrom 1981 to 2010, NOAA data showed that Springfield's annual mean temperature increased slightly to . During that period, July averaged , while January averaged .\nFrom 1991 to 2020, NOAA's latest dataset showed a continued increase in the annual mean to . During that period, July averaged , while January averaged .\nOn June 14, 1957, a tornado hit Springfield, killing two people. On March 12, 2006, the city was struck by two F2 tornadoes. The storm system that brought the two tornadoes hit the city around 8:30pm; no one died as a result of the weather. Springfield received a federal grant in February 2005 to help improve its tornado warning systems and new sirens were put in place in November 2006 after eight of the sirens failed during an April 2006 test, shortly after the tornadoes hit. The cost of the new sirens totaled $983,000. Although tornadoes are not uncommon in central Illinois, the March 12 tornadoes were the first to hit the actual city since the 1957 storm. The 2006 tornadoes followed nearly identical paths to that of the 1957 tornado.\nCityscape.\nSpringfield proper is largely based on a grid street system, with numbered streets starting with the longitudinal First Street (which leads to the Illinois State Capitol) and leading to 32nd Street in the far eastern part of the city. Previously, the city had four distinct boundary streets: North, South, East, and West Grand Avenues. Since expansion, West Grand Avenue became MacArthur Boulevard and East Grand became 19th Street on the north side and 18th Street on the south side. 18th Street has since been renamed after Martin Luther King Jr. North and South Grand Avenues (which run east\u2013west) have remained important corridors in the city. At South Grand Avenue and Eleventh Street, the old \"South Town District\" lies, with the City of Springfield undertaking a significant redevelopment project there .\nLatitudinal streets range from names of presidents in the downtown area to names of notable people in Springfield and Illinois to names of institutions of higher education, especially in the Harvard Park neighborhood.\nCity neighborhoods\nSpringfield has at least twenty separately designated neighborhoods, though not all have neighborhood associations. They include: Benedictine District, Bunn Park, Downtown, Eastsview, Enos Park, Glen Aire, Harvard Park, Hawthorne Place, Historic West Side, Lincoln Park, Mather and Wells, Medical District, Near South, Northgate, Oak Ridge, Old Aristocracy Hill, Pillsbury District, Shalom, Springfield Lakeshore, Toronto, Twin Lakes, UIS Campus, Victoria Lake, Vinegar Hill, and Westchester neighborhoods.\nThe Lincoln Park Neighborhood is an area bordered by 3rd Street on its west, Black Avenue on the north, 8th street on the east and North Grand Avenue. The neighborhood is not far from Lincoln's Tomb on Monument Avenue.\nSpringfield completely surrounds four suburbs that have their own municipal governments: Jerome, Leland Grove, Southern View, and Grandview. It also surrounds various unincorporated enclaves, including the neighborhoods of Laketown and Cabbage Patch.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\n2020 census.\nAt the 2010 Census, 75.8% of the population was White, 18.5% Black or African American, 0.2% American Indian and Alaska Native, 2.2% Asian, and 2.6% of two or more races. 2.0% of Springfield's population was of Hispanic or Latino origin (they may be of any race). Non-Hispanic Whites were 74.7% of the population in 2010, down from 87.6% in 1980.\nAs of the census of 2000, there were 111,454\u00a0people, 48,621 households, and 27,957 families residing in the city. The population density was . There were 53,733 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the city was 81.0% White, 15.3% African American, 0.2% Native American, 1.5% Asian, 0.1% Pacific Islander, 0.5% from other races, and 1.5% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 1.2% of the population.\nThere were 48,621 households, out of which 27.5% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 41.1% were married couples living together, 12.9% had a female householder with no husband present, and 42.5% were non-families. 36.1% of all households were made up of individuals, and 11.7% had someone living alone who was 65\u00a0years of age or older. The average household size was 2.24 and the average family size was 2.94.\nIn the city, the population was spread out, with 28.0% under the age of 18, 8.8% from 18 to 24, 29.8% from 25 to 44, 23.0% from 45 to 64, and 14.4% who were 65\u00a0years of age or older. The median age was 37\u00a0years. For every 100 females, there were 88.6 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 86.6 males.\nThe median income for a household in the city was $39,388, and the median income for a family was $51,298. Families with children had a higher income of about $69,437. Males had a median income of $36,864 versus $28,867 for females. The per capita income for the city was $23,324. About 8.4% of families and 11.7% of the population were below the poverty line, including 17.3% of those under age 18 and 7.7% of those age 65 or over.\nEconomy.\nMany of the jobs in the city center around state government, which is headquartered in Springfield. As of 2002, the State of Illinois is both the city's and county's largest employer, employing 17,000\u00a0people across Sangamon County. As of February 2007, government jobs, including local, state, and county, account for about 30,000 of the city's non-agricultural jobs. Trade, transportation and utilities, and the health care industries each provide between 17,000 and 18,000\u00a0jobs to the city. The largest private sector employer in 2002 was Memorial Health System with 3,400\u00a0people working for the organization. According to estimates from the \"Living Wage Calculator\" the living wage for the city of Springfield is $7.89 per hour for one adult, approximately $15,780 working 2,000\u00a0hours per year. For a family of four, costs are increased and the living wage is $17.78 per hour within the city. According to the United States Department of Labor's Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS), the Civilian Labor force dropped from 116,500 in September 2006 to 113,400 in February 2007. In addition, the unemployment rate rose during the same time period from 3.8% to 5.1%.\nLargest employers.\nAccording to the city's 2025 Annual Comprehensive Financial Report, the largest employers in the city are:\nArts and culture.\nSpringfield has been home to a wide array of individuals who, in one way or another, contributed to the broader American culture. Wandering poet Vachel Lindsay, most famous for his poem \"The Congo\" and a booklet called \"Rhymes to be Traded for Bread\", was born in Springfield in 1879.\nAt least two notable people affiliated with American business and industry have called the Illinois state capital home at one time or another. Both John L. Lewis, a labor activist, and Marjorie Merriweather Post, the founder of the General Foods Corporation, lived in the city; Post in particular was a native of Springfield. In addition, astronomer Seth Barnes Nicholson was born in Springfield in 1891.\nA Madeiran Portuguese community resided in the vicinity of the Carpenter Street Underpass, one of the earliest and largest Portuguese settlements in the Midwest. The Portuguese immigrants that originated the community left Madeira because they experienced social ostracization due to being Protestants in their largely Catholic homeland, having been converted to Protestantism by a Scottish reverend named Robert Reid Kalley, who visited Madeira in 1838. These Protestant Madeiran exiles relocated to the Caribbean island of Trinidad before settling permanently in Springfield in 1849. By the early twentieth century, these immigrants resided in the western extension of a neighborhood known as the \"Badlands\". The Badlands was included in the widespread destruction and violence of the Springfield Race Riot in August 1908, an event that led to the formation of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP). The Carpenter Street archaeological site possesses local and national significance for its potential to contribute to an understanding of the lifestyles of multiple ethnic/racial groups in Springfield during the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries.\nLiterary tradition.\nSpringfield and the Sangamon Valley enjoy a strong literary tradition in Abraham Lincoln, Vachel Lindsay, Edgar Lee Masters, John Hay, William H. Herndon, Benjamin P. Thomas, Paul Angle, Virginia Eifert, Robert Fitzgerald, and William Maxwell, among others. The Illinois State Library's Gwendolyn Brooks Building features the names of 35 Illinois authors etched on its exterior fourth floor frieze. Through the Illinois Center for the Book, a comprehensive resource on authors, illustrators, and other creatives who have published books who have written about Illinois or lived in Illinois is maintained.\nPerforming arts.\nThe Hoogland Center for the Arts in downtown Springfield is a centerpiece for performing arts, and houses among other organizations the Springfield Theatre Centre, the Copper Coin Ballet Company, and the Springfield Municipal Opera, also known as The Muni, which stages community theatre productions of Broadway musicals outdoors each summer. Before being purchased and renamed, the Hoogland Center was Springfield's Masonic Temple. Prior to the Hoogland, the Springfield Theatre Centre was housed in the nearby Legacy Theatre. Sangamon Auditorium, located on the campus of the University of Illinois Springfield also serves as a larger venue for musical and performing acts, both touring and local.\nA few films have been created or had elements of them created in Springfield. \"\" was filmed in Springfield in 2003.\nMusicians Artie Matthews and Morris Day both once called Springfield home.\nSpringfield was also home to long-running underground all-ages space The Black Sheep Cafe.\nFestivals.\nSpringfield is home to the annual Springfield Old Capitol Art Fair, a spring festival held annually in the third weekend in May. Since 2002, Springfield has also hosted the 'Route 66 Film Festival', set to celebrate films routed in, based on, or taking part on the famous Route 66.\nTourism.\nSpringfield is known for several popular food items: the corn dog is claimed to have been invented in the city under the name \"Cozy Dog\", although there is some debate to the origin of the snack. The horseshoe sandwich, not well known outside of central Illinois, also originated in Springfield. Springfield was once the site of the Reisch Beer brewery, which operated for 117 years under the same name and family from 1849 to 1966.\nThe Maid-Rite Sandwich Shop in Springfield still operates what it claims as the first U.S. drive-thru window. The city is also known for its chili \u2015 or \"chilli\", as it is spelled in many chili shops throughout Sangamon County. The unique spelling is said to have begun with the founder of the Dew Chilli Parlor in 1909, due to a spelling error in its sign. Another interpretation is that the misspelling represented the \"Ill\" in the word Illinois. In 1993, the Illinois state legislature adopted a resolution proclaiming Springfield the \"Chilli Capital of the Civilized World\".\nSpringfield is dotted with sites associated with U.S. President Abraham Lincoln, who started his political career there. These include the Lincoln Home National Historic Site, a National Historical Park that includes the preserved surrounding neighborhood; the Lincoln-Herndon Law Offices State Historic Site, the Lincoln Tomb State Historic Site, the Old State Capitol State Historic Site, the Lincoln Depot, from which Abraham Lincoln departed Springfield to be inaugurated in Washington, D.C.; the Elijah Iles House, Edwards Place and the Abraham Lincoln Presidential Library and Museum. The church that the Lincoln family belonged to, First Presbyterian Church, still has the original Lincoln family pew on display in its narthex. Near the village of Petersburg, is New Salem State Park, a restored hamlet of log cabins. This is a reconstruction of the town where Lincoln lived as a young man. With the opening of the Presidential Library and Museum in 2004, the city has attracted numerous prominent visitors, including Presidents George W. Bush and Barack Obama, the actor Liam Neeson, and the Emir of Qatar.\nThe Donner Party, a group of pioneers who resorted to cannibalism while snowbound during a winter in the Sierra Nevada mountains of California, began their journey West from Springfield. Springfield's Dana\u2013Thomas House is among the best preserved and most complete of Frank Lloyd Wright's early \"Prairie\" houses. It was built in 1902\u20131904 and has many of the furnishings Wright designed for it. Springfield's Washington Park is home to Thomas Rees Memorial Carillon and the site of a carillon festival, held annually since 1962. In August, the city is the site of the Illinois State Fair at the Illinois State Fairgrounds.\nAlthough not born in Springfield, Lincoln is the city's most famous resident. He lived there for 24\u00a0years. The only home he ever owned is open to the public, seven days a week, free of charge, and operated by the National Park Service.\nSpringfield has the area's largest amusement park, Knight's Action Park and Caribbean Water Park, which is open from May to September. The park also features and operates the city's only remaining drive-in theater, the Route 66 Twin Drive-In.\nSports.\nHistorically, Springfield has been home to a number of minor league baseball franchises, the latest club, the college-prep Springfield Sliders, arriving in the city in 2008. In the 1948 baseball season, Springfield was also home to an All-American Girls Professional Baseball League team, the Springfield Sallies, but the team's lackluster performance led them to be folded in with the Chicago Colleens as rookie development teams the following year.\nThe city was the home of the Springfield Stallions, an indoor football team who played at the Prairie Capital Convention Center in 2007. Today, the city is host to the Springfield Jr. Blues, a North American Hockey League team that plays at the Nelson Recreation Center. The city is also a host to several Semi Pro Football Teams. The oldest organization is the Capital City Outlaws, which was established in 1992. The Outlaws which played 11 man football, most recently in The Midwest Football League until 2004, switched to an 8-man Semi Pro Football League (8FL) in 2004. The Sangamon County Seminoles became an expansion team in the 8FL in 2008. A newly formed team in 2010, the Springfield Foxes, play in the Mid States Football League (MSFL) (11 man). The Foxes were league runners-up in the MSFL League Championship in 2012.\nThe city has produced several notable professional sports talents. Current and former Major League Baseball players Kevin Seitzer, Jeff Fassero, Ryan O'Malley, Jason and Justin Knoedler, and Hall of Famer Robin Roberts were all born in Springfield. Springfield's largest baseball field, Robin Roberts Stadium at Lanphier Park, takes its full name in honor of Roberts and his athletic achievements. Former MLB player Dick \"Ducky\" Schofield is currently an elected official in Springfield, and his son Dick also played in the Major Leagues, as does Ducky's grandson, Jayson Werth. Ducky, Dick, and Jayson were all born in Springfield. Ducky's daughter (and Jayson's mother) Kim Schofield Werth, also from Springfield, is a track star who competed in the U.S. Olympic Trials. National Basketball Association players Dave Robisch, Kevin Gamble, and Andre Iguodala are all from the city. Long-time NFL announcer (NBC) and former Cincinnati Bengal Pro Bowl tight end Bob Trumpy is a city native, having graduated from Springfield High School. Former NFL wide receiver Otto Stowe was a 1967 graduate of the now-defunct Feitshans High School. A UFC fighter, Matt Mitrione, attended and played football for Sacred Heart Griffin. He also played in the NFL as an undrafted free agent.\nAt the 2016 Olympics in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, Springfield native Ryan Held won a gold medal as a member of the USA 400-meter (4 X 100 meter) freestyle relay team along with Caeleb Dressel, Michael Phelps, and Nathan Adrian. During his senior year at Sacred-Heart Griffin High School in 2014, Held was named Illinois State Swimmer of the Year.\nParks and recreation.\nThe Springfield Park District operates more than 30 parks throughout the city. The two best-known are Carpenter Park, an Illinois Nature Preserve on the banks of the Sangamon River, and Washington Park and Botanical Garden on the city's southwest side and adjacent to some of Springfield's most beautiful and architecturally interesting homes. Washington Park has also been home to the Thomas Rees Memorial Carillon since its dedication in 1962. Southwind Park, on the southern edge of the city, has been developed as a park enjoying full compliance with the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990. Lincoln Park, located next to Oak Ridge Cemetery where President Lincoln's tomb is located, is home to the Nelson Recreation Center, which boasts a public swimming pool, tennis courts, and the city's only public ice rink, home of the Springfield Junior Blues, a minor league hockey team. Centennial Park, which rests on the outskirts of Springfield's southwest limits, holds one of the city's two public skateparks (the other being in Iles Park), as well as several ball fields, tennis courts, and a manmade hill for cardio exercises and sledding in winter months.\nIn addition to the public-sector parks operated by the Springfield Park District, two significant privately operated tree gardens/arboretums operate within city limits: the Abraham Lincoln Memorial Garden on Lake Springfield south of the city, and the Adams Wildlife Sanctuary on Springfield's east side.\nGovernment.\nSpringfield city government is structured under the mayor-council form of government. It is the strong mayor variation of that type of municipal government, the mayor holds executive authority, including veto power, in Springfield. The executive branch also consists of 17 non-elected city \"offices\". Ranging from the police department to the Office of Public Works, each office can be altered through city ordinance.\nElected officials in the city (mayor, aldermen, city clerk, and treasurer) serve four-year terms. The elections are not staggered. The council members are elected from ten districts throughout the city while the mayor, city clerk and city treasurer are elected on an at-large basis. The council, as a body, consists of the ten aldermen and the mayor, though the mayor is generally a non-voting member who only participates in the discussion. There are a few instances where the mayor does vote on ordinances or resolutions: if there is a tie vote, if more than half of the aldermen support the motion, whether there is a tie or not, and where a vote greater than the majority is required by the municipal code.\nMembers.\nCity elections are technically non partisan, however most candidates are affiliated with a political party. As such, party affiliation is a matter of self identification.\nState government.\nAs the state capital, Springfield is home to the three branches of Illinois government. Much like the United States federal government, Illinois government has an executive branch, occupied by the state governor, a legislative branch, which consists of the state senate and house, and a judicial branch, which is topped by the Illinois Supreme Court. The Illinois legislative branch is collectively known as the Illinois General Assembly. Many state bureaucrats work in offices in Springfield, and it is the regular meeting place of the Illinois General Assembly. All persons elected on a statewide basis are required to have at least one residence in Springfield, and the state government funds these residents.\nAs of 2020[ [update]] none of the major constitutional officers in Illinois designated Springfield as their primary residence; most cabinet officers and all major constitutional officers instead primarily do their business in Chicago. A former director of the Southern Illinois University Paul Simon Institute for Public Affairs, Mike Lawrence, stated that many of the elected officials in Illinois \"spend so little time in Springfield\". In 2012 \"St. Louis Post-Dispatch\" columnist Pat Gauen argued that \"in the reality of Illinois politics, [Springfield] shares de facto capital status with Chicago.\" Gauen noted that several elected officials such as the Governor, as well as the Attorney General, Speaker of the House, the minority leader of the House, President of the Senate, the minority leader of the Senate, the Comptroller, and the Treasurer, all live in the Chicago area. According to Gauen, \"Everybody who's anybody in Illinois government has an office in Chicago\"; most state officials work from the James R. Thompson Center in the Chicago Loop. He added that at one point in 2011, Governor Pat Quinn only spent 68 days and 40 nights in Springfield as per his official schedule. University of Illinois researcher and former member of the Illinois legislature Jim Nowlan stated \"It's almost like Chicago is becoming the shadow capital of Illinois\" and that \"Springfield is almost become a hinterland outpost.\" Lawrence criticized the fact that state officials spent little time in Springfield since it estranged them from and devalued Illinois state employees based in that city.\nAccording to Gauen, \"Illinois seems rather unlikely to move its official capital to Chicago\".\nTownships.\nThe Capital Township formed from Springfield Township on July 1, 1877, and was established and named by the Sangamon County Board on March 6, 1878. The limits of the township and City of Springfield were made co-extensive on February 17, 1892, but are no longer so with subsequent annexation by the City of Springfield. There are three functions of this township: assessing property, collection first property tax payment, and assisting residents that live in the township. One thing that makes the Capital township unique is that the township never has to raise taxes for road work, since the roads are maintained by the Springfield Department of Public Works.\nIn the 21st century Springfield annexed large parts of Springfield and Woodside townships. The annexed parcels remained part of their original townships despite being within the Springfield city limits.\nLaw enforcement.\nThe Springfield Police Department was founded in 1840 as part of the city charter. The police chief is Joseph Behl, and as of 2022, the department had 242 employees.\nSpringfield Police officer Samuel Rosario was arrested by the Illinois State Police on February 28, 2017, after fighting with a teenager on charges of official misconduct and battery. He was found guilty of official misconduct in August 2019.\nIn 2024, Sangamon County sheriff's deputy Sean Grayson was fired, and subsequently charged with first-degree murder, following the murder of Sonya Massey in Springfield.\nEducation.\nSpringfield is currently home to six public and private high schools.\nThe Springfield public school district is District No. 186. District 186 operates 24 elementary schools and an early learning center, (pre-K). District 186 operates three high schools, Lanphier High School, Springfield High School and Springfield Southeast High School, which replaced Feitshans High School in 1967, and five middle schools.\nSpringfield's Sacred Heart-Griffin High School is a city Catholic high school. Other area high schools include Calvary Academy and Lutheran High School. Ursuline Academy was a second Catholic high school founded in 1857, first as an all-girls school, and converted to co-ed in 1981. The school was closed in 2007.\nSpringfield hosts one University. The University of Illinois Springfield (UIS, formerly Sangamon State University), which is located on the southeast side of the city.\nSpringfield is also home to a junior college Lincoln Land Community College, located just south of UIS. From 1875 to 1976, Springfield was also home to Concordia Theological Seminary. The seminary was moved back to its original home of Fort Wayne, Indiana, and the campus now serves as the Illinois Department of Corrections Academy.\nThe city is home to the Springfield campus of the Southern Illinois University School of Medicine, which includes Simmons Cancer Institute in Springfield's Medical District.\nMedia.\nThe \"State Journal-Register\" is the primary daily newspaper for Springfield, and its surrounding area. The newspaper was founded in 1831 as the \"Sangamon Journal\", and claims to be \"the oldest newspaper in Illinois\". The local alternative weekly is the \"Illinois Times\".\nTelevision stations.\nSpringfield is part of the Springfield-Decatur-Champaign TV market. Four TV stations broadcast from the Springfield area: WCIX MYTV 49, WICS ABC 20, WRSP FOX 55, and WSEC PBS 14. Both WICS and WRSP are currently owned by the same parent company Sinclair Broadcast Group. Springfield is also served by two stations in Decatur, WAND NBC 17 and WBUI CW 23, and two stations in Champaign, WCIA CBS 3 and WILL PBS 12. One television station that has since ceased to exist was WJJY-TV, which operated in the Springfield area for three years (1969\u20131971).\nRadio stations.\nThe following radio stations broadcast in the Springfield area:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Hlist/styles.css\"/&gt;* WTTT 88.9 FM\nInfrastructure.\nHealth systems.\nThere are two Springfield hospitals, Memorial Medical Center and St. John's Hospital. A third hospital, originally Springfield Community Hospital, and later renamed Doctor's Hospital operated on Springfield's south side until 2003. Kindred Healthcare opened a long term acute care hospital in Springfield in 2010, however, the facility was purchased by Vibra Healthcare in 2013, and was operated by Vibra under the name Vibra Hospital of Springfield until it closed in 2019.\nSt. John's Hospital is home to the Prairie Heart Institute, which performs more cardiovascular procedures than any other hospital in Illinois. The dominant health care providers in the area are SIU HealthCare and Springfield Clinic. The major medical education center in the area is the Southern Illinois University School of Medicine. The major regional cancer center is the SIU Simmons Cancer Institute.\nPublic utilities.\nThe owner of Lake Springfield \u2013 City Water, Light &amp; Power \u2013 supplies electric power generated from the Dallman Power Plants to the city of Springfield and eight surrounding communities. The company also provides these cities and towns with water from the lake. In 2005, ground was broken for a third municipally owned power plant, which came online in 2009. Natural gas is provided via Ameren Illinois, formerly Central Illinois Light Company (CILCO).\nTransportation.\nInterstate 55 runs from north to south past Springfield, while I-72, which is concurrent with U.S. Route 36 from the Missouri state line to Decatur, runs from east to west.\nAmtrak serves daily with its \"Lincoln Service\" and \"Texas Eagle\" routes. Service consists of four \"Lincoln Service\" round-trips between and , and one \"Texas Eagle\" round-trip between and Chicago. Three days a week, the \"Eagle\" continues on to . Springfield is served by the following freight railroads: Canadian National, Illinois and Midland Railroad, Kansas City Southern, Norfolk Southern and Union Pacific. Springfield is also served by Greyhound buses at a station on North Dirksen Parkway.\nLocal mass transportation needs are met by a bus service. The Sangamon Mass Transit District (SMTD) operates Springfield's bus system. The city also lies along historic Route 66.\nBorder thoroughfare traffic is handled by Veterans Parkway and J. David Jones Parkway on the west side, Everett M. Dirksen Parkway on the east side, Sangamon Avenue on the north end, and Wabash Avenue, Stanford Avenue, and Adlai Stevenson Drive on the south end. The far south corridor is served by Toronto and Woodside Roads. Thoroughfare traffic through the heart of the city is provided by a series of one-way streets. Fifth and Sixth Streets serve the bulk of the north\u2013south traffic, with Seventh Street serving additional traffic between North Grand and South Grand Avenues. East\u2013west traffic is handled by Jefferson Street, entering Springfield on the west side from IL 97, and then splitting into a pair of one-way streets at Amos Avenue (Madison eastbound and Jefferson westbound). The two converge again after Eleventh Street to become Clearlake Avenue, which in turn converges into I-72 eastbound just past Dirksen Parkway. Additional east\u2013west one-way streets run through the downtown areas of Springfield, including Monroe, Adams, Washington, and Cook Streets, as well as a stretch of Lawrence Avenue.\nAbraham Lincoln Capital Airport serves the capital city with scheduled passenger jet service to Chicago O'Hare, Fort Myers (via the Punta Gorda Airport) and Orlando.\nSpringfield and the surrounding metropolitan area have constructed several bike trails; currently, four main trails exist. Two significant paved trails, the Interurban Trail and the Lost Bridge Trail, serve Springfield and its suburbs of Chatham, Illinois and Rochester, Illinois respectively. The Lost Bridge Trail has been extended further into Springfield by the Bunn to Lost Bridge Trail, which follows a stretch of Ash Street and Taylor Avenue. Plans are to extend it further still to Stanford Avenue. A third trail, the Wabash Trail, extends westward from the northern end of the Interurban Trail toward Parkway Pointe, a regional shopping destination. Additionally, several streets contain designated bicycle lanes, and there are multiple class III bicycle routes.\nThe fourth trail is a section, opened in July 2011, of the Sangamon Valley Trail spanning north to south through the west central part of Sangamon County. The section open as of 2011 extends northward from Centennial Park to Stuart Park. This trail, if completed in its entirety, will reuse the entire Sangamon County portion of the abandoned St. Louis, Peoria and North Western Railway railroad line as a trail that will extend from Girard, Illinois, to Athens, Illinois.\nSister cities.\nSpringfield, Illinois has two sister cities, as designated by Sister Cities International:\nIt maintains a \"Friendship\" city designation with Killarney, Ireland.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "57707", "revid": "445772", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57707", "title": "Indianapolis", "text": "Capital and most populous city of Indiana, United States\nIndianapolis ( ), colloquially known as Indy, is the capital and most populous city of the U.S. state of Indiana and the county seat of Marion County. Indianapolis is situated in the state's central till plain region along the west fork of the White River. The city's official slogan, \"Crossroads of America\", reflects its historic importance as a transportation hub and its relative proximity to other major North American markets.\nAt the 2020 census, the balance population was 887,642. Indianapolis is the 16th-most populous city in the United States, the third-most populous city in the Midwest after Chicago and Columbus, Ohio, and the fourth-most populous state capital in the nation after Phoenix, Austin, and Columbus. The Indianapolis metropolitan area is the 33rd-most populous metropolitan statistical area in the United States, home to 2.1 million residents. With a population of more than 2.6 million, the combined statistical area ranks 28th. Indianapolis proper covers , making it the 18th-most extensive city by land area in the country.\nIndigenous peoples inhabited the area dating to as early as 10,000 BC. In 1818, the Lenape relinquished their tribal lands in the Treaty of St. Mary's. In 1821, Indianapolis was established as a planned city for the new seat of Indiana's state government. The city was platted by Alexander Ralston and Elias Pym Fordham on a grid. Completion of the National and Michigan roads and later arrival of rail solidified the city's position as a major manufacturing and commercial center. Since the 1970 city-county consolidation, known as Unigov, local government administration operates under the direction of an elected 25-member city-county council headed by the mayor.\nIndianapolis anchors the 28th largest metropolitan economy in the United States. Prominent industries include trade, transportation, and utilities; education and health services; professional and business services; government; leisure and hospitality; and manufacturing. The city has notable niche markets in amateur sports and auto racing. Contemporary Indianapolis is home to two major league sports teams, three \"Fortune\" 500 companies, eight university campuses, and numerous cultural institutions, including the world's largest children's museum. The city is perhaps best known for hosting the world's largest single-day sporting event, the Indianapolis 500. Among the city's historic sites and districts, Indianapolis is home to the largest collection of monuments dedicated to veterans and war casualties in the United States outside of Washington, D.C.\nEtymology.\nThe name Indianapolis is derived from pairing the state's name, \"Indiana\" (meaning \"Land of the Indians\", or simply \"Indian Land\"), with the suffix \"\", the Greek word for \"city\". Jeremiah Sullivan, justice of the Indiana Supreme Court, is credited with coining the name. Other names considered were Concord, Delaware, Suwarrow, Tecumseh, Wayne, and Whetzel.\nHistory.\n19th century.\nIn 1816, the year Indiana gained statehood, the U.S. Congress donated four sections of federal land to establish a permanent seat of state government. Two years later, under the Treaty of St. Mary's (1818), the Delaware relinquished title to their tribal lands in central Indiana, agreeing to leave the area by 1821. This tract of land, which was called the New Purchase, included the site selected for the new state capital in 1820. The indigenous people of the land prior to systematic removal are the Miami Nation of Indiana (Miami Nation of Oklahoma) and Indianapolis makes up part of Cession 99; the primary treaty between the indigenous population and the United States was the Treaty of St. Mary's in 1818.\nThe availability of new federal lands for purchase in central Indiana attracted settlers, many of them descendants of families from northwestern Europe. Although many of these first European and American settlers were Protestants, a large proportion of the early Irish and German immigrants were Catholics. Few African Americans lived in central Indiana before 1840.\nThe first European Americans to permanently settle in the area that became Indianapolis were either the McCormick or Pogue families. The McCormicks are generally considered to be the first permanent settlers; however, some historians believe George Pogue and family may have arrived first, on March 2, 1819, and settled in a log cabin along the creek that was later called Pogue's Run. Other historians have argued as early as 1822 that John Wesley McCormick and his family and employees became the area's first European American settlers, settling near the White River in February 1820.\nOn January 11, 1820, the Indiana General Assembly authorized a committee to select a site in central Indiana for the new state capital. The state legislature approved the site, adopting the name Indianapolis on January 6, 1821. In April, Alexander Ralston and Elias Pym Fordham were appointed to survey and design a town plan for the new settlement. Indianapolis became a seat of county government on December 31, 1821, when Marion County, was established. A combined county and town government continued until 1832 when Indianapolis was incorporated as a town.\nIndianapolis became an incorporated city effective March 30, 1847. Samuel Henderson, the city's first mayor, led the new city government, which included a seven-member city council. In 1853, voters approved a new city charter that provided for an elected mayor and a fourteen-member city council. The city charter continued to be revised as Indianapolis expanded. Effective January 1, 1825, the seat of state government moved to Indianapolis from Corydon, Indiana. In addition to state government offices, a U.S. district court was established at Indianapolis in 1825.\nGrowth occurred with the opening of the National Road through the town in 1827, the first major federally funded highway in the United States. A small segment of the ultimately failed Indiana Central Canal was opened in 1839. The first railroad to serve Indianapolis, the Jeffersonville, Madison and Indianapolis Railroad, began operation in 1847, and subsequent railroad connections fostered growth. Indianapolis Union Station was the first of its kind in the world when it opened in 1853.\nAmerican Civil War.\nDuring the American Civil War, Indianapolis was mostly loyal to the Union cause. Governor Oliver P. Morton, a major supporter of President Abraham Lincoln, quickly made Indianapolis a rallying place for Union army troops. On February 11, 1861, President-elect Lincoln arrived in the city, en route to Washington, D.C. for his presidential inauguration, marking the first visit from a president-elect in the city's history. On April 16, 1861, the first orders were issued to form Indiana's first regiments and establish Indianapolis as a headquarters for the state's volunteer soldiers. Within a week, more than 12,000 recruits signed up to fight for the Union.\nIndianapolis became a major logistics hub during the war, establishing the city as a crucial military base. Between 1860 and 1870, the city's population more than doubled. An estimated 4,000 men from Indianapolis served in 39 regiments, and an estimated 700 died during the war. On May 20, 1863, Union soldiers attempted to disrupt a statewide Democratic convention at Indianapolis, forcing an adjournment of the proceedings, sarcastically referred to as the Battle of Pogue's Run. Fear turned to panic in July 1863, during Morgan's Raid into southern Indiana, but Confederate forces turned east toward Ohio, never reaching Indianapolis. On April 30, 1865, Lincoln's funeral train made a stop at Indianapolis, where an estimated crowd of more than 100,000 people passed the assassinated president's bier at the Indiana Statehouse.\nFollowing the Civil War and in the wake of the Second Industrial Revolution, Indianapolis experienced tremendous growth and prosperity. In 1880, Indianapolis was the world's third-largest pork packing city, after Chicago and Cincinnati, and the second-largest railroad center in the U.S. by 1888. By 1890, the city's population surpassed 100,000. Some of the city's most notable businesses were founded during this period of growth and innovation, including L. S. Ayres (1872), Eli Lilly and Company (1876), Madam C. J. Walker Manufacturing Company (1910), and Allison Transmission (1915).\n20th century.\nSome of the city's most prominent architectural features and best known historical events date from the turn of the 20th century. The Soldiers' and Sailors' Monument, dedicated on May 15, 1902, would later become the city's unofficial symbol. Ray Harroun won the inaugural running of the Indianapolis 500, held May 30, 1911, at Indianapolis Motor Speedway. Indianapolis was one of the hardest hit cities in the Great Flood of 1913, resulting in five known deaths and the displacement of 7,000 families.\nOnce home to 60 automakers, Indianapolis rivaled Detroit as a center of automobile manufacturing. The city was an early focus of labor organization. The Indianapolis streetcar strike of 1913 and subsequent police mutiny and riots led to the creation of the state's earliest labor-protection laws, including a minimum wage, regular work weeks, and improved working conditions. The International Typographical Union and United Mine Workers of America were among several influential labor unions based in the city.\nAs a stop on the Underground Railroad, Indianapolis had one of the largest black populations in the Northern States, until the Great Migration. Led by D. C. Stephenson, the Indiana Klan became the most powerful political and social organization in Indianapolis from 1921 through 1928, controlling the City Council and the Board of School Commissioners, among others. At its height, more than 40% of native-born white males in Indianapolis claimed membership in the Klan.\nWhile campaigning in the city in 1968, Robert F. Kennedy delivered one of the most lauded speeches in 20th century American history following the assassination of Martin Luther King Jr. As in most U.S. cities during the civil rights movement, the city experienced strained race relations, including 1969 riots. A 1971 federal court decision forcing Indianapolis Public Schools to implement desegregation busing proved controversial.\nDuring the mayoral administration of Richard Lugar (1968\u20131976), the city and county governments consolidated. Known as Unigov (a portmanteau of \"unified\" and \"government\"), the city-county consolidation removed bureaucratic redundancies, captured increasingly suburbanizing tax revenue, and created a Republican political machine that dominated local politics until the early 2000s. Effective January 1, 1970, Unigov expanded the city's land area by more than and increased its population by some 250,000 people. It was the first major city-county consolidation to occur in the U.S. without a referendum since the creation of the City of Greater New York in 1898. Lugar is credited with initiating downtown revitalization efforts, overseeing the building of Market Square Arena, renovations to Indianapolis City Market, and the formation of Indiana University\u2013Purdue University Indianapolis.\nAmid the changes in government and growth, the city pursued an aggressive economic development strategy to raise the city's stature as a sports tourism destination, known as the Indianapolis Project. During the administration of the city's longest-serving mayor, William Hudnut (1976\u20131992), millions of dollars were invested into sports venues and public relations campaigns. The strategy was successful in landing the U.S. Olympic Festival in 1982, securing the relocation of the Baltimore Colts in 1984, and hosting the 1987 Pan American Games.\nBeginning in 1992, the mayoral administration of Stephen Goldsmith introduced a number of austerity measures to address budget shortfalls through privatization and greater reliance on public\u2013private partnerships. Major downtown revitalization projects continued through the 1990s, including the openings of Circle Centre Mall, Victory Field, and Gainbridge Fieldhouse, as well as ongoing redevelopment of the Canal and White River State Park area.\nBart Peterson took office in 2000, the first Democrat elected to the post since John J. Barton's 1963 election. The Peterson administration focused on education reform and promoting the arts.\n21st century.\nIn 2001, the mayor's office became the first in the U.S. to authorize charter schools. Indianapolis Cultural Districts were designated in 2003, followed by the groundbreaking of the Indianapolis Cultural Trail in 2007. Further consolidation of city and county units of government resulted in the establishment of the Indianapolis Metropolitan Police Department in 2007. Later that year, Greg Ballard succeeded Peterson in a political upset.\nThe Ballard administration oversaw the lease of the city's parking meters and the sale of the city's water and wastewater utilities with proceeds financing street repairs. Ballard pursued several environmental sustainability efforts, including establishing an office of sustainability, installing of bike lanes and trails, and spearheading a controversial deal to start an electric carsharing program. Two of the city's largest capital projects, the Indianapolis International Airport's new terminal and Lucas Oil Stadium, were completed in 2008. In 2012, construction began on a $2\u00a0billion tunnel system, a project known as DigIndy, which was designed to reduce sewage overflows into the city's waterways.\nSince 2016, the administration of Joe Hogsett has focused on addressing a rise in gun violence and the city's racial disparities. In recent years, significant capital and operational investments have been made in public safety, criminal justice, and public transit. The city also established rental assistance and food security programs. In 2020, the George Floyd protests in Indiana prompted a series of local police reforms and renewed efforts to bolster social services for mental health treatment and homelessness. In 2021, a mass shooting occurred at a FedEx facility on the city's southwest side, killing nine (including the gunman) and injuring seven others.\nGeography.\nIndianapolis is located in the East North Central region of the Midwestern United States, about south-southeast of Indiana's geographic center. It is situated northwest of Cincinnati, Ohio, north of Louisville, Kentucky, southeast of Chicago, Illinois, and west of Columbus, Ohio. According to the U.S. Census Bureau, the Indianapolis (balance) encompasses a total area of , of which is land and is water. It is the 18th-most extensive city by land area in the U.S.\nAs a consolidated city-county, Indianapolis's city limits are coterminous with Marion County, except the autonomous and semi-autonomous municipalities outlined in Unigov. Nine civil townships form the broadest geographic divisions within the city and county; these are Center, Decatur, Franklin, Lawrence, Perry, Pike, Warren, Washington, and Wayne townships. The consolidated city-county borders the adjacent counties of Boone to the northwest; Hamilton to the north; Hancock to the east; Shelby to the southeast; Johnson to the south; Morgan to the southwest; and Hendricks to the west.\nBetween 2.6 million and 11,700 years ago, the Indianapolis area was situated on the southern margin of the Laurentide Ice Sheet. The erosive advance and retreat of glacial ice produced a flat or gently sloping landscape, known as a till plain. Elevations across Indianapolis vary from about to above mean sea level. Indianapolis is located in the West Fork White River drainage basin, part of the larger Mississippi River watershed via the Wabash and Ohio rivers. The White River flows north-to-south through the city and is fed by some 35 streams, including Eagle Creek, Fall Creek, Pleasant Run, and Pogue's Run. The city's largest waterbodies are artificial quarry lakes and reservoirs.\nCityscape.\nIndianapolis is an example of a planned city. In 1821, the Indiana General Assembly selected a site near the confluence of the White River and Fall Creek to serve as the new state capital, adopting a plan co-designed by surveyors Alexander Ralston and Elias Pym Fordham. The grid plan called for a town of centered on a traffic circle (from which Indianapolis's \"Circle City\" nickname originates). Four diagonal avenues\u2014Indiana (northwest), Kentucky (southwest), Massachusetts (northeast), and Virginia (southeast)\u2014radiated a block from the circle. The city's address numbering system originates at the intersection of Washington (running east\u2013west) and Meridian streets (running north\u2013south).\nIn the 2020 census, Indianapolis was among the 20 largest cities in the U.S. by both population and land area. The city\u2019s population density of 2,455 people per square mile (948/km2) ranked 222nd. This contrast is evident in Indianapolis's cityscape where low-density development patterns dominate and some of farmland remain within its municipal boundaries.\nNeighborhoods.\nFor statistical purposes, the consolidated city-county is organized into 99 \"neighborhood areas\" with most containing numerous individual historic and cultural districts, subdivisions, and some semi-autonomous towns. In total, some 500 self-identified neighborhood associations are listed in the city's Registered Community Organization system. As a result of the city's expansive land area, Indianapolis has a unique urban-to-rural transect, ranging from dense urban neighborhoods to suburban tract housing subdivisions, to rural villages.\nTypical of American cities in the Midwest, Indianapolis urbanized in the late 19th and early 20th centuries, resulting in the development of relatively dense, well-defined neighborhoods clustered around streetcar corridors, especially in Center Township. Notable streetcar suburbs include Broad Ripple, Irvington, and University Heights. Starting in the mid-20th century, the post\u2013World War II economic expansion and subsequent suburbanization greatly influenced the city's development patterns. From 1950 to 1970, nearly 100,000 housing units were built in Marion County, most outside Center Township in suburban neighborhoods such as Castleton, Eagledale, and Nora.\nSince the 2000s, downtown Indianapolis and surrounding neighborhoods have seen increased reinvestment mirroring nationwide market trends, driven by empty nesters and millennials. Renewed interest in urban living has been met with some dispute regarding gentrification and affordable housing. According to a Center for Community Progress report, neighborhoods like Cottage Home and Fall Creek Place have experienced measurable gentrification since 2000. The North Meridian Street Historic District is among the most affluent urban neighborhoods in the U.S., with a mean household income of $102,599 in 2017.\nHistoric districts and landmarks.\nMore than 260 properties and historic districts are listed on the National Register of Historic Places in Marion County; most sites are located in Center Township, listed separately. This includes nine National Historic Landmarks: the Athen\u00e6um (Das Deutsche Haus), the Benjamin Harrison House, the Broad Ripple Park Carousel, Hinkle Fieldhouse, the Indiana World War Memorial, the Indianapolis Motor Speedway, the James Whitcomb Riley House, the Madam C. J. Walker Building, and Oldfields.\nThe Indianapolis Historic Preservation Commission oversees 13 local historic districts and five conservation areas. Notable districts include Chatham\u2013Arch and Massachusetts Avenue, Cottage Home, Cumberland, Fletcher Place, Fountain Square, Herron\u2013Morton Place, Irvington, Lockefield Gardens, Lockerbie Square, Monument Circle, New Augusta, the Old Northside, Ransom Place, St. Joseph, the Wholesale District, and Woodruff Place.\nThe Indiana Central Canal is the oldest extant artificial facility in the city, dating to the 1830s. Between 1985 and 2001, nearly of the former canal in downtown Indianapolis were redeveloped into a cultural and recreational amenity. North of 18th Street, the canal retains much of its original appearance, flowing through the northside neighborhoods of Riverside, Butler\u2013Tarkington, Rocky Ripple, and Broad Ripple. This segment has been recognized as an American Water Landmark since 1971.\nFollowing the dedication of the Soldiers' and Sailors' Monument in 1902, Indianapolis enacted its first height restriction laws to protect views of the monument. In 1962, the City-County Building became the first high-rise in the city to surpass the monument\u2019s height. The tallest residential buildings in Indianapolis, the twin 30-floor Riley Towers, were completed in 1963. The 48-floor Salesforce Tower, completed in 1990, is the city\u2019s tallest, with a roof height of . Its distinctive twin antenna masts bring the building\u2019s height to .\nIndiana limestone has been a signature building material in Indianapolis since the 1800s, featured prominently in the city\u2019s monuments, churches, commercial, and civic buildings. Examples include Roberts Park Methodist Episcopal Church (1876), the Indiana Statehouse (1888), the Majestic Building (1896), the Soldiers' and Sailors' Monument (1902), Birch Bayh Federal Building and United States Courthouse (1905), Saints Peter and Paul Cathedral (1907), the Indianapolis Masonic Temple (1909), Old Indianapolis City Hall (1910), Central Library (1917), the Scottish Rite Cathedral (1927), Circle Tower (1929), the Indiana World War Memorial (1933), the Indiana State Library and Historical Bureau (1934), Clowes Memorial Hall (1963), and OneAmerica Tower (1982).\nParks.\nThe city of Indianapolis maintains 212 public parks, totaling or about 5.1% of the city's land area. Garfield Park, the city's first municipal park, opened in 1876 as Southern Park. George Kessler's Indianapolis Park and Boulevard Plan (1909) linked notable parks, such as Brookside, Ellenberger, Garfield, and Riverside, with a system of parkways following the city's waterways. The system's were added to the National Register of Historic Places in 2003. Eagle Creek Park, Indianapolis's largest and most visited park, ranks among the largest municipal parks in the U.S., covering .\nMarion County is also home to parks managed by the State of Indiana, including Fort Harrison State Park and White River State Park. Established in 1996, Fort Harrison State Park covers that are overseen by the Indiana Department of Natural Resources. Since 1979, White River has been owned and operated by the White River State Park Development Commission, a quasi-governmental agency. White River's are home to several attractions, including the Indianapolis Zoo and White River Gardens. Two land trusts are active in the city managing several sites for nature conservation throughout the region.\nFlora and fauna.\nIndianapolis is situated in the Southern Great Lakes forests ecoregion which in turn is located within the larger temperate broadleaf and mixed forests biome, as defined by the World Wide Fund for Nature. Based on the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency's alternative classification system, the city is located in the Eastern Corn Belt Plains, an area of the country known for its fertile soil.\nMuch of the decidious forests that once covered 98% of the region were cleared for agriculture and urban development, contributing to considerable habitat loss. Indianapolis's current urban tree canopy averages approximately 33%. A rare example of old-growth forest in the city can be found on of Crown Hill Cemetery's North Woods in the Butler\u2013Tarkington neighborhood. The cemetery's represents the largest green space in Center Township, home to an abundance of wildlife and some 130 species of trees. Native trees most common to the area include varieties of ash, maple, and oak. Several invasive species are also common in Indianapolis, including tree of heaven, wintercreeper, Amur honeysuckle, and Callery pear.\nA 2016 bioblitz along three of the city's riparian corridors found 590 taxa. Urban wildlife common to the Indianapolis area include mammals such as the white-tailed deer, eastern chipmunk, eastern cottontail, and the eastern grey and American red squirrels. In recent years, local raccoon and groundhog populations have increased alongside sightings of American badgers, beavers, mink, coyotes, and red fox. Birds native to the area include the northern cardinal, wood thrush, eastern screech owl, mourning dove, pileated and red-bellied woodpeckers, and wild turkey. Located in the Mississippi Flyway, the city sees more than 400 migratory bird species throughout the year. Some 57 species of fish can be found in the city's waterways, including bass and sunfish. Some federally-designated endangered and threatened species are native to the Indianapolis area, including several species of freshwater mussels, the rusty patched bumble bee, Indiana bat, northern long-eared bat, and the running buffalo clover.\nIn recent years, the National Wildlife Federation has ranked Indianapolis among the ten most wildlife-friendly cities in the U.S.\nClimate.\nIndianapolis has a hot-summer humid continental climate (K\u00f6ppen climate classification: \"Dfa\"), but can be considered a borderline humid subtropical climate (K\u00f6ppen: \"Cfa\") using the isotherm. It experiences four distinct seasons. The city lies at the transition between USDA plant hardiness zones 6a and 6b.\nTypically, summers are fairly hot, humid, and wet. Winters are generally cold with moderate snowfall. The July daily average temperature is . High temperatures reach or exceed an average of 18 days each year, and occasionally exceed . Spring and autumn are usually pleasant, if at times unpredictable. Midday temperature drops exceeding are common during March and April, and instances of very warm days () followed within 36 hours by snowfall are not unusual during these months. Winters are cold, with an average January temperature of . Temperatures dip to or below an average of 3.7 nights per year.\nThe rainiest months occur in the spring and summer, with slightly higher averages during May, June, and July. May is typically the wettest, with an average of of rain. Most rain is derived from thunderstorm activity. There is no distinct dry season, although occasional droughts occur. Severe weather is not uncommon, particularly in the spring and summer months. Indianapolis experiences an average of 20 thunderstorm days annually.\nIndianapolis's average annual rainfall is . Snowfall averages per season. Official temperature extremes range from , set on July 14, 1936, to , set on January 19, 1994.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe U.S. Census Bureau considers Indianapolis as two entities: the consolidated city and the city's remainder, or balance. The consolidated city is coterminous with Marion County, except the independent municipalities of Beech Grove, Lawrence, Southport, and Speedway. The city's balance excludes the populations of ten semi-autonomous municipalities that are included in totals for the consolidated city. These are Clermont, Crows Nest, Homecroft, Meridian Hills, North Crows Nest, Rocky Ripple, Spring Hill, Warren Park, Williams Creek, and Wynnedale. An eleventh town, Cumberland, is partially included.\nIn 2015, Brookings characterized the Indianapolis metropolitan area as a minor-emerging immigrant gateway with a foreign-born population of 126,767, or 6.4% of the total population, a 131% increase from 2000. Much of this growth can be attributed to thousands of Burmese-Chin refugees who have settled in Indianapolis, particularly Perry Township, since the late 1990s. Indianapolis is home to one of the largest concentrations of Chin people outside of Myanmar (formerly Burma), with an estimated population ranging from 17,000 to 24,000.\nThe Williams Institute reported that the Indianapolis metropolitan area had an estimated 4.6% LGBT adult population in 2020, totaling about 68,000.\nCensus and estimates.\nAt the 2020 census, Indianapolis had a population of 887,642 and a population density of . The estimated population was 880,621 in 2022. By population, Indianapolis is the state's largest city and the country's 16th largest.\nThe Indianapolis metropolitan area, officially the Indianapolis\u2013Carmel\u2013Greenwood, IN metropolitan statistical area (MSA), consists of Marion County and the surrounding counties of Boone, Brown, Hamilton, Hancock, Hendricks, Johnson, Madison, Morgan, Shelby, and Tipton. In 2020, the metropolitan area's population was 2,111,040, the most populous in Indiana and home to 31% of the state's residents. In 2022, the estimated population was 2,141,779. In 2020, the larger Indianapolis\u2013Carmel\u2013Muncie, IN combined statistical area (CSA) had a population of 2,492,514, home to nearly 37% of Indiana residents across 20 of Indiana's 92 counties. In 2022, the estimated population was 2,524,790.\nIn the 2010 census, 97.2% of the Indianapolis population was reported as one race: 61.8% White, 27.5% Black or African American, 2.1% Asian (0.4% Burmese, 0.4% Indian, 0.3% Chinese, 0.3% Filipino, 0.1% Korean, 0.1% Vietnamese, 0.1% Japanese, 0.1% Thai, 0.1% other Asian); 0.3% American Indian, and 5.5% as other. The remaining 2.8% of the population was reported as multiracial (two or more races). Indianapolis's Hispanic or Latino community was 9.4% of the city's population in the 2010 U.S. Census: 6.9% Mexican, 0.4% Puerto Rican, 0.1% Cuban, and 2% as other. Sometime between 2020 and 2023, Marion County became majority non-white.\nIn 2010, the median age for Indianapolis was 33.7 years. Age distribution for the city's inhabitants was 25% under the age of 18; 4.4% were between 18 and 21; 16.3% were age 21 to 65; and 13.1% were age 65 or older. For every 100 females, there were 93 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 90 males.\nThe 2010 census reported 332,199 households in Indianapolis, with an average household size of 2.42 and an average family size of 3.08. Of the total households, 59.3% were family households, with 28.2% of these including the family's own children under the age of 18; 36.5% were husband-wife families; 17.2% had a female householder (with no husband present) and 5.6% had a male householder (with no wife present). The remaining 40.7% were non-family households. As of 2010[ [update]], 32% of the non-family households included individuals living alone, 8.3% of these households included individuals age 65 years of age or older.\nThe U.S. Census Bureau's 2007\u20132011 American Community Survey indicated the median household income for Indianapolis city was $42,704, and the median family income was $53,161. Median income for males working full-time, year-round, was $42,101, compared to $34,788 for females. Per capita income for the city was $24,430. 14.7% of families and 18.9% of the city's total population lived below the poverty line. 28.3% of those in poverty were under the age of 18 and 9.2% were age 65 or older.\nHomelessness.\nIn 2023, a Point-In-Time Count conducted by the Coalition for Homelessness Intervention and Prevention identified 1,619 homeless individuals in Indianapolis. About 78% of the city's homeless population was sheltered, with 64% living in emergency shelters and 14% in transitional housing. The remaining 22% were unsheltered.\nReligion.\nReligion has played a central role in shaping the city's healthcare, political, and social service systems. Christianity is the prevalent religion in the Indianapolis area. In 2016, the Public Religion Research Institute identified the largest groupings of Protestantism by faith tradition: 23% Evangelical Protestant, 20% Mainline Protestant, and 11% Black Protestant, respectively. At 15%, the Catholic Church was the largest single denomination. Other predominant denominations include Baptists (15%), Methodists (8%), Disciples of Christ (5%), Pentecostals (5%), Jehovah\u2019s Witnesses (3%), and Lutherans (2%). About 3% of the population adheres to non-Christian religions. Some 22% of residents identified as religiously \"unaffiliated\", consistent with the national average of 22.7%.\nIndianapolis is home to roughly 1,200 congregations representing numerous faiths, including some 100 Christian denominations. Some of the city\u2019s oldest congregations include Meridian Street United Methodist Church (1821), Central Christian Church (1833), Bethel A.M.E. Church (1836), Christ Church Cathedral (1837), St. John the Evangelist Catholic Church (1837), Second Presbyterian Church (1838), and the Indianapolis Hebrew Congregation (1856). Newer establishments reflect the city\u2019s growing religious diversity, including Masjid Al Mu'mineen (2001), the Hindu Temple of Central Indiana (2006), and the Indianapolis Indiana Temple (2015), located in Carmel. The First Church of Cannabis was established in response to Indiana\u2019s Religious Freedom Restoration Act in 2015.\nReligious denominations headquartered in the Indianapolis area include the Christian Church (Disciples of Christ), the Free Methodist Church the Lutheran Ministerium and Synod \u2013 USA, and the Wesleyan Church. Indianapolis is the seat of two dioceses.\nEconomy.\nIndianapolis anchors the 28th largest metropolitan economy in the U.S., with a gross domestic product of US$199.2 billion in 2023. The city's major exports include pharmaceuticals, motor vehicle parts, medical equipment and supplies, engine and power equipment, and aircraft products and parts. According to the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, the largest industries by employment in the Indianapolis metropolitan area are trade, transportation, and utilities; education and health services; professional and business services; government; leisure and hospitality; and manufacturing, respectively. The area's unemployment rate was 3.7% in February 2024.\nThree \"Fortune\" 500 companies are based in the city: insurance company Elevance Health; pharmaceutical company Eli Lilly; and agrochemical company Corteva. Other notable companies based in the city include AES Indiana, Allison Transmission, Barnes &amp; Thornburg, Calumet, Inc., CountryMark, Elanco, Emmis Corporation, Finish Line, Herff Jones, Klipsch Audio Technologies, Lids, Lucas Oil Products, OneAmerica Financial, Republic Airways Holdings, Simon Property Group, Steak 'n Shake, Sun King Brewing, Wheaton World Wide Moving, and Zipp.\nIndianapolis's central location and extensive highway and rail infrastructure have positioned the city as an important logistics center. According to the Indy Chamber, the region was home to some 4,300 establishments employing nearly 110,000 in 2020. Amazon has a major presence in the Indianapolis metropolitan area, employing 9,000. FedEx employs 7,000 workers across 35 facilities in the city, including FedEx Express's National Hub, which employs 5,800 workers in sorting, distribution, and shipping at Indianapolis International Airport. Other logistics companies in the region with large workforces include Ingram Micro and Venture Logistics.\nIndianapolis anchors one of the largest life sciences clusters in the U.S., notably in the subsectors of drugs and pharmaceuticals and agricultural feedstock and chemicals. Life sciences employ between 21,200 and 28,700 among nearly 350 companies located in the region. Pharmaceutical company Eli Lilly is the city's largest private employer, with a workforce of 11,000 in research and development, manufacturing, and executive administration. Other major employers include Corteva, Fortrea, and Roche's North American headquarters.\nThe city's hospitality industry has grown in importance in recent years due to an expanding convention business. According to the city's destination marketing organization, Indianapolis receives 29.2\u00a0million visitors annually, generating US$5.6\u00a0billion, and supporting 82,900 jobs. The city's major hospitality facilities are clustered in downtown Indianapolis, including the Indiana Convention Center, Lucas Oil Stadium, and some 8,500 hotel rooms. Major annual conventions include FDIC International, the National FFA Organization Convention, Gen Con, and the Performance Racing Industry Trade Show.\nIndianapolis ranks among the fastest high-tech job growth areas in the U.S. The metropolitan area is home to 28,500 information technology-related jobs at such companies as Angi, Formstack, Genesys, Hubstaff, Infosys, Ingram Micro, and Salesforce Marketing Cloud. Salesforce has the largest workforce of local tech firms, employing about 2,100 in Indianapolis.\nManufacturing.\nHistorically, manufacturing has been a critical component of Indianapolis's economy; however, deindustrialization since the mid-20th century has significantly impacted the city's workforce. Indianapolis is typically considered part of the Rust Belt, a region of the Northeastern and Midwestern U.S. beleaguered by industrial and population decline. Between 1990 and 2012, approximately 26,900 manufacturing jobs were lost in the city as it continued diversification efforts and transitioned to a service economy. RCA and Western Electric formerly employed thousands at their Indianapolis manufacturing plants.\nOnce home to 60 automakers, Indianapolis rivaled Detroit as a center of automobile manufacturing and design in the early 20th century. Indianapolis was home to several luxury car companies, including Duesenberg, Marmon, and Stutz Motor Company; however, the automakers did not survive the Great Depression of the 1930s. Detroit's Big Three automakers maintained a presence in the city and continued to operate in various capacities until the 2000s: Ford Motor Company (1914\u20131942, 1956\u20132008), Chrysler (1925\u20132005), and General Motors (1930\u20132011).\nIndianapolis is home to Allison Transmission's headquarters and manufacturing facilities, employing 2,500 in the design and production of automatic transmissions and hybrid propulsion systems. Rolls-Royce North America dates its local presence to the establishment of the Allison Engine Company in 1915. Its Indianapolis Operations Center has a workforce of 4,000 in aircraft engine development and manufacturing. Other major manufacturing employers include Allegion and RTX Corporation. In 2016, Carrier Corporation announced the closure of its Indianapolis plant, moving 1,400 manufacturing jobs to Mexico. Carrier later negotiated with the incoming Trump administration to save some jobs. The company's local workforce numbers 800 in gas furnace production.\nArts and culture.\nVisual arts.\nWith a permanent collection of 54,000 works, the Indianapolis Museum of Art at Newfields is the city's primary art museum. It is among the largest and oldest art museums in the U.S., tracing its roots back to the Art Association of Indianapolis, which was founded in 1883. The museum's Newfields' campus includes Oldfields (Lilly House), the , eight gardens, and four performance spaces.\nEstablished in 1902, the Herron School of Art and Design's first core faculty included Impressionist painters belonging to the Hoosier Group. Eskenazi Hall at IU Indianapolis has been home to the school since 2005, hosting five public galleries and numerous programs throughout the year.\nLocated in Broad Ripple, the Indianapolis Art Center houses the Marilyn K. Glick School of Art, galleries, and a sculpture garden. The center hosts and manages art classes, exhibitions, art fairs, and outreach programs throughout the year. The Harrison Center in the Old Northside and the Murphy Art Center in Fountain Square house several galleries and artist studios and participate in First Friday events.\nLocated in downtown Indianapolis, the Eiteljorg Museum is home to a diverse collection of visual arts by indigenous peoples of the Americas and Western American Art. The museum hosts numerous lectures, artist residencies, special exhibitions, and events annually.\nIn 2021, there were more than 3,000 recorded works of public art in Indianapolis. More than one-third of those are concentrated in the downtown Indianapolis area, including dozens belonging to the Indiana University\u2013Purdue University Indianapolis Public Art Collection, the Indiana Statehouse Public Art Collection, or the Indianapolis Cultural Trail. Murals are the most popular medium of public art found in the city.\nSince 2020, Ganggang has been a prominent supporter of Black artists in the city. Their annual art fair \"BUTTER\" is a multi-day art exhibition that takes place over Labor Day weekend.\nPerforming arts.\nSeveral of the city's most prominent performing arts venues and organizations are located in the downtown area, including the Hilbert Circle Theatre (home to the Indianapolis Symphony Orchestra) and the Indiana Theatre (home to the Indiana Repertory Theatre). Other notable venues near the central business district include The Cabaret, Indianapolis Artsgarden, Phoenix Theatre, Slippery Noodle Inn, and Everwise Amphitheater at White River State Park, the city's largest outdoor venue.\nThe Mass Ave Cultural Arts District is home to Old National Centre, the oldest stagehouse in Indianapolis, having opened in 1910. The performing arts center features the 2,500-seat Murat Theatre, the 2,000-seat Egyptian Room, and the 600-seat Corinthian Hall. Mass Ave is also home to the Athen\u00e6um, Basile, District, and IF theaters, all of which host the annual Indianapolis Theatre Fringe Festival, or \"IndyFringe\". Hedback Community Theatre in Herron\u2013Morton is home to Footlite Musicals and Epilogue Players theater companies.\nThe Madam Walker Legacy Center opened in the heart of the city's African-American neighborhood on Indiana Avenue in 1927. The building's theater hosted vaudeville shows and anchored the Indiana Avenue jazz scene from the 1920s through the 1960s. \"The Avenue\" produced greats such as David Baker, Slide Hampton, Freddie Hubbard, J. J. Johnson, James Spaulding, and the Montgomery Brothers (Buddy, Monk, and Wes). Wes Montgomery is considered one of the most influential jazz guitarists of all time, and is credited with popularizing the \"Naptown Sound\".\nLocal performing arts organizations include the Indianapolis Baroque Orchestra, Indianapolis Chamber Orchestra, Indianapolis Men's Chorus, Indianapolis Opera, and Indianapolis Youth Orchestra. Other notable venues include Butler University's Clowes Memorial Hall and Melody Inn in Butler\u2013Tarkington, and the Frank and Katrina Basile Opera Center and the Jazz Kitchen in Meridian\u2013Kessler. The city's Broad Ripple and Fountain Square neighborhoods are known for local live music, home to dozens of venues.\nIndianapolis is home to a variety of national professional musical organizations, including the American Piano Awards, Bands of America, Drum Corps International, and the Percussive Arts Society. Annual music festivals and competitions held in the city include the Drum Corps International World Class Championships, Indianapolis Early Music Festival, and Indy Jazz Fest. The quadrennial International Violin Competition of Indianapolis is considered among the most prestigious of its kind in the world.\nLiterary arts.\nFrom about 1870 to 1920, Indianapolis was at the center of the Golden Age of Indiana Literature. Several notable poets and writers based in the city achieved national prominence and critical acclaim during this period, including James Whitcomb Riley, Booth Tarkington, and Meredith Nicholson. Perhaps the city's most acclaimed twentieth-century writer was Kurt Vonnegut, known for his darkly satirical and controversial bestselling novel \"Slaughterhouse-Five\". Vonnegut became known for including at least one character in his novels from Indianapolis. Upon returning to the city in 1986, Vonnegut acknowledged the influence the city had on his writings:{\nA key figure of the Black Arts Movement, Indianapolis resident Mari Evans was among the most influential of the twentieth century's black poets. Indianapolis is home to bestselling young adult fiction writer John Green, known for his critically acclaimed 2012 novel \"The Fault in Our Stars\", set in the city. Notable sites in Indianapolis include the James Whitcomb Riley Museum Home, the Ray Bradbury Center at IU Indianapolis, and the Kurt Vonnegut Museum and Library.\nAttractions.\nThe Children's Museum of Indianapolis is the world's largest children's museum with of exhibit space and a collection of over 120,000 artifacts. Due to its leadership and innovations, the museum is a world leader in its field. In 2023, it was one of the region's most popular attractions, drawing about 1.2\u00a0million visitors.\nThe Indianapolis Zoo houses more than 1,400 animals of 235 species while the adjoining White River Gardens contains more than 50,000 plants of nearly 3,000 species, respectively. The zoo is a leader in animal conservation and research, recognized for its biennial Indianapolis Prize award. It is among the largest privately funded zoos in the U.S. and one of the city's most visited attractions, with 1.1\u00a0million guests in 2023.\nLocated inside the Indianapolis Motor Speedway, the Indianapolis Motor Speedway Museum exhibits an extensive collection of auto racing memorabilia showcasing various motorsports and automotive history. Daily grounds and track tours originate from the museum. Located at the National Collegiate Athletic Association headquarters, the NCAA Hall of Champions contains exhibits on collegiate athletics in the U.S.\nThe Benjamin Harrison Presidential Site includes the archives and restored home of the 23rd president of the U.S., Benjamin Harrison. Harrison is buried about north of the site at Crown Hill Cemetery. Other notable interments at the cemetery include three U.S. vice presidents (Fairbanks, Hendricks, and Marshall), notorious American gangster John Dillinger, and First Lady Caroline Harrison. State-specific historical institutions based in Indianapolis include the Indiana Historical Society, Indiana Humanities, the Indiana Jewish Historical Society, Indiana Landmarks, the Indiana Medical History Museum, and the Indiana State Museum.\nThe Indiana World War Memorial Historic District in downtown Indianapolis is home to more than a dozen memorials and monuments to United States veterans, including the national headquarters of the American Legion, the Indiana War Memorial Museum, and the Soldiers' and Sailors' Monument. Combined, it is the largest war memorial project in the United States, encompassing . Other notable sites in the city include Crown Hill National Cemetery, the Indiana 9/11 Memorial, the Medal of Honor Memorial, and the USS \"Indianapolis\" National Memorial.\nIndianapolis hosts numerous annual fairs, festivals, and parades. The largest is the Indiana State Fair, regularly drawing more than 800,000 attendees each August. Held during the \"Month of May\", the 500 Festival features over 30 programs and events leading up to the Indianapolis 500. Other notable events include the Indy Pride Festival and the Marion County Fair in June, the Indiana Black Expo Summer Celebration in July, the Historic Irvington Halloween Festival in October, and the Circle of Lights during the holiday season.\nCuisine.\nIndianapolis has an emerging food scene as well as established eateries. Founded in 1821 as the city's public market, the Indianapolis City Market has served the community from its current building since 1886. Before World War II, the City Market was home to meat and vegetable vendors. As consumer habits evolved and residents moved from the central city, City Market transitioned from a traditional marketplace to a food hall. The AMP and The Garage food halls opened in 2021.\nSituated in the Corn Belt, Indianapolis has maintained close ties to farming and food production. Urban agriculture in the city dates to the 1930s, when Flanner House began teaching Black arrivals how to farm on vacant lots during the Great Migration. Within a few years, more than 200 families were tending 600 garden plots on nearly of land on the city's near north side. Urban agriculture has made a comeback in recent years in an effort to alleviate food deserts. According to the city's Office of Sustainability, there were 129 community farms and gardens in 2020. As of 2020[ [update]], several farmers' markets have been established throughout Indianapolis.\nDistinctive local dishes include pork tenderloin sandwiches, sugar cream pie, and beef Manhattan, invented in Indianapolis. Wonder Bread and Choc-Ola also originate in the city. Longstanding local eateries include Long's Bakery, Mug-n-Bun, Shapiro's Deli, The Workingman's Friend, and St. Elmo Steak House. St. Elmo was recognized with the America's Classics award by the James Beard Foundation in 2012. In 2008, the Indianapolis metropolitan area had the highest concentration of chain restaurants per capita in the U.S. Locally based chains include MCL Restaurant &amp; Bakery, Noble Roman's, and Steak 'n Shake. The city's growing immigrant population has contributed to a rise in global cuisine, with some 800 ethnic restaurants opening in recent years.\nIn 2016, \"Cond\u00e9 Nast Traveler\" named Indianapolis the \"most underrated food city in the U.S.\", while ranking Milktooth as one of the best restaurants in the world. \"Food &amp; Wine\" called Indianapolis the \"rising star of the Midwest\". Several Indianapolis chefs and restaurateurs have been semifinalists in the James Beard Foundation Awards in recent years. Microbreweries have become a staple in the city, increasing fivefold since 2009. There are now about 50 craft brewers in Indianapolis, with Sun King Brewing being the largest.\nFilm and television.\nIndianapolis natives have left a mark on the entertainment industry, most notably during the Classical Hollywood cinema era. James Baskett received an Academy Honorary Award in 1948 for his role in Walt Disney's \"Song of the South\", becoming the first Black male Oscar recipient. Sid Grauman, one of the founders of the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences, received an Academy Honorary Award in 1949, recognized for raising the standard for film exhibition. Perhaps the most famous actor from the Indianapolis area is Academy Award-nominee, Steve McQueen, who was born in Beech Grove. Other Academy Award nominees from the city include costume designer Gloria Gresham, actress Marjorie Main, and actor Clifton Webb.\nThe city's sports venues have served as backdrops for such films as \"Hoosiers\" (1986) and \"Eight Men Out\" (1988). The city's largest contribution to popular culture, the Indianapolis 500, has influenced entertainment for decades, referenced in film, television, video games, and other media. Three motion pictures filmed at the Indianapolis Motor Speedway include \"Speedway\" (1929), \"To Please a Lady\" (1950), and \"Winning\" (1969). Other motion pictures at least partially filmed in the city include \"Going All the Way\" (1997), \"Palindromes\" (2004), \"Saving Star Wars\" (2004), \"Amanda\" (2009), \"Walter\" (2015), \"The MisEducation of Bindu\" (2019), \"Athlete A\" (2020), and \"Our Father\" (2022). \"Hoosiers\" and \"Ringling Brothers Parade Film\" (1902) were added to the National Film Registry in 2001 and 2021, respectively.\nTelevision programs that have been shot on location in the city include \"100 Days to Indy\", \"American Ninja Warrior\", \"Antiques Roadshow\", \"College GameDay\", \"Cops\", \"Diners, Drive-Ins and Dives\", \",\" \"Gaycation\", \"Ghost Hunters\", \"Good Bones\", \"Good Morning America\", \"Hard Knocks\", \"House Hunters\", \"Late Night with Jimmy Fallon\", \"Man v. Food\", \"Parks and Recreation\", \"Say I Do\", \"SportsCenter\", \"Today\", and \"What Would You Do?\"\nAnnual film festivals held in Indianapolis include the Circle City Film Festival, Heartland International Film Festival, Indy Film Fest, the Indianapolis Jewish Film Festival, and the Indianapolis LGBT Film Festival. Founded in 2018, the Indy Shorts International Film Festival is one of 34 film festivals in the world used to qualify for the Academy Awards.\nFilm Indy was established in 2016 to support local visual artists, filmmakers, and aspiring filmmakers; recruit film and television-related marketing opportunities to the region, and provide resources for producers interested in filming in the city. Since 2016, more than 350 film and media projects have been produced in the Indianapolis region with a collective economic impact of $24.1 million and the creation of 1,900 local jobs.\nSports.\nProfessional.\nThe Indianapolis Colts of the National Football League have been based in the city since relocating from Baltimore in 1984. The Colts' tenure in Indianapolis has produced 11 division championships, two conference titles, and two Super Bowl appearances. Pro Football Hall of Fame inductees Tony Dungy and Peyton Manning led the team to win Super Bowl XLI in 2007. Lucas Oil Stadium replaced the team's first home, the RCA Dome, in 2008.\nFounded in 1967, the Indiana Pacers began in the American Basketball Association (ABA), joining the National Basketball Association (NBA) when the leagues merged in 1976. Before joining the NBA, the Pacers won three ABA division titles and three ABA championships (1970, 1972, 1973), led by Naismith Basketball Hall of Fame inductees Mel Daniels, Roger Brown, and George McGinnis. Since the merger, the Pacers have made 10 appearances in the NBA Eastern Conference finals. In 2000, Hall of Fame inductees Larry Bird and Reggie Miller led the team to its first NBA Finals appearance. The team returned to the NBA Finals in 2025, led by Rick Carlisle and Tyrese Haliburton.\nSince their debut in 2000, the Indiana Fever of the Women's National Basketball Association (WNBA) have won three conference titles, made three appearances in the WNBA Finals, and won one championship. Hall of fame inductees Lin Dunn and Tamika Catchings led the Fever to their first championship title in 2012. The Fever and Pacers share Gainbridge Fieldhouse, which replaced Market Square Arena in 1999.\nThe Indianapolis Indians are a Minor League Baseball team of the International League and the Triple-A affiliate of the Pittsburgh Pirates. Established in 1902, the Indians are among the oldest teams in Minor League Baseball. The Indians have won 26 division titles, 14 league titles, and seven championships, most recently in 2000. Victory Field replaced Bush Stadium as the team's home in 1996.\nIndy Eleven, a professional soccer team in the second-division USL Championship, play their home matches at Carroll Stadium. The Fishers Event Center in the suburb of Fishers is home to the Indy Fuel (a minor league ice hockey team in the ECHL), Indy Ignite (a member of the Pro Volleyball Federation), and Fishers Freight (a member of the Indoor Football League). The Noblesville Boom of the NBA G League will begin playing at The Arena at Innovation Mile in 2025.\nAmateur.\nIndianapolis has been called the \"Amateur Sports Capital of the World\". The National Collegiate Athletic Association (NCAA), the main governing body for U.S. collegiate sports, and the National Federation of State High School Associations are based in the city. Indianapolis is home to two NCAA athletic conferences: the Horizon League (D-I) and the Great Lakes Valley Conference (D-II). The city is also home to three national sport governing bodies, as recognized by the U.S. Olympic &amp; Paralympic Committee: USA Football; USA Gymnastics; and USA Track &amp; Field.\nTwo NCAA D-I athletic programs are based in Indianapolis: the Butler Bulldogs of the Big East Conference and the IU Indy Jaguars of the Horizon League. The University of Indianapolis is a D-II school; the Greyhounds compete in the Great Lakes Valley Conference. Marian University athletics compete in the National Association of Intercollegiate Athletics's Crossroads League.\nTraditionally, Butler's Hinkle Fieldhouse was the hub for Hoosier hysteria, a general excitement for the game of basketball throughout the state, specifically the Indiana High School Boys Basketball Tournament. Hinkle, a National Historic Landmark, opened in 1928 as the world's largest basketball arena, with seating for 15,000. It is regarded as \"Indiana's Basketball Cathedral\". The Indiana High School Athletic Association is based in Indianapolis.\nMotorsports.\nIndianapolis is a global center for auto racing, home to numerous motorsports facilities and events, two sanctioning bodies (INDYCAR and United States Auto Club), and more than 500 motorsports-related companies. Indianapolis, or Indy, is a metonym for auto racing, particularly when referring to American open-wheel car racing.\nCompleted in 1909 as an automotive test track, the Indianapolis Motor Speedway is a National Historic Landmark and the world's largest sports venue by capacity, with 235,000 permanent seats. Since 1911, the rectangular oval has hosted the Indianapolis 500, an open-wheel automobile race. It is contested as part of the IndyCar Series and traditionally held over Memorial Day weekend. Steeped in tradition, the race is considered the world's largest single-day sporting event and part of the Triple Crown of Motorsport. The track also hosts the Grand Prix of Indianapolis in May and NASCAR's Brickyard 400 and Pennzoil 250 in July.\nLucas Oil Indianapolis Raceway Park (in nearby Brownsburg) contains a road course, a dragstrip, and a oval short track. Each Labor Day weekend, the facility hosts the NHRA U.S. Nationals, the largest and most prestigious drag racing event in the world. The city's Indianapolis Speedrome is believed to be the oldest operating figure 8 racing venue in the U.S.\nEvents.\nBeyond its many auto races, Indianapolis hosts numerous other sporting events throughout the year, including the NFL Scouting Combine in February, the 500 Festival Mini-Marathon in May, the Circle City Classic in September, the Monumental Marathon in November, and the Big Ten Football Championship Game and Indy Classic in December. Indianapolis also regularly hosts the NCAA Division I men's and women's basketball Final Fours, most recently in 2021 and 2016, respectively.\nNotable past events hosted in the city include the U.S. Clay Court Championships (1969\u20131987), the National Sports Festival (1982), the NBA All-Star Game (1985 and 2024), the Pan American Games (1987), the Indianapolis Tennis Championships (1988\u20132009), the World Artistic Gymnastics Championships (1991), WrestleMania VIII (1992), the World Rowing Championships (1994), the United States Grand Prix (2000\u20132007), the World Police and Fire Games (2001), the FIBA Basketball World Cup (2002), Super Bowl XLVI (2012), the College Football Playoff National Championship (2022), and the WNBA All-Star Game (2025).\nGovernment.\nIndianapolis\u2014officially the Consolidated City of Indianapolis and Marion County\u2014has a consolidated city-county form of government, a status it has held since 1970 under Indiana Code's Unigov provision. Many functions of the municipal and county governments are consolidated, though some remain separate. The city has a strong mayor\u2013council system of government which oversees six administrative departments. Marion County also contains some 60 taxing units, nine separate civil township governments, and seven special-purpose municipal corporations.\nThe executive branch is headed by an elected mayor who serves as the chief executive of both the city and county. Indianapolis City-County Council is the legislative body and consists of 25 members, all of whom represent geographic districts. The mayor and council members are elected to unlimited four-year terms. Executive and legislative functions are based from the City-County Building. The judiciary consists of a circuit court and superior court with four divisions and 32 judges. Each of the county's nine civil townships elects its own township trustee, three-member board, assessor, and a constable and small claims court judge, all of whom serve four-year terms.\nSince its move from Corydon in 1825, Indianapolis has served as the capital and seat of Indiana's state government. The Indiana Statehouse houses the executive, legislative, and judicial branches of state government, including the office of the Governor of Indiana, the Indiana General Assembly, and the Indiana Supreme Court. Most state departments and agencies are headquartered in the neighboring Indiana Government Center complex. The Indiana Governor's Residence is on Meridian Street in the Butler\u2013Tarkington neighborhood, about north of downtown. In the Indiana House of Representatives, Indianapolis is split between 16 districts. In the Indiana Senate, the city is split between nine districts.\nThe Birch Bayh Federal Building and U.S. Courthouse houses the U.S. District Court for the Southern District of Indiana. Most federal field offices are located in the Minton-Capehart Federal Building. From 1906 to 1991, the U.S. Army operated Fort Benjamin Harrison in neighboring Lawrence. About 5,000 federal employees work for the Defense Finance and Accounting Service, headquartered near the former base. Indianapolis is split between two of Indiana's nine congressional districts: Indiana's 7th congressional district, represented by Andr\u00e9 Carson, and Indiana's 6th congressional district, represented by Jefferson Shreve.\nPolitics.\nUntil fairly recently, Indianapolis was considered one of the most conservative major cities in the U.S. According to 2014 research published in the \"American Political Science Review\", the city's policy preferences are less conservative than the national mean when compared with other large U.S. cities. While Indianapolis as a whole leans Democratic, the southern third of the city, consisting of Decatur, Perry, and Franklin townships, trends Republican.\nRepublicans held the mayor's office for 32 years (1967\u20131999), and controlled the City-County Council from its inception in 1970 to 2003. In the 2000 United States presidential election, Marion County voters narrowly selected George W. Bush over Al Gore by a margin of 1.3%, but voted in favor of John Kerry by a margin of 1.9% in the 2004 United States presidential election. Presidential election results have increasingly favored Democrats, with Marion County voters selecting Joe Biden over Donald Trump in the 2020 United States presidential election, 63.3\u201334.3%. Incumbent mayor Democrat Joe Hogsett faced Republican State Senator Jim Merritt and Libertarian Doug McNaughton in the 2019 Indianapolis mayoral election. Hogsett was elected to a second term, with 72% of the vote. The 2019 City-County Council elections expanded Democratic control of the council, flipping six seats to hold a 20\u20135 supermajority over Republicans.\nPublic safety.\nThe Indianapolis Fire Department (IFD) comprises seven battalions with 44 fire stations. IFD provides mutual aid to the excluded municipalities of Lawrence and Speedway, as well as Decatur, Pike, and Wayne townships (all of which operate separate fire departments). IFD directs operations for Indiana Task Force 1 (IN-TF1), one of 28 FEMA Urban Search and Rescue Task Force teams in the U.S.\nThe Indianapolis Metropolitan Police Department (IMPD) is the city's primary law enforcement agency. IMPD's jurisdiction covers Marion County, excluding the municipalities of Beech Grove, Lawrence, Southport, and Speedway (all of which operate separate forces). In 2020, IMPD had 1,700 sworn police personnel and 250 civilian employees across six districts. In 2022, the Community Justice Campus opened, housing the Marion County Sheriff's Office, a new courthouse, jail, and mental health and substance abuse clinic.\nThe Indiana National Guard's major command units and joint headquarters staff are based at the former Stout Army Air Field on the city's southwest side.\nUnlike other major Midwest cities like Detroit and Chicago, the homicide rate for Indianapolis remained below the national average throughout the 1990s. Homicides hit a spike in 1998 when the city reached 162 murders. Murders drastically decreased in the following years but spiked again in 2006 with 153 murders. Until 2019, annual criminal homicide numbers had grown each year since 2011, reaching record highs from 2015 to 2018. With 144 criminal homicides, 2015 surpassed 1998 as the year with the most murder investigations in the city. With 159 criminal homicides, 2018 stands as the most violent year on record in the city. FBI data showed a 7% increase in violent crimes committed in Indianapolis, outpacing the rest of the state and country. Law enforcement has blamed increased violence on a combination of root causes, including poverty, substance abuse, and mental illness.\nEducation.\nPrimary and secondary schools.\nNine K\u201312 public school districts serve residents of the consolidated city as defined by the U.S. Census Bureau (which includes the balance and included cities, and does not include the excluded cities):\nBeech Grove City Schools and Speedway School Town only include sections of excluded cities.\nIndianapolis Public Schools is the largest district in the city, enrolling about 23,000 students across 60 schools. In 2015, the district began contracting with charter organizations and nonprofit managers to operate failing schools. About 63% of the district's students attend traditional neighborhood or magnet schools, while the remaining 37% are enrolled in independently managed schools. About 18,000 students are enrolled in tuition-free charter schools sponsored by the Indianapolis Mayor's Office of Education Innovation and Indianapolis Charter School Board.\nIndianapolis is home to two state-supported residential schools, the Indiana School for the Blind and Visually Impaired and Indiana School for the Deaf. According to the Indiana Department of Education, about 75 private, parochial, and independent charter schools operate throughout Marion County. Roman Catholic and Christian parochial primary and secondary schools are most prevalent. Notable independent private schools include the International School of Indiana, the Orchard School, and Park Tudor School in Meridian Hills.\nColleges and universities.\nThe city is home to two four-year public university campuses: Indiana University Indianapolis and Purdue University in Indianapolis. The two institutions jointly operated Indiana University\u2013Purdue University Indianapolis (IUPUI) until its dissolution in 2024. IU Indianapolis is an R1 urban research university that enrolls about 25,000 students in 330 different bachelor's, master's, and doctoral degree programs. It is home to 17 degree-granting schools, including the main campus of the IU School of Medicine, the largest medical school by enrollment in the U.S. Purdue University in Indianapolis is considered an extension of its flagship campus in West Lafayette.\nIvy Tech, Indiana's statewide community college system, enrolls some 21,000 full-time students at its Downtown Indianapolis campus. Other public institutions with satellite campuses in the city include Ball State University's Estopinal College of Architecture and Planning, Purdue Polytechnic Institute, and Vincennes University.\nTwo secular private universities are based in Indianapolis. Founded in 1855, Butler University serves an enrollment of about 5,000 from its Butler\u2013Tarkington campus. Martin University, Indiana's only Predominantly Black Institution, was founded in 1977 and is located in the Martindale\u2013Brightwood neighborhood. Indiana Tech maintains a branch campus in the city. Two seminaries are located in the city: Bishop Simon Brut\u00e9 College Seminary and Christian Theological Seminary. Three religiously affiliated universities based in the city are Indiana Bible College, the University of Indianapolis, and Marian University. The College of Biblical Studies and Indiana Wesleyan University operate satellite sites in Indianapolis.\nLibraries.\nFounded in 1873, the Indianapolis Public Library (IndyPL) consists of the Central Library and 24 branches throughout Marion County. Central Library's special collections include the Center for Black Literature &amp; Culture, the Chris Gonzalez Collection, and the Nina Mason Pulliam Indianapolis Special Collections Room. The library collection contains nearly 1.7 million materials staffed by 410 full-time employees and has a circulation of 14.6 million, making it the ninth largest library by circulation in the U.S.\nIndianapolis is also home to the Indiana State Library and Historical Bureau, the state's largest public library. Notable academic libraries in the city include IU Indianapolis's University Library and Butler University's Irwin Library.\nMedia.\nPrint.\nIndianapolis's primary daily newspaper is the \"Indianapolis Star\". Defunct major newspapers include the \"Indianapolis News\", an evening publication which printed its last edition in 1999; and the \"Indianapolis Times\", which ceased publication in 1965. Additional publications include \"Indianapolis Monthly\", a regional lifestyle publication; \"Indianapolis Business Journal\", a weekly business newspaper; and \"NUVO\", an alternative weekly that became digital-only in 2019.\nIndianapolis's ethnic media include the \"Indianapolis Recorder\", a weekly newspaper that primarily serves the city's African American community; \"Indiana Minority Business Magazine\", a quarterly publication; and \"La Voz de Indiana\", a biweekly newspaper printed in English and Spanish.\nBroadcast.\nThe Indianapolis television market area is served by 11 full-power stations, including WTTV 4 (CBS), WRTV 6 (ABC), WISH-TV 8 (The CW), WTHR 13 (NBC), WFYI-TV 20 (PBS), WNDY-TV 23 (MyNetworkTV), WHMB-TV 40 (Univision), WCLJ-TV 42 (Bounce TV), WXIN 59 (Fox), WIPX-TV 63 (Ion), and WDTI 69 (Daystar). Indianapolis natives Jane Pauley and David Letterman launched their Emmy Award-winning broadcasting careers in local television, Pauley with WISH-TV and Letterman with WTHR, respectively. Sports talk program \"The Pat McAfee Show\" broadcasts from the city, airing weekdays on ESPN.\nDozens of commercial AM and FM radio stations serve the Indianapolis area, including WCBK (country), WEDJ (Regional Mexican), WFBQ (classic rock), WFMS (country), WHHH (urban contemporary), WIBC (news/talk), WJJK (classic hits), WLHK (country), WNTS (classic Regional Mexican), WNDX (mainstream rock), WNTR (adult contemporary), WOLT (classic alternative), WSYW (Spanish adult contemporary), WTLC (urban adult contemporary), WYXB (adult contemporary), WZPL (contemporary hits), and WZRL (mainstream urban). Since 1983, WFBQ has been the flagship station for the popular nationally syndicated radio program \"The Bob &amp; Tom Show\".\nSports radio stations include WFNI (ESPN Radio), WNDE (Fox Sports Radio), and WXNT (Infinity Sports Network). WFNI (formerly WIBC, currently broadcasting on WIBC-HD3 and its FM translators) is the flagship of the Indianapolis Motor Speedway Radio Network. Religious stations include WBRI, WGNR, WWDL, and WYHX. WICR is the campus radio station at the University of Indianapolis. Classical Music Indy produces and syndicates classical music programming for WICR. Metropolitan Indianapolis Public Media operates WFYI-FM, the region's NPR affiliate.\nInfrastructure.\nTransportation.\nIndianapolis's transportation infrastructure consists of a complex network that includes a local public bus system, several private intercity bus providers, Amtrak passenger rail service, four freight rail lines, four primary and two auxiliary Interstate Highways, two airports, a heliport, bikeshare system, of bike lanes, and of trails and greenways. Private ridesharing companies Lyft and Uber as well as taxicabs operate in the city. Launched in 2018, electric scooter-sharing systems operating in Indianapolis include Bird, Lime, and Veo.\nUrban sprawl and the absence of a comprehensive regional public transit system have contributed to Indianapolis residents driving more vehicle miles per capita than any other U.S. city. According to the 2016 American Community Survey, 83.7% of working residents in the city commuted by driving alone, 8.4% carpooled, 1.5% used public transportation, and 1.8% walked. About 1.5% used all other forms of transportation, including taxicab, motorcycle, and bicycle. About 3.1% of working city residents worked at home. In 2015, 10.5 percent of Indianapolis households lacked a car, which decreased to 8.7 percent in 2016, the same as the national average in that year. Indianapolis averaged 1.63 cars per household in 2016, compared to a national average of 1.8.\nFour primary Interstate Highways intersect the city: Interstate 65, Interstate 69, Interstate 70, and Interstate 74. The metropolitan area also has two auxiliary Interstate Highways: a beltway (Interstate 465) and connector (Interstate 865). The Indiana Department of Transportation manages all Interstates, U.S. Highways, and state roads within the city. The city's Department of Public Works maintains more than of local streets in addition to alleys, sidewalks, curbs, and 510 bridges.\nSidewalks are absent from nearly of the city's roadways, contributing to Indianapolis's low walkability among peer U.S. cities. However, city officials have increased investments in bicycle and pedestrian infrastructure in recent years. About of trails and greenways form the core of the city's active transportation network, connecting into of on-street bike lanes. Popular routes include the Fall Creek Greenway, Monon Trail, and Pleasant Run Greenway. The privately managed Indianapolis Cultural Trail operates Indiana Pacers Bikeshare, the city's bicycle-sharing system, which consists of 525 bicycles and 50 stations.\nIndyGo operates and manages the city's public bus system, including bus rapid transit, microtransit, and paratransit services. The Julia M. Carson Transit Center serves as the downtown hub for 27 of its 31 fixed routes. In 2020, IndyGo's fleet of 212 buses provided about 4.8\u00a0million passenger trips (compared with pre-COVID-19 pandemic ridership of 9.2\u00a0million in 2019). The Central Indiana Regional Transportation Authority is a quasi-governmental agency that organizes regional car and vanpools and operates three public shuttle buses connecting Indianapolis to employment centers in suburban Plainfield and Whitestown.\nIndianapolis International Airport's Colonel H. Weir Cook Terminal contains two concourses and 40 gates. In 2024, the airport served 10.5 million passengers and offered nonstop service to 53 domestic and international destinations. As home to the second largest FedEx Express hub in the world, it ranks among the ten busiest U.S. airports in terms of air cargo throughput. The Indianapolis Airport Authority oversees operations at five additional aviation facilities in the region, two of which are located in the city: Eagle Creek Airpark and the Indianapolis Downtown Heliport.\nIndianapolis Union Station is the state's primary intercity bus transfer hub, served by seven carriers operating 12 routes. Amtrak's \"Cardinal\" passenger rail service operates three weekly roundtrips between New York City and Chicago. Located in the enclave of Beech Grove, the Beech Grove Shops serve as Amtrak's primary heavy maintenance and overhaul facility. About of freight rail lines traverse the city, including one Class I railroad (CSX Transportation), one Class II railroad (Indiana Rail Road), and two shortline railroads (Indiana Southern Railroad and Louisville and Indiana Railroad).\nUtilities.\nAES Indiana supplies electricity to more than 500,000 Indianapolis customers and maintains 90,000 street lights. Natural gas, water, and wastewater utilities are provided by Citizens Energy Group. The company's thermal division operates the Perry K. Generating Station which produces and distributes steam for heating and cooling to about 160 customers in downtown Indianapolis. The city's water supply is sourced from the White River and its tributaries as well as aquifers via four surface water treatment plants, four reservoirs, and five groundwater pumping stations throughout the region.\nArea codes 317 and 463 are telephone area codes in the North American Numbering Plan assigned to Indianapolis and seven surrounding counties in Central Indiana. Established in 1947, 317 is the original area code for the Indianapolis area, while 463 is an overlay code for the same area that was added in 2016, making ten-digit dialing mandatory for all calls in the region. Telecommunications, including cable television, internet, telephone, and wireless services, are provided by AT&amp;T Communications, Metronet, Spectrum, Verizon Communications, and Xfinity.\nWaste collection services in Indianapolis are provided by the city's Department of Public Works Solid Waste Division, Republic Services, and WM. Solid waste disposal in the city is processed by landfill and incineration. Reworld operates a waste-to-energy plant in the city. About 11% of residents subscribe to private curbside recycling services; however, free public recycling drop-off sites are available throughout the city. Of U.S. cities, Indianapolis is the largest without a universal curbside recycling program, resulting in one of the lowest landfill diversion rates.\nHealthcare.\nHealthcare in Indianapolis is provided by about 20 hospitals, most belonging to the private, non-profit hospital networks of Ascension St. Vincent Health, Community Health Network, and IU Health. Several are teaching hospitals affiliated with the IU School of Medicine or Marian University's Tom and Julie Wood College of Osteopathic Medicine. Four hospitals are Level I trauma centers.\nHealth and Hospital Corporation of Marion County oversees the city's public health facilities and programs, including the Marion County Public Health Department, Indianapolis Emergency Medical Services, and Eskenazi Health. Eskenazi Health operates ten primary care sites across the city, including the Sidney &amp; Lois Eskenazi Hospital. Other public hospitals include the Richard L. Roudebush VA Medical Center (managed by the Veterans Health Administration) and the NeuroDiagnostic Institute (managed by the State of Indiana).\nIU Health Methodist, University, and Riley Hospital for Children are affiliated with the IU School of Medicine. Riley is among the nation's foremost children's hospitals, recognized in all ten pediatric specialties by \"U.S. News &amp; World Report\". IU Health is consolidating and replacing Methodist and University hospitals with a new $4.3\u00a0billion academic medical center which is slated to open in 2027. Other major hospitals include Ascension St. Vincent Hospital - Indianapolis, Community Hospital East, Community Hospital North, and Franciscan Health Indianapolis.\nSister cities.\nIndianapolis has 11 sister cities. Listed alphabetically, they are:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "57708", "revid": "48795375", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57708", "title": "Topeka, Kansas", "text": "State capital city of Kansas, United States\nTopeka ( ) is the capital city of the U.S. state of Kansas and the county seat of Shawnee County. It is along the Kansas River in the central part of Shawnee County, in northeastern Kansas, in the Central United States. As of the 2020 census, the population of the city was 126,587.\nThe city, laid out in 1854, was one of the Free-State towns founded by Eastern antislavery men immediately after the passage of the Kansas\u2013Nebraska Bill. In 1857, Topeka was chartered as a city.\nThe city is well known for the landmark U.S. Supreme Court case \"Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka\", which overturned \"Plessy v. Ferguson\" and declared racial segregation in public schools to be unconstitutional.\nHistory.\nName.\nThe name \"Topeka\" is a Kansa-Osage word that means \"place where we dig potatoes\", or \"a good place to dig potatoes\". As a placename, Topeka was first recorded in 1826 as the Kansa name for what is now called the Kansas River. Topeka's founders chose the name in 1855 because it \"was novel, of Indian origin, and euphonious of sound\". Mixed-heritage Kansa Native American Joseph James, called Jojim, is credited with suggesting Topeka's name.\nEarly history.\nFor many millennia, Native Americans inhabited the Great Plains of North America. From the 16th to the mid-18th centuries, the Kingdom of France laid claim to large parts of North America. In 1762, late in the French and Indian War, France secretly ceded Louisiana west of the Mississippi River to Spain in the Treaty of Fontainebleau. In 1800, Spain returned Louisiana to France. In 1803, the United States purchased the territory, which included most of the land of modern Kansas, from France for $15 million (~$ in 2024).\n19th century.\nIn the 1840s, wagon trains made their way west from Independence, Missouri, on a journey of , following what came to be known as the Oregon Trail. About west of Kansas City, Missouri, three half-Kansas Indian sisters married to the French-Canadian Pappan brothers established a ferry service allowing travelers to cross the Kansas River at what is now Topeka. During the 1840s and into the 1850s, travelers could reliably find a way across the river, but little else was in the area.\nIn the early 1850s, traffic along the Oregon Trail was supplemented by trade on a new military road stretching from Fort Leavenworth through Topeka to the newly established Fort Riley. In 1854, after completion of the first cabin, nine men established the Topeka Town Association. The group included Cyrus K. Holliday, an \"idea man\", who became mayor of Topeka and founder of the Atchison, Topeka &amp; Santa Fe Railroad. Soon, steamboats were regularly docking at the Topeka landing, depositing meat, lumber, and flour and returning eastward with potatoes, corn, and wheat. By the late 1860s, Topeka had become a commercial hub that offered many Victorian era comforts.\nTopeka was a bastion for the free-state movement during the problems in Kansas Territory between abolitionist and proslavery settlers (the latter of whom controlled the legal government based out of Lecompton). After southern forces barricaded Topeka in 1856, Topeka's leaders took actions to defend the free-state town from invasion. A militia was organized and stone fortifications were built on Quincy Street. The fortifications seemed to consist of low-lying earthwork levies strengthened by the presence of at least one cannon. The militia manned the fortifications until at least September 1856, when the siege around the town was lifted.\nAfter a decade of abolitionist and pro-slavery conflict that gave the territory the nickname Bleeding Kansas, it was admitted to the Union in 1861 as the 34th state. Topeka was chosen as the capital, with Charles Robinson as the first governor. In 1862, Cyrus K. Holliday donated a tract of land to the state for the construction of a state capitol. Construction of the Kansas State Capitol began in 1866. About 37 years were needed to build the capitol, first the east wing, and then the west wing, and finally the central building, using Kansas limestone. In fall 1864, a stockade fort, later named Fort Simple, was built in the intersection of 6th and Kansas Avenues to protect Topeka, should Confederate forces then in Missouri decide to attack the city. It was abandoned by April 1865 and demolished in April 1867.\nState officers first used the state capitol in 1869, moving from Constitution Hall, what is now 427-429 S. Kansas Avenue. Besides being used as the Kansas statehouse from 1863 to 1869, Constitution Hall is the site where antislavery settlers convened in 1855 to write the first of four state constitutions, making it the \"Free State Capitol\". The National Park Service recognizes Constitution Hall in Topeka as headquarters in the operation of the Lane Trail to Freedom on the Underground Railroad, the chief slave escape passage and free-trade road.\nAlthough the drought of 1860 and the ensuing period of the Civil War slowed the growth of Topeka and the state, Topeka kept pace with the revival and period of growth Kansas enjoyed from the close of the war in 1865 until 1870. In the 1870s, many former slaves, known as Exodusters, settled on the east side of Lincoln Street between Munson and 12th Streets. The area was known as Tennessee Town because so many of them were from the Volunteer State. Charles Sheldon, pastor of the Central Congregational Church, organized the first African American kindergarten west of the Mississippi in 1893.\nLincoln College, now Washburn University, was established in 1865 in Topeka by a charter issued by the State of Kansas and the General Association of Congregational Ministers and Churches of Kansas. In 1869, the railway started moving westward from Topeka, where general offices and machine shops of the Atchison, Topeka &amp; Santa Fe Railroad system were established in 1878.\nDuring the late 1880s, Topeka passed through a boom period that ended in disaster. Vast speculation on town lots occurred. The 1889 bubble burst, and many investors were ruined. Topeka, however, doubled in population during the period, and was able to weather the depressions of the 1890s.\nEarly in the 20th century, another kind of boom, this time the automobile industry, took off, and numerous pioneering companies appeared and disappeared. Topeka was not left out. The Smith Automobile Company was founded there in 1902, lasting until 1912.\n20th century.\nHome to the first African-American kindergarten west of the Mississippi River, Topeka was the home of Oliver Brown, the named plaintiff in \"Brown v. Board of Education\", which was the case responsible for eliminating the standard of \"separate but equal\", and requiring racial integration in American public schools. In 1960, the Census Bureau reported Topeka's population as 91.8% White and 7.7% Black.\nAt the time the suit was filed, only the elementary schools were segregated in Topeka, and Topeka High School had been fully integrated since its inception in 1871. Furthermore, Topeka High School was the only public high school in the city of Topeka. Other rural high schools existed, such as Washburn Rural High School\u2014created in 1918\u2014and Seaman High School\u2014created in 1920. Highland Park High School became part of the Topeka school system in 1959 along with the opening of Topeka West High School in 1961. A Catholic high school \u2014Assumption High School, later renamed Capitol Catholic High School, then in 1939 again renamed, to Hayden High School after its founder, Father Francis Hayden \u2014 also served the city beginning in 1911.\nMonroe Elementary, a segregated school that figured in the historic \"Brown v. Board of Education\" decision, through the efforts of the Brown Foundation working with the Kansas Congressional delegation place in the early 1990s, is now Brown v. Board of Education National Historic Site. The Brown Foundation is largely responsible for the content of the interpretive exhibits at the historic site. The National Historic Site was opened by President George W. Bush on May 17, 2004.\nTopeka has struggled with the burden of racial discrimination even after \"Brown\". New lawsuits attempted unsuccessfully to force suburban school districts that ring the city to participate in racial integration with the inner-city district. In the late 1980s, a group of citizens calling themselves the Task Force to Overcome Racism in Topeka formed to address the problem in a more organized way.\nOn June 8, 1966, Topeka was struck by a tornado rated F5 on the Fujita scale. It started on the southwest side of town, moving northeast, passing over a local landmark named Burnett's Mound. According to a local Indian legend, this mound was thought to protect the city from tornadoes if left undisturbed. A few years prior to the tornado strike, development began near the mound, including a water tank constructed near the top of the mound against the warnings of local Native Americans. The tornado went on to rip through the city, hitting the downtown area and Washburn University. Total repair cost was put at $100 million, making it, at the time, one of the most costly tornadoes in American history. Even to this day, with inflation factored in, the Topeka tornado stands as one of the most costly on record. It also helped bring to prominence future CBS and A&amp;E broadcaster Bill Kurtis, who became well known for his televised admonition to \"...take cover, for God's sake, take cover!\" on WIBW-TV during the tornado. (The city is home of a National Weather Service Forecast Office that serves 23 counties in north-central, northeast, and east-central Kansas).\nTopeka recovered from the 1966 tornado and has sustained steady economic growth. Washburn University, which lost several historic buildings, received financial support from the community and alumni to rebuild many school facilities. Today, university facilities offer more than one million square feet of modern academic and support space.\nIn 1974, Forbes Air Force Base closed and more than 10,000 people left Topeka, influencing the city's growth patterns for years to come. During the 1980s, Topeka citizens voted to build a new airport and convention center and to change the form of city government. West Ridge Mall opened in 1988, replacing the White Lakes Mall, which opened in 1964.\nIn 1989, Topeka became a motorsports mecca with the opening of Heartland Park Topeka. The Topeka Performing Arts Center opened in 1991. In the early 1990s, the city experienced business growth with Reser's Fine Foods locating in Topeka and expansions for Santa Fe and Hill's Pet Nutrition.\nDuring the 1990s, voters approved bond issues for public school improvements, including magnet schools, technology, air conditioning, classrooms, and a sports complex. Voters also approved a quarter-cent sales tax for a new law-enforcement center, and in 1996, approved an extension of the sales tax for the East Topeka Interchange connecting the Oakland Expressway, K-4, I-70, and the Kansas Turnpike. During the 1990s, Shawnee County voters approved tax measures to expand the Topeka and Shawnee County Public Library. The Kansas Legislature and governor also approved legislation to replace the majority of the property tax supporting Washburn University with a countywide sales tax.\n21st century.\nIn 2000, the citizens again voted to extend the quarter-cent sales tax, this time for the economic development of Topeka and Shawnee County. In August, 2004, Shawnee County citizens voted to repeal the 2000 quarter-cent sales tax and replace it with a 12-year, half-cent sales tax designated for economic development, roads, and bridges. Each year, the sales tax provides $5 million designated for business development and job creation incentives, and $9 million for roads and bridges. Planning is under way to continue to redevelop areas along the Kansas River, which runs west to east through Topeka. In the Kansas River Corridor through the center of town, downtown Topeka has experienced apartment and condominium loft development, and fa\u00e7ade and streetscape improvements.\nGoogle, Kansas.\nOn March 1, 2010, Topeka Mayor Bill Bunten issued a proclamation calling for Topeka to be known for the month of March as \"Google, Kansas, the capital city of fiber optics\". The name change came from Ryan Gigous, who wanted to \"re-brand\" the city with a simple gesture. This was to help \"support continuing efforts to bring Google's fiber experiment\" to Topeka, though it was not a legal name change. Lawyers advised the city council and mayor against an official name change. Google jokingly announced it would change its name to Topeka to \"honor that moving gesture\" on April 1, 2010 (April Fools' Day) and changed its home page to say Topeka. In its official blog, Google announced this change thus affected all of its services as well as its culture, e.g. \"Googlers\" to \"Topekans\", \"Project Virgle\" to \"Project Vireka\", and proper usage of \"Topeka\" as an adjective and not a verb, to avoid the trademark becoming genericized.\nGeography.\nTopeka is in north east Kansas at the intersection of I-70 and U.S. Highway 75. It is the origin of I-335 which is a portion of the Kansas Turnpike running from Topeka to Emporia, Kansas. Topeka is also on U.S. Highway 24 (about east of Manhattan, Kansas) and U.S. Highway 40 (about west of Lawrence, Kansas). US\u00a040 is coincident with I-70 west from Topeka. According to the United States Census Bureau, the city has a total area of , of which are covered by water.\nClimate.\nTopeka has a humid continental climate (K\u00f6ppen climate classification \"Dfa\", Trewartha climate classification \"Dcao\") or a humid subtropical climate (K\u00f6ppen \"Cfa\") using the isotherm, with hot, somewhat humid summers and cool to cold, fairly dry winters, and is in USDA plant hardiness zone 6a. Over the course of a year, the monthly daily average temperature ranges from in January to in July. The maximum temperature reaches an average of 49.6 afternoons per year and reaches an average of 6.0 afternoons per year. The minimum temperature falls below an average of 2.7 mornings per year, and 21.7 afternoons per year stay below freezing. The average window for freezing temperatures is October 15 through April 17.\nThe area receives about of precipitation during a typical year, with the largest share being received in May and June\u2014the April through June period averages 32.8 days of measurable precipitation. Generally, the spring and summer have the most rainfall, with autumn and winter being fairly dry. During a typical year, the total amount of precipitation may vary from . Much of the rainfall is delivered by thunderstorms. These can be severe, producing frequent lightning, large hail, and sometimes tornadoes. An average of 100 days of measurable precipitation occur per year. Winter snowfall is light, as is the case in most of the state, as a result of the dry, sunny weather patterns that dominate Kansas winters, which do not allow for sufficient moisture for significant snowfall. Winter snowfall averages . Measurable (\u2265) snowfall occurs an average of 12 days per year, with at least of snow being received on five of those days. Snow depth of at least an inch occurs an average of 17.7 days per year.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe city is part of the Topeka metropolitan statistical area, which includes Shawnee, Jackson, Jefferson, Osage, and Wabaunsee Counties.\n2020 census.\nThe 2020 United States census counted 126,587 people, 54,092 households, and 30,361 families in Topeka. The population density was 2,060.3 per square mile (795.4/km2). There were 60,489 housing units at an average density of 984.5 per square mile (380.1/km2).\nThe U.S. Census accounts for race by two methodologies. \"Race alone\" and \"Race alone less Hispanics\" where Hispanics are delineated separately as if a separate race.\nThe racial makeup (including Hispanics in the racial counts) was 68.44% (86,642) white, 10.44% (13,218) black or African-American, 1.36% (1,723) Native American, 1.64% (2,073) Asian, 0.12% (153) Pacific Islander, 6.09% (7,707) from other races, and 11.91% (15,071) from two or more races.\nThe racial and ethnic makeup (where Hispanics are excluded from the racial counts and placed in their own category) was 64.18% (81,243) White (non-Hispanic), 9.93% (12,574) Black (non-Hispanic), 0.92% (1,169) Native American (non-Hispanic) or Alaskan Native (non-Hispanic), 1.61% (2,043) Asian (non-Hispanic), 0.11% (135) Pacific Islander (non-Hispanic), 0.36% (458) from other race (non-Hispanic), 6.49% (8,216) Multiracial, and 16.39% (20,749) Hispanic or Latino.\nOf the 54,092 households, 24.1% had children under the age of 18; 38.4% were married couples living together; 34.9% had a female householder with no husband present. 37.3% of households consisted of individuals and 15.3% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.2 and the average family size was 3.0.\n22.7% of the population was under the age of 18, 9.3% from 18 to 24, 25.3% from 25 to 44, 24.0% from 45 to 64, and 18.0% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 38.1 years. For every 100 females, the population had 91.0 males. For every 100 females ages 18 and older, there were 87.3 males.\nThe 2016-2020 5-year American Community Survey estimates show that the median household income was $49,647 (with a margin of error of +/- $1,860) and the median family income $64,454 (+/- $1,541). Males had a median income of $36,601 (+/- $1,727) versus $29,303 (+/- $1,097) for females. The median income for those above 16 years old was $32,634 (+/- $944). Approximately, 9.5% of families and 13.9% of the population were below the poverty line, including 16.7% of those under the age of 18 and 7.8% of those ages 65 or over.\n2010 census.\nAs of the census of 2010, the city had 127,473 people, 53,943 households, and 30,707 families. The population density was . The 59,582 housing units averaged . The city's racial makeup was 76.2% White, 11.3% African American, 1.4% Native American, 1.3% Asian, 4.8% from other races, and 4.9% from two or more races. Hispanics or Latinos of any race were 13.4% of the population. Non-Hispanic Whites were 69.7% of the population in 2010, down from 86.3% in 1970.\nOf the 53,943 households, 29.5% had children under 18 living with them, 37.9% were married couples living together, 14.2% had a female householder with no husband present, 4.8% had a male householder with no wife present, and 43.1% were not families. About 35.9% of all households were made up of individuals, and 12% had someone living alone who was 65 or older. The average household size was 2.29, and the average family size was 2.99.\nThe city's age distribution was 24.4% under age 18, 9.8% from 18 to 24; 26.1% from 25 to 44, 25.4% from 45 to 64, and 14.3% were 65 or older. The median age in the city was 36 years. The city's gender makeup was 47.8% male and 52.2% female.\n2000 census.\nAs of the 2000 census, 122,377 people, 52,190 households, and 30,687 families were residing in the city. The population density was . There were 56,435 housing units at an average density of . The city's racial makeup was 78.5% White, 11.7% African American, 1.31% Native American, 1.09% Asian, 4.10% from other races, and 3.26% from two or more races. Hispanics or Latinos of any race were 8.9% of the population.\nOf the 52,190 households, 28.0% had children under 18 living with them, 41.8% were married couples living together, 13.1% had a female householder with no husband present, and 41.2% were not families. About 35.0% of all households were made up of individuals, and 11.7% had someone living alone who was 65 or older. The average household size was 2.27, and the average family size was 2.94.\nAbout 24.3% of the city's population was under age 18, 9.9% was from age 18 to 24, 28.9% was from age 25 to 44, 21.9% was from age 45 to 64, and 15.1% was age 65 or older. The median age was 36 years. For every 100 females, there were 92.4 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 88.4 males.\nAs of 2000, the city's median household income was $35,928, and the median family income was $45,803. Males had a median income of $32,373 versus $25,633 for females. The city's per capita income was $19,555. About 8.5% of families and 12.4% of the population were below the poverty line, including 16.7% of those under age 18 and 8.2% of those age 65 or over.\nCrime.\nAlthough Topeka experienced problems with crime in the 1990s, the city's crime rates have improved since. Overall, crime in Topeka was down nearly 18% in the first half of 2008, compared with the same period of 2007. Topeka police reported a 6.4% drop in crime from 2007 to 2008, including significant reductions in business robberies and aggravated assaults and batteries, as well as thefts.\nOn October 11, 2011, the Topeka city council agreed to repeal the ordinance banning domestic violence in an effort to force the Shawnee County District Attorney to prosecute the cases. Shawnee County District Attorney Chad Taylor said the DA \"would no longer prosecute misdemeanors committed in Topeka, including domestic battery, because his office could no longer do so after county commissioners cut his budget by 10%\". The next day, Taylor said his office would \"commence the review and filing of misdemeanors decriminalized by the City of Topeka\". The same day, 17% of the employees in the district attorney's office were announced to be laid off.\nReligion.\nTopeka is sometimes cited as the home of Pentecostalism, as it was the site of Charles Fox Parham's Bethel Bible College, where glossolalia was first claimed as the evidence of a spiritual experience referred to as the baptism of the Holy Spirit in 1901. It is also the home of Reverend Charles Sheldon, author of \"In His Steps\", and was the site where the famous question \"What would Jesus do?\" originated in a sermon of Sheldon's at Central Congregational Church.\nThe First Presbyterian Church in Topeka is one of the few churches in the U.S. to have its sanctuary completely decorated with Tiffany stained glass (another is St. Luke's United Methodist in Dubuque, Iowa; another is the Emmanuel Episcopal Church in Cumberland, Maryland).\nThe Roman Catholic population is large, and the city is home to nine Roman Catholic parishes, five of which feature elementary schools. Grace Cathedral of the Episcopal Diocese of Kansas is a large Gothic Revival structure in the city.\nTopeka also has a claim in the history of the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Faith in Kansas. Not only does the city have the oldest continuous Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed community in Kansas (beginning in 1906), but the community also has roots to the first Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed community in Kansas, in Enterprise, in 1897. This was the second Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed community in the Western Hemisphere.\nTopeka is home of the Westboro Baptist Church, a hate group according to the Southern Poverty Law Center. The homophobic church has garnered worldwide media attention for picketing the funerals of U.S. servicemen and women for what church members claim as \"necessary to combat the fight for equality for gays and lesbians\". They have sometimes successfully brought lawsuits against the city of Topeka. Directly across the street from them is the Equality House, a pro-LGBT home where volunteers of Planting Peace can stay. It is painted in rainbow colors and serves as a home for social workers caring for the LGBT+ community.\nEconomy.\nBeing the state's capital city, Topeka's largest employer is the State of Kansas\u2014employing about 8,400 people, or 69% of the city's government workers. Altogether, government workers make up one out of every five employed persons in the city.\nThe educational, health, and social services industry makes up the largest proportion of the working population (22.4%). The four school districts employ nearly 4,700 people, and Washburn University employs about 1,650. Three of the largest employers are Stormont-Vail HealthCare (with about 3,100 employees), St. Francis Health Center (1,800), and Colmery-O'Neil Veterans Administration Hospital (900).\nThe retail trade employs more than a tenth of the working population (11.5%) with Wal-Mart and Dillons having the greater share. Nearly another tenth is employed in manufacturing (9.0%). Top manufacturers include Goodyear Tire and Rubber Company, Hill's Pet Nutrition, Frito-Lay, and Jostens Printing and Publishing. Jostens announced plans in May 2012 to move production from its Topeka facility to Clarksville, Tennessee, affecting about 372 employee positions. Southwest Publishing &amp; Mailing Corporation, a smaller employer, has its headquarters in Topeka.\nOther industries are finance, insurance, real estate, and rental and leasing (7.8%); professional, scientific, management, administrative, and waste management services (7.6%); arts, entertainment, recreation, accommodation and food services (7.2%); construction (6.0%); transportation and warehousing, and utilities (5.8%); and wholesale trade (3.2%). Blue Cross and Blue Shield of Kansas is the largest insurance employer, with about 1,800 employees. BNSF is the largest transportation employer, with about 1,100. Evergy employs nearly 800. About a tenth of the working population is employed in public administration (9.9%).\nTop Employers.\nAs of the city's 2023 Annual Comprehensive Financial Report, Topeka's top employers are:\nArts and culture.\nArts.\nThe Topeka Symphony Orchestra was founded in 1945 and currently performs on the campus of Washburn University.\nTopeka is home to broad areas of fine art, including in the Northern Topeka (NOTO) Arts &amp; Entertainment District. Since 2007 the city has worked on the Great Mural Wall of Topeka, a community-driven initiative featuring murals telling the story of the city.\nSports.\nTopeka is home to the Topeka Warhawks, a collegiate summer baseball team in the Mid-Plains league, which comprises teams from Kansas and neighboring Missouri.\nThe city hosted three now defunct indoor football teams, the Topeka Knights/Kings (1999\u20132000), the Kansas Koyotes (2003\u20132014), and the Topeka Tropics (2022\u20132023).\nGovernment.\nCity.\nThe current mayor of Topeka is Mike Padilla. The city manager is Robert Perez. The city manager is responsible to the Topeka's City Council, which consists of the mayor and nine members elected from separate districts within the city. The city council members select the deputy mayor from among themselves. The deputy mayor chairs the Committee of the Whole and represents the City of Topeka at official functions whenever the mayor is unavailable. The city manager also guides the council through the meetings but cannot vote.\nEducation.\nElementary and secondary education.\nTopeka is served by four public school districts, including:\nPost-secondary education.\nTopeka has several colleges, universities, technical schools and branch campuses of other universities around the state. These include the following:\nMedia.\nPrint.\nTopeka is the home of a daily newspaper, the \"Topeka Capital-Journal\"; a bi-weekly newspaper, \"The Topeka Metro News\"; \"Topeka Metro Voice\"; and \"Kaw Valley Senior Monthly\". From 1911 to 1913, the city published the \"Kansas Baptist Herald\".\nRadio.\nThe following radio stations are licensed to Topeka:\nAM\nFM\nAdditionally, most of the Kansas City stations provide at least grade B coverage of Topeka. KANU-FM in Lawrence (in the Kansas City market) serves as Topeka's NPR member station.\nTelevision.\nThe following television stations are licensed to Topeka:\nInfrastructure.\nTransportation.\nI-70, I-470, and I-335 all go through the City of Topeka. I-335 is part of the Kansas Turnpike where it passes through Topeka. Other major highways include: US-24, US-40, US-75, and K-4. Major roads within the city include NW/SW Topeka Blvd. SW Wanamaker Road. N/S Kansas Ave. SW/SE 29th St. SE/SW 21st St. SE California Ave. SW Gage Blvd. and SW Fairlawn Rd.\nTopeka Regional Airport (FOE), formerly known as Forbes Field, is in south Topeka in Pauline, Kansas. Forbes Field also serves as an Air National Guard base, home of the highly decorated 190th Air Refueling Wing. Manhattan Regional Airport (MHK) in Manhattan, Kansas is the next closest commercial airport; Kansas City International Airport (MCI) in Kansas City is the closest major airport. Philip Billard Municipal Airport (TOP) is located in Topeka's Oakland area.\nPassenger rail service provided by Amtrak stops at the Topeka Station. Service is via the Chicago-to-Los Angeles Southwest Chief during the early morning and makes intermediate stops at Lawrence and Kansas City. The Kansas Department of Transportation has asked Amtrak to study additional service, including daytime service to Oklahoma City. The Burlington Northern Santa Fe railroad and Union Pacific Railroad provide freight service as well as several short line railroads throughout the state.\nGreyhound Lines provides bus service westward towards Denver, Colorado, eastward to Kansas City, Missouri, southwest to Wichita, Kansas.\nThe Topeka Metropolitan Transit Authority provides local transit service. The agency offers bus service from 6 am to 6:30 pm Monday through Friday, and 7 am to 5 pm on Saturday. It also provides demand response general public taxi service which operates evenings from 8 pm until 11:30 pm and on Sundays.\nHealth care.\nTopeka has two major hospitals, Stormont-Vail and The University of Kansas Hospital - St. Francis Campus. Both are in central Topeka. Topeka is also home to the Colmery-O'Neil VA Medical Clinic and Topeka ER &amp; Hospital.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "57709", "revid": "51014073", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57709", "title": "Amur", "text": "Major river in the Russian Far East and Northeast China\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Routemap/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe Amur River () or Heilong River () is a perennial river in Northeast Asia, forming the natural border between the Russian Far East and Northeast China (historically the Outer and Inner Manchuria). The Amur \"proper\" is long, and has a drainage basin of . If including its main stem tributary, the Argun, the Amur is long, making it the world's tenth longest river.\nThe Amur is an important river for the aquatic fauna of Northeast Asia. The river basin is home to a variety of large predatory fish such as northern snakehead, Amur pike, taimen, Amur catfish, predatory carp and yellowcheek, as well as several species of trout and anadromous salmonids. The largest fish species in the Amur is the kaluga, a sturgeon that is one of the largest freshwater fish in the world, attaining a length as great as . The Amur is also home to the northernmost populations of the Amur softshell turtle and Indian lotus.\nName.\nThe etymology of the name Amur is unknown. One theory dictates that it entered into Russian through either the Evenki word \"amur\" or the Even word \"amar\", both meaning \"river\" in their respective Tungusic languages. However, it is unclear whether Russian borrowed the name Amur from either Tungusic language rather than the other way around. An alternative theory suggests that Amur comes from \"mur\", the word in Dagur, one of the Mongolic languages, for \"big river\".\nIts ancient Chinese names were \"Yushui\", \"Wanshui\" and \"Heishui\", with the latter name, meaning \"black water\", being the basis of the modern Chinese name \"Heilongjiang\" or \"Black Dragon River\", while the Manchurian name \"Sahaliyan Ula\", the Mongolian names \"Amar m\u00f6r\u00f6n\" (Cyrillic: \u0410\u043c\u0430\u0440 \u043c\u04e9\u0440\u04e9\u043d) originates from the name \"Amar\" meaning to rest and \"Khar m\u00f6r\u00f6n\" (Cyrillic: \u0425\u0430\u0440 \u043c\u04e9\u0440\u04e9\u043d) mean Black River.\nCourse.\nThe river rises in the hills in the western part of Northeast China at the confluence of its two major affluents, the Shilka and the Argun (or Ergune), at an elevation of . It flows east forming the border between China and Russia, and slowly makes a great arc to the southeast for about , receiving many tributaries and passing many small towns. At Huma, it is joined by a major tributary, the Huma He. Afterwards it continues to flow south until, between the cities of Blagoveshchensk in Russia and Heihe in China, it widens significantly as it is joined by one of its most important tributaries the Zeya.\nThe Amur arcs to the east and turns southeast again at the confluence with the Bureya, then does not receive another significant tributary for nearly before its confluence with its largest tributary, the Songhua, at Tongjiang. At the confluence with the Songhua the river turns northeast, now flowing towards Khabarovsk, where it joins the Ussuri and ceases to define the Russia\u2013China border. Now the river spreads out dramatically into a braided character, flowing north-northeast through a wide valley in eastern Russia, passing Amursk and Komsomolsk-on-Amur. The valley narrows after about and the river again flows north onto plains at the confluence with the Amgun. Shortly after, the Amur turns sharply east and into an estuary at Nikolayevsk-on-Amur, about downstream of which it flows into the Strait of Tartary.\nDuring years with heavy precipitation, the Amur river system is connected with the Kherlen river. The normally exit\u2212less endorheic lake Hulun Lake, into which Kherlen flows, will overflow at its northern shore through the arroyo of Mutnaya Protoka, and the water will meet the Argun River (Ergune) after about . The Amur Basin of the Kherlen\u2212Argun\u2212Amur River system has a total length of to its river mouth on the Sea of Okhotsk.\nTributaries.\nThe largest tributaries of the Amur are, from source to mouth:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThere are also numerous lakes in the floodplain of the Amur. Some of the largest ones are Bolon, Khummi and Udyl.\nThe main tributaries from the mouth:\n(1)Amur\u2013Shilka\u2013Onon: 4,354\u00a0km; (2)Amur\u2013Argun\u2013Hailar\u2013Dayan: 4,444\u00a0km; (3)Amur\u2013Argun\u2013Dalan Orom\u2013Kherlen: 5,052\u00a0km;\nHistory and context.\nMany historical references distinguish two geopolitical entities in the area of the Amur: Manchuria (Northeast China) and Outer Manchuria. The Chinese province of Heilongjiang on the south bank of the river takes its name from the river, as does the Russian Amur Oblast on the north bank. The native Manchu people and their Qing Empire of China, who regarded this river as sacred, use the name \"Sahaliyan Ula\" (Black River).\nThe Amur is an important symbol of, and geopolitical factor in, Chinese\u2013Russian relations. The Amur became especially prominent in the period of the Sino\u2013Soviet political split of 1956\u20131966.\nFor many centuries, inhabitants of the Amur Valley comprised the Tungusic (Evenki, Solon, Ducher, Jurchen, Nanai, Ulch), Mongol (Daur) people, some Ainu and, near its mouth, the Nivkhs. For many of these groups, fishing in the Amur and its tributaries was the main source of their livelihood. Until the 17th century, those peoples were not known to Europeans, and little known to the Han Chinese, who sometimes collectively described them as the Wild Jurchens. The Chinese-language term \"Y\u00fap\u00ed D\u00e1zi\" \u9b5a\u76ae\u97c3\u5b50 (\"Fish-skin Tatars\") came to apply to the Nanais and related groups as well, owing to their traditional clothes made of fish skins.\nThe Mongols, ruling the region as the Yuan dynasty, established a tenuous military presence on the lower Amur in the 13th and the 14th centuries; ruins of a Yuan-era temple have been excavated near the village of Tyr.\nDuring the early-15th-century reigns of the Yongle and the Xuande Emperors, the Ming dynasty reached the Amur in their drive to establish control over the lands adjacent to the Ming Empire to the northeast, which would later become known as Manchuria. Expeditions headed by the eunuch Yishiha reached Tyr several times between 1411 and the early 1430s, re-building (twice) the Yongning Temple and obtaining at least the nominal allegiance of the lower Amur's tribes to the Ming government. Some sources report also a Chinese presence during the same period on the middle Amur\u00a0\u2013 a fort existed at Aigun for about 20 years during the Yongle era on the left (northwestern) shore of the Amur downstream from the mouth of the Zeya River. This Ming Dynasty Aigun was located on the opposite bank to the later Aigun that was later relocated during the Qing Dynasty. In any event, the Ming presence on the Amur was as short-lived as it was tenuous; soon after the end of the Yongle era, the Ming dynasty's frontiers retreated to southern Manchuria. \nChinese cultural and religious influence such as Chinese New Year, the \"Chinese god\", Chinese motifs like the dragon, spirals, scrolls, and material goods like agriculture, husbandry, heating, iron cooking-pots, silk, and cotton spread among Amur natives such as the Udeghes, Ulchis, and Nanais.\nRussian Cossack expeditions led by Vassili Poyarkov and Yerofey Khabarov explored the Amur and its tributaries in 1643-44 and 1649-51, respectively10, 15. From 1640s to 1980s the Cossacks collected tribute from local peoples71,78. They also established the fort of Albazin on the upper Amur113.\nAt the time, the Manchus were busy with conquering China; but a few decades later, during the Kangxi era of 1661\u20131722, they turned their attention to their north-Manchurian backyard. Aigun was re-established near the supposed Ming site in about 1683\u201384, and a military expeditions went upstream to dislodge the Russians, whose Albazin establishment deprived the Manchu rulers of the tribute of sable pelts that the Solons and Daurs of the area would supply otherwise. Albazin fell during a short military campaign in 1685. The Treaty of Nerchinsk, concluded in 1689, marked the end of the hostilities: it left the entire Amur valley, from the convergence of the Shilka and the Ergune downstream, in Chinese hands.\nFedor Soimonov was commissioned in 1753 to map the then little explored area of the Amur, the actual expedition taking place in 1757246-7. He mapped the Shilka, which was partly in Chinese territory, but was turned back when he reached its confluence with the Argun247. The Russian proselytization of Orthodox Christianity to the indigenous peoples along the Amur was viewed as a threat by the Qing.\nThe Amur region remained a relative backwater of the Qing Empire for the next century and a half, with Aigun being practically the only major town on the river. Russians reappeared on the river in the mid-19th century, which forced the Manchus to yield all lands north of the river to the Russian Empire by the Treaty of Aigun (1858). Lands east of the Ussuri and the lower Amur were acquired by Russia as well, by the Convention of Peking (1860).\nBridges and tunnels.\nThe first permanent bridge across the Amur, the Khabarovsk Bridge with an overall length of , was completed in 1916, allowing the trains on the Trans-Siberian Railway to cross the river year-round without using ferries or rail tracks on top of the river ice. In 1941 a railway tunnel was added as well.\nLater, a combined road and rail bridge over the Amur at Komsomolsk-on-Amur (1975; 1400 m) and the road and rail Khabarovsk Bridge (1999; 3890 m) were constructed.\nThe Tongjiang-Nizhneleninskoye railway bridge was proposed in 2007 by Valery Solomonovich Gurevich, the vice-chairman of the Jewish Autonomous Oblast in Russia. The railway bridge over the Amur will connect Tongjiang with Nizhneleninskoye, a village in the Jewish Autonomous Oblast. The Chinese portion of the bridge was finished in July 2016. In December 2016, work began on the Russian portion of the bridge. Completion of structural link between the two sides of the bridge was completed in March 2019. Opening to rail traffic has been repeatedly delayed, with the December 2019 estimate being \"the end of 2020\", and then 3rd quarter of 2021.\nWildlife.\nIt is believed there are at least 123 species of fish from 23 families inhabiting the Amur. The majority are of the \"Gobioninae\" subfamily of \"Cypriniformes\", followed in number by Salmonidae. Several of the species are endemic. \"Pseudaspius\" and \"Mesocottus\" are monotypic genera found only in the Amur and some nearby coastal rivers. Other animals inhabiting this region include the Amur falcon, Amur leopard and Amur tiger; while some notable local flora include Amur cork tree, Amur maple and the Amur honeysuckle.\nFour species of the Acipenseridae family can be found: the kaluga, Amur sturgeon, Sakhalin sturgeon and sterlet. The Kaluga and Amur sturgeon are endemic. The sterlet was introduced from the Ob in the 1950s. This region is home to the Kaluga fish (Acipenseriformes).\nDirection.\nFlowing across northeast Asia for over (including its two tributaries), from the mountains of northeastern China to the Sea of Okhotsk (near Nikolayevsk-na-Amure), it drains a remarkable watershed that includes diverse landscapes of desert, steppe, tundra, and taiga, eventually emptying into the Pacific Ocean through the Strait of Tartary, where the mouth of the river faces the northern end of the island of Sakhalin.\nThe Amur has always been closely associated with the island of Sakhalin at its mouth, and most names for the island, even in the languages of the indigenous peoples of the region, are derived from the name of the river: \"Sakhalin\" derives from a Tungusic dialectal form cognate with Manchu \"sahaliyan\" (\"black\", as in \"sahaliyan ula\", \"Black River\"), while Ainu and Japanese \"Karaputo\" or \"Karafuto\" is derived from the Ainu name of the Amur or its mouth. Anton Chekhov vividly described the Amur in writings about his journey to Sakhalin Island in 1890.\nThe average annual discharge varies from (1980) to (1957), leading to an average or per year. The maximum runoff measured occurred in Oct 1951 with whereas the minimum discharge was recorded in March 1946 with a mere .\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "57710", "revid": "295933692", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57710", "title": "FTAA", "text": ""}
{"id": "57711", "revid": "47120006", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57711", "title": "Indianapolis (disambiguation)", "text": "Indianapolis is the capital and largest city of the U.S. state of Indiana.\nIndianapolis may also refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "57713", "revid": "50844716", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57713", "title": "Dermatitis", "text": "Inflammatory disease of the skin\nMedical condition&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nDermatitis is a term used for different types of skin inflammation, typically characterized by itchiness, redness and a rash. In cases of short duration, there may be small blisters, while in long-term cases the skin may become thickened. The area of skin involved can vary from small to covering the entire body. Dermatitis is also called eczema but the same term is often used for the most common type of skin inflammation, atopic dermatitis.\nThe exact cause of the condition is often unclear. Cases may involve a combination of allergy and poor venous return. The type of dermatitis is generally determined by the person's history and the location of the rash. For example, irritant dermatitis often occurs on the hands of those who frequently get them wet. Allergic contact dermatitis occurs upon exposure to an allergen, causing a hypersensitivity reaction in the skin.\nPrevention of atopic dermatitis is typically with essential fatty acids, and may be treated with moisturizers and steroid creams. The steroid creams should generally be of mid-to high strength and used for less than two weeks at a time, as side effects can occur. Antibiotics may be required if there are signs of skin infection. Contact dermatitis is typically treated by avoiding the allergen or irritant. Antihistamines may help with sleep and decrease nighttime scratching.\nDermatitis was estimated to affect 245 million people globally in 2015, or 3.34% of the world population. Atopic dermatitis is the most common type and generally starts in childhood. In the United States, it affects about 10\u201330% of people. Contact dermatitis is twice as common in females as in males. Allergic contact dermatitis affects about 7% of people at some point in their lives. Irritant contact dermatitis is common, especially among people with certain occupations; exact rates are unclear.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nTerminology.\nThe terms \"dermatitis\" and \"eczema\" are sometimes used synonymously. However the term eczema is often used to specifically mean atopic dermatitis (also known as atopic eczema). Terminology might also differ according to countries. In some languages, dermatitis and eczema mean the same thing, while in other languages, dermatitis implies an acute condition and eczema a chronic one.\nSigns and symptoms.\nThere are several types of dermatitis, including atopic dermatitis, contact dermatitis, stasis dermatitis, and seborrhoeic dermatitis. Dermatitis symptoms vary with all different forms of the condition. Although every type of dermatitis has different symptoms, there are certain signs that are common for all of them, including redness of the skin, swelling, itching, and skin lesions with sometimes oozing and scarring. Also, the area of the skin on which the symptoms appear tends to be different with every type of dermatitis, whether on the neck, wrist, forearm, thigh or ankle.\nAlthough the location may vary, the primary symptom of this condition is itchy skin. More rarely, it may appear on the genital area, such as the vulva or scrotum. Symptoms of this type of dermatitis may be very intense and may come and go. Irritant contact dermatitis is usually more painful than itchy.\nAlthough the symptoms of atopic dermatitis vary from person to person, the most common symptoms are dry, itchy, red skin on light skin. However, this redness does not appear on darker skin, and dermatitis can appear darker brown or purple in color. Typical affected skin areas include the folds of the arms, the back of the knees, wrists, face and hands. Perioral dermatitis refers to a red, bumpy rash around the mouth.\nDermatitis herpetiformis symptoms include itching, stinging, and a burning sensation. Papules and vesicles are commonly present. The small red bumps experienced in this type of dermatitis are usually about 1 cm in size, red in color and may be found symmetrically grouped or distributed on the upper or lower back, buttocks, elbows, knees, neck, shoulders and scalp.\nThe symptoms of seborrhoeic dermatitis, on the other hand, tend to appear gradually, from dry or greasy scaling of the scalp (dandruff) to scaling of facial areas, sometimes with itching, but without hair loss. In newborns, the condition causes a thick and yellowish scalp rash, often accompanied by a diaper rash. In severe cases, symptoms may appear along the hairline, behind the ears, on the eyebrows, on the bridge of the nose, around the nose, on the chest, and on the upper back.\nComplications.\nPeople with eczema should not receive the smallpox vaccination due to risk of developing eczema vaccinatum, a potentially severe and sometimes fatal complication. Other major health risks for people with dermatitis are viral and bacterial infections because atopic dermatitis patients have deficiencies in their proteins and lipids that have barrier functions along with defects in dendritic cells and as a result are unable to keep foreign invaders out, leading to recurring infections. If left untreated, these infections may be life-threatening, so skin barrier improvement (such as daily moisturizing to minimize transepidermal water loss) and anti-inflammatory therapy are recommended as preventative measures.\nCause.\nThe cause of dermatitis is unknown, but it is presumed to be a combination of genetic and environmental factors. Eczema is not contagious.\nEnvironmental.\nThe hygiene hypothesis postulates that the cause of asthma, eczema, and other allergic diseases is an unusually clean environment in childhood, which leads to an insufficient human microbiota. It is supported by epidemiologic studies for asthma. The hypothesis states that exposure to bacteria and other immune system modulators is important during development, and missing out on this exposure increases the risk for asthma and allergy. One systematic review of literature on eczema found that urban areas have an increased prevalence of eczema compared to rural areas. While it has been suggested that eczema may sometimes be an allergic reaction to the excrement from house dust mites, with up to 5% of people showing antibodies to the mites, the overall role this plays awaits further corroboration.\nMalnutrition.\nEssential fatty acid deficiency results in a dermatitis similar to that seen in zinc or biotin deficiency.\nGenetic.\nA number of genes have been associated with eczema, one of which affects the production of filaggrin. Genome-wide studies found three new genetic variants associated with eczema: OVOL1, ACTL9 and IL4-KIF3A.\nEczema occurs about three times more frequently in individuals with celiac disease and about two times more frequently in relatives of those with celiac disease, potentially indicating a genetic link between the conditions.\nDiagnosis.\nDiagnosis of eczema is based mostly on the history and physical examination. In uncertain cases, skin biopsy may be taken for a histopathologic diagnosis of dermatitis. Those with eczema may be especially prone to misdiagnosis of food allergies.\nPatch tests are used in the diagnosis of allergic contact dermatitis.\nClassification.\nThe term \"eczema\" refers to a set of clinical characteristics. Classification of the underlying diseases has been haphazard with numerous different classification systems, and many synonyms being used to describe the same condition.\nA type of dermatitis may be described by location (e.g., hand eczema), by specific appearance (eczema craquele or discoid) or by possible cause (varicose eczema). Further adding to the confusion, many sources use the term \"eczema\" interchangeably for the most common type: atopic dermatitis.\nThe European Academy of Allergology and Clinical Immunology (EAACI) published a position paper in 2001, which simplifies the nomenclature of allergy-related diseases, including atopic and allergic contact eczemas. Non-allergic eczemas are not affected by this proposal.\nHistopathologic classification.\nBy histopathology, superficial dermatitis (in the epidermis, papillary dermis, and superficial vascular plexus) can basically be classified into either of the following groups:\n*With epidermal changes\n*Without epidermal changes. These characteristically have a superficial perivascular inflammatory infiltrate and can be classified by type of cell infiltrate:\n*Lymphocytic (most common)\n*Lymphoeosinophilic\n*Lymphoplasmacytic\n*Mast cell\n*Lymphohistiocytic\n*Neutrophilic\nCommon types.\nAtopic.\nAtopic dermatitis is an allergic disease believed to have a hereditary component and often runs in families whose members have asthma. Itchy rash is particularly noticeable on the head and scalp, neck, inside of elbows, behind knees, and buttocks. It is very common in developed countries and is rising. Irritant contact dermatitis is sometimes misdiagnosed as atopic dermatitis. Stress can cause atopic dermatitis to worsen.\nContact.\nContact dermatitis is of two types: allergic (resulting from a delayed reaction to an allergen, such as poison ivy, nickel, or Balsam of Peru), and irritant (resulting from direct reaction to a detergent, such as sodium lauryl sulfate, for example).\nSome substances act both as allergens and irritants (wet cement, for example). Other substances cause a problem after sunlight exposure, bringing on phototoxic dermatitis. About three-quarters of cases of contact eczema are of the irritant type, which is the most common occupational skin disease. Contact eczema is curable, provided the offending substance can be avoided and its traces removed from one's environment. (ICD-10 L23; L24; L56.1; L56.0)\nSeborrhoeic.\nSeborrhoeic dermatitis or seborrheic dermatitis is a condition sometimes classified as a form of eczema that is closely related to dandruff. It causes dry or greasy peeling of the scalp, eyebrows, and face, and sometimes trunk. In newborns, it causes a thick, yellow, crusty scalp rash called cradle cap, which seems related to lack of biotin and is often curable. (ICD-10 L21; L21.0)\nThere is a connection between seborrheic dermatitis and \"Malassezia\" fungus, and antifungals such as anti-dandruff shampoo can be helpful in treating it.\nLess common types.\nDyshidrosis.\nDyshidrosis (dyshidrotic eczema, pompholyx, vesicular palmoplantar dermatitis) only occurs on palms, soles, and sides of fingers and toes. Tiny opaque bumps called vesicles, thickening, and cracks are accompanied by itching, which gets worse at night. A common type of hand eczema, it worsens in warm weather. (ICD-10 L30.1)\nDiscoid.\nDiscoid eczema (nummular eczema, exudative eczema, microbial eczema) is characterized by round spots of oozing or dry rash, with clear boundaries, often on the lower legs. It is usually worse in winter. The cause is unknown, and the condition tends to come and go. (ICD-10 L30.0)\nVenous.\nVenous eczema (gravitational eczema, stasis dermatitis, varicose eczema) occurs in people with impaired circulation, varicose veins, and edema, and is particularly common in the ankle area of people over 50. There is redness, scaling, darkening of the skin, and itching. The disorder predisposes to leg ulcers. (ICD-10 I83.1)\nHerpetiformis.\nDermatitis herpetiformis (Duhring's disease) causes an intensely itchy and typically symmetrical rash on arms, thighs, knees, and back. It is directly related to celiac disease, can often be put into remission with an appropriate diet, and tends to get worse at night. (ICD-10 L13.0)\nHyperkeratotic.\nHyperkeratotic hand dermatitis presents with hyperkeratotic, fissure-prone, erythematous areas of the middle or proximal palm, and the volar surfaces of the fingers may also be involved.\nNeurodermatitis.\nNeurodermatitis (lichen simplex chronicus, localized scratch dermatitis) is an itchy area of thickened, pigmented eczema patch that results from habitual rubbing and scratching. Usually, there is only one spot. Often curable through behaviour modification and anti-inflammatory medication. Prurigo nodularis is a related disorder showing multiple lumps. (ICD-10 L28.0; L28.1)\nAutoeczematization.\nAutoeczematization (id reaction, auto sensitization) is an eczematous reaction to an infection with parasites, fungi, bacteria, or viruses. It is completely curable with the clearance of the original infection that caused it. The appearance varies depending on the cause. It always occurs some distance away from the original infection. (ICD-10 L30.2)\nViral.\nThere are eczemas overlaid by viral infections (eczema herpeticum or vaccinatum), and eczemas resulting from underlying disease (e.g., lymphoma).\nEczemas originating from ingestion of medications, foods, and chemicals have not yet been clearly systematized. Other rare eczematous disorders exist in addition to those listed here.\nPrevention.\nThere have been various studies on the prevention of dermatitis through diet, none of which have proven any positive effect.\nExclusive breastfeeding of infants during at least the first few months may decrease the risk. There is no good evidence that a mother's diet during pregnancy or breastfeeding affects the risk, nor is there evidence that delayed introduction of certain foods is useful. There is tentative evidence that probiotics in infancy may reduce rates but it is insufficient to recommend its use. There is moderate certainty evidence that the use of skin care interventions such as emollients within the first year of life of an infant's life is not effective in preventing eczema. In fact, it may increase the risk of skin infection and of unwanted effects such as allergic reaction to certain moisturizers and a stinging sensation.\nHealthy diet.\nThere has not been an adequate evaluation of changing the diet to reduce eczema. There is some evidence that infants with an established egg allergy may have a reduction in symptoms if eggs are eliminated from their diets. Benefits have not been shown for other elimination diets, though the studies are small and poorly executed. Establishing that there is a food allergy before dietary change could avoid unnecessary lifestyle changes.\nFatty acids.\nOils with fatty acids that have been studied to prevent dermatitis include:\nIn the 1950s Arild Hansen showed that infants fed skimmed milk developed essential fatty acid deficiency, which was characterized by increased food intake, poor growth, and scaly dermatitis, and was cured by the administration of corn oil.\nManagement.\nThere is no known cure for some types of dermatitis, with treatment aiming to control symptoms by reducing inflammation and relieving itching. Contact dermatitis is treated by avoiding what is causing it.\nSeborrheic dermatitis is treated with antifungals such as anti-dandruff shampoo.\nLifestyle.\nBathing once or more a day is recommended, usually for five to ten minutes in warm water. Soaps should be avoided, as they tend to strip the skin of natural oils and lead to excessive dryness. The American Academy of Dermatology suggests using a controlled amount of bleach diluted in a bath to help with atopic dermatitis.\nPeople can wear clothing designed to manage the itching, scratching, and peeling.\nHouse dust mite reduction and avoidance measures have been studied in low-quality trials and have not shown evidence of improving eczema.\nMoisturizers.\nLow-quality evidence indicates that moisturizing agents (emollients) may reduce eczema severity and lead to fewer flares. In children, oil\u2013based formulations appear to be better, and water\u2013based formulations are not recommended. It is unclear if moisturizers that contain ceramides are more or less effective than others. Products that contain dyes, perfumes, or peanuts should not be used. Occlusive dressings at night may be useful.\nSome moisturizers or barrier creams may reduce irritation in occupational irritant hand dermatitis, a skin disease that can affect people in jobs that regularly come into contact with water, detergents, chemicals or other irritants. Some emollients may reduce the number of flares in people with dermatitis.\nMedications.\nCorticosteroids.\nIf symptoms are well controlled with moisturizers, steroids may only be required when flares occur. Corticosteroids are effective in controlling and suppressing symptoms in most cases. Once daily use is generally enough. For mild-moderate eczema, a weak steroid may be used (e.g., hydrocortisone), while in more severe cases a higher-potency steroid (e.g., clobetasol propionate) may be used. In severe cases, oral or injectable corticosteroids may be used. While these usually bring about rapid improvements, they have greater side effects.\nLong-term use of topical steroids may result in skin atrophy, stria, and telangiectasia. Their use on delicate skin (face or groin) is therefore typically with caution. They are, however, generally well tolerated. Red burning skin, where the skin turns red upon stopping steroid use, has been reported among adults who use topical steroids at least daily for more than a year.\nAntihistamines.\nThere is little evidence supporting the use of antihistamine medications for the relief of dermatitis. Sedative antihistamines, such as diphenhydramine, may be useful in those who are unable to sleep due to eczema. Second-generation antihistamines have minimal evidence of benefit. Of the second-generation antihistamines studied, fexofenadine is the only one to show evidence of improvement in itching with minimal side effects.\nImmunosuppressants.\nTopical immunosuppressants like pimecrolimus and tacrolimus may be better in the short term and appear equal to steroids after a year of use. Their use is reasonable in those who do not respond to or are not tolerant of steroids. Treatments are typically recommended for short or fixed periods of time rather than indefinitely. Tacrolimus 0.1% has generally proved more effective than pimecrolimus, and equal in effect to mid-potency topical steroids. There is no association to increased risk of cancer from topical use of pimecrolimus nor tacrolimus.\nWhen eczema is severe and does not respond to other forms of treatment, systemic immunosuppressants are sometimes used. Immunosuppressants can cause significant side effects, and some require regular blood tests. The most commonly used are cyclosporin, azathioprine, and methotrexate.\nDupilumab is a new medication that improves eczema lesions, especially moderate to severe eczema. Dupilumab, a monoclonal antibody, suppresses inflammation by targeting the interleukin-4 receptor.\nAntifungals.\nAntifungals are used in the treatment of seborrheic dermatitis.\nOthers.\nIn September 2021, ruxolitinib cream (Opzelura) was approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for the topical treatment of mild to moderate atopic dermatitis. It is a topical Janus kinase inhibitor.\nLight therapy.\nNarrowband UVB.\nAtopic dermatitis (AD) may be treated with narrowband UVB, which increases 25-hydroxyvitamin D3 in persons in individuals with AD.\nLight therapy using heliotherapy, balneophototherapy, psoralen plus UVA (PUVA therapy), light has tentative support but the quality of the evidence is not very good compared with narrowband UVB and UVA1. UVB is more effective than UVA1 for treatment of atopical dermatitis.\nOverexposure to ultraviolet light carries its own risks, particularly that of skin cancer.\nAlternative medicine.\nTopical.\nChiropractic spinal manipulation lacks evidence to support its use for dermatitis. There is little evidence supporting the use of psychological treatments. While dilute bleach baths have been used for infected dermatitis, there is little evidence for this practice.\nPrognosis.\nMost cases are well managed with topical treatments and ultraviolet light. About 2% of cases are not. In more than 60% of young children, the condition subsides by adolescence.\nEpidemiology.\nGlobally, dermatitis affected approximately 230\u00a0million people as of 2010 (3.5% of the population). Dermatitis is most commonly seen in infancy, with female predominance of eczema presentations occurring during the reproductive period of 15\u201349 years. In the UK about 20% of children have the condition, while in the United States about 10% are affected.\nAlthough little data on the rates of eczema over time exists prior to the 1940s, the rate of eczema has been found to have increased substantially in the latter half of the 20th century, with eczema in school-aged children being found to increase between the late 1940s and 2000. In the developed world there has been rise in the rate of eczema over time. The incidence and lifetime prevalence of eczema in England have been seen to increase in recent times.\nDermatitis affected about 10% of U.S. workers in 2010, representing over 15 million workers with dermatitis. Prevalence rates were higher among females than among males and among those with some college education or a college degree compared to those with a high school diploma or less. Workers employed in healthcare and social assistance industries and life, physical, and social science occupations had the highest rates of reported dermatitis. About 6% of dermatitis cases among U.S. workers were attributed to work by a healthcare professional, indicating that the prevalence rate of work-related dermatitis among workers was at least 0.6%.\nEtymology and history.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n from Ancient Greek , from , from 'out' + 'to boil'\n (OED)\nThe term \"atopic dermatitis\" was coined in 1933 by Wise and Sulzberger. Sulfur as a topical treatment for eczema was fashionable in the Victorian and Edwardian eras.\nThe word \"dermatitis\" is from the Greek 'skin' and 'inflammation' and \"eczema\" is from 'eruption'.\nSociety and culture.\nSome cosmetics are marketed as hypoallergenic to imply that their use is less likely to lead to an allergic reaction than other products. However, the term \"hypoallergenic\" is not regulated, and no research has been done showing that products labeled \"hypoallergenic\" are less problematic than any others. In 1977, courts overruled the U.S. Food and Drug Administration's regulation of the use of the term hypoallergenic. In 2019, the European Union released a document about claims made concerning cosmetics, but this was issued as guidance, not a regulation.\nResearch.\nMonoclonal antibodies are under preliminary research to determine their potential as treatments for atopic dermatitis, with only dupilumab showing evidence of efficacy, as of 2018.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "57714", "revid": "2003421", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57714", "title": "Rob Malda", "text": "American businessman (born 1976)\nRob Malda (born May 10, 1976), also known as CmdrTaco, is an American Internet content author, and former editor-in-chief of the website Slashdot.\nCareer.\nMalda is an alumnus of Hope College and Holland Christian High School.\nIn 1997, he and Jeff Bates created Slashdot while undergraduates of Hope College. After running the site for two years \"on a shoestring\", they sold the site to Andover.net, which was later acquired by VA Linux Systems. Malda ran the site out of the SourceForge, Inc. office in Dexter, Michigan.\nMalda also wrote a monthly column for \"Computer Power User\". In 2002, he was named in the MIT Technology Review TR100 as one of the top 100 innovators in the world under the age of 35.\nOn August 25, 2011, Malda announced his resignation from Slashdot.\nOn March 5, 2012, he was appointed as chief strategist and editor-at-large of WaPo Labs, a subsidiary of The Washington Post Company. After The Washington Post Company sold its newspaper operations to Amazon.com CEO Jeff Bezos, it rebranded as Graham Holdings Company. WaPo Labs became Trove, for which Malda was chief strategist and head of product, before shutting down in December, 2015.\nPersonal life.\nMalda proposed to longtime girlfriend Kathleen Fent using the front page of Slashdot on February 14, 2002. They were married on December 8, 2002, in Las Vegas, Nevada.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "57715", "revid": "31111023", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57715", "title": "Richard von Krafft-Ebing", "text": "Austrian neurologist, psychiatrist, and nobleman (1840\u20131902)\nRichard Freiherr von Krafft-Ebing (full name Richard Fridolin Joseph Freiherr Krafft von Festenberg auf Frohnberg, genannt von Ebing; 14 August 1840 \u2013 22 December 1902) was a German psychiatrist and author of the foundational work \"Psychopathia Sexualis\" (1886).\nLife and work.\nBackground and education.\nRichard von Krafft-Ebing was born as the eldest of five children to Friedrich Karl Konrad Christoph von Krafft-Ebing, a high-ranking official in the Grand Duchy of Baden.\nHis mother Klara Antonia Carolina was a daughter of the renowned Heidelberg legal scholar and defense attorney Carl Joseph Anton Mittermaier. His paternal lineage was ennobled in the year 1770 by Empress Maria Theresia and elevated to the Baronial status in 1805 by Emperor Franz II (as Franz I, Emperor of Austria).\nDue to his father's professional relocation, the family moved initially to various locations in Baden and eventually to Heidelberg. In Heidelberg, Richard von Krafft-Ebing, after passing his university entrance exam at Ruprecht-Karls-University Heidelberg, where his grandfather taught law, turned to the study of medicine. He passed the state examination in 1863 \"summa cum laude\" with his work on \"Sensory Delusions\" and earned his Doctorate in Medicine. During his studies, he became a member of \"Burschenschaft Frankonia Heidelberg\" in the winter semester of 1858/59.\nEarly medical career.\nRecovery from a bout of typhoid led him to spend a summer in Z\u00fcrich, where he became acquainted with Wilhelm Griesinger's brain anatomical studies. He observed practices in Vienna, Prague, and Berlin.\nIn the subsequent years from 1864 to 1868, he worked as an assistant at the Baden mental hospital Illenau\u2014chiefly under Christian Roller and Karl Hergt\u2014gaining practical experience in the extensive field of treating and caring for the mentally ill and those suffering from neurological disorders. Since that time, he maintained a lifelong friendship with his colleague Heinrich Sch\u00fcle (1840\u20131916), who later became the director of this institution (from 1890).\nIn 1868, von Krafft-Ebing set up his own practice as a neurologist in Baden-Baden. At the beginning of his career, he looked after his younger, severely ill brother Friedrich for several months. After losing the battle for his brother's life, who was just 24, a restorative and art-focused journey, coupled with visits to psychiatric and neurological institutions, took him several weeks through southern Europe. During the Franco-Prussian War (1870/71), he first served as a field doctor with the rank of captain in the Baden Division and was then transferred as a hospital doctor to the Fortress Rastatt. His observations, especially regarding patients suffering from typhus, were compiled in a special treatise. After the end of the war, he was put in charge of the electrotherapeutic station in Baden-Baden, mainly for the neurological follow-up treatment of wounded soldiers.\nProfessor of psychiatry in Strasbourg and Graz.\nAlready boasting an impressive number of scientific publications, von Krafft-Ebing was eager to pursue an academic career. After a trial lecture in Leipzig under the Dean of the Faculty of Medicine, Wunderlich, a decision on his habilitation was expected soon. However, on 13 May 1872, von Krafft-Ebing was able to inaugurate his psychiatric clinic in Strasbourg.\nAfter a one-year stint at the newly established Psychiatric Clinic of the University of Strasbourg\u2014the university clinic consisted of two beds in a room for men, another two-bed room for women, and two rooms for clinic management\u2014the now 32-year-old university professor had to tolerate these limitations only for a short time.\nThrough the mediation of his teacher Roller, he was appointed in 1873 as the director of the newly established Styrian State Asylum Feldhof near Graz, and simultaneously awarded the Chair of Psychiatry at the University of Graz.\nThe following year, his wife Maria Luise Ki\u00dfling (1846\u20131903), who was originally from Baden-Baden, joined him there.\nOn 22 May 1874, he opened the clinic in Graz and led it until 1880. After years of effort, he was finally relieved from the burdens of his dual role in such a way that he could give up the administration of the Feldhof institution. With appropriate modifications to the clinic and his appointment to a full professorship in 1885, he was solely a Professor of Psychiatry.\nRising fame and major works.\nA part of his research was focused on examining the relationships between psychiatry and criminal law. Already during his time in Strasbourg, he published his \"Fundamentals of Criminal Psychology\", followed in 1875 by his first major work, \"Textbook of Forensic Psychopathology\". Of the many publications he released, some of which saw multiple editions and became widely known, notable are his \"Textbook of Psychiatry\" (1st ed. 1879) and his most famous work \"Psychopathia Sexualis\" (1st ed. 1886), which through numerous, constantly expanded new editions, became the standard textbook on sexual pathology (see also: Sexology) of the 19th century.\nKrafft-Ebing spent thirteen years in the Styrian capital. He was aware that separating psychiatry from neurology would be incompatible with fruitful effectiveness in both fields, and following constant efforts in this direction, his professorship was expanded to include both psychiatry and neurology. During his work at Feldhof and in the Graz clinic, Krafft-Ebing laid the foundation for his global fame. Within a few years, his name spread across the entire world. Patients came to him from many countries. For the increasing number of patients from wealthy families, he built a state-of-the-art Private clinic in Mariagr\u00fcn for the time.\nHis book \"Psychopathia Sexualis\" later became a widely published standard work. In the same year, 1886, he was elected a member of the Leopoldina.\nActivities in Vienna.\nGiven the reputation that Richard von Krafft-Ebing had meanwhile established in the professional world\u2014as he was also frequently consulted abroad (Italy, France, Russia, etc.)\u2014it was inevitable that he was first appointed in 1889 to Vienna at the \"I. Psychiatric Clinic of the Lower Austrian State Asylum\" following Maximilian Leidesdorf, and he became a professor of psychiatry at the University of Vienna. In 1892, after the death of Theodor Meynert, he was called to the psychiatric university clinic of the General Hospital of the City of Vienna. Several professional publications appeared again from his pen, such as in 1894 his well-known monographs on \"Progressive Paralysis\"\u2014a disease he also highlighted in 1897 at the International Medical Congress in Moscow in a highly regarded lecture.\nAccording to Volkmar Sigusch, he adopted the degeneration theories of his French research colleagues and borrowed the term Sadism used in France since 1834 (Dictionnaire universel de Boiste, eighth edition) as the name for a pathology. The now well-known technical term \"Masochism\" was coined by him. He also dealt extensively with Hypnotism and was one of the first to apply it clinically. Increasingly, he was called in as a forensic expert.\nFor the subsequent generation of researchers around Magnus Hirschfeld, Krafft-Ebing's findings and his strict empirical method formed the starting point for their own research.\nLater years in Graz.\nAt the age of sixty-two, Krafft-Ebing retired for health reasons to Graz, to the Private clinic in Mariagr\u00fcn he had created\u2014after having previously celebrated his thirtieth anniversary as a university professor in Vienna; and just half a year after his retirement, multiple strokes ended his life on 22 December 1902. He was buried at the St. Leonhard Cemetery in Graz and left behind his wife, two sons, and a daughter.\n\"He was an utterly noble nature,\" reads the obituary in the Wiener Klinische Wochenschrift, \"toward his patients he was of touching kindness and friendliness. Nothing could disturb his calm; he possessed perfect self-control and proved himself equal to any situation. His tall figure, his firm stride, his calm gaze, his intellectual countenance had often a marvelous effect on the most agitated patients.\"\nStudy of homosexuality.\nKrafft-Ebing had particular significance for the scientific study of homosexuality. He was led to this still relatively-unexplored field of work (as per his own accounts in a letter to him) by the writings of Karl Heinrich Ulrichs and maintained a correspondence with Ulrivchs over several years. Ulrichs's theory of the \"Urning\" as a third sex greatly influenced Krafft-Ebing's thinking on the subject. In the 19th century, homosexuality was widely considered by the public and especially the churches to be an expression of immoral mindset and lifestyle, a result of seduction, sexual excess or degenerate heredity (degeneration theory). It was criminalized in some countries, particularly in England, Austria and in Prussia, and punished with harsh prison sentences.\nConversely, several of the constiuent states in the German Confederation had reformed their criminal codes abd sodomy had been decriminalized in the states Hanover, Bavaria, Thuringia, Baden and W\u00fcrttemberg. Krafft-Ebing was a leading psychiatrist of his day and his research initially positioned same sex attracted men and women as hereditarily burdened but not responsible for their innate \"reversal\" of sexual drive. Throughout his career, he supported the decriminalisation of homosexuality believing that homosexuals would be best served by medical treatment. He ran a clinic and a sanatorium offering therapeutic approaches to the modification of sexual orientation. In time and with increased study he came to the view that there was nothing inherantly pathologically wrong with the homosexual disposition.\nIn \"Psychopathia sexualis\" (1886), he defined homosexuality as an innate neuropsychopathic disorder\u2014essentially a hereditary nervous disease.\nThis diagnosis allowed him to advocate complete decriminalization of homosexuality, arguing that homosexuals were not responsible for their \"malformation\" and that homosexuality was not contagious. Although Krafft-Ebing was considered an authoritative figure in the field of forensic medicine at his time, this theory remained without consequences for decriminalization. \nIn addition to clear cases of homosexuality, there are apparent a number of individuals in the book who shunned their birth sex and show what we today know as gender incongruence \u2014 one of dozens, case 129 is notable for this, with the individual\u2014assigned male at birth\u2014delighting in spending as much time as they can to dress, act and do things typically associated with feminine sides of life in the 1800s, much to the chagrin of their family. A number of others akin to the previously mentioned case are also mentioned in the chapter on Androgyny &amp; Gynandry, such as several people, assigned female at birth, who saw themselves as men, preferred masculine occupations, clothing, activities &amp; engagements, and often lived their lives as such. Some individuals also show what we today would know as body dysphoria.\nKrafft-Ebing equated ideas of lesbianism as an orientation and as a gender nonconformity; he cited the characters in Gustave Flaubert's \"Salammb\u00f4\" (1862) and Ernest Feydeau's \"La comtesse de Chalis\" (1867) as examples of lesbians because both novels feature female protagonists who do not adhere to social norms and express \"contrary sexual feeling\", although neither participated in same-sex desire or sexual behavior.72\nHonors.\nIn 1920, the \"Krafft-Ebing Street\" was named after him in Vienna-Penzing (14th district). Likewise, a street was named after Richard von Krafft-Ebing in the German city of Mannheim and in the Austrian city of Graz (XI. District, Graz Mariatrost).\nPrincipal work.\nKrafft-Ebing's principal work is \"Psychopathia Sexualis: eine Klinisch-Forensische Studie\" (\"Sexual Psychopathy: A Clinical-Forensic Study\"), which was first published in 1886 and expanded in subsequent editions. The last edition from the hand of the author (the twelfth) contained a total of 238 case histories of human sexual behaviour.\nTranslations of various editions of this book introduced to English such terms as \"sadist\" (derived from the brutal sexual practices depicted in the novels of the Marquis de Sade), \"masochist\", (derived from the name of Leopold von Sacher-Masoch), \"homosexuality\", \"bisexuality\", \"necrophilia\", and \"anilingus\".\n\"Psychopathia Sexualis\" is a forensic reference book for psychiatrists, physicians, and judges. Written in an academic style, its introduction noted that, to discourage lay readers, the author had deliberately chosen a scientific term for the title of the book and that he had written parts of it in Latin for the same purpose.\n\"Psychopathia Sexualis\" was one of the first books about sexual practices that studied homosexuality/bisexuality. It proposed consideration of the mental state of sex criminals in legal judgements of their crimes. During its time, it became the leading medico-legal textual authority on sexual pathology.\nThe twelfth and final edition of \"Psychopathia Sexualis\" presented four categories of what Krafft-Ebing called \"cerebral neuroses\":\nKrafft-Ebing considered procreation the purpose of sexual desire and that any form of recreational sex was a perversion of the sex drive. \"With opportunity for the natural satisfaction of the sexual instinct, every expression of it that does not correspond with the purpose of nature\u2014i.e., propagation,\u2014must be regarded as perverse.\" Hence, he concluded that homosexuals suffered a degree of sexual perversion because homosexual practices could not result in procreation. In some cases, homosexual libido was classified as a moral vice induced by the early practice of masturbation. Krafft-Ebing proposed a theory of homosexuality as biologically anomalous and originating in the embryonic and fetal stages of gestation, which evolved into a \"sexual inversion\" of the brain. In 1901, in an article in the \"Jahrbuch f\u00fcr sexuelle Zwischenstufen\" (Yearbook for Intermediate Sexual Types), he changed the biological term from \"anomaly\" to \"differentiation\".\nAlthough the primary focus is on sexual behaviour in men, there are sections on \"Sadism in Woman\", \"Masochism in Woman\", and \"Lesbian Love\". Several of the cases of sexual activity with children were committed by women.\nKrafft-Ebing's conclusions about homosexuality are now largely forgotten, partly because Sigmund Freud's theories were more interesting to physicians (who considered homosexuality to be a psychological problem) and partly because he incurred the enmity of the Austrian Catholic Church when he psychologically associated martyrdom (a desire for sanctity) with hysteria and masochism.\nThe term \"hetero-sexual\" is used, but not in chapter or section headings. The term \"bi-sexuality\" appears twice in the 7th edition, and more frequently in the 12th.\nThere is no mention of sexual activity with children in Chapter III, \"General Pathology\", where the \"cerebral neuroses\" (including sexuality the paraesthesias) are covered. Various sexual acts with children are mentioned in Chapter IV, \"Special Pathology\", but always in the context of specific mental disorders, such as dementia, epilepsy, and paranoia, never as resulting from its own disorder. However, Chapter V on sexual crimes has a section on sexual crimes with children. This section is brief in the 7th edition, but is expanded in the 12th to cover \"Non-Psychopathological Cases\" and \"Psychopathological Cases\", in which latter subsection the term \"paedophilia erotica\" is used.\nWorks.\nA bibliography of von Krafft-Ebing's writings can be found in A. Kreuter, \"Deutschsprachige Neurologen und Psychiater\", M\u00fcnchen 1996, Band 2, pp.\u00a0767\u2013774.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "57716", "revid": "3145267", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57716", "title": "Rothmund-Thompson's syndrome", "text": ""}
{"id": "57717", "revid": "122189", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57717", "title": "Direct memory access", "text": "Feature of computer systems\nDirect memory access (DMA) is a feature of computer systems that allows certain hardware subsystems to access main system memory independently of the central processing unit (CPU).\nWithout DMA, when the CPU is using programmed input/output, it is typically fully occupied for the entire duration of the read or write operation, and is thus unavailable to perform other work. With DMA, the CPU first initiates the transfer, then it does other operations while the transfer is in progress, and it finally receives an interrupt from the DMA controller (DMAC) when the operation is done. This feature is useful at any time that the CPU cannot keep up with the rate of data transfer, or when the CPU needs to perform work while waiting for a relatively slow I/O data transfer.\nMany hardware systems use DMA, including disk drive controllers, graphics cards, network cards, sound cards and dedicated DMA controllers (acting on behalf of the aforementioned device types). DMA is also used for intra-chip data transfer in some multi-core processors. Computers that have DMA channels can transfer data to and from devices with much less CPU overhead than computers without DMA channels. Similarly, a processing circuitry inside a multi-core processor can transfer data to and from its local memory without occupying its processor time, allowing computation and data transfer to proceed in parallel.\nDMA can also be used for \"memory to memory\" copying or moving of data within memory. DMA can offload expensive memory operations, such as large copies or scatter-gather operations, from the CPU to a dedicated DMA engine. An implementation example is the I/O Acceleration Technology. DMA is of interest in network-on-chip and in-memory computing architectures.\nWhile hardware acceleration is usually vendor-specific, direct memory access can be used by the class driver.\nPrinciples.\nThird-party.\nStandard DMA, also called third-party DMA, uses a DMA controller. A DMA controller can generate memory addresses and initiate memory read or write cycles. It contains several hardware registers that can be written and read by the CPU. These include a memory address register, a byte count register, and one or more control registers. Depending on what features the DMA controller provides, these control registers might specify some combination of the source, the destination, the direction of the transfer (reading from the I/O device or writing to the I/O device), the size of the transfer unit, and/or the number of bytes to transfer in one burst.\nTo carry out an input, output or memory-to-memory operation, the host processor initializes the DMA controller with a count of the number of words to transfer, and the memory address to use. The CPU then commands the peripheral device to initiate a data transfer. The DMA controller then provides addresses and read/write control lines to the system memory. Each time a byte of data is ready to be transferred between the peripheral device and memory, the DMA controller increments its internal address register until the full block of data is transferred.\nSome examples of buses using third-party DMA are PATA, USB (before USB4), and SATA; however, their host controllers use bus mastering.\nBus mastering.\nIn a bus mastering system, also known as a first-party DMA system, the CPU and peripherals can each be granted control of the memory bus. Where a peripheral can become a bus master, it can directly write to system memory without the involvement of the CPU, providing memory address and control signals as required. Some measures must be provided to put the processor into a hold condition so that bus contention does not occur.\nModes of operation.\nBurst mode.\nIn \"burst mode\", an entire block of data is transferred in one contiguous sequence. Once the DMA controller is granted access to the system bus by the CPU, it transfers all bytes of data in the data block before releasing control of the system buses back to the CPU, but renders the CPU inactive for relatively long periods of time. The mode is also called \"Block Transfer Mode\".\nCycle stealing mode.\nThe \"cycle stealing mode\" is used in systems in which the CPU should not be disabled for the length of time needed for burst transfer modes. In the cycle stealing mode, the DMA controller obtains access to the system bus the same way as in burst mode, using \"BR (Bus Request)\" and \"BG (Bus Grant)\" signals, which are the two signals controlling the interface between the CPU and the DMA controller. However, in cycle stealing mode, after one unit of data transfer, the control of the system bus is deasserted to the CPU via BG. It is then continually requested again via BR, transferring one unit of data per request, until the entire block of data has been transferred. By continually obtaining and releasing the control of the system bus, the DMA controller essentially interleaves instruction and data transfers. The CPU processes an instruction, then the DMA controller transfers one data value, and so on. Data is not transferred as quickly, but CPU is not idled for as long as in burst mode. Cycle stealing mode is useful for controllers that monitor data in real time.\nTransparent mode.\nTransparent mode takes the most time to transfer a block of data, yet it is also the most efficient mode in terms of overall system performance. In transparent mode, the DMA controller transfers data only when the CPU is performing operations that do not use the system buses. The primary advantage of transparent mode is that the CPU never stops executing its programs and the DMA transfer is free in terms of time, while the disadvantage is that the hardware needs to determine when the CPU is not using the system buses, which can be complex. This is also called \"Hidden DMA data transfer mode\".\nCache coherency.\nDMA can lead to cache coherency problems. Imagine a CPU equipped with a cache and an external memory that can be accessed directly by devices using DMA. When the CPU accesses location X in the memory, the current value will be stored in the cache. Subsequent operations on X will update the cached copy of X, but not the external memory version of X, assuming a write-back cache. If the cache is not flushed to the memory before the next time a device tries to access X, the device will receive a stale value of X.\nSimilarly, if the cached copy of X is not invalidated when a device writes a new value to the memory, then the CPU will operate on a stale value of X.\nThis issue can be addressed in one of two ways in system design: Cache-coherent systems implement a method in hardware, called bus snooping, whereby external writes are signaled to the cache controller which then performs a cache invalidation for DMA writes or cache flush for DMA reads. Non-coherent systems leave this to software, where the OS must then ensure that the cache lines are flushed before an outgoing DMA transfer is started and invalidated before a memory range affected by an incoming DMA transfer is accessed. The OS must make sure that the memory range is not accessed by any running threads in the meantime. The latter approach introduces some overhead to the DMA operation, as most hardware requires a loop to invalidate each cache line individually.\nHybrids also exist, where the secondary L2 cache is coherent while the L1 cache (typically on-CPU) is managed by software.\nExamples.\nISA.\nIn the original IBM PC (and the follow-up PC/XT), there was only one Intel 8237 DMA controller capable of providing four DMA channels (numbered 0\u20133). These DMA channels performed 8-bit transfers (as the 8237 was an 8-bit device, ideally matched to the PC's i8088 CPU/bus architecture), could only address the first (i8086/8088-standard) megabyte of RAM, and were limited to addressing single 64\u00a0kB segments within that space (although the source and destination channels could address different segments). Additionally, the controller could only be used for transfers to, from or between expansion bus I/O devices, as the 8237 could only perform memory-to-memory transfers using channels 0 &amp; 1, of which channel 0 in the PC (&amp; XT) was dedicated to dynamic memory refresh. This prevented it from being used as a general-purpose \"Blitter\", and consequently block memory moves in the PC, limited by the general PIO speed of the CPU, were very slow.\nWith the IBM PC/AT, the enhanced AT bus (more familiarly retronymed as the Industry Standard Architecture (ISA)) added a second 8237 DMA controller to provide three additional, and as highlighted by resource clashes with the XT's additional expandability over the original PC, much-needed channels (5\u20137; channel 4 is used as a cascade to the first 8237). ISA DMA's extended 24-bit address bus width allows it to access up to 16\u00a0MB lower memory. The page register was also rewired to address the full 16 MB memory address space of the 80286 CPU. This second controller was also integrated in a way capable of performing 16-bit transfers when an I/O device is used as the data source and/or destination (as it actually only processes data itself for memory-to-memory transfers, otherwise simply \"controlling\" the data flow between other parts of the 16-bit system, making its own data bus width relatively immaterial), doubling data throughput when the upper three channels are used. For compatibility, the lower four DMA channels were still limited to 8-bit transfers only, and whilst memory-to-memory transfers were now technically possible due to the freeing up of channel 0 from having to handle DRAM refresh, from a practical standpoint they were of limited value because of the controller's consequent low throughput compared to what the CPU could now achieve (i.e., a 16-bit, more optimised 80286 running at a minimum of 6\u00a0MHz, vs an 8-bit controller locked at 4.77\u00a0MHz). In both cases, the 64\u00a0kB segment boundary issue remained, with individual transfers unable to cross segments (instead \"wrapping around\" to the start of the same segment) even in 16-bit mode, although this was in practice more a problem of programming complexity than performance as the continued need for DRAM refresh (however handled) to monopolise the bus approximately every 15\u00a0\u03bcs prevented use of large (and fast, but uninterruptible) block transfers.\nDue to their lagging performance (1.6\u00a0MB/s maximum 8-bit transfer capability at 5\u00a0MHz, but no more than 0.9\u00a0MB/s in the PC/XT and 1.6\u00a0MB/s for 16-bit transfers in the AT due to ISA bus overheads and other interference such as memory refresh interruptions) and unavailability of any speed grades that would allow installation of direct replacements operating at speeds higher than the original PC's standard 4.77\u00a0MHz clock, these devices have been effectively obsolete since the late 1980s. Particularly, the advent of the 80386 processor in 1985 and its capacity for 32-bit transfers (although great improvements in the efficiency of address calculation and block memory moves in Intel CPUs after the 80186 meant that PIO transfers even by the 16-bit-bus 286 and 386SX could still easily outstrip the 8237), as well as the development of further evolutions to (EISA) or replacements for (MCA, VLB and PCI) the \"ISA\" bus with their own much higher-performance DMA subsystems (up to a maximum of 33\u00a0MB/s for EISA, 40\u00a0MB/s MCA, typically 133\u00a0MB/s VLB/PCI) made the original DMA controllers seem more of a performance millstone than a booster. They were supported to the extent they are required to support built-in legacy PC hardware on later machines. The pieces of legacy hardware that continued to use ISA DMA after 32-bit expansion buses became common were Sound Blaster cards that needed to maintain full hardware compatibility with the Sound Blaster standard; and Super I/O devices on motherboards that often integrated a built-in floppy disk controller, an IrDA infrared controller when FIR (fast infrared) mode is selected, and an IEEE 1284 parallel port controller when ECP mode is selected. In cases where an original 8237s or direct compatibles were still used, transfer to or from these devices may still be limited to the first 16\u00a0MB of main RAM regardless of the system's actual address space or amount of installed memory.\nEach DMA channel has a 16-bit address register and a 16-bit count register associated with it. To initiate a data transfer the device driver sets up the DMA channel's address and count registers together with the direction of the data transfer, read or write. It then instructs the DMA hardware to begin the transfer. When the transfer is complete, the device interrupts the CPU.\nScatter-gather or vectored I/O DMA allows the transfer of data to and from multiple memory areas in a single DMA transaction. It is equivalent to the chaining together of multiple simple DMA requests. The motivation is to off-load multiple input/output interrupt and data copy tasks from the CPU.\nDRQ stands for \"Data request\"; DACK for \"Data acknowledge\". These symbols, seen on hardware schematics of computer systems with DMA functionality, represent electronic signaling lines between the CPU and DMA controller. Each DMA channel has one Request and one Acknowledge line. A device that uses DMA must be configured to use both lines of the assigned DMA channel.\n16-bit ISA permitted bus mastering.\nStandard ISA DMA assignments:\nPCI.\nA PCI architecture has no central DMA controller, unlike ISA. Instead, A PCI device can request control of the bus (\"become the bus master\") and request to read from and write to system memory. More precisely, a PCI component requests bus ownership from the PCI bus controller (usually PCI host bridge, and PCI to PCI bridge), which will arbitrate if several devices request bus ownership simultaneously, since there can only be one bus master at one time. When the component is granted ownership, it will issue normal read and write commands on the PCI bus, which will be claimed by the PCI bus controller.\nAs an example, on an Intel Core-based PC, the southbridge will forward the transactions to the memory controller (which is integrated on the CPU die) using DMI, which will in turn convert them to DDR operations and send them out on the memory bus. As a result, there are quite a number of steps involved in a PCI DMA transfer; however, that poses little problem, since the PCI device or PCI bus itself are an order of magnitude slower than the rest of the components (see list of device bandwidths).\nA modern x86 CPU may use more than 4 GB of memory, either utilizing the native 64-bit mode of x86-64 CPU, or the Physical Address Extension (PAE), a 36-bit addressing mode. In such a case, a device using DMA with a 32-bit address bus is unable to address memory above the 4 GB line. The new Double Address Cycle (DAC) mechanism, if implemented on both the PCI bus and the device itself, enables 64-bit DMA addressing. Otherwise, the operating system would need to work around the problem by either using costly double buffers (DOS/Windows nomenclature) also known as bounce buffers (FreeBSD/Linux), or it could use an IOMMU to provide address translation services if one is present.\nI/OAT.\nAs an example of DMA engine incorporated in a general-purpose CPU, some Intel Xeon chipsets include a DMA engine called I/O Acceleration Technology (I/OAT), which can offload memory copying from the main CPU, freeing it to do other work. In 2006, Intel's Linux kernel developer Andrew Grover performed benchmarks using I/OAT to offload network traffic copies and found no more than 10% improvement in CPU utilization with receiving workloads.\nDDIO.\nFurther performance-oriented enhancements to the DMA mechanism have been introduced in Intel Xeon\u00a0E5 processors with their Data Direct I/O (DDIO) feature, allowing the DMA \"windows\" to reside within CPU caches instead of system RAM. As a result, CPU caches are used as the primary source and destination for I/O, allowing network interface controllers (NICs) to DMA directly to the Last level cache (L3 cache) of local CPUs and avoid costly fetching of the I/O data from system RAM. As a result, DDIO reduces the overall I/O processing latency, allows processing of the I/O to be performed entirely in-cache, prevents the available RAM bandwidth/latency from becoming a performance bottleneck, and may lower the power consumption by allowing RAM to remain longer in low-powered state.\nAHB.\nIn systems-on-a-chip and embedded systems, typical system bus infrastructure is a complex on-chip bus such as AMBA High-performance Bus. AMBA defines two kinds of AHB components: master and slave. A slave interface is similar to programmed I/O through which the software (running on embedded CPU, e.g. ARM) can write/read I/O registers or (less commonly) local memory blocks inside the device. A master interface can be used by the device to perform DMA transactions to/from system memory without heavily loading the CPU.\nTherefore, high bandwidth devices such as network controllers that need to transfer huge amounts of data to/from system memory will have two interface adapters to the AHB: a master and a slave interface. This is because on-chip buses like AHB do not support tri-stating the bus or alternating the direction of any line on the bus. Like PCI, no central DMA controller is required since the DMA is bus-mastering, but an arbiter is required in case of multiple masters present on the system.\nInternally, a multichannel DMA engine is usually present in the device to perform multiple concurrent scatter-gather operations as programmed by the software.\nCell.\nAs an example usage of DMA in a multiprocessor-system-on-chip, IBM/Sony/Toshiba's Cell processor incorporates a DMA engine for each of its 9 processing elements including one Power processor element (PPE) and eight synergistic processor elements (SPEs). Since the SPE's load/store instructions can read/write only its own local memory, an SPE entirely depends on DMAs to transfer data to and from the main memory and local memories of other SPEs. Thus the DMA acts as a primary means of data transfer among cores inside this CPU (in contrast to cache-coherent CMP architectures such as Intel's cancelled general-purpose GPU, Larrabee).\nDMA in Cell is fully cache coherent (note however local stores of SPEs operated upon by DMA do not act as globally coherent cache in the standard sense). In both read (\"get\") and write (\"put\"), a DMA command can transfer either a single block area of size up to 16 KB, or a list of 2 to 2048 such blocks. The DMA command is issued by specifying a pair of a local address and a remote address: for example when a SPE program issues a put DMA command, it specifies an address of its own local memory as the source and a virtual memory address (pointing to either the main memory or the local memory of another SPE) as the target, together with a block size. According to an experiment, an effective peak performance of DMA in Cell (3\u00a0GHz, under uniform traffic) reaches 200 GB per second.\nPipelining.\nProcessors with scratchpad memory and DMA (such as digital signal processors and the Cell processor) may benefit from software overlapping DMA memory operations with processing, via double buffering or multibuffering. For example, the on-chip memory is split into two buffers; the processor may be operating on data in one, while the DMA engine is loading and storing data in the other. This allows the system to avoid memory latency and exploit burst transfers, at the expense of needing a predictable memory access pattern.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "57718", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57718", "title": "Direct Memory Access", "text": ""}
{"id": "57719", "revid": "48612216", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57719", "title": "Arkan", "text": "Serbian paramilitary commander and career criminal\n' (, ; 17 April 1952 \u2013 15 January 2000), better known as ' (), was a Serbian warlord, mobster and head of the Serb paramilitary force called the Serb Volunteer Guard during the Yugoslav Wars, considered one of the most feared and effective paramilitary forces during the wars. His paramilitary unit was responsible for numerous crimes in Eastern Bosnia, including murder, pillaging, rape and ethnic cleansings. was one of the most feared, celebrated and iconic figures in Serbia during his time.\n was on Interpol's top 10 most wanted list in the 1970s and 1980s for robberies and murders committed in countries across Europe, he escaped jail twice, and was later indicted by the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia for crimes against humanity. Up until his assassination in January 2000, was the most powerful organised crime figure in the Balkans, as well as the most powerful state-sponsored gangster in Serbia. had links to Avraham Golan, an infamous security contractor.\nEarly life.\n was born in , a small border town in Lower Styria, PR Slovenia, FPR Yugoslavia. His father, a Montenegrin Serb served as a decorated officer in the SFR-Yugoslav Air Force, being highly ranked for his notable involvement in World War II. was stationed in Slovenian Styria at the time when his fourth child was born.\nInfant spent part of his childhood in Zagreb and Pan\u010devo before his father's job eventually took the family to the Yugoslav capital of Belgrade, which is considered his hometown. He grew up with three older sisters in a strict, militaristic patriarchal household with regular physical abuse from his father. In a 1991 interview, he recalled: \"He didn't really hit me in a classical sense, he'd basically grab me and slam me against the floor.\" As a child, was considered to be a \"problem child\" by his teachers who regularly complained of his unruly behavior.\nIn his youth, aspired to become a pilot as his father had been. Due to the highly demanding and significant positions of his parents, there appeared to be very little time in which a bond was able to be established between parents and children. 's parents eventually divorced during his teenage years.\n was arrested for the first time in 1966 for snatching women's purses around Ta\u0161majdan Park, spending a year at a juvenile detention centre not far from Belgrade. His father then sent him to the seaside town of Kotor in order to join the Yugoslav Navy, but had other plans (ending up in Paris at the age of 15). In 1969, was arrested by French police and deported home, where he was sentenced to three years at the detention centre in Valjevo for several burglaries. During this time, he organised his own gang in the prison.\nIn his youth, was a ward of his father's friend, the Slovenian politician and Federal Minister of the Interior, . was chief of the Directorate for State Security (UDBA) and a close associate of President Josip Broz Tito. Whenever was in trouble, helped him, allegedly as a reward for his services to the UDBA, as seen in the escape from the Lugano prison in 1981. is quoted as having said: \"One is worth more than the whole UDBA.\"\nCriminal career.\nWestern Europe.\nIn 1972, aged 20, migrated to Western Europe. Abroad, he was introduced to and kept contact with many well-known criminals from Yugoslavia, such as , , , and , all of whom were also occasionally contracted by the UDBA, and all of whom have since been assassinated or otherwise died. took the nickname \"\" from one of his forged passports. On 28 December 1973, he was arrested in Belgium following a bank robbery, and was sentenced to ten years in prison. In 1974, was active in Sweden and among other crimes robbed a bank in .\n managed to escape from the Verviers prison on 4 July 1979. Although he was apprehended in the Netherlands on 24 October 1979, the few months he was free were enough for at least two more armed robberies in Sweden and three more in the Netherlands. Serving a seven-year sentence at a prison in Amsterdam, pulled off another escape on 8 May 1981 after someone slipped him a gun. Wasting no time, more robberies followed, this time in West Germany, where after less than a month of freedom he was arrested in Frankfurt on 5 June 1981 following a jewellery store stickup. In the ensuing shootout with police he was lightly wounded, resulting in his placement in the prison hospital ward. Looser security allowed to escape again only four days later, on 9 June, supposedly by jumping from the window, beating up the first passerby and stealing his clothing before disappearing. His final Western European arrest occurred in Basel, Switzerland, during a routine traffic check on 15 February 1983. However, he managed to escape again within months, this time from Thorberg Prison on 27 April.\nIt is widely speculated that was closely affiliated with the UDBA throughout his criminal career abroad. He had convictions or warrants in Belgium (bank robberies, prison escape), the Netherlands (armed robberies, prison escape), Sweden (twenty burglaries, seven bank robberies, prison escape, attempted murder), West Germany (armed robberies, prison escape), Austria, Switzerland (armed robberies, prison escape), and Italy. had achieved the status in the Belgrade underworld of earning \"\", a Serbo-Croatian phrase that roughly translates as being \"respected for fear\". ' was generally achieved in the Yugoslav underworld by committing violent crimes in Western Europe, being arrested and convicted, serving a sentence in a Western European prison, and terrorising the other inmates to such an extent that the said criminal became the most feared inmate in the prison. In the macho world of the Yugoslav underworld, having ' status was seen as proof of a criminal's toughness and masculinity.\nReturn to Yugoslavia.\n returned to Belgrade in May 1983, continuing his criminal career by managing a number of illegal activities. In November of that year, six months after his return, a bank in Zagreb was robbed with the thieves leaving a rose on the counter (allegedly 's signature from his robberies in Western Europe). Looking to question about his whereabouts during the robbery, two policemen, members of the Secretariat of Internal Affairs' (SUP) Tenth department from the Belgradian municipality of Palilula, showed up in civilian clothing at his mother's flat on 27 March Street in Belgrade. happened to not be home at the moment, so the policemen introduced themselves to his mother as \"friends of her son looking to return a cash debt they owed him\" and asked the woman if they could wait for him to return to the flat. 's mother phoned him to say that two unknown males waited for him. showed up with a revolver and proceeded to shoot and wound both policemen. He was detained immediately; however, barely 48 hours later, he was released. The occurrence made it clear to all observers, especially his criminal rivals, that he enjoyed protection from the highest echelons of the Yugoslav state security establishment.\n spent the mid-1980s running the Amadeus discoth\u00e8que together with and . Located in the neighbourhood, the nightclub was reportedly another perk of their contractual work for the UDBA. Moreover, could be seen driving around Belgrade in a pink Cadillac and gambling on roulette in casinos all over the country, from Belgrade (Hotel ) and nearby Pan\u010devo to Sveti Stefan (Hotel Maestral on the Milo\u010der beach) and Portoro\u017e (Hotel Metropol).\nAn avid gambler, following a private game of poker in a flat at Street in Belgrade, got into an lift altercation with a tenant from the flat building, reportedly breaking the man's arm after beating him with a gun. could not avoid being charged this time and the trial saw a notable exchange between him and the judge; during the pre-session identification, stated he was an employee of the Secretariat of Internal Affairs (SUP). When this was challenged by the prosecutor, produced a document summarising a mortgage loan he obtained from the UDBA for his house at ' Street. He ended up receiving a six-month sentence, which he served at the Belgrade Central Prison. In the late 1980s, a football hooligan subculture had emerged in Yugoslavia and the unruly and rowdy fans of the Red Star Belgrade football team were seen as a major social problem. At the request of the Ministry of the Interior, took over the (transl.\u2009Heroes) fan club of Red Star Belgrade in an attempt to impose some control on the hooligans. quickly became a hero to the ' club by his ability to arrange for them to go to Western Europe whenever Red Star Belgrade played a game in a Western European city.\nYugoslav Wars.\nEarly.\nOnly days after the 1990 Croatian multi-party election, , who was the leader of the ' (hooligan supporters of the football club Red Star Belgrade), was present at the away game against Croatian side Dinamo Zagreb at Stadion Maksimir on 13 May, a match that ended in the infamous Dinamo\u2013Red Star riot. and the , consisting of 1,500 people, were involved in a massive fight with the home team's football hooligans, the Bad Blue Boys. On 11 October 1990, as the political situation in Yugoslavia became tense, created a paramilitary group named the Serb Volunteer Guard. was the supreme commander of the unit, which was primarily made up of members of the ' and his personal friends.\nIn late October 1990, traveled to Knin to meet representatives of the SAO Krajina, a Serb break-away region that sought to remain in FR Yugoslavia, as opposed to the Croatian government that seceded. On 29 November, Croatian police arrested him at the Croatian-Bosnian border crossing Dvor na Uni along with local and Belgraders and . 's entourage was sent to Sisak and was charged with conspiracy to overthrow the newly formed Croatian state. was sentenced to twenty months in jail. He was released from Zagreb's Remetinec prison on 14 June 1991. It has been claimed that the Croatian and Serbian governments agreed on a DM1 million settlement for his release.\nIn July 1991, stayed for some time at the Cetinje Monastery, with Metropolitan of Montenegro . His group of men, fully armed, were allowed to enter the monastery, where they served as security. 's group traveled from to the Siege of Dubrovnik. On his return from , he was again a guest at .\nWar.\nThe Serb Volunteer Guard, also known as \"'s Tigers\", was organised as an elite paramilitary force supporting the Serb armies, set up in a former military facility in Erdut. The force, led by and , consisted of a core of 600 men and perhaps totaled more than 5,000 soldiers, and it was much feared by the public. Under 's command the SDG massacred hundreds of people in eastern Croatia and Bosnia and Herzegovina. It saw action from mid-1991 until late 1995, and was supplied and equipped privately, by the reserves of the Serbian police force or through capturing enemy arms.\nWhen the Croatian War of Independence broke out in 1991, the SDG was active in the Vukovar region, committing crimes against Croat and Hungarian civilians in Dalj, Erdut, Tenja and other areas. After the Bosnian War broke out in April 1992, the unit moved between the Croatian and Bosnian fronts, engaging in multiple instances of ethnic cleansing by killing and forcefully deporting mostly Bosniak civilians. In Croatia, it fought in various areas in SAO Eastern Slavonia, Baranja and Western Syrmia. , reportedly, had a dispute over military operations with leader . In Bosnia, the SDG notably fought in battles in and around Zvornik, Bijeljina and Br\u010dko, mostly against Bosniak and Bosnian Croat paramilitary groups, including killings of civilians.\n was favored by the Serbian authorities because as a gangster and a football hooligan he seemed to have no political ambitions and hence posed no threat to the regime of . However, he started to show signs of wanting to move beyond organised crime, founding his own political party, the Party for Serbian Unity, in 1992. He also became the owner of the casino in the Hotel Jugoslavija along with a radio station, a shipping company and a brand of wine named Erdut after the base of the Tiger militia. The SDG served as much of a criminal organisation as a para-military group, and was involved in smuggling petrol into Serbia from Romania and Bulgaria in defiance of the United Nations sanctions imposed on Serbia in May 1992. 's petrol smuggling brought him into conflict with , the son of Slobodan, who from 1994 onwards was said to be trying to monopolise the petrol smuggling. In the summer of 1995, the Serbian state curtailed the supply of arms to the SDG, which was said to have been a punishment for competing with .\nIn late 1995, 's troops fought in the area of , and . In October 1995, he left as the Army of the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina reclaimed the city. personally led most of the operations, and rewarded his most efficient officers and soldiers with ranks, medals and eventually looted goods. Several younger soldiers were rewarded for their actions in and around and . reportedly sent one of his most trusted men, , to Italy to start a relationship with boss . According to , eased arms smuggling to Serbia by stopping the Albanian mobsters' blocking of weapons routes, and helped money transfer into Serbia in the form of humanitarian aid amid the international sanctions. In exchange, the acquired companies, enterprises, shops and farms in Serbia at optimal prices.\n has been accused of kidnapping Serb refugees who had fled to Serbia from Croatia and Bosnia and Herzegovina and forcing them into conscription. After Operation Storm in Croatia resulted in the collapse of the Republic of Serbian and exodus of Serb refugees fleeing to Serbia, the Serbian Interior Ministry rounded up over 5,000 refugees to conscript into the SDG. Military-aged men were forcibly rounded up after arriving in Serbia by local police and then sent to detention camp in Erdut against their will and without informing their families. Once in Erdut, the refugees' heads were shaved and all valuables were confiscated. The men were then subjected to days of physical and psychological torture from the SDG guards, which included extreme physical exercises, routine beatings, and often being subjected to humiliating acts. had been giving speeches accusing the refugees of being cowards and traitors, blaming them for the loss of RSK. Belgrade's Humanitarian Law Centre has represented over 100 people suing the state of Serbia for forced mobilisation.\nPost-war fame.\n came to serve as a popular icon for both Serbs and their enemies. For some Serbs he was a patriot and folk hero, while serving as an object of hatred and fear to Croats and Bosniaks. In the postwar period after the Dayton Agreement was signed, returned to his interests in sport and private business. The SDG was officially disbanded in April 1996, with the threat of being reactivated in case of war. In June of that year he took over a second division football team, , which he soon turned into a top caliber club, even winning the 1997\u201398 FR Yugoslav League championship.\nAccording to Franklin Foer, in his book \"How Soccer Explains the World\", threatened players on opposing teams if they scored against . This threat was underlined by the thousands of SDG veterans that filled his team's home field, chanting threats, and on occasion pointing pistols at opposing players during matches. One player told the British football magazine \"FourFourTwo\" that he was locked in a garage when his team played . Europe's football governing body, the Union of European Football Associations (UEFA), considered prohibiting from participation in continental competitions because of its connections to . In response to this, stepped away from the position of president and gave his seat to his wife . In a 2006 interview, (who was coach of while was with the club) said claims that verbally and physically assaulted players were false. was a chairman of the Yugoslav Kickboxing Association.\nMany of the former members of \"'s Tigers\" are prominent figures in Serbia, maintaining close ties between each other and with Russian nationalist organisations. and posed with Russian Night Wolves, performed for Vladimir Putin during his visit in Serbia, is a popular trance performer known as \"DJ Max\" and was identified by \"Rolling Stone\" as the SDG soldier kicking dead bodies of a Bosniak family in Bijeljina on a photo from 1992. came to take on the attributes of a (the term for a Serb bandit during the Ottoman empire), and he was celebrated in \"militaristic nationalist circles\" for his criminal-military exploits. The German political writer Klaus Schlichte wrote that was the \"most military\" of the various Serb para-military leaders in the Bosnian war, and that his primary motive in the war was greed as he seemed all too interested in looting. However, Schlichte noted that 's attempts at political career and his frequent appearances to the Serb media suggest he had wider ambitions beyond greed.\nKosovo War and NATO bombing.\nAccording to chief judge Richard May from the United Kingdom, the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia issued an indictment against on 30 September 1997 for war crimes of genocide or massacre against the Bosniak population, crimes against humanity and grave breaches of the Geneva Conventions. The warrant was not made public until 31 March 1999, a week after the NATO bombing of Yugoslavia had begun, as intervention in the Kosovo War. 's indictment was made public by the UN court's chief prosecutor Louise Arbour. In the week before the start of NATO bombing, as the Rambouillet talks collapsed, appeared at the Hyatt hotel in Belgrade, where most Western journalists were staying, and ordered all of them to leave Serbia.\nDuring the NATO bombing, denied the war crime charges against him in interviews he gave to foreign reporters. accused NATO of bombing civilians and creating refugees of all ethnicities, and stated that he would deploy his troops only in the case of a direct NATO ground invasion. After the United States bombing of the Chinese embassy in Belgrade, which killed three journalists and led to a diplomatic row between the United States and China, \"The Observer\" and \"Politiken\" newspapers claimed the building might have been targeted because the office of the Chinese military attach\u00e9 was being used by to communicate and transmit messages to his paramilitary group in Kosovo. As neither paper offered any proof for this claim it was largely ignored by the media.\nDuring an interview with Western journalists, while the three-month period of the NATO bombing was ongoing, showed a small rubber part of the F-117A downed by the Yugoslav army (one of only five NATO aircraft destroyed on 38,000 sorties), which he had taken as \"a souvenir\"; Yugoslav media falsely proclaimed that had downed the stealth fighter.\nICTY indictment and proceedings.\nIn March 1999, the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY) announced that had been indicted by the Tribunal, although the indictment was only made public after his assassination. According to the indictment, was to have been prosecuted on 24 charges of crimes against humanity (Art. 5 ICTY Statute), grave breaches of the Geneva Conventions (Art. 2 ICTY Statute) and violations of the laws of war (Art. 3 ICTY Statute), for the following acts:\nFollowing 's assassination in 2000, ICTY Prosecutor said she was \"confident, however, that other persons who shared responsibility with [him] for his crimes will ultimately be brought to justice.\"\nAssassination.\nIn the late 1990s, became an isolated figure in Belgrade who rarely went outside without his bodyguards. Between 1995\u20132000, there were over 500 gangland murders in Belgrade, virtually none of which were solved by the police. A number of the gangsters killed were associates of , which was seen as a sign that he had lost his political protection. Together with his wife, virtually lived in the lounges of international hotels in Belgrade, apparently out of the hope he would not be killed in a place where so many foreign journalists were present. \n was assassinated, 15 January 2000, 17:05 GMT, in the lobby of the Hotel InterContinental in New Belgrade, in a location where he was surrounded by other hotel guests. The killer, , a 23-year-old junior police mobile brigade member, had ties to the underworld and was on sick leave at the time. He walked up alone toward his target from behind. was sitting and chatting with two friends and, according to BBC Radio, was filling out a betting slip. waited for a few minutes, calmly walked up behind the party, and rapidly fired a succession of bullets from his CZ99 pistol. was hit in his left eye and became unconscious on the spot. His bodyguard put him into a car, and rushed him to a hospital; he died on the way.\nAccording to his widow , died in her arms as they were driving to hospital. His companions , a business manager, and , a police inspector, were also shot dead by , who in turn was shot and wounded by . A female bystander was also seriously wounded in the shootout. After complicated surgery, survived, but was disabled from the waist down and confined to a wheelchair.\nA memorial ceremony in 's honour was held on 19 January 2000, with writer , Yugoslav Left official , singers , Toni Montano, and , along with the entire first team of , including club director , in attendance. was buried at the Belgrade New Cemetery with military honours by his volunteers and with funeral rites on 20 January 2000. Sources dispute the number of people that attended, but most sources state between 2,000 to 10,000 people attended the funeral.\nTrials.\n pleaded not guilty but was convicted and sentenced to nineteen years in prison. His accomplices received from three to fifteen years each, after a year-long trial in 2002. However, the district court verdict was overturned by the Supreme Court because of \"lack of evidence and vagueness of the first trial process\". A new trial was conducted in 2006, ending on 9 October 2006 with guilty verdicts upheld for as well as his accomplices, and . was sentenced to thirty years in prison, as well as and , for murder in complicity.\nPrior to carrying out his sentence, however, obtained a passport from Bosnia and Herzegovina under the name and fled Serbia. In March 2011, he was driving a crime boss, Cyril Beeka, in Cape Town, South Africa when a gunman on a motorcycle opened fire on them, killing Beeka and wounding . Cocaine was found in the vehicle they were in, leading to being fingerprinted and his true identity discovered. Since that time, he has been incarcerated in South Africa and fighting his extradition to Serbia where his 2006 sentence awaits him. As of February 2021[ [update]], he is still fighting his extradition to Serbia in South African courts.\nPersonal life.\nFamily.\n fathered nine children by five different women. His eldest son was born in Gothenburg, in 1975, from a relationship with a Swedish woman. In 1992, 17-year-old decided to move to Serbia to live with his father. During this time the teenager was photographed wearing the uniform of his father's paramilitary unit during the Yugoslav Wars and according to a Swedish tabloid report the youngster participated in combat operations in . has since lived in Belgrade where he played for the Red Star Belgrade ice-hockey club off and on between 2000 and 2009, also representing Serbia-Montenegro on the national team level between 2002 and 2004. During this time he also ran a sushi restaurant in Belgrade called Iki Bar and dated Macedonian pop singer . He left Serbia after that. In 2013 he was in the news in Serbia again following the conclusion of a court case that had dragged on since 2005 over 's failure to meet the repayment terms on a RSD1.1 million car loan he took out in 2002 from . After continually failing to meet his monthly payments, the bank wanted the loan paid off in full in August 2005, and two years later took him to court. In June 2010 he was ordered to pay RSD3.3 million based upon the interest on the original loan. In the end, the verdict stated he owed the bank RSD2.9 million.\nIn June 1994, sometime after her separation from , and their four children left Serbia and moved to Athens, where he bought them a flat in the suburb of Glyfada. After his assassination, disputed his will, claiming that doctored it. In May 2000, she sued over 's assets, including the villa at Street in which he and lived, claiming it was built with funds from a bank loan and took out in 1985. The court eventually ruled against . The court agreed with her assertions that the villa was built with money from a 1985 bank loan taken out by her and , but ruled she had forfeited any rights in future division of that asset when she signed the property over to in 1994 before moving to Greece.\nIn 2012, 's son again accused of falsifying his father's will. In response, 's former associate said that the villa at Street was not mentioned in the will as he had already signed it over to his second wife. and have a daughter and a son. Their daughter sings on her mother's record label, and publishes the songs on YouTube.\nReligion.\n was a professed Serbian Orthodox Christian and \"paid great homage to the Serbian Orthodox Church\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "57720", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57720", "title": "Locost", "text": "Home-built car\nA Locost is a home-built car inspired by the Lotus Seven. The car features a space frame chassis usually welded together from mild steel square tubing. Front suspension is usually double wishbone with coil spring struts. The rear is traditionally live axle, but has many variants including independent rear suspension or De Dion tube. Body panels are usually fibreglass nose and wings and aluminium side panels. Each car is highly individualized according to the resources, needs and desires of each respective builder.\nThe original design was intended to be built from scratch. However, the design has become so popular that several fabricators have begun producing the chassis in kit car form. Additionally, fibreglass body components, suspension pieces and other Locost-specific components can be sourced from various suppliers.\nRon Champion's Locost.\nThe Locost pattern originated in the mid 90s, and then with the publishing by Haynes Manuals of the book \"Build your own sports car for as little as \u00a3250\" by Ron Champion (). This design was based heavily on the original Lotus Seven. It also used a live axle rear suspension. The De Dion tube setup was used in factory racers and some of the models offered by Caterham.\nBoth Colin Chapman and Ron Champion have a background in the 750 Motor Club and the design of the Locost is based on a Lotus Race Car designed and built by Colin Chapman in 1963. The front of the Locost is of course \"inspired by\" the Lotus 7.\nHaynes Roadster.\nRon Champion's original book was followed up with \"Build Your Own Sports Car: On a Budget\" () by Chris Gibbs. The subject car differs most significantly from the original in that it has an independent rear suspension. Additionally, the car was designed using CAD software, eliminating the measurement errors inherent to the original design. Other additions to the original Locost design include information for fabricating a rollbar and advice on using engines with fuel injection.\nThe suggested donor car is a Ford Sierra. The book contains alternative suggestions for incorporating other donors including a BMW E36, Mazda MX-5 and also motorcycle engines.\nRoadsters are becoming an increasingly popular choice over the Locost due to the more plentiful donors and the more advanced suspension. Approximately 10 (as of April 2010) cars have been completed and passed by their countries' governments for use on the road. In the UK this entails an IVA test and registration with the DVLA.\nOther Variations.\nThe Locost is not to be confused with the similarly named Locust which is also a Lotus Seven-inspired car. In contrast to the Locost's space frame-inspired chassis, the Locust uses a ladder chassis and a body constructed from plywood skinned with aluminium.\nMcSorley Locost.\nThe Champion Locost and the Haynes Roadster share similar chassis dimensions to the original Lotus Seven. Locost Builder http:// revised the Ron Champion design in order to accommodate wider engines, rear axles, and seats. In particular, the McSorley 442 design was referenced by https:// in August 2006.\n\"Australian Modifications\".\nIn Australia, kit cars must pass structural testing for certification for road use. This has led to a series of improvements to the Champion design, including increased reinforcement at the nose of the chassis and around the occupants. These modifications also increase the stiffness and torsional rigidity of the chassis and have been adopted in Locosts in other countries.\nVarious projects have analyzed the strength of the Locost Chassis under finite element analysis for interest's sake. The FEA is known to show the original Locost's design to be slightly under engineered.\nCost of Construction.\nWhile the title of Ron Champion's book claims to offer a means to build a car for \u00a3250, most Locosts are usually as much as ten times that cost or more.\nThe \u00a3250 figure does not include the cost of tools, which can equal or exceed the cost of the car. The book also is based on purchasing a Mk1 or Mk2 Ford Escort that has been rejected for road use by the British MOT. At the time of printing, Champion claimed said cars could be purchased for \u00a350. Rear wheel drive Escorts are now hard to find due to their becoming a classic car in their own right, continued use in Rallying and increased interest from collectors.\nThe book gives some hints and tips on how to cut the costs for the build:\nSome builders have come up with additional cost saving tips:\nEven at ten times the \u00a3250, Locosts frequently cost far less than a car of similar performance.\nCommon donor vehicles.\nThe car described in the Champion book is built using parts from a Mk1 or Mk2 Ford Escort with front spindles from Ford Cortina. Due to the dwindling supply of Escorts, the Haynes Roadster is based on mechanicals from the Ford Sierra. Some use small car-based trucks as donors such as the Mitsubishi L300, Mazda E1800 (same gearbox as the MX-5) and Suzuki Carry (aka Bedford Rascal, Vauxhall Rascal, Holden Scurry, Chevrolet Supercarry and Maruti Omni).\nIn North America, the Toyota Corolla and Mazda Miata are popular donor cars, as are the Ford Fox platform cars. The Wankel engine-based Mazda RX-7 is also starting to become popular.\nMany different companies make and sell parts and complete kits for building the car. Examples include MK Engineering (who have continued on the concept and now offer their MK Indy, based on the Ford Sierra), RaceTech with their Lada-based ESTfield, DD7 in Ume\u00e5, Sweden and many more.\nRacing.\nThe Locost has produced one of the most successful championships in UK Club Motor sport, the Formula Locost. Organised by the 750 Motor Club the championship regularly sees around 35 competitors racing at circuits such as Brands Hatch, Donington, Oulton Park and Silverstone, to name but a few. Running with very tight regulations and deliberately limiting costs, the 750 Motor Club have ensured affordable and close competitive racing for the enthusiastic amateur. While it is not really possible to build a race car for the \u00a3250 quoted in the title of the book by Ron Champion, it is one of the cheaper forms of motor sport available in the UK, with season costs of around \u00a35000 after racewear, car and trailer.\nWhile Locost racing is not as popular in North America, Locosts are eligible to compete in several amateur racing formats under many governing bodies such as the SCCA and NASA. Grassroots Motorsports' $200X Challenge has a special category for Locosts and other kit cars.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "57721", "revid": "23838081", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57721", "title": "Women's National Basketball Association", "text": "Professional women's basketball league in the United States\nBasketball league\nThe Women's National Basketball Association (WNBA) is a women's professional basketball league in the United States. The league comprises 13 teams (scheduled to expand to 15 by 2026 and 18 by 2030). The WNBA is headquartered in Midtown Manhattan.\nThe WNBA was founded on April 24, 1996, as the women's counterpart to the National Basketball Association (NBA); league play began in 1997. The regular season runs from May to September, with each team playing 44 games. The top eight teams (regardless of conference) qualify for the playoffs, culminating in the WNBA Finals, which is played in October.\nThe All-Star Game occurs midway through the season in July. The league hosts an annual mid-season competition, the Commissioner's Cup. The WNBA is an active member of USA Basketball (USAB), which is recognized by the International Basketball Federation (FIBA) as the governing body for basketball in the United States.\nHistory.\nLeague founded and play begins (1996\u20131997).\nThe creation of the WNBA was officially approved by the NBA Board of Governors on April 24, 1996, and announced at a press conference with Rebecca Lobo, Lisa Leslie, and Sheryl Swoopes in attendance. The new WNBA had to compete with the recently formed American Basketball League, another professional women's basketball league that began play in the fall of 1996, but would cease operation during its 1998\u201399 season.\nThe WNBA began with eight teams: the Charlotte Sting, Cleveland Rockers, Houston Comets, and New York Liberty in the Eastern Conference; and the Los Angeles Sparks, Phoenix Mercury, Sacramento Monarchs, and Utah Starzz in the Western Conference.\nWhile not the first major women's professional basketball league in the United States (a distinction held by the defunct WBL), the WNBA is the only league to receive full backing of the NBA. The WNBA logo, \"Logo Woman\", paralleled the NBA logo and was selected out of 50 different designs.\nOn the heels of a much-publicized gold medal run by the USA Basketball Women's National Team at the 1996 Summer Olympic Games, the WNBA then began its first season on June 21, 1997. The first WNBA game featured the New York Liberty facing the Los Angeles Sparks in Los Angeles. The Liberty defeated the Sparks 67\u201357. A crowd of 14,284 attended the game at the Great Western Forum in Inglewood, California. The game was televised nationally in the United States on the NBC television network. At the start of the 1997 season, the WNBA had television deals in with NBC (NBA rights holder), ESPN, and Lifetime. Penny Toler scored the league's first point.\nHouston domination and league expansion (1997\u20132000).\nThe WNBA centered its marketing campaign, dubbed \"We Got Next,\" around stars Rebecca Lobo, Lisa Leslie, and Sheryl Swoopes. In the league's first season, Leslie's Los Angeles Sparks underperformed, and Swoopes sat out much of the season due to her pregnancy. Perhaps the WNBA's first star was MVP Cynthia Cooper, Swoopes' teammate on the Houston Comets. The Comets defeated Lobo's New York Liberty in the first WNBA championship game. The initial \"We Got Next\" advertisement ran before each season until it was replaced with a \"We Got Game\" campaign.\nTwo teams were added in 1998 (Detroit and Washington), and two more in 1999 (Orlando and Minnesota), bringing the total number of teams in the league up to 12. The 1999 season began with a collective bargaining agreement between players and the league, marking the first collective bargaining agreement to be signed in the history of women's professional sports. That year, the WNBA also announced that it would add four more teams for the 2000 season (the Indiana Fever, the Seattle Storm, the Miami Sol, and the Portland Fire), bringing the league up to 16 teams. WNBA president Val Ackerman discussed expansion by saying, \"This won't be the end of it. We expect to keep growing the league.\"\nIn 1999, the league's chief competition, the American Basketball League (ABL), declared bankruptcy. Many of the ABL's star players, including several Olympic gold medalists (such as Nikki McCray and Dawn Staley) and a number of standout college performers (including Kate Starbird and Jennifer Rizzotti), joined the rosters of WNBA teams, enhancing the overall quality of play in the league. When a lockout resulted in an abbreviated NBA season, the WNBA saw faltering TV viewership.\nOn May 23, 2000, the Houston Comets became the first WNBA team to be invited to the White House Rose Garden. Before this invitation, only men's sports teams had traveled to the White House. At the end of the 2000 season, the Houston Comets won their fourth championship, capturing every title since the league's inception. Led by the \"Big Three\" of Sheryl Swoopes, Tina Thompson, and Cynthia Cooper (who won the Finals MVP for all four championships), the Comets dominated every team in the league. Under head coach Van Chancellor, the team posted a 98\u201324 record their first four seasons (16\u20133 in the playoffs). After 2000, Cooper retired from the league, and the Comets' dynasty came to an end.\nL.A. Sparks success; new league ownership and contraction (2001\u20132002).\nThe Los Angeles Sparks had the best record during the 2001 WNBA season. Led by Lisa Leslie, the Sparks posted a regular-season record of 28\u20134 and advanced to their first WNBA Finals, sweeping the Charlotte Sting.\nLooking to repeat in 2002, the Sparks again made a strong run toward the postseason, going 25\u20137 in the regular season under head coach Michael Cooper, who formerly played for the Los Angeles Lakers. Again, Leslie dominated her opponents throughout the Playoffs, leading the Sparks to a perfect 6\u20130 record, beating the New York Liberty in the 2002 Finals.\nTeams and the league were collectively owned by the NBA until the end of 2002, when the NBA sold WNBA teams either to their NBA counterparts in the same city or to a third party as a result of the dot-com bubble. This led to two teams moving: Utah moved to San Antonio, and Orlando moved to Connecticut and became the first WNBA team to be owned by a third party instead of an NBA franchise. This sale of teams also led to two teams folding, the Miami Sol and Portland Fire, because new owners could not be found.\nBill Laimbeer leaves his mark (2003\u20132006).\nThe Women's National Basketball Players Association (WNBPA) threatened to strike in 2003 if a new deal was not worked out between players and the league. The result was a delay in the start of the 2003 preseason and the 2003 WNBA draft. As a result of the strike, the league received negative publicity.\nFormer Detroit Pistons forward, Bill Laimbeer, took over the Detroit Shock in 2002 as head coach and general manager. He had high hopes for the Detroit Shock, despite the team having gone just 9\u201323 its previous season. Three Shock members made it the 2003 All-Star Game (Swin Cash, Cheryl Ford, and Deanna Nolan) and Laimbeer orchestrated a worst-to-first turnaround with the Shock finishing the season 25\u20139 and in first place in the Eastern Conference. After winning the first two rounds of the Playoffs, the Shock faced two-time champion, Los Angeles Sparks, and Lisa Leslie in the 2003 Finals. The Shock defeated the Los Angeles Sparks, winning Game Three on a three-pointer by Deanna Nolan.\nAfter the 2003 season, the Cleveland Rockers, one of the league's original eight teams, folded because its owners were unwilling to continue operating the franchise.\nVal Ackerman, the first WNBA president, resigned effective February 1, 2005, citing the desire to spend more time with her family. Ackerman later became president of USA Basketball. On February 15, 2005, NBA commissioner David Stern announced that Donna Orender, who had been serving as the senior vice president of the PGA Tour and who had played for several teams in the now-defunct Women's Pro Basketball League, would be Ackerman's successor as of April 2005.\nThe WNBA awarded an expansion team to Chicago (later named the Chicago Sky) in February 2005. In the off-season, a set of rule changes was approved that made the WNBA more like the NBA.\nIn 2006, the league reached a milestone as the first team-oriented women's professional sports league to exist for ten consecutive seasons. On the occasion of the tenth anniversary, the WNBA released its All-Decade Team, comprising the ten WNBA players who had contributed, through on-court play and off-court activities, the most to women's basketball during the league's existence.\nAfter not making it to the Finals in 2004 and 2005, the Shock bounced back in 2006 behind newly acquired Katie Smith, along with six remaining members from their 2003 Finals run (Cash, Ford, Holland-Corn, Nolan, Powell, and Riley). The Shock finished second in the Eastern Conference and knocked out first-seeded Connecticut in the second round of the Playoffs. The Shock faced reigning champion Sacramento Monarchs in a five-game series, winning in Game Five on their home floor.\nBringing \"Paul Ball\" to the WNBA (2007\u20132009).\nIn December 2006, the Charlotte Bobcats organization announced it would no longer operate the Charlotte Sting. Soon after, the WNBA announced that the Sting would not operate for 2007. A dispersal draft was held on January 8, 2007. Teams selected in inverse order of their 2006 records with the Chicago Sky receiving the first pick.\nFormer Los Angeles Lakers championship coach, Paul Westhead, was named head coach of the Phoenix Mercury on October 11, 2005, bringing his up-tempo style of play to the WNBA. This fast-paced offense was perfect for his team, especially after the league shortened the shot clock from 30 seconds to 24 seconds in 2006. Much like the early Houston Comets championship teams, the Phoenix Mercury had risen to prominence led by their own \"Big Three\" of Cappie Pondexter, Diana Taurasi, and Penny Taylor.\nThe Mercury were well-suited for the fast offense driven by their three stars. Phoenix averaged a league-record 88.97 points per game in 2007. Other teams could not keep up with their new style of play, and the Mercury were propelled into first place in the Western Conference. Facing the reigning champions, the Detroit Shock, the Mercury imposed their high-scoring offense with hopes of capturing their first title in franchise history. Averaging 93.2 points per game in the 2007 Finals, the Mercury beat Detroit on their home floor in front of 22,076 fans in game five to claim their first-ever WNBA title.\nIn October 2007, the WNBA awarded another expansion franchise to Atlanta. Atlanta businessman Ron Terwilliger was the original owner of the new team. Citizens of Atlanta were voted for their choice of the new team's nickname and colors. The Atlanta Dream, as they were named, played their first regular-season game on May 17, 2008, losing to the Connecticut Sun 67\u2013100.\nPaul Westhead resigned from the Mercury after capturing the 2007 title and Penny Taylor opted to stay home to prepare for the 2008 Summer Olympics, causing the Mercury to falter in 2008. The team posted a 16\u201318 record and became the first team in WNBA history to miss the Playoffs after winning the championship in the previous season. In their place, the Detroit Shock won their third championship under coach Bill Laimbeer, solidifying their place in WNBA history before Laimbeer resigned early in 2009, effectively ending the Shock dynasty.\nDuring the 2008 regular season, the first-ever outdoor professional basketball game in North America was played at Arthur Ashe Stadium in New York City. The Indiana Fever defeated the New York Liberty 71\u201355 in front of over 19,000 fans.\nLate in 2008, the WNBA took over ownership of one of the league's original franchises, the Houston Comets. The Comets ceased operations on December 1, 2008, after no owners for the franchise could be found. A dispersal draft took place on December 8, 2008, with the first pick, Sancho Lyttle, taken by the Atlanta Dream.\nAfter an unsatisfying conclusion in 2008, the Mercury looked to bounce back to championship caliber. New head coach Corey Gaines implemented Paul Westhead's style of play, and the Mercury averaged 92.82 points per game throughout the 2009 season. Helped by the return of Penny Taylor, the Mercury once again locked up first place in the Western Conference and advanced to the 2009 Finals. The championship series was a battle of contrasting styles as the Mercury (number one league offense, 92.82 points per game) had to face the Indiana Fever (number three league defense, 73.55 points per game). The series went five games, including arguably one of the most thrilling games in WNBA history in game one of the series (Phoenix winning in overtime, 120\u2013116). The Mercury beat the Fever in game five, this time on their home court, capturing their second WNBA championship.\nNot only did Paul Westhead's system influence his Mercury team, but it created a domino effect throughout the league. Young athletic players were capable of scoring more and playing at a faster pace. As a league, the 2010 average of 80.35 points per game was the best, far surpassing the 69.2 average in the league's inaugural season.\nChanging of the guard (2010\u20132012).\nOn October 20, 2009, the WNBA announced that the Detroit Shock would relocate to Tulsa, Oklahoma, to become the Tulsa Shock. On November 20, 2009, the WNBA announced that the Sacramento Monarchs had folded due to lack of support from its current owners, the Maloof family, who were also the owners of the Sacramento Kings at the time. The league announced it would seek new owners to relocate the team to the San Francisco Bay Area; however, no ownership was found and a dispersal draft was held on December 14, 2009.\nThe 2010 season saw a tight race in the East, with three teams being tied for first place on the final day of the regular season. Five of the six teams in the East were in first place at some point during the season. The East held a .681 winning percentage over the West, its highest ever. In the 2010 Finals, two new teams represented each conference: the Seattle Storm and the Atlanta Dream. Seattle made their first finals appearance since winning it all in 2004, and Atlanta, coming into the playoffs as a four seed, impressively swept its opponents in the first two rounds to advance to the Finals in only the third year of the team's existence.\nAfter the 2010 season, President Orender announced she would be resigning from her position as of December 31. On April 21, 2011, NBA commissioner David Stern announced that former Girl Scouts of the USA Senior Vice President and Chief Marketing Officer, Laurel J. Richie, would assume duties as president on May 16, 2011.\nThe 2011 season began with strong publicity brought on by the rising young stars of the league and the NBA lockout. The 2011 NBA lockout began on July 1, 2011. Unlike the previous lockout, which affected the WNBA, president Laurel J. Richie confirmed that this lockout would not affect the WNBA. If the NBA season was shortened or canceled, the 2012 WNBA season (including the WNBA teams still owned by NBA owners) would run as planned. The lockout ended on November 26, and NBA teams would play a 66-game regular season following the lockout.\nMany news outlets began covering the league more frequently. NBA TV, the television home of the NBA scheduled over 70 regular-season games to be televised (along with a dozen more on ESPN2 and ABC). The new influx of young talent into the league gave many teams something to be excited about. Players like Candace Parker of the Sparks, Maya Moore of the Lynx, DeWanna Bonner of the Mercury, Angel McCoughtry of the Dream, Sylvia Fowles of the Sky, Tina Charles of the Sun, and Liz Cambage of the Shock brought a new level of excitement to the game, adding talent to the teams of young veterans such as Diana Taurasi, Seimone Augustus and Cappie Pondexter. The level of play seemed to be evidenced by higher scoring, better defense, and higher shooting percentages. By the end of the 2011 regular season, nine of the twelve teams in the league had increased attendance over their 2010 averages.\nConnecticut Sun center, Tina Charles, set a league record for double-doubles in a season with 23. Also, Sylvia Fowles of the Chicago Sky became only the second player in WNBA history to finish a season averaging at least 20 points (20.0ppg) and 10 rebounds (10.2rpg) per game. The San Antonio Silver Stars experienced boosts from their young players as well; rookie Danielle Adams scored 32 points off the bench in June and fellow rookie Danielle Robinson had a 36-point game in September. Atlanta Dream forward, Angel McCoughtry, was the first player in league history to average over 20 points per game (21.6ppg) while playing under 30 minutes per game (27.9mpg).\nMcCoughtry led her team to the 2011 Finals, appearing for the second straight year, but despite breaking her own Finals scoring record, the Dream were swept for the second straight year, this time by the Minnesota Lynx, which won its first title behind a fully healthy Seimone Augustus.\n2012 featured a long Olympic break. The Indiana Fever won that year's WNBA championship.\nThe Three to See (2013\u20132019).\nThe much-publicized 2013 WNBA draft produced Baylor University star Brittney Griner, Delaware's Elena Delle Donne, and Notre Dame All American Skylar Diggins as the top three picks. The draft was the first to be televised in primetime on ESPN. Griner, Delle Donne, and Diggins were thus labeled \"The Three To See.\" The retirement of legends Katie Smith, Tina Thompson, Ticha Penicheiro, and Sheryl Swoopes coupled with the arrival of highly touted rookies and new rule changes effectively marked the end of an era for the WNBA and the ushering of another.\nOn the court, the Minnesota Lynx won their second title in three years, defeating the Atlanta Dream in the 2013 Finals and becoming the first team to sweep the playoff series since the Seattle Storm.\nThe promotion of Griner, Delle Donne, and Diggins helped boost television ratings for the league by 28 percent, and half of the teams ended the season profitable. The improved health of the league was on display after the season, when the Los Angeles Sparks' ownership group folded; it took the league only a few weeks to line up Guggenheim Partners to purchase the team, and the franchise also garnered interest from the ownership of the Golden State Warriors.\nTwo more franchise relocations happened in the following years, as the Tulsa Shock moved in 2016 to the Dallas\u2013Fort Worth region in Texas and were renamed the Dallas Wings, and in 2018 the San Antonio Stars went to Nevada, becoming the Las Vegas Aces.\nNew CBA and Commissioner's Cup plans (2020).\nDuring the 2018 season, the WNBA players' union opted out of the collective bargaining agreement (CBA) with the league, which ended after the 2019 season. In January 2020, the league and union announced that they had reached an agreement on a new CBA to take effect with the 2020 season and running through 2027. Among the features of the new agreement were:\nAlso in January 2020, the WNBA announced a new in-season tournament, the Commissioner's Cup, which would begin with the 2020 season. Each team was scheduled to play 10 Cup games during the season\u2014specifically, the first home and road games against each team in its conference. The final Cup games were to be played in July, with the top team in the Cup standings from each conference advancing to a one-off Cup final in August.\nThe 2020 WNBA schedule originally included a month-long break in July and August to allow players to participate in the 2020 Tokyo Olympics. The 2020 games were postponed until 2021, due to the COVID-19 pandemic, rendering the break unnecessary. On April 3, 2020, the WNBA announced that the beginning of its own schedule would be postponed. The 2020 entry draft took place as originally scheduled on April 17, although it was done remotely. No details of the revised schedule were announced as of the time of the draft, and the Commissioner's Cup was ultimately not held in 2020.\n2020 season at IMG Academy.\nIn June 2020, WNBA commissioner Cathy Engelbert announced plans for the league to have a 22-game regular season, and a traditional playoff format, to be held exclusively at IMG Academy in Bradenton, Florida. The players were housed at the Bradenton complex, and all games and practices took place there. Players had until June 25 to let their teams know whether they planned to participate.\n\"Count It\" campaign and expansion (2021\u2013present).\nOn March 15, 2021, an announcement was made that the WNBA would introduce a ceremonial logo, basketball, and uniforms as part of its 25th anniversary celebratory campaign called \"Count It\". As part of the campaign, the league unveiled The W25, a list of 25 players determined to be the league's greatest and most influential, as chosen by a panel of media and pioneering women's players.\nThe delayed launch of the Commissioner's Cup was officially announced on May 12, 2021, two days before the start of the regular season. The originally planned schedule, with the first home game and first road game of each team against each of its fellow conference members doubling as Cup games, was maintained. All Cup games within each conference were played before the league took its Olympic break after July 11. The Cup final, officially termed the Commissioner's Cup Championship Game, involves the conference leaders in the Cup standings; its first edition was held on August 12 as the league's first game after the Olympic break, and was streamed via Amazon Prime Video. A prize pool of $500,000 is provided for the Cup, with players on the winning team guaranteed a minimum bonus of $30,000 and those of the losing team guaranteed $10,000, with the championship game MVP receiving an extra $5,000.\nIn February 2022, the league raised $75 million in capital, on terms valuing the league at $475 million. Under the deal, investors received 16 percent of the league's equity. In mid-2022, Cathy Engelbert said that the WNBA hoped to identify one or two cities for expansion either by the start of that year's playoffs or by the end of the year, with the teams starting play as early as the 2024 season. The WNBA narrowed its list of potential cities from 100 to 20 to 10. The league would evaluate each city based on 25 metrics in the categories of viewership, fan data, psychographics, sports benchmarks, and demographics. There were constant demands for expansion as Engelbert was commissioner with lottery picks cut during their first season and long-time veterans cut during training camp due to the limited number of roster spots in the league.\nOn September 26, 2023, \"The Athletic\" reported that the co-owners of the Golden State Warriors, Joe Lacob and Peter Guber, were finalizing an agreement to start an expansion team in San Francisco. On October 5, 2023, the agreement was formally announced. The Valkyries, which began playing in 2025 at the Chase Center, are headquartered in Oakland, and were the league's first expansion team since the Atlanta Dream in 2008. There was an expansion draft in December 2024. It was reported that the expansion fee for the team was $50 million over ten years. On the same date, WNBA commissioner Cathy Engelbert said that she expected the WNBA to add a fourteenth team by 2025, and mentioned that there were groups expressing serious interest in a franchise in Denver, Philadelphia, Portland, Sacramento, and Toronto. On May 23, 2024, it was officially announced that the Kilmer Group had acquired a franchise based in Toronto that will debut in 2026. On August 31, 2024, it was reported that the Bhathal family, owners of the Portland Thorns of the National Women's Soccer League (NWSL), was in negotiations to acquire a franchise based in Portland. The new Portland expansion team was officially announced on September 18, 2024, and will also debut in 2026.\nOn June 30, 2025, the WNBA announced expansion teams in Cleveland, Detroit, and Philadelphia. The Cleveland team is scheduled to begin play in 2028, followed by Detroit in 2029, and Philadelphia in 2030.\nIn July 2025, during the WNBA All-Star Weekend, the WNBA players union and the league officials had a meeting regarding\u00a0a new collective bargaining agreement (CBA). The current CBA, which was signed in 2020, was set to expire in 2027, but in October 2024 the WNBPA exercised its right to opt out of the agreement that now lasts through October 31, 2025. More than 40 players were present at the meeting, which they described as a \"missed opportunity\", as both sides did not get any closer to a new deal. Meanwhile, Engelbert painted the conversation as \"very constructive\". Players have said that revenue sharing, salary structure, and prioritization are some of the key issues that they do not agree on. On July 19, before the All-Star Game, all players wore \"Pay Us What You Owe Us\" T-shirts during warmups and fans chanted \"pay them!\" in support after the game. In August, representatives of the WNBA and the WNBPA had another meeting in New York to continue the negotiations. If both sides don't reach an agreement before the CBA expires, the league could experience a lockout, which has never happened in its history.\nTeams.\nDream \nSky \nSun \nFever \nLiberty \nMystics \nWings \nValkyries \nAces \nSparks \nLynx \nMercury \nStorm \nThe WNBA originated with 8 teams in 1997, and through a sequence of expansions, contractions, and relocations will consist of 13 teams as of the 2025 season and a total of 19 franchises in WNBA history.\nAs of the 2025 season, the Las Vegas Aces (formerly known as the Utah Starzz and San Antonio (Silver) Stars), Los Angeles Sparks, New York Liberty, and Phoenix Mercury are the only remaining franchises that were founded in 1997.\nArenas listed below reflect those in use during the 2025 season.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFuture teams.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nRelationship with NBA teams.\nShare ownership.\nWNBA teams affiliated with an NBA team from the same market are known as sister teams. These include the New York Liberty and Brooklyn Nets, the Indiana Fever and Pacers, the Minnesota Lynx and Timberwolves, the Phoenix Mercury and Suns, the Washington Mystics and Wizards, the Golden State Valkyries and Warriors, and future expansion teams the Toronto Tempo (2026) and Raptors, Cleveland (2028) and the Cavaliers, Detroit (2029) and the Pistons, and Philadelphia (2030) and the 76ers. Of these teams, only the Mystics and Tempo don't share an arena with their NBA counterpart.\nThe Liberty were previously associated with the New York Knicks, having been owned by the Knicks' parent company, the Madison Square Garden Company, but the team was sold in January 2019 to a group led by Joseph Tsai, then a minority owner of the Brooklyn Nets and now sole owner of that team. The Liberty, which played at Madison Square Garden until 2017 and at Westchester County Center in suburban White Plains in 2018 and 2019, were then relocated to the Nets' home arena, Barclays Center, in downtown Brooklyn.\nShare market with an NBA team, but not ownership.\nAmongst the WNBA teams that are in the same market as an NBA team, but are independently owned, are the Chicago Sky, who are not affiliated with the Bulls and play in a separate arena from their NBA counterpart.\nThe Detroit Shock was the sister team of the Pistons until the teams' owner sold the Shock to investors who moved the team to Tulsa, Oklahoma. The franchise relocated again in 2016, this time to the Dallas\u2013Fort Worth metro area to become the Dallas Wings. However, the Wings are not affiliated with the Mavericks and also play in a separate arena.\nWhile the Atlanta Dream shared State Farm Arena with the Hawks from 2008 to 2016 and again in 2019, the Hawks never held any ownership stake in the WNBA team. The Los Angeles Sparks share an arena with the Lakers, but not ownership. However, Lakers' legend Magic Johnson has an ownership stake in the Sparks.\nThe future Portland Fire plans to start play in the Trail Blazers' home of Moda Center, but does not share ownership with the NBA team; the WNBA team instead shares ownership with the Portland Thorns of the National Women's Soccer League.\nDo not share market with an NBA team.\nThree teams do not share a market with an NBA counterpart. The Orlando Miracle was the sister team of the Magic until the team was sold to the Mohegan Sun casino, who relocated the franchise to Connecticut to become the Sun.\nThe Utah Starzz were affiliated with the Jazz before relocating to San Antonio as the Silver Stars in 2003. The Silver Stars (shortened to Stars in 2014) were then paired with the San Antonio Spurs from 2003 through the 2017 season, but that relationship ended in October 2017 when the Stars were bought by MGM Resorts International and moved to Las Vegas to become the Aces.\nThe Seattle Storm was formerly the sister team of the SuperSonics, but was sold to a Seattle-based group when the SuperSonics relocated to become the Oklahoma City Thunder.\nSeason format.\nRegular season.\nTeams hold training camps in May that allow the coaching staff to prepare the players for the regular season and determine the 12-woman roster with which they will begin the regular season. After training camp, a series of preseason exhibition games are held.\nThe WNBA regular season begins in May. In 2023 and 2024, each team played 40 regular-season games, 20 each home and away. With the Golden State Valkyries joining the league in 2025, the regular season expanded to 44 games. As in the NBA, each team hosts and visits every other team at least once every season.\nDuring years in which the Summer Olympics are held, the WNBA takes a month off in the middle of the season to allow players to practice and compete with their respective national teams. During years in which the FIBA World Cup is held, the WNBA either takes a break for the World Cup or ends its season early, depending on the scheduling of the World Cup.\nCommissioner's Cup.\nThe 2020 season was planned to be the first for the Commissioner's Cup, an in-season tournament. Each team's first home and away games against each of its conference opponents, all of which were to be played in the first half of the season, were designated as Cup games. After each team played its 10 Cup games, the top team in each conference's Cup standings would advance to the Commissioner's Cup Final, a single match held in August. The COVID-19 pandemic caused the tournament to be scrapped for the time being; the tournament instead launched in 2021 under the originally announced format.\nThe format was changed for the 2024 season. Each team now plays only one Commissioner's Cup game against each team in its conference, with either two or three games at home and the remainder away. All games in the first half of June are Cup contests. The Cup final, which remains a single game featuring the top teams in each conference's Cup standings, is now held near the end of June or at the start of July. Under both formats, all Cup games except the final count as regular-season games.\nAll-Star Game.\nIn 1999, the league held its first All-Star Game, where the best players of the Eastern Conference played against the best players of the Western Conference. The West dominated play until 2006, when the East finally won a game.\nIn July, the regular season pauses to celebrate the annual WNBA All-Star Game. The game is part of a weekend-long event, held in a selected WNBA city each year. The game is played on the selected WNBA team's home court. Through the 2017 edition, the All-Star Game featured star players from the Western Conference facing star players from the Eastern Conference. Since 2018, conference affiliations have been ignored in team selections. During the season, voting for All-Star starters takes place among fans, WNBA players, and sports media members. The starters are selected by a weighted vote (fans 50%, players and media 25% each), while reserves are selected by the league's head coaches. The two players with the most fan votes are named team captains, who then fill out their teams in a draft format similar to that currently used for the NBA All-Star Game.\nIn 2004, The Game at Radio City was held in place of a traditional All-Star Game. The 2006 All-Star Game was the first game to feature custom uniforms that match the decade anniversary logo. From 2008 through 2016, no All-Star Game was held in any Summer Olympic year. In 2010, an exhibition game (Stars at the Sun) was held. Although the 2020 Summer Olympics were postponed to 2021 due to COVID-19, no All-Star Game was played in that season. The 2021 season featured the first All-Star Game in an Olympic year since 2000; this contest featured a WNBA all-star team facing the US national team. The 2024 game used the same format as in 2021, and was also an official All-Star Game.\nShortly after the All-Star break is the trading deadline. After this date, teams are not allowed to exchange players with each other for the remainder of the season, although they may still sign and release players. Major trades are often completed right before the trading deadline.\nPlayoffs.\nThe WNBA playoffs usually begin in late September, though in years of the FIBA World Cup they begin in August. In the current system, the eight best teams by the regular-season record, without regard to conference alignment, qualify for the playoffs. Since 2022, the playoffs have been held in a standard knockout format, with the quarterfinals consisting of best-of-three series and the semifinals being best-of-five. The Finals were also best-of-five until being expanded to best-of-seven in 2025. Since 2021, Google has been the official sponsor of all playoff rounds except for the Finals, which are sponsored by YouTube TV.\nHaving a higher seed offers several advantages. The higher seed will generally face a weaker team, and will have home-court advantage in each round. In 2024, all quarterfinal series used a 2\u20131 home-court pattern, which allowed the higher seed the opportunity to win the series without having to visit the lower seed. This in turn meant that a lower seed that won one of the first two games would host the series decider. However, the quarterfinals returned to an odd-even pattern in 2025, with the higher seed hosting the first game and a potential third game.\nThe quarterfinals are bracketed in the normal manner for an 8-team tournament, with 1 vs. 8 and 4 vs. 5 on one side of the bracket and 2 vs. 7 and 3 vs. 6 on the other. The winners of each quarterfinal series advance to the semifinals, with the bracket not being reseeded. The semifinals use a 2\u20132\u20131 home-court pattern, meaning that the higher-seeded team will have home court in games 1, 2, and 5 while the other team plays at home in game 3 and 4.\nFinals.\nThe final playoff round, a best-of-seven series between the two semifinal winners, is known as the WNBA Finals and is held annually, currently scheduled in October. Each player on the winning team receives a championship ring. Also, the league awards a WNBA Finals Most Valuable Player Award. Since 2025, the Finals have used the same 2\u20132\u20131\u20131\u20131 pattern currently used by the NBA, meaning that the higher seed hosts games 1 and 2, the lower seed hosts games 3 and 4, and the teams alternate the last three games, all if necessary.\nPlayers and coaches.\nIn 2011, a decade and a half after the launch of the WNBA, only two players remained from the league's inaugural season in 1997: Sheryl Swoopes and Tina Thompson. Lisa Leslie was the longest-tenured player from the 1997 draft class; she spent her entire career (1997\u20132009) with the Los Angeles Sparks. Sue Bird holds both of the league's most significant longevity records\u2014number of seasons in the league (19) and games played (580).\nThe members of the WNBA's All-Decade Team were chosen in 2006 on the occasion of the tenth anniversary of the WNBA from 30 nominees compiled by fans, media, coach, and player voting. The team was to comprise the 10 best and most influential players of the first decade of the WNBA, with consideration also given to sportsmanship, community service, leadership, and contribution to the growth of women's basketball.\nPlayers for the WNBA's Top 15 Team were chosen in 2011 on the anniversary of the league's fifteenth season from amongst 30 nominees compiled similarly to that of the All-Decade Team process. This process was repeated for the league's 20th anniversary season in 2016 with the selection of the WNBA Top 20@20, and for the 25th anniversary season in 2021 with the selection of The W25.\nOver 30 players have scored at least 3,000 points in their WNBA careers. Only 15 WNBA players have reached the 6,000 point milestone: Diana Taurasi, Tina Charles, DeWanna Bonner, Tina Thompson, Tamika Catchings, Nneka Ogwumike, Candice Dupree, Cappie Pondexter, Sue Bird, Candance Parker, Katie Smith, Sylvia Fowles, Lisa Leslie, Seimone Augustus and Lauren Jackson. The scoring average leader is A'ja Wilson of the Las Vegas Aces, with an average of 21.30 points per game.\nIn 2007, Paul Westhead of the Phoenix Mercury became the first person to earn both NBA and WNBA championship rings as a coach.\nIn 2008, 50-year-old Nancy Lieberman became the oldest player to play in a WNBA game. She signed a seven-day contract with the Detroit Shock and played one game, tallying https:// in nine minutes of action. By playing in the one game Lieberman broke a record that she had set in 1997 when she was the league's oldest player at 39. The oldest player to have participated in a full season is Diana Taurasi, who turned 42 early in the 2024 season.\nSue Bird, who played for the Seattle Storm from 2002 until her retirement in 2022 (though she missed the 2013 and 2019 seasons to injury), holds the record for career assists with 3,234 in 580 regular-season games. The record for most assists per game is currently held by Courtney Vandersloot, an American who also holds a Hungarian passport and has represented that country internationally. She has averaged 6.62 assists per game during her career with the Chicago Sky (2011\u20132022, 2025\u2013present) and New York Liberty (2023\u20132024). Vandersloot also has six of the top ten seasons in assists per game, with 8.1 in 2017 and 2023, 8.6 in 2018 and 2021, 9.1 in 2019, and 10.0 in 2020.\nAwards.\nAround the beginning of September (or late August in Olympic and FIBA World Cup years), the regular season ends. It is during this time that voting begins for individual awards. The Sixth Player of the Year Award (known before 2021 as the \"Sixth Woman\" award) is given to the best player coming off the bench (must have more games coming off the bench than actual games started). The Rookie of the Year Award is awarded to the most outstanding first-year player. The Most Improved Player Award is awarded to the player who is deemed to have shown the most improvement from the previous season. The Defensive Player of the Year Award is awarded to the league's best defender. The Kim Perrot Sportsmanship Award is awarded to the player who shows outstanding sportsmanship on and off the court. The Coach of the Year Award is awarded to the coach that has made the most positive difference to a team. The Most Valuable Player Award is given to the player deemed the most valuable for her team that season. The Basketball Executive of the Year Award is presented to the team executive most instrumental in his or her team's success in that season. The newest WNBA award, first presented in 2019, is the season-long version of the WNBA Community Assist Award, presented to a player for especially meritorious community service.\nAlso named are the All-WNBA Teams, the All-Defensive Teams, and the All-Rookie Team; each consists of five players. There are two All-WNBA teams; starting with the 2022 season, each consists of five top players selected without regard to position, with first-team status being the most desirable. There are two All-Defensive teams; since the 2023 season, each consists of the top defenders regardless of position. Finally, there is one All-Rookie team, consisting of the top five first-year players regardless of position. (In all cases, a tie in voting may lead to a team containing six players instead of five.)\nMost recent award winners.\nAll listed winners are from the 2025 season unless noted otherwise.\nRetired numbers.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nNotable international players.\nA number of international players that have played in the WNBA have earned multiple all-stars or won MVP awards:\nSome of these players, among them Jones, Lyttle, Penicheiro, Sabally, Sutton-Brown, and Young played U.S. college basketball.\nRules and regulations.\nRules are governed by standard basketball rules as defined by the NBA, with a few notable exceptions:\nGames are divided into four 10-minute quarters as opposed to the league's original two 20-minute halves of play, similar to FIBA and NCAA women's college rules.\nA recent trend with new WNBA rules has been to match them with a similar NBA rule. Since the 2006 WNBA season:\nThe 2007 WNBA season brought changes that included:\nIn 2012, the WNBA added the block/charge arc under the basket. As of 2013 the defensive three-second rule and anti-flopping guidelines were introduced. The three-point line was also extended; in 2017, that line extended into the corners to match the NBA's.\nSince 2017, Tissot is the official timekeeper for the league, as it uses a unified game clock/shot clock system.\nBusiness.\nFinance.\nDuring the mid-2000s, the NBA spent more than $10\u00a0million per year to keep the WNBA financially solvent. In 2007, teams were estimated to be losing $1.5\u00a0million to $2\u00a0million a year. In total, the league projected losses through the 2010 season to be around $400 million. In December 2010, Donna Orender said that the league had its first-ever \"cash flow positive\" team during the 2010 season. In 2011, three teams were profitable, and in 2013, six of the league's 12 teams reported a profit. However, in 2018, NBA Commissioner Adam Silver revealed that the WNBA had lost an average of more than $10 million annually, which would amount to at least $280 million in losses since the WNBA's inception in 1997.\nBy the 2024 season, the WNBA has seen their revenue grow rapidly through a variety of avenues, such as through raising capital, re-negotiating their media rights deal, expansion fees, increased ticket sales, and establishing new strategic partnerships and sponsorships with organizations. Still, 40% of the revenue generated by the WNBA goes to the teams and the players, with the remainder going to the NBA and outside investors. Overall, the league is expected to have lost $50 million for the 2024 season.\nActivism.\n\"The New York Times\" in 2020 called the WNBA \"the most socially progressive pro league\".\nAs the popularity of the league has grown, players have gained more voice and power to perform as activists in many fields. One of the activist players' main focuses is the inequality between men's and women's sports. Many players such as Brittney Griner, Breanna Stewart, and Maya Moore have spoken about equality between gender, sexual orientation, and race. The players have also supported progressive social and political movements such as Black Lives Matter and others. The Minnesota Lynx were early advocates. \"The New York Times\" called Seimone Augustus \"one of sports' most forward-thinking and undersung activists\" for her early work advocating for marriage equality and LGBTQ+ rights. Before the Lynx July 9, 2016, home game, the team held a press conference where the four co-captains wore black t-shirts with the message \"\"Change starts with us - Justice and Accountability\" on the front and the names of Philando Castile and Alton Sterling on the back. Castile had been murdered by police in a traffic stop three days before the game. Shortly after the George Floyd protests began, the league and union decided in 2020 to put Black Lives Matter and Say Her Name slogans on warmup gear and opening weekend uniforms. When team owner Senator Kelly Loeffler criticized the league's support for Black Lives Matter, her team wore black T-shirts with the slogan \"VOTE WARNOCK\", endorsing her election opponent Raphael Warnock, an African-American pastor who defeated Loeffler.\nIn 2021, during the COVID-19 pandemic, the WNBA led American professional sports teams in promoting the COVID-19 vaccine. Teams hosted vaccine clinics in their home arenas. In April the league and union's Social Justice Council made a PSA, \"Our Health is Worth a Shot\", that aired during the WNBA draft. In June 2021, the WNBA announced that 99% of its players had been fully vaccinated.\nIn June 2024, the documentary film \"Power of the Dream\" will be released. The film focuses on the league's work to support Black Lives Matter and the organizing to support the election of Raphael Warnock. Sue Bird and Nneka Ogwumike are co-producers of the film along with Tracee Ellis Ross and the director Dawn Porter.\nSponsorships.\nOn June 1, 2009, the Phoenix Mercury was the first team in WNBA history to announce a marquee sponsorship. The team secured a partnership with LifeLock to brand their jerseys and warm-ups. It was the first branded jersey in WNBA history. Following the expiration of the LifeLock deal, the Mercury secured a new uniform sponsorship deal with Casino Arizona and Talking Stick Resort on February 3, 2014.\nOther teams eventually followed in the Mercury's footsteps; some teams feature sponsors prominently on the front of their jerseys, while others have sponsors on the upper left-hand shoulder.\nOn August 22, 2011, the WNBA announced a league-wide marquee sponsorship with Boost Mobile. The deal would allow the Boost Mobile logo to be placed on eleven of the 12 teams' jerseys (excluding San Antonio) in addition to branding on the courts and in arenas. A source said the deal is a \"multiyear, eight-figure deal\".\nBefore the start of the 2011 season, every team announced a new look for their uniforms. The supplier of the uniforms for the league, Adidas, upgraded all teams to new high-tech designs, much like they did for the NBA before the start of their season.\nOn April 8, 2019, the WNBA announced a multiyear marquee partnership with AT&amp;T, making them the first non-apparel partner to have its logo featured on the front of all 12 team jerseys. The jerseys officially debuted during the 2019 WNBA draft.\nIn 2020, the league launched WNBA Changemakers, a collective of businesses committed to the advancement of women in sports. The business partners that make up the collective provide direct financial investment to the WNBA as well as marketing amplification through collaborations.\nSalaries, rosters, and collective bargaining.\nBefore the 2009 season, the maximum team roster size was changed from 13 players (11 active and 2 inactive) to 11 players (all active). Any team that falls below nine players able to play due to injury or any other factor outside of the control of the team will, upon request, be granted a roster hardship exception allowing the team to sign an additional player or players so that the team will have nine players able to play in an upcoming game or games. As soon as the injured (or otherwise sidelined) player(s) can play, the roster hardship player(s)\u2014not any other player on the roster\u2014must be waived. In March 2014, the WNBA and players signed a new, eight-year collective bargaining agreement, increasing the number of players on a roster to 12.\nThe WNBA draft is held annually every spring. The minimum age is 22 years for American players and 20 years for international players, measured as of December 31 of the calendar year of the draft. For draft purposes, \"American\" includes those born in the U.S., as well as those who have enrolled in a U.S. college or university, regardless of their citizenship. The draft is three rounds long, with each of the 12 teams in the league (trades aside) getting three picks each. The draft order for the eight teams that made the playoffs the previous year are based on team records, and the team with the highest previous record will pick last. For the remaining top four picks, a selection process similar to the NBA draft lottery is conducted for the four teams that did not qualify for the playoffs.\nPreviously, in 2008, a new six-year collective bargaining agreement was agreed upon between the players and the league. The salary cap for an entire team in 2010 was $827,000 (although it was later lowered to $775,000). By 2013 (the sixth year under this agreement), the cap for an entire team was $900,000. In 2010, the \"minimum\" salary for a player with three-plus years of experience was $51,000 while the \"maximum\" salary for a six-plus year player was $101,500 (the first time in league history that players can receive over $100,000). The minimum salary for rookies was $35,190. Many WNBA players supplement their salaries by playing in European, Australian, or more recently Chinese women's basketball leagues during the WNBA offseason. The WNBA pays its female players less than their NBA counterparts, although this is attributed to the much greater revenues of the NBA; however the WNBA has been criticized for \"paying its players a lower share of revenue than the NBA\".\nThe decision of superstar Diana Taurasi to sit out the 2015 WNBA season was seen by some in the media as a harbinger of salary-related troubles in the future. The Russian club for which she was playing at the time, UMMC Ekaterinburg, offered her a bonus well over the league's maximum player salary to sit out that season. Taurasi accepted, largely because she had not had an offseason since playing college basketball more than a decade earlier. Such offers have often been made to star American players, including Taurasi herself, but none were accepted until Taurasi did so in 2015.\nA more recent incident that led to widespread media comment on the WNBA's salary structure was the torn Achilles suffered by reigning WNBA MVP Breanna Stewart while playing for another Russian side, Dynamo Kursk, in the 2019 EuroLeague Women final. The injury came at a time when the WNBA and its players' union were preparing to negotiate a new collective bargaining agreement, following the union's announcement in November 2018 that it would opt out of the current CBA after the 2019 season. With overseas leagues offering much higher salaries to many players than the WNBA currently provides, roughly 70% of the league's players go overseas in any given season. While these players do not necessarily play as many games as NBA players do in their seasons, even participants in the NBA Finals get several months of rest in the offseason, something not available for WNBA players who also play overseas. In a story on the ramifications of Stewart's injury, Michael Voepel of ESPN had this to say about the lead-in to the injury:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;For Stewart, her 2018 went like this: playing in China, brief time off, WNBA season, World Cup in the Canary Islands, brief time off, playing in Russia. She hasn't had significant recovery time since before her senior season at UConn. Now, she'll have time away from playing but while going through rehab and physical therapy.\nThe current CBA, which took effect in 2020, significantly increased minimum and maximum salaries. The minimum league salary in 2020 was $57,000 for players with less than three years of experience, and $68,000 otherwise. For most players, the 2020 maximum salary was $185,000; players who met specified criteria for league service had a maximum of $215,000.\nWNBA players are awarded bonuses for certain achievements. Some of the bonuses given by the league (amount is per player), from 2020 to 2027 (the duration of the current CBA):\nWNBA champion: $11,356; Runner-up: $5,678; Most Valuable Player: $15,450; All-WNBA First Team member: $10,300; and All-Star Game participant: $2,575. These were only modest increases from amounts provided before 2020.\nIn recent years, the lack of roster space for rookies, thus hampering their professional development, has become a major issue. While the 2020 CBA led to maximum player salaries nearly doubling from 2019 to 2022, the team cap only increased by slightly less than 40% in that period. Because the cap is a hard cap, many WNBA teams now carry only 11 players on their rosters instead of the maximum 12, leading Stewart to state \"We're at a tipping point. . . . without some easy tweaks, we are no longer a league that has 12 teams and 144 players \u2014 it's more like 133.\" The WNBA also has no developmental league similar to the NBA G League; Chiney Ogwumike, a vice president of the players' union, publicly called for such a league. While roster limits have always been a significant issue in the league\u2014between the first WNBA draft in 1997 and 2021, more than 40% of drafted players never made a roster\u2014this became especially apparent at the dawn of the 2020s. In one notable example, the 2019 Naismith Trophy winner Megan Gustafson did not make an opening-day roster in 2019, and had only played in parts of the 2019\u20132021 seasons before being cut in the 2022 preseason. This issue gained major publicity during the week before the start of the 2022 season. The Minnesota Lynx, which began that week with barely over $12,000 of cap room, cut six players, including the 2020 Rookie of the Year Crystal Dangerfield, their 2021 first-round pick Rennia Davis, and both of their 2022 draft picks. The Seattle Storm, whose first 2022 draft pick was in the middle of the second round, waived that pick (Elissa Cunane), and the Las Vegas Aces waived both of their picks, one of them a first-rounder.\nAnother clause in the 2020 CBA, known as the \"prioritization\" clause, has been viewed as a potential problem for the league. Because of overseas league commitments, a significant number of WNBA players have reported late to training camp each season. Several overseas leagues and continental club competitions overlap with WNBA training camps, and even with the start of the WNBA season. For example, 55 WNBA players missed the start of training camp in 2021, meaning that most teams were unable to start practice with their full rosters. Starting in 2023, teams are required to fine players with more than two years of WNBA experience who miss the start of training camp. (Exemptions are provided for national team commitments, graduations, and other significant life events.) Starting in 2024, the league can penalize a veteran player who does not report to camp with a season-long suspension without pay. In a 2021 episode of a podcast hosted by Napheesa Collier and A'ja Wilson, Collier raised the prospect of players choosing to abandon the WNBA for higher overseas salaries, telling Wilson \"If I'm not making that much in the league, if it's not enough for me to survive on during the year, I'm going overseas and having the summer off.\" When Stewart re-signed with the Seattle Storm as a free agent before the 2022 season, she cited the prioritization clause as the reason she only signed a one-year contract.\nPlayer revenue.\nThere are many factors that play into the smaller wages WNBA players receive during their season, but two major contributors are revenue and viewership numbers and the allocation of funds by both the NBA and the WNBA. It is estimated that wages for NBA players take up 50% of the league's annual revenue, while WNBA players only receive 20% of their league's income. Kelsey Plum said in an interview with The Residency Podcast, \"We're not asking to get paid what the men get paid. We're asking to get paid the same percentage of revenue shared.\"\nViewership.\nIn sports, revenue and viewership are indicators of how much money the sport is generating. It can be brought in through sales such as tickets and merchandise, as well as how many spectators are broadcasting the game. The salary of players and the finances that go into maintaining the sport depend on viewership. Without revenue and viewership, it is difficult to uphold and maintain sporting facilities and equipment. In 2019, it was reported that the total revenue the WNBA brought in was $102 million. New data shows that in 2023, the league and teams together are estimated to bring in around $180 million to $200 million in revenue.\nThe WNBA's audience has increased by 67% halfway through the 2023 season, with an average of 556,184 viewers per game. Their social media presence has also risen in popularity, garnering more than 24 million views across all social media platforms. With increased media attention on women's basketball, Commissioner Cathy Engelbert announced in May 2024 that the league would allocate $50 million over two years to fund charter flights for players.\nPlayer marketing agreements.\nPlayer marketing agreements are contracts that allow WNBA players to bring in more individual revenue by promoting the WNBA year-round. As of 2022, there are 10 players who have signed PMAs: Diamond DeShields, Dearica Hamby, Napheesa Collier, DiDi Richards, Arike Ogunbowale, Kahleah Copper, Ariel Atkins, Jasmine Thomas, Kelsey Mitchell, and Izzy Harrison. The league is expected to spend $1 million on PMAs annually, and this funding is divided between the players who have signed contracts, with a salary cap of $250,000. While this is a way for players to make more money during their off-season, it is also a way for the league to keep players from going overseas, as they become tied to the WNBA and are unable to play in leagues in Europe and elsewhere. Players choose to sign PMAs for many different reasons, ranging anywhere from injuries sustained in-season that need to be rested to childcare responsibilities. These agreements are still in their infancy stage and need further developing and funding to become a viable option for more WNBA players who are looking to increase their revenue.\nNBA support.\nThe WNBA is half-owned by the NBA and receives between $10\u2013$15 million annually to subsidize the league from the NBA's yearly revenue, which in 2022, reached up to $10 billion. Six WNBA teams are considered sister teams to the NBA teams based in the same areas and are directly connected to those NBA teams and their markets. The NBA's allotment of funding to all WNBA teams, not just sister teams, has been discussed in many academic and sports analysis circles, with some authors arguing that the NBA should be doing more to support the WNBA if they want the league to succeed. Sponsorship and television deals continue to be an area where the WNBA creates less revenue than their NBA counterparts, with the WNBA bringing in $25 million from ESPN and the NBA bringing in $930 million from ESPN and TNT. Some argue that the NBA could be working harder to bridge that gap between organizations and either share more revenue from deals or help the WNBA create their own more profitable agreements.\nIn July 2024, the WNBA negotiated a new media rights deal as part of a total package with the NBA valued at $77 billion. Prior to re-negotiating their deal, the WNBA media rights were only valued at $60 million a year. Under the new deal, the WNBA can expect to earn $200 million a year for the next eleven years, more than a 300% increase over previous years, but because the media deal lumps the NBA together with the WNBA, the true valuation of the WNBA media rights remains unknown.\nMerchandise.\n2021.\nThe following shows the top merchandise sales during the 2021 season, based on sales through the WNBA's official online store.\nHowever, a story by NBC Sports journalist Alex Azzi argued that the WNBA's merchandise rankings were misleading for multiple reasons.\n2024.\nThe arrival of Caitlin Clark in 2024 led to unprecedented public interest in the WNBA, and subsequently the league's merchandise was being sold in record numbers, both player-specific and league-wide, such as the orange WNBA hoodie. Clark had the most jerseys sold during the year's first half, with the rankings also featuring two other rookies in Angel Reese and Kate Martin.\n2025.\nIn the first half of 2025, the best-selling jerseys were as shown below.\nPresidents and commissioners.\nThe title of the league's chief executive was \"President\" before Cathy Engelbert became the first \"Commissioner\".\nAttendance.\nIn the inaugural 1997 WNBA season, average attendance for the regular season was 9,661 attendants with 112 games played. Average attendance increased by 12% the following year in 1998 over 150 games. By 2000, the regular WNBA season consisted of 256 games and attendance dropped with an average of 9,142 attendants per game for season 2000-2003. Beginning in 2003, attendance dropped at a rate of approximately 5% year-over-year until 2006 when average attendance was 7,479. From 2007 to 2014, attendance numbers remained relatively steady with a low of 7,457 in 2012 and a high of 8,039 in 2009.\nIn 2015, the WNBA's attendance per game decreased by 3.4% to 7,318. This was a record low for the WNBA since it was established in 1997. The relocation of the San Antonio Stars to Freeman Coliseum and the Tulsa Shock to Arlington likely contributed to particularly large drops in attendance in 2015 (\u221237.4% and \u22127.2% respectively). With record low attendance, the WNBA sought to improve their branding effort for the following 20th anniversary season and the WNBA President, Laurel J. Richie, discussed creating an expansion committee to evaluate if and how the WNBA should go about expanding their reach.\nAttendance in 2016 and 2017 recovered slightly with average attendance at 7,655 and 7,716 respectively, but the 2018 and 2019 seasons each set the lowest average attendance in WNBA history (6,769 and 6,535 respectively). However, about half of the decline in attendance from 2017 to 2018 was due to the New York Liberty moving from 19,812-seat Madison Square Garden to the 5,000-seat Westchester County Center. While the Liberty had averaged over 9,000 fans in 2017, James Dolan, then the team's owner, noted that roughly half of the team's attendance in that season came from complimentary tickets. Similarly in 2019, the Washington Mystics moved from the 20,356-seat Capital One Arena to the 4,111-seat Entertainment and Sports Arena. The Las Vegas Aces and New York Liberty each saw double-digit percentage losses in 2019, but half of the league's teams saw attendance increases in that season, and the number of sellouts was the same in both seasons (41).\nWith plans to expand the number of games played by each team from 34 to 36 regular season games, and with the introduction of the mid-season Commissioner's Cup tournament to be broadcast on ESPN and ABC, the league had high hopes for the 2020 WNBA season, but that was derailed when the season was postponed indefinitely due to the COVID-19 pandemic on April 3. Instead, the league held an abbreviated 22-game regular season at IMG Academy in Bradenton, Florida, with no fans in attendance. The 2021 WNBA season was also shortened to a 32-game regular season and attendance numbers remained low with an average of 2,620 people in attendance per game, likely due to persistent fears around the COVID-19 virus and new protocols put in place for large indoor venues. By 2022, average attendance had rebounded to 5,646 and in 2023 attendance had recovered to pre-pandemic numbers with 6,615 average attendance per game.\n2024 turned out to be a breakout season for WNBA attendance, with an average of 9,807 fans per game and an increase of 48% over the 2023 season. Three games drew more than 20,000 fans during the 2024 season, including a record-breaking attendance of 20,711 fans when the Indiana Fever visited the Washington Mystics on September 19. A surge in interest in women's college basketball preceded the 2024 WNBA season, with viewership of the 2024 women's NCAA championship game up over 90% from the previous season and marking the first time in NCAA history where viewership for the women's championship game exceeded the men's. Sports analysts cite intense interest in the incoming 2024 rookie class, led by number one draft pick Caitlin Clark, as the reason for the dramatic increases in attendance, dubbing her ability to drive up ticket sales \"Clarkonomics\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Hidden begin/styles.css\"/&gt;Attendance\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Hidden begin/styles.css\"/&gt;1990s\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Hidden begin/styles.css\"/&gt;2000s\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Hidden begin/styles.css\"/&gt;2010s\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Hidden begin/styles.css\"/&gt;2020s\nMedia coverage.\nCurrently, WNBA games are televised throughout the U.S. by ABC, ESPN, ESPN2, and Ion Television.\nIn the early years, two women-oriented networks, Lifetime and Oxygen, also broadcast games, including the first game of the WNBA. NBC showed games from 1997 to 2002 as part of their \"NBA on NBC\" coverage before the league transferred the rights to ABC/ESPN.\nIn June 2007, the WNBA signed a contract extension with ESPN, the first agreement to pay television rights fees to a women's professional league. The new television deal runs from 2009 to 2016. A minimum of 18 games will be broadcast on ABC, ESPN, and ESPN2 each season; the rights to broadcast the first regular-season game and the All-Star game are held by ABC. Additionally, a minimum of 11 postseason games will be broadcast on any of the three networks. Along with this deal, came the first-ever rights fees to be paid to a women's professional sports league. Over the eight years of the contract, \"millions and millions of dollars\" will be \"dispersed to the league's teams\".\nIn 2013, the WNBA and ESPN signed a six-year extension on the broadcast deal to cover 2017\u20132022. In the new deal, a total of 30 games would be shown each season on ESPN networks. Each team would receive around $1\u00a0million per year.\nOn April 22, 2019, CBS Sports Network reached a multi-year deal to televise 40 regular-season weekend and primetime WNBA games, beginning in the 2019 season.\nOn April 20, 2023, Ion Television signed a multi-year deal with the WNBA to air a 15-week slate of doubleheader games on Friday nights (branded as \"WNBA Friday Night Spotlight on ION\"), beginning with that year's regular season. It will be the first national sports broadcast carried by Ion since 2011, and marks the first ever television contract for Scripps Sports, which was founded by the E. W. Scripps Company in December 2022 to acquire sports events for Ion and the group's local television stations. The agreement also grants local rights to selected Ion O&amp;Os for games involving regional WNBA teams, which stations may carry in early- or late-evening broadcast windows depending on tip-off time. The first broadcast was on May 26, 2023, when the Washington Mystics visited the Chicago Sky. On June 13, 2025, the WNBA announced that they have extended their agreement with Scripps Sports to continue their Friday Night Showcase package of games on Ion Television. On September 30, 2025, the WNBA announced that it has also entered an 11-year agreement with Versant, the cable spin-off company of NBCUniversal owned by Comcast shareholders, where its games will air on USA Network.\nStarting in 2026, the WNBA will begin a new 11-year agreement that will see games return to NBC Sports, with new airings on USA Sports, as well as remaining on ESPN/ABC and Amazon Prime Video. With this new deal, the league will distribute more than 125 games nationally (a minimum of 25 across ESPN/ABC, 50 across NBC platforms, and 30 on Prime Video) and worldwide. ESPN continues on as the league's All-Star and Draft broadcaster, Prime Video continues as the broadcaster for the league's Commissioner's Cup games, and NBC will pick up rights to all USA Basketball games. In addition, the WNBA Playoffs and Finals will see a wider distribution across the three partners, where each partner airs a first round series annually (two on ESPN/ABC and one each on NBC platforms and Prime Video), and rotates turns airing the semifinals and Finals (eight semifinals and five Finals on ESPN/ABC and seven semifinals and three Finals on NBC platforms and Prime Video). The WNBA also stated that they are expected to add additional media partners prior to the first year of the new deal.\nSome teams offer games on local radio, while all teams have some games broadcast on local television stations:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nWNBA League Pass.\nIn 2009, the WNBA announced the launch of \"WNBA LiveAccess\", a feature on WNBA.com that provides fans with access to more than 200 live game webcasts throughout the WNBA season. All of the \"WNBA LiveAccess\" games are then archived for on-demand viewing. Most games (except broadcasts on ABC, ESPN or ESPN2, which are available on ESPN3) are available via this system. The first use of LiveAccess was the E League versus Chicago Sky preseason game.\nBefore the 2011 season, LiveAccess was given an overhaul, and the system became more reliable and many new features were added. Before the 2012 season, it was announced that users of LiveAccess would have to pay a $4.99 subscription fee to use the service. In 2013, this was increased to $14.99. In 2014 the streaming service was renamed WNBA League Pass.\nWNBA League Pass is available as part of the WNBA App, the free mobile application available on the iPhone, iPad and Android devices and costs US$16.99 for the season. Games airing on ESPN, ESPN2 as well as other games taking place during the telecast windows of ESPN and ESPN2 games, are not available live on WNBA League Pass. However, those games will be available on-demand shortly after the conclusion of their live broadcast.\nViewership.\nOn the 2008 season opening day (May 17), ABC broadcast the Los Angeles Sparks and Phoenix Mercury matchup to showcase new rookie sensation Candace Parker. The game received a little over 1\u00a0million viewers. In 2008, WNBA games averaged just 413,000 viewers, compared to 1.46\u00a0million viewers on ESPN and over 2.2\u00a0million on ABC for NBA games. In addition, WNBA games have much poorer visibility, attendance, and ratings than NCAA games.\nIn 2011, the regular-season broadcast drew 270,000 viewers, an increase of 5% over the 2010 season. As sponsorships continued to grow with deals from ESPN to air WNBA games on ESPN and ESPN2. The league did experience some success on the digital forefront. In 2015, WNBA.com saw a 26% increase in mobile page views, along with a major increase in its social media space; WNBA Instagram grew by 51% that year.\nESPN viewership grew 35% in 2018 over 2017. This became the impetus for the multi-year partnership in which CBS Sports Network would broadcast live WNBA games beginning with the 2019 season. The 2023 season broke viewership and attendance records. Viewership was up 21% compared to the 2022 season within the four national televised networks. (ABC, ESPN, CBS &amp; ESPN2) Attendance was up 16% compared to the previous season and the average game attendance per fan was 6,615 which is the highest since 2018.\nThe 2024 WNBA regular season set an all-time record with more than 54 million unique viewers and a record 22 games that garnered more than one million viewers each. With an 170% increase in viewership over the 2023 season, the 2024 regular season was the most-viewed season ever across ESPN platforms with an average of 1.19 million viewers per game.\nOffseason.\nIn July 2023, Napheesa Collier and Breanna Stewart announced Unrivaled, a women's professional three-on-three basketball league. The league was founded, in part, to allow WNBA players to play domestically and to bypass complications from the WNBA's prioritization rule for players who choose to play overseas in the WNBA offseason. Unrivaled's inaugural season, consisting of six teams of six players debuted in January 2025 in the Miami-area community of Medley, Florida.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "57722", "revid": "50533662", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57722", "title": "WNBA", "text": ""}
{"id": "57723", "revid": "21408729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57723", "title": "Agoraphobia", "text": "Anxiety disorder\nMedical condition&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nAgoraphobia is an anxiety disorder characterized by symptoms of anxiety in situations where the person perceives their environment to be unsafe with no way to escape. These situations can include public transit, shopping centers, crowds and queues, or simply being outside their home on their own. Being in these situations may result in a panic attack. Those affected will go to great lengths to avoid these situations. In severe cases, people may become completely unable to leave their homes.\nAgoraphobia is believed to be due to a combination of genetic and environmental factors. The condition often runs in families, and stressful or traumatic events such as the death of a parent or being attacked may be a trigger. In the DSM-5, agoraphobia is classified as a phobia along with specific phobias and social phobia. Other conditions that can produce similar symptoms include separation anxiety, post-traumatic stress disorder, and major depressive disorder. The diagnosis of agoraphobia has been shown to be comorbid with depression, substance abuse, and suicidal ideation.\nWithout treatment, it is uncommon for agoraphobia to resolve. Treatment is typically with a type of counselling called cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT). CBT results in resolution for about half of people. In some instances, those with a diagnosis of agoraphobia have reported taking benzodiazepines and antipsychotics. Agoraphobia affects about 1.7% of adults. Women are affected about twice as often as men. The condition is rare in children, often begins in adolescence or early adulthood, and becomes more common at age 65 or above.\nEtymology.\nThe term \"agoraphobia\" was coined in German in 1871 by pioneering German psychologist Karl Friedrich Otto Westphal (1833\u20131890) in his article \"\" in the journal \"Archiv f\u00fcr Psychiatrie und Nervenkrankheiten\", Berlin, 1871\u201372; 3: 138\u2013161. It is derived from Greek (), meaning 'place of assembly' or 'market-place' and (), meaning 'fear'.\nSigns and symptoms.\nAgoraphobia is a condition where individuals become anxious in unfamiliar environments or where they perceive that they have little control. Triggers for this anxiety may include wide-open spaces, crowds (social anxiety), or traveling (even short distances). Agoraphobia is often, but not always, compounded by a fear of social embarrassment, as a person experiencing agoraphobia fears the onset of a panic attack and appearing distraught in public. Most of the time they avoid these areas and stay in the comfort of a known, controllable space, usually their home.\nAgoraphobia is also defined as \"a fear, sometimes terrifying, by those who have experienced one or more panic attacks\". In these cases, the patient is fearful of a particular place because they have previously experienced a panic attack at the same location. Fearing the onset of another panic attack, the patient is fearful or avoids a location. Some refuse to leave their homes in medical emergencies because the fear of being outside of their comfort areas is too great.\nThe person with this condition can sometimes go to great lengths to avoid the locations where they have experienced the onset of a panic attack. Agoraphobia, as described in this manner, is a symptom professionals check when making a diagnosis of panic disorder. Other syndromes like obsessive\u2013compulsive disorder or post-traumatic stress disorder can also cause agoraphobia. Any irrational fear that keeps one from going outside can cause the syndrome.\nPeople with agoraphobia may experience temporary separation anxiety disorder when certain individuals of the household depart from the residence temporarily, such as a parent or spouse, or when they are left home alone. These situations can result in an increase in anxiety or a panic attack or feeling the need to separate themselves from family or friends.\nPeople with agoraphobia sometimes fear waiting outside for long periods of time; that symptom can be called \"macrophobia\".\nPanic attacks.\nAgoraphobia patients can experience sudden panic attacks when traveling to places where they fear they are out of control, help would be difficult to obtain, or they could be embarrassed. During a panic attack, epinephrine is released in large amounts, triggering the body's natural fight-or-flight response. A panic attack typically has an abrupt onset, building to maximum intensity within 10 to 15 minutes, and rarely lasts longer than 30 minutes. Symptoms of a panic attack include palpitations, rapid heartbeat, sweating, trembling, nausea, vomiting, dizziness, tightness in the throat, and shortness of breath. Many patients report a fear of dying, fear of losing control of emotions, or fear of losing control of behaviors.\nCauses.\nAgoraphobia is believed to be due to a combination of genetic and environmental factors. The condition often runs in families, and stressful or traumatic events such as the death of a parent or being attacked may be a trigger.\nResearch has uncovered a link between agoraphobia and difficulties with spatial orientation. Individuals without agoraphobia are able to maintain balance by combining information from their vestibular system, their visual system, and their proprioceptive sense. A disproportionate number of agoraphobics have weak vestibular function and consequently rely more on visual or tactile signals. They may become disoriented when visual cues are sparse (as in wide-open spaces) or overwhelming (as in crowds). Likewise, they may be confused by sloping or irregular surfaces.\nIn a virtual reality study, agoraphobics showed more difficulty integrating sensory changes than non-agoraphobics and are \"more sensitive to sensory conflicts\" than the general population.\nSubstance-induced.\nChronic use of tranquilizers and sleeping pills such as benzodiazepines has been linked to onset of agoraphobia. In 10 patients who had developed agoraphobia during benzodiazepine dependence, symptoms abated within the first year of assisted withdrawal. Similarly, alcohol use disorders are associated with panic with or without agoraphobia; this association may be due to the long-term effects of alcohol consumption causing a distortion in brain chemistry.\nTobacco smoking has also been associated with the development and emergence of agoraphobia, often with panic disorder; it is uncertain how tobacco smoking results in anxiety-panic with or without agoraphobia symptoms, but the direct effects of nicotine dependence or the effects of tobacco smoke on breathing have been suggested as possible causes. Self-medication or a combination of factors may also explain the association between tobacco smoking and agoraphobia and panic.\nAttachment theory.\nSome scholars have explained agoraphobia as an attachment deficit, i.e., the temporary loss of the ability to tolerate spatial separations from a secure base. Recent empirical research has also linked attachment and spatial theories of agoraphobia.\nSpatial theory.\nIn the social sciences, a perceived clinical bias exists in agoraphobia research. Branches of the social sciences, especially geography, have increasingly become interested in what may be thought of as a spatial phenomenon. One such approach links the development of agoraphobia with modernity. Factors considered contributing to agoraphobia within modernity are the ubiquity of cars and urbanization. These have helped develop the expansion of public space and the contraction of private space, thus creating a conflict in the mind of agoraphobic individuals.\nEvolutionary perspectives.\nSome evolutionary models propose that agoraphobia\u2014like other specific phobias\u2014may be rooted in adaptive mechanisms that helped early humans avoid threats in open or unfamiliar environments. From this viewpoint, fear and avoidance behaviors could have been selectively favored if they aided survival\u2014for instance, by prompting individuals to steer clear of potentially dangerous surroundings or minimize exposure to predators and pathogens. According to preparedness models, human defensive systems are especially sensitive to cues linked to ancestral threats and can rapidly form strong, lasting fear associations with them. In modern life, such defenses might become mismatched to relatively low-risk environments, producing disproportionate anxiety responses.\nAn additional evolutionary psychology view is that the more unusual primary agoraphobia without panic attacks may be due to a different mechanism from agoraphobia with panic attacks. Primary agoraphobia without panic attacks may be a specific phobia explained by it once having been evolutionarily advantageous to avoid exposed, large, open spaces without cover or concealment. Agoraphobia with panic attacks may be an avoidance response secondary to the panic attacks, due to fear of the situations in which the panic attacks occurred.\nDiagnosis.\nMost people who present to mental health specialists develop agoraphobia after the onset of panic disorder. Agoraphobia is best understood as an adverse behavioral outcome of repeated panic attacks and subsequent anxiety and preoccupation with these attacks that leads to an avoidance of situations where a panic attack could occur. Early treatment of panic disorder can often prevent agoraphobia. Agoraphobia is typically determined when symptoms are worse than panic disorder, but also do not meet the criteria for other mental disorders such as depression.\nAgoraphobia without history of panic disorder.\nAgoraphobia without a history of panic disorder (also called primary agoraphobia) is an anxiety disorder where the individual with the diagnosis does not meet the DSM-5 criteria for panic disorder. Agoraphobia typically develops as a result of having panic disorder. In a small minority of cases, however, agoraphobia can develop by itself without being triggered by the onset of panic attacks. Agoraphobia can be caused by traumatic experiences, such as bullying or abuse. Historically, there has been debate over whether agoraphobia without panic genuinely existed, or whether it was simply a manifestation of other disorders such as panic disorder, generalized anxiety disorder, avoidant personality disorder and social phobia. One researcher said: \"out of 41 agoraphobics seen (at a clinic) during a period of 1 year, only 1 fit the diagnosis of agoraphobia without panic attacks, and even this particular classification was questionable...Do not expect to see too many agoraphobics without panic\". In spite of this earlier skepticism, current thinking is that agoraphobia without panic disorder is indeed a valid, unique illness which has gone largely unnoticed, since those with the condition are far less likely to seek clinical treatment.\nAccording to the DSM-IV-TR, a widely used manual for diagnosing mental disorders, the condition is diagnosed when agoraphobia is present without panic disorder where symptoms are not caused by or are unreasonable to an underlying medical problem or pharmacological influence. The DSM-5 decoupled agoraphobia and panic disorder, making them separate disorders that can be diagnosed together.\nTreatments.\nTherapy.\nSystematic desensitization can provide lasting relief to the majority of patients with panic disorder and agoraphobia. The disappearance of residual and sub-clinical agoraphobic avoidance, and not simply of panic attacks, should be the aim of exposure therapy. Many patients can deal with exposure easier if they are in the company of a friend on whom they can rely. In this approach, it is suggested that people being treated remain in the situation that provokes anxiety until the symptoms anxiety have subsided because if they leave the situation, the phobic response will not decrease and it may even rise.\nA related exposure treatment is exposure, a cognitive behavioral therapy method, that gradually exposes patients to the feared situations or objects. This treatment was largely effective with an effect size from \"d =\" 0.78 to \"d =\" 1.34, and these effects were shown to increase over time, proving that the treatment had long-term efficacy (up to 12 months after treatment).\nPsychological interventions in combination with pharmaceutical treatments were overall more effective than treatments simply involving either CBT or pharmaceuticals. Further research showed there was no significant effect between using group CBT versus individual CBT.\nCognitive restructuring has also proved useful in treating agoraphobia. This treatment involves coaching a participant through a dianoetic discussion, with the intent of replacing irrational, counterproductive beliefs with more factual and beneficial ones.\nRelaxation techniques are often useful skills for the agoraphobic to develop, as they can be used to stop or prevent symptoms of anxiety and panic.\nVideoconferencing psychotherapy (VCP) is an emerging modality used to treat various disorders in a remote method. Similar to traditional face-to-face interventions, VCP can be used to administer CBT.\nVirtual reality computer stimulated therapy has been suggested to help people with psychosis and agoraphobia manage their avoidance of outside environments. In the therapy, the user wears a headset and a virtual character provides psychological advice and guides them as they explore simulated environments (such as a cafe or a busy street).\nMedications.\nAntidepressant medications most commonly used to treat anxiety disorders are mainly selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors. Benzodiazepines, monoamine oxidase inhibitors, and tricyclic antidepressants are also sometimes prescribed for treatment of agoraphobia. Antidepressants are important because some have anxiolytic effects. Antidepressants should be used in conjunction with exposure as a form of self-help or with cognitive behaviour therapy. A combination of medication and cognitive behaviour therapy is sometimes the most effective treatment for agoraphobia.\nAlternative medicine.\nEye movement desensitization and reprocessing (EMDR) has been studied as a possible treatment for agoraphobia, with poor results. As such, EMDR is only recommended in cases where cognitive-behavioral approaches have proven ineffective or in cases where agoraphobia has developed following trauma.\nMany people with anxiety disorders benefit from joining a self-help or support group (telephone conference-call support groups or online support groups being of particular help for completely housebound individuals). Sharing problems and achievements with others, as well as sharing various self-help tools, are common activities in these groups. In particular, stress management techniques and various kinds of meditation practices and visualization techniques can help people with anxiety disorders calm themselves and may enhance the effects of therapy, as can service to others, which can distract from the self-absorption that tends to go with anxiety problems. Also, preliminary evidence suggests aerobic exercise may have a calming effect. Since caffeine, certain illicit drugs, and even some over-the-counter cold medications can aggravate the symptoms of anxiety disorders, they should be avoided.\nEpidemiology.\nAgoraphobia occurs about twice as often in women as it does in men. Age of onset is typically mid to late twenties, though it can occur at any age.\nPanic disorder with or without agoraphobia affects roughly 5.1% of Americans, and about 1/3 of this population with panic disorder have co-morbid agoraphobia. It is uncommon to have agoraphobia without panic attacks, with only 0.17% of people with agoraphobia not presenting with panic disorders as well.\nSociety and culture.\nNotable cases.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "57724", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57724", "title": "James Randi Educational Foundation", "text": "American grant-making foundation\nThe James Randi Educational Foundation (JREF) is an American grant-making institution founded in 1996 by magician and skeptic James Randi. As a nonprofit organization, the mission of JREF includes educating the public and the media on the dangers of accepting unproven claims, and to support research into paranormal claims in controlled scientific experimental conditions. The organization announced its change to a grant-making foundation in September 2015.\nThe organization previously administered the One Million Dollar Paranormal Challenge, a prize of one million U.S. dollars to anyone who could demonstrate a supernatural or paranormal ability under agreed-upon scientific testing criteria.\nThe organization has been funded through member contributions, grants, and conferences, though it ceased accepting memberships after 2015. For several years, the JREF website published the blog \"Swift\", which included news and information as well as expos\u00e9s of paranormal claimants.\nHistory.\nThe James Randi Educational Foundation (JREF) officially came into existence on February 29, 1996, when it was registered as a nonprofit corporation in the State of Delaware in the United States. On April 3, 1996, James Randi formally announced the creation of JREF through his email hotline.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;THE FOUNDATION IS IN BUSINESS! It is my great pleasure to announce the creation of the James Randi Educational Foundation. This is a non-profit, tax-exempt, educational foundation under Section 501(c)3 of the Internal Revenue Code, incorporated in the State of Delaware. The Foundation is generously funded by a sponsor in Washington D.C. who wishes, at this point in time, to remain anonymous.\u2014\u200a\nJREF is now headquartered in Falls Church, Virginia.\nRandi stated that Johnny Carson was a major sponsor, giving several six-figure donations.\nFrom 2003 to 2015, JREF annually hosted The Amazing Meeting (styled as The Amaz!ng Meeting), a gathering of scientists, skeptics, and atheists. Perennial speakers included Richard Dawkins, Penn &amp; Teller, Phil Plait, Michael Shermer, and Adam Savage.\nIn 2008, the astronomer Philip Plait became the new president of JREF, and Randi became its board chairman. In December 2009, Plait left JREF due to involvement in a television project, and D.J. Grothe assumed the position of president on January 1, 2010, holding the position until his departure from the organization was announced on September 1, 2014.\nThe San Francisco newspaper \"SF Weekly\" reported in August 2009, that Randi's annual salary was about $200,000.\nRandi resigned from JREF in 2015.\nAs of January 2024, JREF leadership consisted of:\nOne Million Dollar Paranormal Challenge.\nIn 1964, Randi began offering a prize of US$1,000 to anyone who could demonstrate a paranormal ability under agreed-upon testing conditions. This prize was later increased to US$1million in bonds and was administered by JREF. Since its inception, more than 1,000 people applied to be tested.\nThe Challenge was eventually terminated, with JREF noting in 2015, \"We can no longer justify the resources to interact with these people.\" No applicants managed to demonstrate their claimed abilities under the testing conditions, with all applicants either failing to demonstrate the claimed ability during the test or deviating from the foundation conditions for taking the test such that any apparent success was held invalid; thus, the prize was not awarded.\nPodcasts and videos.\nThe foundation produced two audio podcasts, \"For Good Reason\" which was an interview program hosted by D.J. Grothe, promoting critical thinking and skepticism about the central beliefs of society. It has not been active since December 2011. \"Consequence\" was a biweekly podcast hosted by former outreach coordinator Brian Thompson in which regular people shared their personal narratives about the negative impact a belief in pseudoscience, superstition, and the paranormal had had on their lives. It has not been active since May, 2013.\nThe JREF also produced a regular video cast and YouTube show, \"The Randi Show\", in which former JREF outreach coordinator Brian Thompson interviewed Randi on a variety of skeptical topics, often with lighthearted or comedic commentary. It has not been active since August 2012. In November 2015, Harriet Hall produced a series of ten lectures called \"Science Based Medicine\" for the JREF. The videos deal with various complementary alternative medicine subjects including homeopathy, chiropractic, acupuncture, and more.\nThe JREF posted many of its educational videos from The Amaz!ng Meeting and other events online. There are lectures by Neil DeGrasse Tyson, Carol Tavris, Lawrence Krauss, live tests of the One Million Dollar Paranormal Challenge, workshops on cold reading by Ray Hyman, and panels featuring leading thinking on various topics related to JREF's educational mission on the JREF YouTube channel. JREF past president D.J. Grothe has claimed that the JREF's YouTube channel was once the \"10th most subscribed nonprofit channel of all time\", though its status in 2013 was 39th and most non-profits do not register for this status.\nThe foundation produced its own \"Internet Audio Show\" which ran January\u2013December 2002 and was broadcast via a live stream. The archive can be found as mp3 files on the JREF website and as a podcast on iTunes.\nForum and online community.\nAs part of the JREF's goal of educating the general population about science and reason, people involved in their community ran a popular skeptic based online forum with the overall goal of promoting \"critical thinking and providing the public with the tools needed to reliably examine paranormal, supernatural, and pseudoscientific claims\".\nOn October 5, 2014, this online forum was divorced from the JREF and moved as its own entity to International Skeptics Forum.\nThe JREF has also helped to support local grassroot efforts and outreach endeavors, such as SkeptiCamp, Camp Inquiry, and various community-organized conferences. However, according to their tax filing, they spend less than $2,000 a year on other organizations or individuals.\nJREF Award.\nThe JREF Award \"is given to the person or organization that best represents the spirit of the foundation by encouraging critical questions and seeking unbiased, fact-based answers.\" Some of the recipients include the following:\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "57725", "revid": "15951871", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57725", "title": "The Amazing Randi", "text": ""}
{"id": "57726", "revid": "44106950", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57726", "title": "Stage magic", "text": ""}
{"id": "57729", "revid": "15951874", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57729", "title": "Zoonose", "text": ""}
{"id": "57731", "revid": "38556235", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57731", "title": "Leopold II of Belgium", "text": "King of the Belgians from 1865 to 1909\nLeopold II (9 April 1835 \u2013 17 December 1909) was the second king of the Belgians from 1865 to 1909, and the founder and sole owner of the Congo Free State from 1885 to 1908.\nBorn in Brussels as the second but eldest-surviving son of King Leopold I and Queen Louise, Leopold succeeded his father to the Belgian throne in 1865 and reigned for 44 years until his death, the longest reign of a Belgian monarch to date. He died without surviving legitimate sons; the current king of the Belgians, Philippe, descends from his nephew and successor, Albert I. He is popularly referred to as the Builder King in Belgium in reference to the great number of buildings, urban projects and public works he commissioned.\nLeopold was the founder and sole owner of the Congo Free State, a private colonial project undertaken on his own behalf as a personal union with Belgium. He used Henry Morton Stanley to help him lay claim to the Congo, the present-day Democratic Republic of the Congo. At the Berlin Conference of 1884\u20131885, the colonial nations of Europe authorised his claim and committed the Congo Free State to him. Leopold ran the Congo, which he never personally visited, by using the mercenary Force Publique for his personal gain. He extracted a fortune from the territory, initially by the collection of ivory and, after a rise in the price of rubber in the 1890s, by forced labour from the native population to harvest and process rubber.\nLeopold's administration was characterised by systematic brutality and atrocities in the Congo Free State, including forced labour, torture, murder, kidnapping, and the amputation of the hands of men, women, and children when the quota of rubber was not met. In one of the first uses of the term, George Washington Williams described the practices of Leopold's administration of the Congo Free State as \"crimes against humanity\" in 1890.\nWhile it has proven difficult to accurately estimate the pre-colonial population and the extent to which it changed under the Congo Free State, estimates for the Congolese population decline during Leopold's rule range from 1 million to 15 million. The causes of the decline included epidemic disease, a reduced birth rate, and violence and famine caused by the regime. He was widely condemned because of his brutal and oppressive regime in the Congo that resulted in widespread suffering and loss of life including exploitation, violence, and immense human rights abuses, particularly involving the rubber trade.\nEarly life.\nLeopold was born in Brussels on 9 April 1835, the second child of the reigning Belgian monarch, Leopold I, and of his second wife, Louise, the daughter of King Louis Philippe of France. His eldest brother, Louis Philippe, Crown Prince of Belgium, died in infancy in 1834. As heir apparent, Leopold was granted the title of Duke of Brabant in 1840. The French Revolution of 1848 forced his maternal grandfather, Louis Philippe, to flee to the United Kingdom. Louis Philippe died two years later, in 1850. Leopold's fragile mother was deeply affected by the death of her father and her health deteriorated. She died of tuberculosis the same year, when Leopold was 15 years old.\nLeopold's sister Charlotte became Empress Carlota of Mexico in 1864. The British monarch at the time, Queen Victoria, was Leopold II's first cousin, as was Victoria's husband, Prince Albert, since Leopold's father, Albert's father, Duke Ernest I of Saxe-Coburg-Gotha, and Victoria's mother, the then Duchess of Kent, were all siblings. As a young man, Leopold II served in the Belgian military and achieved the rank of lieutenant-general. He also served in the Belgian Senate during this time.\nMarriage and family.\nAt the age of 18, Leopold married Marie Henriette of Austria, a cousin of Emperor Franz Joseph I of Austria and granddaughter of the late Holy Roman Emperor Leopold II, on 22 August 1853 in Brussels. Lively and energetic, Marie Henriette endeared herself to the people by her character and benevolence. Her beauty earned her the sobriquet \"The Rose of Brabant\". She was also an accomplished artist and musician. She was passionate about horse riding, to the point that she would care for her horses personally. Some joked about this \"marriage of a stableman and a nun\", the latter referring to the shy and withdrawn Leopold. The marriage produced four children: three daughters and one son, Prince Leopold, Duke of Brabant. The younger Leopold died in 1869 at the age of nine from pneumonia after falling into a pond. His death was a source of great sorrow for King Leopold. The marriage became unhappy, and the couple separated after a last attempt to have another son, a union that resulted in the birth of their last daughter, Clementine. Marie Henriette retreated to Spa in 1895, and died there in 1902.\nLeopold had many mistresses. In 1899, in his 65th year, Leopold took as a mistress Caroline Lacroix, a 16-year-old French prostitute, and they remained together until his death ten years later. Leopold lavished upon her large sums of money, estates, gifts, and a noble title, Baroness de Vaughan. Owing to these gifts and the unofficial nature of their relationship, their affair ironically lost Leopold more popularity in Belgium than any of his crimes in the Congo. Caroline bore two sons, Lucien Philippe Marie Antoine, Duke of Tervuren, and Philippe Henri Marie Fran\u00e7ois, Count of Ravenstein. Their second son was born with a deformed hand, leading a cartoon to depict Leopold holding the child surrounded by Congolese corpses with their hands sliced off: the caption said \"Vengeance from on high\". They married secretly in a religious ceremony five days before his death. Their failure to perform a civil ceremony rendered the marriage invalid under Belgian law. After the king's death, it soon emerged that he had left his widow a large fortune in Congo securities, only some of which the Belgian government and Leopold's three estranged daughters were able to win back.\nEarly political career.\nAs Leopold's older brother, the earlier crown prince Louis Philippe, had died the year before Leopold's birth, Leopold was heir to the throne from his birth. When he was 5 years old, Leopold received the title of Duke of Brabant, and was appointed a sub-lieutenant in the army. He served in the army until his accession in 1865, by which time he had reached the rank of lieutenant-general.\nLeopold's public career began on his attaining the age of majority in 1855, when he became a member of the Belgian Senate. He took an active interest in the senate, especially in matters concerning the development of Belgium and its trade, and began to urge Belgium's acquisition of colonies. Leopold travelled abroad extensively from 1854 to 1865, visiting India, China, Egypt, and the countries on the Mediterranean coast of Africa. His father died on 10 December 1865, and Leopold took the oath of office on 17 December, at the age of 30. He also served in the Belgian Senate during this time.\nDomestic reign.\nLeopold became king in 1865. He explained his goal for his reign in an 1888 letter addressed to his brother, Prince Philippe, Count of Flanders: \"the country must be strong, prosperous, therefore have colonies of her own, beautiful and calm.\"\nLeopold's reign was marked by a number of major political developments. The Liberals governed Belgium from 1857 to 1880, and during its final year in power legislated the Fr\u00e8re-Orban Law of 1879. This law created free, secular, compulsory primary schools supported by the state and withdrew all state support from Roman Catholic primary schools. The Catholic Party obtained a parliamentary majority in 1880, and four years later restored state support to Catholic schools. In 1885, various socialist and social democratic groups drew together and formed the Labour Party. Increasing social unrest and the rise of the Labour Party forced the adoption of universal male suffrage in 1893.\nDuring Leopold's reign other social changes were enacted into law. Among these were the right of workers to form labour unions and the abolition of the \"livret d'ouvrier\", an employment record book. Laws against child labour were passed. Children younger than 12 were not allowed to work in factories, children younger than 16 were not allowed to work at night, and women younger than 21 years old were not allowed to work underground. Workers gained the right to be compensated for workplace accidents and were given Sundays off.\nLeopold's reluctance to use the Dutch language in public did little to solve the linguistic conflict in Belgium and made him more unpopular than his father with the Flemish Movement. However, his nephew and heir, Prince Baudouin, became something of a hero to the Flemings, and Leopold did make some speeches in Dutch shortly before and after Baudouin's premature death in 1891.\nThe first revision of the Belgian Constitution came in 1893. Universal male suffrage was introduced, though the effect of this was tempered by plural voting. The eligibility requirements for the Senate were reduced, and elections would be based on a system of proportional representation, which continues to this day. Leopold pushed strongly to enable a royal referendum, whereby the king would have the power to consult the electorate directly on an issue, and use his veto according to the results of the referendum. The proposal was rejected, as it would have given the king the power to override the elected government. Leopold was so disappointed that he considered abdication.\nLeopold emphasised military defence as the basis of neutrality, and strove to make Belgium less vulnerable militarily. He achieved the construction of defensive fortresses at Li\u00e8ge, at Namur and at Antwerp. During the Franco-Prussian War, he managed to preserve Belgium's neutrality in a period of unusual difficulty and danger. Leopold pushed for a reform in military service, but he was unable to obtain one until he was on his deathbed. The Belgian army was a combination of volunteers and a lottery, and it was possible for men to pay for substitutes for service. This was replaced by a system in which one son in every family would have to serve in the military. According to historian Jean Stengers, Leopold II\u2019s imperialism was driven by economic advantage rather than political grandeur. Leopold sought to maximise profit through efficient exploitation, including forced labour and direct revenue. However, Stengers emphasises that Leopold\u2019s voracity was not solely for personal enrichment; it was also rooted in patriotism\u2014a desire to ensure Belgium\u2019s prosperity and embellishment.\nBuilder King.\nLeopold commissioned a great number of buildings, urban projects and public works. According to the historians Wm. Roger Louis and Adam Hochschild, this was largely possible thanks to the profits generated from the Congo Free State, though this is disputed. These projects earned him the epithet of \"Builder King\" (, ). The public buildings were mainly in Brussels, Ostend, Tervuren and Antwerp, and include the Parc du Cinquantenaire/Jubelpark (1852\u20131880), memorial arcade and complex, the Basilica of the Sacred Heart (1905\u20131969) and Duden Park in Brussels (1881); the Hippodrome Wellington racetrack (1883), the Royal Galleries and Maria Hendrikapark in Ostend (1902); the Royal Museum for Central Africa and its surrounding park in Tervuren (1898); and Antwerpen-Centraal railway station in Antwerp (1895\u20131905).\nIn addition to his public works, Leopold acquired and built numerous private properties for himself inside and outside Belgium. He expanded the grounds of the Royal Castle of Laeken, and built the Royal Greenhouses, as well as the Japanese Tower and the Chinese Pavilion near the palace (now the Museums of the Far East). In the Ardennes, his domains consisted of of forests and agricultural lands and the ch\u00e2teaux of Ardenne, Ciergnon, Fenffe, Villers-sur-Lesse and Ferage. He also built important country estates on the French Riviera, including the Villa des C\u00e8dres and its botanical garden, and the Villa Leopolda.\nThinking of the future after his death, Leopold did not want the collection of estates, lands and heritage buildings he had privately amassed to be scattered among his daughters, each of whom was married to a foreign prince. In 1900, he created the Royal Trust, by means of which he donated most of his properties to the Belgian nation in perpetuity, and arranged for the royal family to continue using them after his death.\nAttempted assassination.\nOn 15 November 1902, Italian anarchist Gennaro Rubino attempted to assassinate Leopold, who was riding in a royal cortege from a ceremony at the Church of St. Michael and St. Gudula (now Brussels' cathedral) in memory of his recently deceased wife, Marie Henriette. After Leopold's carriage passed, Rubino fired three shots at the procession. The shots missed the king but almost killed his grand marshal, Count Charles John d'Oultremont. Rubino was immediately arrested and subsequently sentenced to life imprisonment; he died in prison in 1918.\nBelgians rejoiced that the king was safe: later in the day, in the Royal Theatre of La Monnaie before \"Tristan und Isolde\" was performed, the orchestra played \"The Braban\u00e7onne\", which was sung loudly and ended with loud cheers and applause. Heads of state and the pope sent telegrams to the king congratulating him for surviving the assassination attempt. After the attack, Leopold replied to a senator: \"My dear senator, if fate wants me shot, too bad! (\"Mon cher S\u00e9nateur, si la fatalit\u00e9 veut que je sois atteint, tant pis\"!).\nCongo Free State.\nLeopold was the founder and sole owner of the Congo Free State, a private project undertaken on his own behalf. He used explorer Henry Morton Stanley to help him lay claim to the Congo, an area now known as the Democratic Republic of the Congo. At the Berlin Conference of 1884\u20131885, the colonial nations of Europe authorised his claim by committing the Congo Free State to improving the lives of the people. The central services of the state were located in Brussels. All officials within the Congo were Belgian, including those in administration, the army, and the courts. Belgian officers from the army played an essential role in the Congo\u2019s governance. Even religious missions, especially Catholic ones, had a distinctly Belgian character.\nLeopold extracted a fortune from the Congo, initially by the collection of ivory, and after a rise in the price of rubber in the 1890s, by forced labour from the people to harvest and process rubber. He ran the Congo using the mercenary \"Force Publique\" for his personal enrichment. Failure to meet rubber collection quotas was punishable by death. Meanwhile, the Force Publique were required to provide a hand of their victim as proof when they had shot and killed someone, as it was believed that they would otherwise use the munitions (imported from Europe at considerable cost) for hunting. As a consequence, the rubber quotas were in part paid off in chopped-off hands.\nShortly after the Brussels Anti-Slavery Conference (1889\u20131890), Leopold issued a new decree mandating that Africans in a large part of the Free State could sell their harvested products (mostly ivory and rubber) only to the state. This law extended an earlier decree declaring that all \"unoccupied\" land belonged to the state. Any ivory or rubber collected from the state-owned land, the reasoning went, must belong to the state, thus creating a de facto state-controlled monopoly. Therefore, a large share of the local population could sell only to the state, which could set prices and thereby control the income the Congolese could receive for their work. For local elites, however, this system presented new opportunities, as the Free State and concession companies paid them with guns to tax their subjects in kind.\nUnder his regime, millions of Congolese inhabitants, including children, were mutilated, killed or died from disease and famine. In addition, the birth rate rapidly declined during this period. Estimates for the total population decline range from 1 million to 15 million, with a consensus growing around 10 million. Several historians argue against this figure due to the absence of reliable censuses, the enormous mortality of diseases such as smallpox or sleeping sickness and the fact that there were only 175 administrative agents in charge of rubber exploitation.\nReports of deaths and abuse led to a major international scandal in the early 20th century, and Leopold was forced by the Belgian government to relinquish control of the colony to the civil administration in 1908.\nObtaining the Congo Free State.\nLeopold fervently believed that overseas colonies were the key to a country's greatness, and he worked tirelessly to acquire colonial territory for Belgium. He envisioned \"our little Belgium\" as the capital of a large overseas empire. Leopold eventually began to acquire a colony as a private citizen. The Belgian government lent him money for this venture.\nDuring his reign, Leopold saw the empires of the Netherlands, Portugal, and Spain as being in a state of decline and expressed interest in buying their territories. In 1866, Leopold instructed the Belgian ambassador in Madrid to speak to Queen Isabella II of Spain about ceding the Philippines to Belgium, but the ambassador did nothing. Leopold quickly replaced the ambassador with a more sympathetic individual to carry out his plan. In 1868, when Isabella II was deposed as queen of Spain, Leopold tried to press his original plan to acquire the Philippines. But without funds, he was unsuccessful. Leopold then devised another unsuccessful plan to establish the Philippines as an independent state, which could then be ruled by a Belgian. When both of these plans failed, Leopold shifted his aspirations of colonisation to Africa.\nAfter numerous unsuccessful schemes to acquire colonies in Africa and Asia, in 1876 Leopold organised a private holding company disguised as an international scientific and philanthropic association, which he called the International African Society, or the International Association for the Exploration and Civilization of the Congo. In 1878, under the auspices of the holding company, he hired explorer Henry Stanley to explore and establish a colony in the Congo region. Much diplomatic manoeuvring among European nations resulted in the Berlin Conference of 1884\u20131885 regarding African affairs, at which representatives of 14 European countries and the United States recognised Leopold as sovereign of most of the area to which he and Stanley had laid claim. On 5 February 1885, the Congo Free State, an area 76 times larger than Belgium, was established under Leopold II's personal rule and private army, the \"Force Publique\".\nLado Enclave.\nIn 1894, King Leopold signed a treaty with the United Kingdom which conceded a strip of land on the Congo Free State's eastern border in exchange for a lifetime lease of the Lado Enclave, which provided access to the navigable Nile and extended the Free State's sphere of influence northwards into Sudan. After rubber profits soared in 1895, Leopold ordered the organisation of an expedition into the Lado Enclave, which had been overrun by Mahdist rebels since the outbreak of the Mahdist War in 1881. The expedition was composed of two columns: the first, under Belgian Baron Dhanis, consisted of a sizeable force, numbering around 3,000, and was to strike north through the jungle and attack the rebels at their base at Rejaf. The second, a much smaller force of 800, was led by Louis-Napol\u00e9on Chaltin and took the main road towards Rejaf. Both expeditions set out in December 1896.\nAlthough Leopold had initially planned for the expedition to carry on much farther than the Lado Enclave, hoping indeed to take Fashoda and then Khartoum, Dhanis' column mutinied in February 1897, resulting in the death of several Belgian officers and the loss of his entire force. Nonetheless, Chaltin continued his advance, and on 17 February 1897, his outnumbered forces defeated the rebels in the Battle of Rejaf, securing the Lado Enclave as Free State territory until Leopold's death in 1909.\nExploitation, atrocities, and death toll.\nLeopold amassed a huge personal fortune by exploiting the natural resources of the Congo. At first, ivory was exported, but this did not yield the expected levels of revenue. When the global demand for rubber exploded, attention shifted to the labour-intensive collection of sap from rubber plants. Abandoning the promises of the Berlin Conference in the late 1890s, the Free State government restricted foreign access and extorted forced labour from the natives. Abuses, especially in the collection of rubber, included forced labour of the native population, beatings, widespread killings, and frequent mutilation when production quotas were not met. One practice used to force workers to collect rubber included taking wives and family members hostage.\nMissionary John Harris of Baringa was so shocked by what he had encountered that he wrote to Leopold's chief agent in the Congo, saying:\nI have just returned from a journey inland to the village of Insongo Mboyo. The abject misery and utter abandon is positively indescribable. I was so moved, Your Excellency, by the people's stories that I took the liberty of promising them that in future you will only kill them for crimes they commit.\nEstimates of the death toll range from one million to fifteen million, since accurate records were not kept. Historians Louis and Stengers in 1968 stated that population figures at the start of Leopold's control are only \"wild guesses\", and that attempts by E. D. Morel and others to determine a figure for the loss of population were \"but figments of the imagination\".\nAdam Hochschild devotes a chapter of his 1998 book \"King Leopold's Ghost\" to the problem of estimating the death toll. He cites several recent lines of investigation, by anthropologist Jan Vansina and others, that examine local sources (police records, religious records, oral traditions, genealogies, personal diaries, and \"many others\"), which generally agree with the assessment of the 1919 Belgian government commission: roughly half the population were killed or died during the Free State period. Hochschild points out that since the first official census by the Belgian authorities in 1924 put the population at about 10 million, these various approaches suggest a rough estimate of a population decline by 10 million.\nSmallpox epidemics and sleeping sickness also devastated the deeply traumatised population. By 1896, African trypanosomiasis had killed up to 5,000 people in the village of Lukolela on the Congo River. The mortality statistics were collected through the efforts of British consul Roger Casement, who found, for example, only 600 survivors of the disease in Lukolela in 1903. Economists Sara Lowes and Eduardo Montero found that King Leopold II's coercive labour practices for rubber extraction in the Congo Free State had long-lasting negative impacts. Ethnic groups subjected to more intensive rubber exploitation exhibited significantly lower economic development over a century later, driven by disruptions to traditional economic systems and human capital accumulation. Their work also examined how colonial co-option of local chiefs during the rubber era may have undermined leader accountability, linking to broader critiques of indirect rule strategies across Africa. They conclude that the oppressive policies under Leopold's personal rule led to lasting economic and political underdevelopment in the region.\nCriticism of the management of Congo.\nInspired by works such as Joseph Conrad\u2019s \"Heart of Darkness\" (1902), originally published as a three-part series in \"Blackwood\u2019s Magazine\" (1899) and based on Conrad's experience as a steamer captain on the Congo 12 years earlier, international criticism of Leopold\u2019s rule increased and mobilised. Reports of outrageous exploitation and widespread human rights abuses led the British Crown to appoint their consul Roger Casement to investigate conditions there. His extensive travels and interviews in the region resulted in the Casement Report, which detailed the extensive abuses under Leopold's regime. A widespread war of words ensued. In Britain, former shipping clerk E. D. Morel with Casement's support founded the Congo Reform Association, the first mass human rights movement. Supporters included American writer Mark Twain, whose stinging political satire entitled \"King Leopold's Soliloquy\" portrays the king arguing that bringing Christianity to the country outweighs a little starvation, and uses many of Leopold's own words against him.\nWriter Arthur Conan Doyle also criticised the \"rubber regime\" in his 1908 work \"The Crime of the Congo\", written to aid the work of the Congo Reform Association. Doyle contrasted Leopold's rule with British rule in Nigeria, arguing that decency required those who ruled primitive peoples to be concerned first with their uplift, not how much could be extracted from them. As Hochschild describes in \"King Leopold's Ghost\", many of Leopold's policies, in particular those of colonial monopolies and forced labour, were influenced by Dutch practice in the East Indies. Similar methods of forced labour were employed to some degree by Germany, France, and Portugal where natural rubber occurred in their own colonies.\nEfforts by Leopold to dampen international criticism of human rights abuses included the sponsoring of an author, May French Sheldon, by his British consule Sir Alfred Lewis Jones on an expedition of the Congo Free State in 1891. While in the Congo, she travelled on steamboats owned by the state and its company allies, who controlled where she went and what she saw. When she returned to England, Jones placed her articles in the newspapers. She stated \"I have witnessed more atrocities in London streets than I have ever seen in the Congo.\" Thereafter, the king paid her a monthly salary to lobby members of Parliament.\nRelinquishment of the Congo.\nInternational opposition and criticism at home from the Catholic Party, Progressive Liberals and the Labour Party caused the Belgian Parliament to compel the king to cede the Congo Free State to Belgium in 1908. The deal that led to the handover cost Belgium the considerable sum of 215.5 million Francs. This was used to discharge the debt of the Congo Free State and to pay out its bond holders as well as 45.5 million for Leopold's pet building projects in Belgium and a personal payment of 50 million to him. The Congo Free State was transformed into a Belgian colony under parliamentary control known as the Belgian Congo. Leopold went to great lengths to conceal potential evidence of wrongdoing during his time as ruler of his private colony. The entire archive of the Congo Free State was burned and he told his aide that even though the Congo had been taken from him, \"they have no right to know what I did there\".\nWhen the Belgian government took over the administration in 1908, the situation in the Congo improved in certain respects. The brutal exploitation and arbitrary use of violence, in which some of the concessionary companies had excelled, were curbed. Article 3 of the new Colonial Charter of 18 October 1908 stated that: \"Nobody can be forced to work on behalf of and for the profit of companies or privates\", but this was not enforced, and the Belgian government continued to impose forced labour on the natives, albeit by less obvious methods. The Belgian Congo gained independence in 1960 and became known as the Republic of the Congo.\nDeath and legacy.\nOn 17 December 1909, Leopold II died at Laeken from an embolism, and the Belgian crown passed to Albert I, the son of Leopold's brother, Philippe, Count of Flanders. His funeral cortege was booed by the crowd in expression of disapproval of his rule. Leopold's reign of exactly 44 years remains the longest in Belgian history. He was interred in the royal vault at the Church of Our Lady of Laeken.\nAttention to the Congo atrocities subsided in the years after Leopold's death, although his appearance in \"The Congo\" by Vachel Lindsay, that poet's best known work, memorialised those atrocities:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nStatues of him were erected in the 1930s at the initiative of Albert I, while the Belgian government celebrated his accomplishments in Belgium. The debate over Leopold's legacy was reignited in 1999 with the publication of \"King Leopold's Ghost\" by American historian Adam Hochschild, which recounts Leopold's plan to acquire the colony, the exploitation, and the large death toll. The debate then periodically resurfaced over the following 20 years.\nIn 2010, Louis Michel, a Belgian member of the European Parliament and former Belgian foreign minister, called Leopold II a \"visionary hero.\" According to Michel, \"To use the word 'genocide' in relation to the Congo is absolutely unacceptable and inappropriate. ... maybe colonisation was domineering and acquiring more power, but at a certain moment, it brought civilisation.\" Michel's remarks were countered by several Belgian politicians. Senator Pol Van Den Driessche replied, \"[A] great visionary? Absolutely not. What happened then was shameful. If we measured him against 21st century standards, it is likely that Leopold would be hauled before the International Criminal Court in The Hague.\"\nIn June 2020, a Black Lives Matter demonstration in Brussels protested the murder of George Floyd, causing Leopold II's legacy to become once again the subject of debate. MPs agreed to set up a parliamentary commission to examine Belgium's colonial past, a step likened to the Truth and Reconciliation Committee set up in South Africa after the apartheid regime was abolished. On 30 June, the 60th anniversary of the Democratic Republic of the Congo's independence, King Philippe released a statement expressing his \"deepest regret\" for the wounds of the colonial past, and the \"acts of violence and cruelty committed\" in the Congo during colonisation but did not explicitly mention Leopold's role in the atrocities. Some activists accused him of not making a full apology.\nStatues.\nLeopold II remains a controversial figure in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. In the capital Kinshasa (known until 1966 as Leopoldville in his honour) his statue was removed after independence. Congolese culture minister Christophe Muzungu decided to reinstate the statue in 2005. He noted that the beginning of the Free State had been a time of some economic and social progress. He argued that people should recognise some positive aspects of the king as well as the negative, but hours after the six-metre (20ft) statue was erected near Kinshasa's central station, it was officially removed.\nSeveral statues have been erected to honour the legacy of Leopold II in Belgium. According to Professor of Colonial History Idesbald Goddeeris of the University of Leuven (2018), most of the statues date from the interwar period, the peak of colonial-patriotic propaganda. The monuments were supposed to help get rid of the scandal after international commotion about the atrocities in the Congo Free State during Leopold II's rule, and to raise people's enthusiasm for the colonial enterprise in Belgian Congo.\nLeopold's controversial regime in the Congo Free State has motivated proposals for these statues to be removed. During the international George Floyd protests against racism (May\u2013July 2020), several statues of Leopold II were vandalised, and petitions calling for the removal of some or all statues were signed by tens of thousands of Belgians. Other petitions, signed by hundreds, called for the statues to remain.\nIn early June 2020, a majority in the Brussels Parliament requested a committee to be set up to 'decolonise the public sphere' in the Brussels-Capital Region. From 9 June 2020 onwards, authorities in Belgium began removing some of the statues of Leopold, beginning with ones in Ekeren in the municipality of Antwerp and in the Warocqu\u00e9 Faculty of Economics and Management of the University of Mons on that day.\nFamily.\nLeopold's sister became the Empress Carlota of Mexico. His first cousins included both Queen Victoria of the United Kingdom and her husband Prince Albert, as well as King Fernando II of Portugal.\nHe had four children with Queen Marie Henriette, of whom the youngest two have descendants living as of 2018[ [update]]:\nLeopold also fathered two sons by Caroline Lacroix. They were adopted in 1910 by Lacroix's second husband, Antoine Durrieux. Leopold granted them courtesy titles that were honorary, as the parliament would not have supported any official act or decree:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "57732", "revid": "14965160", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57732", "title": "Franz Miklosich", "text": "Slovenian philologist and rector of the University of Vienna\nFranz Miklosich (, ; 20 November 1813 \u2013 7 March 1891) was a Slovenian philologist and rector of the University of Vienna.\nEarly life.\nMiklosich was born in the small village of Radomer\u0161\u010dak near the Lower Styrian town of Ljutomer, then part of the Austrian Empire, and baptized \"Franz Xav. Mikloschitsh\". He graduated from the University of Graz with a doctor of philosophy degree.\nCareer.\nHe was a professor of philosophy at the University of Graz. In 1838, he went to the University of Vienna, where he received a doctor of law decree. During his studies, he became influenced by the works of the Slovenian philologist and linguist Jernej Kopitar. He abandoned law, devoting most of his later life to the study of Slavic languages.\nIn 1844, he obtained a post at the Imperial Library of Vienna, where he remained until 1862. In 1844, he published a review of Franz Bopp's book \"Comparative Grammar,\" which attracted attention from the Viennese academic circles. This publication then launched a long series of works, in which Miklosich showed immense erudition. His works led to a revolutionary change in the study of Slavic languages.\nIn 1849 Miklosich was appointed to the newly created chair of Slavic philology at the University of Vienna, and he occupied it until 1886. He became a member of the Academy of Vienna, which appointed him secretary of its historical and philosophical section, a member of the council of public instruction and of the upper house, and correspondent of the French Academy of Inscriptions and Humanities. His numerous writings deal not only with the Slavic languages, but also with Romanian, Aromanian, Albanian, Greek, and Romani.\nBetween 1850 and 1865 he was the Dean of the Faculty of Philosophy for three terms, and the Rector in 1853/1854.\nFrom 1872 to 1880, Miklosich published his original survey of Romani dialects, \"\u00dcber die Mundarten und Wanderungen der Zigeuner Europas\". This work included a discussion of their origins, migration routes, an historical-comparative grammar, and a lexicon. He identified a substantial Greek element that was shared by the Romani dialects, and thus named a \"Greek-speaking area\" as the \"European homeland of the Gypsies\".\nIn 1883, on the occasion of his 70th birthday, he received a medal commissioned by the Austrian Academy of Sciences.\nPolitical engagement.\nIn the Spring of Nations of 1848, Miklosich, who was 35 at the time, actively engaged in the Slovene national movement. He was the chairman of the political association, called \"Slovenija\" (Slovenia) organized by Slovene students that studied in Graz and Vienna. Together with Matija Majar and Lovro Toman, he was among the authors who elaborated the political demand for a United Slovenia. After the failure of the revolutionary requests, he again turned to exclusively academic activity.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "57734", "revid": "48734", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57734", "title": "Ehrich Weiss", "text": ""}
{"id": "57735", "revid": "147410", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57735", "title": "Slavonic languages", "text": ""}
{"id": "57738", "revid": "20957809", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57738", "title": "Slavko Avsenik", "text": "Slovene composer and musician (1929\u20132015)\nSlavko Avsenik (November 26, 1929 \u2013 July 2, 2015) was a Slovene composer and musician. Beginning in 1953 with the formation of the Avsenik Brothers Ensemble, Avsenik produced more than 1,000 songs and garnered success both in Slovenia and in other parts of Europe and America, and is viewed as a Slovenian cultural icon.\nBiography and career.\nSlavko Avsenik was born on November 26, 1929 in the village of Begunje na Gorenjskem, municipality of Radovljica, in the Upper Carniola region of Slovenia. Avsenik was a self-taught musician, who entered the music business \"by coincidence\" in 1952. In 1953 he established the Avsenik Brothers Ensemble with his brother Vilko Avensik (also spelt Ovsenik), who was a university-trained clarinet player.\nHis ensemble, known as 'Ansambel bratov Avsenik' in Slovenian and 'Slavko Avsenik und seine Original Oberkrainer' in German, was already quite popular in Slovenia by 1954, but it was their 1954 hit \"Na Golici\" which brought them international fame and renown. When the original recording was played during 'Slovene Hour' on Klagenfurt Radio in the Austrian state of Carinthia (which has a sizeable Slovenian minority), Bavarian radio producer Fred Rauch immediately recognized the potential and signed the band to his label. They recorded a new version in 1955 in German, which became a huge hit first in the German-speaking world and then after, all around Europe. Growing in popularity, they soon began appearing in broadcasts, movies, and concerts, first in West Germany and then all over Europe.\nIn 1960, the band landed a recording contract with Telefunken-Decca. It appeared regularly on network television, toured continuously, logging over 400,000 miles in 1967 alone. Milestones include a 1961 performance before over 80,000 in Berlin Stadium, tours of the United States and Canada in 1970 and 1985, and a one-hour German television network special in 1980.\nThe group has won numerous awards including eight television competitions, twelve from German network television, eighteen as Germany's most popular band, the recording industry's \"European Oscar\" in 1975, the Golden Rose Award for the most requested group on Austrian radio in 1979, and the Hermann L\u00f6ns award from the German Minister of Culture.\nAvsenik's influence over Cleveland-style polka music began in 1958 when Johnny Pecon's English lyrics transformed Slavko's \"Tam kjer murke cveto\" into a Cleveland-style Hit, \"Little Fella\". Since then, Cleveland-style orchestras have recorded well over 200 Avsenik songs, including nearly sixty by the Hank Haller Ensemble, and as many more by Fred Ziwich, Fred Kuhar, the Fairport Ensemble, Al Markic, Roger Bright, Al Tercek, and Cilka Dolgan. Avsenik tribute bands in North America include Duke Marsic and his Happy Slovenians, the Alpine Sextet, Ansambel Veseli Godci and Veseli Farani, Marjan Kramer, and Planinski Kvintet. Many Slovenian polka/oberkrainer-style bands in Europe have also been influenced by Avsenik's music, including Slovenia's Hi\u0161ni ansambel Avsenik and Ga\u0161perji/Die Jungen Oberkrainer.\nThe most popular song of Avsenik's band is a polka titled \"Na Golici\" in Slovene, \"Trompetenecho\" in German, and \"Trumpet Echoes\" in English, which is considered by some to be the most played instrumental song in the world.\nOver forty years, the Avsenik Ensemble's original \"Oberkrainer\" sound became an example of ethnic musical expression for Slovenia, Austria, Germany, Switzerland, northern Italy and the Benelux countries, spawning hundreds of Alpine orchestras in the process.\nDeath and legacy.\nSlavko Avsenik died on July 2, 2015, at the age of 85. Since 2008, the Avsenik Festival has been held in his home town of Begunje in his honor, featuring over 30 ensembles including the Sa\u0161o Avsenik Ensemble featuring his grandson Sa\u0161o Avsenik and his son Gregor Avsenik. One of his other sons, Slavko Avsenik Jr., is one of Slovenia's most prominent film composers.\nA monument was built by architect Klemen Rodman in 2013 to mark Avsenik's 84th birthday, near his home town in the municipality of Radovljica. It features three accordions surrounding a traditional Upper Carniolan umbrella.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "57739", "revid": "20972928", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57739", "title": "Ad Lib, Inc.", "text": "Canadian manufacturer\nAd Lib, Inc. was a Canadian manufacturer of sound cards and other computer equipment founded by Martin Prevel, a former professor of music and vice-dean of the music department at the Universit\u00e9 Laval. The company's best known product, the \"AdLib Music Synthesizer Card\" (\"ALMSC\"), or simply the AdLib as it was called, was the first add-on sound card for IBM compatibles to achieve widespread acceptance, becoming the first de facto standard for audio reproduction.\nHistory.\nAfter development work on the AdLib Music Synthesizer Card had concluded, the company struggled to engage the software development community with their new product. As a result, Ad Lib partnered with Top Star Computer Services, Inc., a New Jersey company that provided quality assurance services to game developers. Top Star's President, Rich Heimlich, was sufficiently impressed by a product demonstration in Quebec in 1987 to endorse the product to his top customers. Sierra On-Line's \"King's Quest IV\" became the first game to support AdLib. The game's subsequent success helped to launch the AdLib card into mainstream media coverage. As sales of the card rose, many developers began including support for the AdLib in their programs.\nThe success of the AdLib Music Card soon attracted competition. Not long after its introduction, Creative Labs introduced its competing Sound Blaster card. The Sound Blaster was fully compatible with AdLib's hardware, and it also implemented two key features absent from the AdLib: a PCM audio channel and a game port. With additional features and better marketing, the Sound Blaster quickly overshadowed AdLib as the de facto standard in PC gaming audio. AdLib's slow response, the AdLib Gold, did not sell well enough to sustain the company.\nIn 1992, Ad Lib filed for bankruptcy, while the Sound Blaster family continued to dominate the PC game industry. That same year, Binnenalster GmbH from Germany acquired the assets of the company. Ad Lib was renamed AdLib Multimedia and relaunched the AdLib Gold sound card and many other products. Binnenalster sold AdLib Multimedia to Softworld Taiwan in 1994.\nProducts.\nAdLib Music Synthesizer Card (1987).\nAdLib used Yamaha's YM3812 sound chip, which produces sound by FM synthesis. The AdLib card consisted of a YM3812 chip with off-the-shelf external glue logic to plug into a standard PC-compatible ISA 8-bit slot.\nPC software-generated multitimbral music and sound effects through the AdLib card, although the acoustic quality was distinctly synthesized. Digital audio (PCM) was not supported; this would become a key missing feature when the competitor Creative Labs implemented it in their Sound Blaster cards. It was still possible, however, to output PCM sound with software by modulating the playback volume at an audio rate, as was done, for example, in the MicroProse game \"F-15 Strike Eagle II\" and the multi-channel music editor Sound Club for MS-DOS.\nThere are two separate revisions of the original AdLib sound card. The original design from 1987 provided mono output to a \u00bc-inch jack aimed for composers and musicians, while the second design from 1990 used a 3.5\u00a0mm miniature mono output, which was quickly becoming the new standard in the computer and game industry.\nAdLib also released a version of the AdLib sound card for IBM's MicroChannel architecture, the AdLib\u00a0MCA, which used an MCA\u00a0P82C611 interface IC. Notable updates for this MCA version was the use of a volume wheel, as the original potentiometer made the card too thick for the MCA standard.\nAdLib Gold 1000 (1992).\nAd Lib planned a new proprietary standard before releasing the 12-bit stereo sound card called the AdLib Gold. The Gold\u00a01000 used a later-generation Yamaha YMF262 (OPL3) and 12-bit digital PCM capability while retaining backward compatibility with OPL2 through the OPL3 chip. The onboard Yamaha YMZ263-F also performs 2\u00d7 oversampling, which would affect the OPL3 output slightly. A surround-sound module was developed as an optional attachment that allowed a chorus surround effect to be enabled for OPL3 outputs; however, few programs supported it. One unique aspect is that it could be initialized for certain sounds and did not affect the entire output by default. Other optional attachments such as SCSI support and modem support were in development as well.\nThere is evidence of anti-competitive behavior by Creative in the failure of this card. Yamaha made parts for both Creative and AdLib, with Creative being Yamaha's biggest customer at the time. The chip that Yamaha created for the AdLib card continually failed to pass testing, while Creative's Yamaha chip passed. This enabled Creative to come to market first, shortly after which AdLib's chip passed testing, but it was too late for it to sustain itself.\nDespite AdLib's efforts, the Gold 1000 failed to capture the market, and the company eventually went bankrupt due to cheaper alternatives such as the Creative Labs Sound Blaster\u00a016. AdLib designed the Gold\u00a01000 mainly in-house, as such, the Gold\u00a01000's layout has a lot of discrete circuitry and many surface-mount components in a grid array. Creative Labs was able to integrate their sound cards more tightly to reduce cost.\nAdLib had planned a secondary release of the Gold\u00a01000, the Gold\u00a0MC2000, which would have supported the MicroChannel bus. However, AdLib went bankrupt before the card could be produced.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "57742", "revid": "4626", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57742", "title": "Fixed Precision", "text": ""}
{"id": "57744", "revid": "1752", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57744", "title": "Ivory Coast", "text": "Country in West Africa\nIvory Coast, also known as C\u00f4te d'Ivoire and officially the Republic of C\u00f4te d'Ivoire, is a country on the southern coast of West Africa. Its capital city of Yamoussoukro is located in the centre of the country, while its largest city and economic centre is the port city of Abidjan. It borders Guinea to the northwest, Liberia to the west, Mali to the northwest, Burkina Faso to the northeast, Ghana to the east, and the Atlantic Ocean's Gulf of Guinea to the south. With 31.5 million inhabitants in 2024, Ivory Coast is the third-most populous country in West Africa. Its official language is French, and indigenous languages are also widely used, including B\u00e9t\u00e9, Baoul\u00e9, Dyula, Dan, Anyin, and Cebaara Senufo. In total, there are around 78 languages spoken in Ivory Coast. The country has a religiously diverse population, including numerous followers of Islam, Christianity, and traditional faiths often entailing animism.\nBefore its colonisation, Ivory Coast was home to several states, including Gyaaman, the Kong Empire, and Baoul\u00e9. The area became a protectorate of France in 1843 and was consolidated as a French colony in 1893 amid the Scramble for Africa. It achieved independence in 1960, led by F\u00e9lix Houphou\u00ebt-Boigny, who ruled the country until 1993. Relatively stable by regional standards, Ivory Coast established close political-economic ties with its West African neighbours while maintaining close relations with the West, especially France. Its stability was diminished by a coup d'\u00e9tat in 1999 and two civil wars\u2014first between 2002 and 2007 and again during 2010\u20132011. It adopted a new constitution in 2016.\nIvory Coast is a republic with strong executive power vested in its president. Through the production of coffee and cocoa, it was an economic powerhouse in West Africa during the 1960s and 1970s, then experienced an economic crisis in the 1980s, contributing to a period of political and social turmoil that extended until 2011. Ivory Coast has again experienced high economic growth since the return of peace and political stability in 2011. From 2012 to 2023, the economy grew by an average of 7.1% per year in real terms, the second-fastest rate of economic growth in Africa and fourth-fastest rate in the world. In 2023, Ivory Coast had the second-highest GDP per capita in West Africa, behind Cape Verde. Despite this, as of the most recent survey in 2016, 46.1% of the population continues to be affected by multidimensional poverty. As of 2023, Ivory Coast is the world's largest exporter of cocoa beans and has high levels of income for its region. The economy still relies heavily on agriculture, with smallholder cash-crop production predominating.\nEtymology.\nOriginally, Portuguese merchant-explorers in the 15th and 16th centuries divided the west coast of Africa, very roughly, into four \"coasts\" reflecting resources available from each coast. The coast which they named the \u2014meaning 'coast of ivory', and translated into French as \u2014lay between what was known as the , so-called \"Upper Guinea\" at , and Lower Guinea. There was also a Pepper Coast, also known as the \"Grain Coast\" (present-day Liberia), a \"Gold Coast\" (Ghana), and a \"Slave Coast\" (Togo, Benin and Nigeria). Like those, the name \"Ivory Coast\" reflected the major trade that occurred on that particular stretch of the coast: the export of ivory.\nOther names for the area included the , literally 'Coast of Teeth', again reflecting the ivory trade; the , after the people whom the Dutch named the \"Quaqua\" (alternatively \"Kwa Kwa\"); the Coast of the Five and Six Stripes, after a type of cotton fabric also traded there; and the \"C\u00f4te du Vent\", the Windward Coast, after perennial local off-shore weather conditions. In the 19th century, usage switched to .\nThe coastline of the modern state is not quite coterminous with what the 15th- and 16th-century merchants knew as the \"Teeth\" or \"Ivory\" coast, which was considered to stretch from Cape Palmas to Cape Three Points and which is thus now divided between the modern states of Ghana and Ivory Coast (with a minute portion of Liberia). It retained the name through French rule and independence in 1960. \nThe name had long since been translated literally into other languages, which the post-independence government considered increasingly troublesome whenever its international dealings extended beyond the Francophone sphere. Therefore, in April 1986, the government declared that (or, more fully, ) would be its formal name for the purposes of diplomatic protocol and has since officially refused to recognize any translations from French to other languages in its international dealings. Despite the Ivorian government's request, the English translation \"Ivory Coast\" (often \"\"the\" Ivory Coast\") is still frequently used in English by various media outlets and publications. Many governments use \"C\u00f4te d'Ivoire\" for diplomatic reasons, as do their outlets, such as the Chinese CCTV News. Other organizations that use \"C\u00f4te d'Ivoire\" include the Central Intelligence Agency in its \"World Factbook\" and the international sport organizations FIFA and the IOC (referring to their national football and Olympic teams in international games and in official broadcasts), the \"Encyclop\u00e6dia Britannica\" and the \"National Geographic Society\". The BBC usually uses \"Ivory Coast\" both in news reports and on its page about the country. \"The Guardian\" newspaper's style guide says: \"Ivory Coast, not 'The Ivory Coast' or \"; its nationals are Ivorians.\" In a similar fashion, \"The Economist\" states \"...Ivory Coast, \"not\" C\u00f4te d'Ivoire...\"\nHistory.\nLand migration.\nThe first human presence in Ivory Coast has been difficult to determine because human remains have not been well preserved in the country's humid climate. However, newly found weapon and tool fragments (specifically, polished axes cut through shale and remnants of cooking and fishing) have been interpreted as a possible indication of a large human presence during the Upper Paleolithic period (15,000 to 10,000 BC), or at the minimum, the Neolithic period.\nThe earliest known inhabitants of Ivory Coast have left traces scattered throughout the territory. Historians believe that they were all either displaced or absorbed by the ancestors of the present indigenous inhabitants, who migrated south into the area before the 16th century. Such groups included the Ehotil\u00e9 (Aboisso), Kotrowou (Fresco), Z\u00e9hiri (Grand-Lahou), Ega and Di\u00e8s (Divo).\nPre-Islamic and Islamic periods.\nThe first recorded history appears in the chronicles of North African (Berber) traders, who, from early Roman times, conducted a caravan trade across the Sahara in salt, slaves, gold, and other goods. The southern termini of the trans-Saharan trade routes were located on the edge of the desert, and from there supplemental trade extended as far south as the edge of the rainforest. The most important terminals\u2014Djenn\u00e9, Gao, and Timbuctu\u2014grew into major commercial centres around which the great Sudanic empires developed.\nBy controlling the trade routes with their powerful military forces, these empires were able to dominate neighbouring states. The Sudanic empires also became centres of Islamic education. Islam had been introduced in the western Sudan by Muslim Berbers; it spread rapidly after the conversion of many important rulers. From the 11th century, by which time the rulers of the Sudanic empires had embraced Islam, it spread south into the northern areas of contemporary Ivory Coast.\nThe Ghana Empire, the earliest of the Sudanic empires, flourished in the region encompassing present-day southeast Mauritania and southern Mali between the 4th and 13th centuries. At the peak of its power in the 11th century, its realms extended from the Atlantic Ocean to Timbuktu. After the decline of Ghana, the Mali Empire grew into a powerful Muslim state, which reached its apogee in the early part of the 14th century. The territory of the Mali Empire in Ivory Coast was limited to the northwest corner around Odienn\u00e9.\nIts slow decline starting at the end of the 14th century followed internal discord and revolts by vassal states, one of which, Songhai, flourished as an empire between the 14th and 16th centuries. Songhai was also weakened by internal discord, which led to factional warfare. This discord spurred most of the migrations southward toward the forest belt. The dense rainforest covering the southern half of the country created barriers to the large-scale political organisations that had arisen in the north. Inhabitants lived in villages or clusters of villages; their contacts with the outside world were filtered through long-distance traders. Villagers subsisted on agriculture and hunting.\nPre-European modern period.\nFive important states flourished in Ivory Coast during the pre-European early modern period. The Muslim Kong Empire was established by the Dyula in the early 18th century in the north-central region inhabited by the S\u00e9noufo, who had fled Islamisation under the Mali Empire. Although Kong became a prosperous centre of agriculture, trade, and crafts, ethnic diversity and religious discord gradually weakened the kingdom. In 1895 the city of Kong was sacked and conquered by Samori Ture of the Wassoulou Empire.\nThe Abron kingdom of Gyaaman was established in the 17th century by an Akan group, the Abron, who had fled the developing Ashanti confederation of Asanteman in what is present-day Ghana. From their settlement south of Bondoukou, the Abron gradually extended their hegemony over the Dyula people in Bondoukou, who were recent arrivals from the market city of Begho. Bondoukou developed into a major centre of commerce and Islam. The kingdom's Quranic scholars attracted students from all parts of West Africa. In the mid-17th century in east-central Ivory Coast, other Akan groups fleeing the Asante established a Baoul\u00e9 kingdom at Sakasso and two Agni kingdoms, Ind\u00e9ni\u00e9 and Sanwi.\nThe Baoul\u00e9, like the Ashanti, developed a highly centralised political and administrative structure under three successive rulers. It finally split into smaller chiefdoms. Despite the breakup of their kingdom, the Baoul\u00e9 strongly resisted French subjugation. The descendants of the rulers of the Agni kingdoms tried to retain their separate identity long after Ivory Coast's independence; as late as 1969, the Sanwi attempted to break away from Ivory Coast and form an independent kingdom.\nEstablishment of French rule.\nCompared to neighbouring Ghana, Ivory Coast, though practising slavery and slave raiding, suffered little from the slave trade. European slave and merchant ships preferred other areas along the coast. The earliest recorded European voyage to West Africa was made by the Portuguese in 1482. The first West African French settlement, Saint-Louis, was founded in the mid-17th century in Senegal, while at about the same time, the Dutch ceded to the French a settlement at Gor\u00e9e Island, off Dakar. A French mission was established in 1687 at Assinie near the border with the Gold Coast (now Ghana). The Europeans suppressed the local practice of slavery at this time and forbade the trade to their merchants.\nAssinie's survival was precarious, however; the French were not firmly established in Ivory Coast until the mid-19th century. In 1843\u201344, French Admiral Louis \u00c9douard Bou\u00ebt-Willaumez signed treaties with the kings of the Grand-Bassam and Assinie regions, making their territories a French protectorate. French explorers, missionaries, trading companies, and soldiers gradually extended the area under French control inland from the lagoon region. Pacification was not accomplished until 1915.\nActivity along the coast stimulated European interest in the interior, especially along the two great rivers, the Senegal and the Niger. Concerted French exploration of West Africa began in the mid-19th century but moved slowly, based more on individual initiative than on government policy. In the 1840s, the French concluded a series of treaties with local West African chiefs that enabled the French to build fortified posts along the Gulf of Guinea to serve as permanent trading centres. The first posts in Ivory Coast included one at Assinie and another at Grand-Bassam, which became the colony's first capital. The treaties provided for French sovereignty within the posts and for trading privileges in exchange for fees or \"coutumes\" paid annually to the local chiefs for the use of the land. The arrangement was not entirely satisfactory to the French, because trade was limited and misunderstandings over treaty obligations often arose. Nevertheless, the French government maintained the treaties, hoping to expand trade. France also wanted to maintain a presence in the region to stem the increasing influence of the British along the Gulf of Guinea coast.\nThe defeat of France in the Franco-Prussian War in 1871 and the subsequent annexation by Germany of the French province of Alsace\u2013Lorraine initially caused the French government to abandon its colonial ambitions and withdraw its military garrisons from its West African trading posts, leaving them in the care of resident merchants. The trading post at Grand-Bassam was left in the care of a shipper from Marseille, Arthur Verdier, who in 1878 was named Resident of the Establishment of Ivory Coast.\nIn 1886, to support its claims of effective occupation, France again assumed direct control of its West African coastal trading posts and embarked on an accelerated program of exploration in the interior. In 1887, Lieutenant Louis-Gustave Binger began a two-year journey that traversed parts of Ivory Coast's interior. By the end of the journey, he had concluded four treaties establishing French protectorates in Ivory Coast. Also in 1887, Verdier's agent, Marcel Treich-Lapl\u00e8ne, negotiated five additional agreements that extended French influence from the headwaters of the Niger River Basin through Ivory Coast.\nFrench colonial era.\nBy the end of the 1880s, France had established control over the coastal regions, and in 1889 Britain recognised French sovereignty in the area. That same year, France named Treich-Lapl\u00e8ne the titular governor of the territory. In 1893, Ivory Coast became a French colony, with its capital in Grand-Bassam, and Captain Binger was appointed governor. Agreements with Liberia in 1892 and with Britain in 1893 determined the eastern and western boundaries of the colony, but the northern boundary was not fixed until 1947 because of efforts by the French government to attach parts of Upper Volta (present-day Burkina Faso) and French Sudan (present-day Mali) to Ivory Coast for economic and administrative reasons.\nFrance's main goal was to stimulate the production of exports. Coffee, cocoa, and palm oil crops were soon planted along the coast. Ivory Coast stood out as the only West African country with a sizeable population of European settlers; elsewhere in West and Central Africa, Europeans who emigrated to the colonies were largely bureaucrats. As a result, French citizens owned one-third of the cocoa, coffee, and banana plantations and adopted the local forced-labour system.\nThroughout the early years of French rule, French military contingents were sent inland to establish new posts. The African population resisted French penetration and settlement, even in areas where treaties of protection had been in force. Among those offering the greatest resistance was Samori Ture, who in the 1880s and 1890s was establishing the Wassoulou Empire, which extended over large parts of present-day Guinea, Mali, Burkina Faso, and Ivory Coast. Ture's large, well-equipped army, which could manufacture and repair its own firearms, attracted strong support throughout the region. The French responded to Ture's expansion and conquest with military pressure. French campaigns against Ture, which were met with fierce resistance, intensified in the mid-1890s until he was captured in 1898 and his empire dissolved.\nFrance's imposition of a head tax in 1900 to support the colony's public works program provoked protests. Many Ivorians saw the tax as a violation of the protectorate treaties because they felt that France was demanding the equivalent of a \"coutume\" from the local kings, rather than the reverse. Many, especially in the interior, also considered the tax a humiliating symbol of submission. In 1905, the French officially abolished slavery in most of French West Africa. From 1904 to 1958, Ivory Coast was part of the Federation of French West Africa. It was a colony and an overseas territory under the Third Republic. In World War I, France organized regiments from Ivory Coast to fight in France, and colony resources were rationed from 1917 to 1919. Until the period following World War II, governmental affairs in French West Africa were administered from Paris. France's policy in West Africa was reflected mainly in its philosophy of \"association\", meaning that all Africans in Ivory Coast were officially French \"subjects\" but without rights to representation in Africa or France.\nFrench colonial policy incorporated concepts of assimilation and association. Based on the assumed superiority of French culture, in practice the assimilation policy meant the extension of the French language, institutions, laws, and customs to the colonies. The policy of association also affirmed the superiority of the French in the colonies, but it entailed different institutions and systems of laws for the coloniser and the colonised. Under this policy, the Africans in Ivory Coast were allowed to preserve their own customs insofar as they were compatible with French interests.\nAn indigenous elite trained in French administrative practice formed an intermediary group between French and Africans. After 1930, a small number of Westernized Ivorians were granted the right to apply for French citizenship. Most Ivorians, however, were classified as French subjects and were governed under the principle of association. As subjects of France, natives outside the civilised elite had no political rights. They were drafted for work in mines, on plantations, as porters, and on public projects as part of their tax responsibility. They were expected to serve in the military and were subject to the \"indig\u00e9nat\", a separate system of law.\nDuring World War II, the Vichy regime remained in control until 1943, when members of General Charles de Gaulle's provisional government assumed control of all French West Africa. The Brazzaville Conference of 1944, the first Constituent Assembly of the Fourth Republic in 1946, and France's gratitude for African loyalty during World War II, led to far-reaching governmental reforms in 1946. French citizenship was granted to all African \"subjects\", the right to organise politically was recognised, and various forms of forced labour were abolished. Between 1944 and 1946, many national conferences and constituent assemblies took place between France's government and provisional governments in Ivory Coast. Governmental reforms were established by late 1946, which granted French citizenship to all African \"subjects\" under the colonial control of the French.\nUntil 1958, governors appointed in Paris administered the colony of Ivory Coast, using a system of direct, centralised administration that left little room for Ivorian participation in policy-making. The French colonial administration also adopted divide-and-rule policies, applying ideas of assimilation only to the educated elite. The French were also interested in ensuring that the small but influential Ivorian elite was sufficiently satisfied with the \"status quo\" to refrain from developing anti-French sentiments and calls for independence. Although strongly opposed to the practices of association, educated Ivorians believed that they would achieve equality in the French colonial system through assimilation rather than through complete independence from France. After the assimilation doctrine was implemented through the postwar reforms, though, Ivorian leaders realised that even assimilation implied the superiority of the French over the Ivorians and that discrimination and inequality would end only with independence.\nIndependence.\nF\u00e9lix Houphou\u00ebt-Boigny, the son of a Baoul\u00e9 chief, became Ivory Coast's father of independence. In 1944, he formed the country's first agricultural trade union for African cocoa farmers like himself. Angered that colonial policy favoured French plantation owners, the union members united to recruit migrant workers for their own farms. Houphou\u00ebt-Boigny soon rose to prominence and was elected to the French Parliament in Paris within a year. A year later, the French abolished forced labour. Houphou\u00ebt-Boigny established a strong relationship with the French government, expressing a belief that Ivory Coast would benefit from the relationship, which it did for many years. France appointed him as a minister, the first African to become a minister in a European government.\nA turning point in relations with France was reached with the 1956 Overseas Reform Act (\"Loi Cadre\"), which transferred several powers from Paris to elected territorial governments in French West Africa and also removed the remaining voting inequities. On 4 December 1958, Ivory Coast became an autonomous member of the French Community, which had replaced the French Union.\nBy 1960, the country was easily French West Africa's most prosperous, contributing over 40% of the region's total exports. When Houphou\u00ebt-Boigny became the first president, his government gave farmers good prices for their products to further stimulate production, which was further boosted by a significant immigration of workers from surrounding countries. Coffee production increased significantly, catapulting Ivory Coast into third place in world output, behind Brazil and Colombia. By 1979, the country was the world's leading producer of cocoa. It also became Africa's leading exporter of pineapples and palm oil. French technicians contributed to the \"Ivorian miracle\". In other African nations, the people drove out the Europeans following independence, but in Ivory Coast, they poured in. The French community grew from only 30,000 before independence to 60,000 in 1980, most of them teachers, managers, and advisors. For 20 years, the economy maintained an annual growth rate of nearly 10%\u2014the highest of Africa's non-oil-exporting countries.\nHouphou\u00ebt-Boigny administration.\nHouphou\u00ebt-Boigny's one-party rule was not amenable to political competition. Laurent Gbagbo, (who eventually became the president of Ivory Coast in 2000) had to flee the country in the 1980s after he incurred the ire of Houphou\u00ebt-Boigny by founding the Ivorian Popular Front. Houphou\u00ebt-Boigny banked on his broad appeal to the population, who continued to elect him. He was criticised for his emphasis on developing large-scale projects.\nMany felt the millions of dollars spent transforming his home village, Yamoussoukro, into the new political capital were wasted; others supported his vision to develop a centre for peace, education, and religion in the heart of the country. In the early 1980s, the world recession and a local drought sent shock waves through the Ivorian economy. The overcutting of timber and collapsing sugar prices caused the country's external debt to increase three-fold. Crime rose dramatically in Abidjan as an influx of villagers exacerbated unemployment caused by the recession. In 1990, hundreds of civil servants went on strike, joined by students protesting institutional corruption. The unrest forced the government to support multi-party democracy. Houphou\u00ebt-Boigny became increasingly feeble and died in 1993. He favoured Henri Konan B\u00e9di\u00e9 as his successor.\nB\u00e9di\u00e9 administration.\nIn October 1995, B\u00e9di\u00e9 overwhelmingly won re-election against a fragmented and disorganised opposition. He tightened his hold over political life, jailing several hundred opposition supporters. In contrast, the economic outlook improved, at least superficially, with decreasing inflation and an attempt to remove foreign debt. Unlike Houphou\u00ebt-Boigny, who was very careful to avoid any ethnic conflict and left access to administrative positions open to immigrants from neighbouring countries, Bedi\u00e9 emphasised the concept of \"Ivoirit\u00e9\" to exclude his rival Alassane Ouattara, who had two northern Ivorian parents, from running for the future presidential election. As people originating from foreign countries are a large part of the Ivorian population, this policy excluded many people of Ivorian nationality. The relationship between various ethnic groups became strained, resulting in two civil wars in the following decades.\nSimilarly, Bedi\u00e9 excluded many potential opponents from the army. In late 1999, a group of dissatisfied officers staged a military coup, putting General Robert Gu\u00e9\u00ef in power. Bedi\u00e9 fled into exile in France. The new leadership reduced crime and corruption, and the generals pressed for austerity and campaigned in the streets for a less wasteful society.\nFirst civil war.\nA presidential election was held in October 2000 in which Laurent Gbagbo vied with Gu\u00e9\u00ef, but it was not peaceful. The lead-up to the election was marked by military and civil unrest. Following a public uprising that resulted in around 180 deaths, Gu\u00e9\u00ef was swiftly replaced by Gbagbo. Ouattara was disqualified by the country's Supreme Court because of his alleged Burkinab\u00e9 nationality. The constitution did not allow noncitizens to run for the presidency. This sparked violent protests in which his supporters, mainly from the country's north, battled riot police in the capital, Yamoussoukro.\nIn the early hours of 19 September 2002, while Gbagbo was in Italy, an armed uprising occurred. Troops who were to be demobilised mutinied, launching attacks in several cities. The battle for the main gendarmerie barracks in Abidjan lasted until mid-morning, but by lunchtime the government forces had secured Abidjan. They had lost control of the north of the country, and rebel forces made their stronghold in the northern city of Bouak\u00e9. The rebels threatened to move on to Abidjan again, and France deployed troops from its base in the country to stop their advance. The French said they were protecting their citizens from danger, but their deployment also helped government forces. That the French were helping either side was not established as a fact, but each side accused the French of supporting the opposite side. Whether French actions improved or worsened the situation in the long term is disputed. What exactly happened that night is also disputed. The government claimed that former president Robert Gu\u00e9\u00ef led a coup attempt, and state TV showed pictures of his dead body in the street; counter-claims stated that he and 15 others had been murdered at his home, and his body had been moved to the streets to incriminate him. Ouattara took refuge in the German embassy; his home had been burned down. President Gbagbo cut short his trip to Italy and on his return stated, in a television address, that some of the rebels were hiding in the shanty towns where foreign migrant workers lived. Gendarmes and vigilantes bulldozed and burned homes by the thousands, attacking residents. An early ceasefire with the rebels, which had the backing of much of the northern populace, proved short-lived and fighting over the prime cocoa-growing areas resumed. France sent in troops to maintain the cease-fire boundaries, and militias, including warlords and fighters from Liberia and Sierra Leone, took advantage of the crisis to seize parts of the west.\nIn January 2003, Gbagbo and rebel leaders signed accords creating a \"government of national unity\". Curfews were lifted, and French troops patrolled the country's western border. The unity government was unstable, and central problems remained with neither side achieving its goals. In March 2004, 120 people were killed at an opposition rally, and subsequent mob violence led to the evacuation of foreign nationals. A report concluded the killings were planned. Though UN peacekeepers were deployed to maintain a \"Zone of Confidence\", relations between Gbagbo and the opposition continued to deteriorate.\nEarly in November 2004, after the peace agreement had effectively collapsed because the rebels refused to disarm, Gbagbo ordered airstrikes against the rebels. During one of these airstrikes in Bouak\u00e9, on 6 November 2004, French soldiers were hit, and nine were killed; the Ivorian government said it was a mistake, but the French claimed it was deliberate. They responded by destroying most Ivorian military aircraft (two Su-25 planes and five helicopters), and violent retaliatory riots against the French broke out in Abidjan.\nGbagbo's original term as president expired on 30 October 2005, but a peaceful election was deemed impossible, so his term in office was extended for a maximum of one year, according to a plan worked out by the African Union and endorsed by the United Nations Security Council. With the late-October deadline approaching in 2006, the election was regarded as very unlikely to be held by that point, and the opposition and the rebels rejected the possibility of another term extension for Gbagbo. The UN Security Council endorsed another one-year extension of Gbagbo's term on 1 November 2006; however, the resolution provided for strengthening of Prime Minister Charles Konan Banny's powers. Gbagbo said the next day that elements of the resolution deemed to be constitutional violations would not be applied.\nA peace accord between the government and the rebels, or New Forces, was signed on 4 March 2007, and subsequently Guillaume Soro, leader of the New Forces, became prime minister. These events were seen by some observers as substantially strengthening Gbagbo's position. According to UNICEF, at the end of the civil war, water and sanitation infrastructure had been greatly damaged. Communities across the country required repairs to their water supply.\nSecond civil war.\nThe presidential elections that should have been organised in 2005 were postponed until November 2010. The preliminary results showed a loss for Gbagbo in favour of former Prime Minister Ouattara. The ruling FPI contested the results before the Constitutional Council, charging massive fraud in the northern departments controlled by the rebels of the New Forces. These charges were contradicted by United Nations observers (unlike African Union observers). The report of the results led to severe tension and violent incidents. The Constitutional Council, which consisted of Gbagbo supporters, declared the results of seven northern departments unlawful and that Gbagbo had won the elections with 51% of the vote \u2013 instead of Ouattara winning with 54%, as reported by the Electoral Commission. After the inauguration of Gbagbo, Ouattara\u2014who was recognised as the winner by most countries and the United Nations\u2014organised an alternative inauguration. These events raised fears of a resurgence of the civil war; thousands of refugees fled the country. The African Union sent Thabo Mbeki, former president of South Africa, to mediate the conflict. The United Nations Security Council adopted a resolution recognising Ouattara as the winner of the elections, based on the position of the Economic Community of West African States, which suspended Ivory Coast from all its decision-making bodies while the African Union also suspended the country's membership.\nIn 2010, a colonel of Ivory Coast armed forces, Nguessan Yao, was arrested in New York in a year-long U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement operation charged with procuring and illegal export of weapons and munitions: 4,000 handguns, 200,000 rounds of ammunition, and 50,000 tear-gas grenades, in violation of a UN embargo. Several other Ivory Coast officers were released because they had diplomatic passports. His accomplice, Michael Barry Shor, an international trader, was located in Virginia.\nThe 2010 presidential election led to the 2010\u20132011 Ivorian crisis and the Second Ivorian Civil War. International organisations reported numerous human-rights violations by both sides. In Du\u00e9kou\u00e9, hundreds of people were killed. In nearby Blol\u00e9quin, dozens were killed. UN and French forces took military action against Gbagbo. Gbagbo was taken into custody after a raid into his residence on 11 April 2011. The country was severely damaged by the war, and it was observed that Ouattara had inherited a formidable challenge to rebuild the economy and reunite Ivorians. Gbagbo was taken to the International Criminal Court in January 2016. He was declared acquitted by the court but given a conditional release in January 2019. Belgium has been designated as a host country.\nOuattara administration.\nOuattara has ruled the country since 2010. President Ouattara was re-elected in the 2015 presidential election. In November 2020, he won a third term in office in elections boycotted by the opposition. His opponents argued it was illegal for Ouattara to run for a third term. Ivory Coast's Constitutional Council formally ratified President Ouattara's re-election to a third term in November 2020.\nIn December 2022, Ivory Coast's electric production company, Compagnie ivoirienne d'\u00e9lectricit\u00e9 launched a commission to establish the country's first solar plant in Boundiali, with an installation of 37.5 MW, backed by a 10-MW lithium battery energy storage system.\nOn 6 October 2023, Ouattara dissolved the government and removed Prime Minister Patrick Achi from his position.\nGovernment and politics.\nThe government is divided into three branches: executive, legislative, and judicial. The Parliament of Ivory Coast, consists of the indirectly elected Senate and the National Assembly which has 255 members, elected for five-year terms.\nSince 1983, Ivory Coast's capital has been Yamoussoukro, while Abidjan was the administrative center. Most countries maintain their embassies in Abidjan.\nAlthough most of the fighting ended by late 2004, the country remained split in two, with the north controlled by the New Forces. A new presidential election was expected to be held in October 2005, and the rival parties agreed in March 2007 to proceed with this, but it continued to be postponed until November 2010 due to delays in its preparation.\nElections were finally held in 2010. The first round of elections was held peacefully and widely hailed as free and fair. Runoffs were held on 28 November 2010, after being delayed one week from the original date of 21 November. Laurent Gbagbo as president ran against former Prime Minister Alassane Ouattara. On 2 December, the Electoral Commission declared that Ouattara had won the election by a margin of 54% to 46%. In response, the Gbagbo-aligned Constitutional Council rejected the declaration, and the government announced that country's borders had been sealed. An Ivorian military spokesman said, \"The air, land, and sea border of the country are closed to all movement of people and goods.\"\nPresident Alassane Ouattara has led the country since 2010 and he was re-elected to a third term in November 2020 elections boycotted by two leading opposition figures former President Henri Konan Bedie and ex-Prime Minister Pascal Affi N'Guessan. The Achi II government has ruled the country from April 2022 until 6 October 2023. It was succeeded by the government of Robert Beugr\u00e9 Mamb\u00e9 on 17 October 2023.\nForeign relations.\nIn Africa, Ivorian diplomacy favours step-by-step economic and political cooperation. In 1959, Ivory Coast formed the Council of the Entente with Dahomey (Benin), Upper Volta (Burkina Faso), Niger, and Togo; in 1965, the African and Malagasy Common Organization (OCAM); in 1972, the Economic Community of West Africa (CEAO). The latter organisation changed to the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) in 1975. A founding member of the Organization of African Unity (OAU) in 1963 and then of the African Union in 2000, Ivory Coast defends respect for state sovereignty and peaceful cooperation between African countries.\nWorldwide, Ivorian diplomacy is committed to fair economic and trade relations, including the fair trade of agricultural products and the promotion of peaceful relations with all countries. Ivory Coast thus maintains diplomatic relations with international organisations and countries all around the world. In particular, it has signed United Nations treaties such as the Convention Relating to the Status of Refugees, the 1967 Protocol, and the 1969 Convention Governing Specific Aspects of Refugee Problems in Africa. Ivory Coast is a member of the Organisation of Islamic Cooperation, African Union, La Francophonie, Latin Union, Economic Community of West African States, and South Atlantic Peace and Cooperation Zone.\nIvory Coast has partnered with nations of the Sub-Saharan region to strengthen water and sanitation infrastructure. This has been done mainly with the help of organisations such as UNICEF and corporations like Nestle.\nIn 2015, the United Nations engineered the Sustainable Development Goals (replacing the Millennium Development Goals). They focus on health, education, poverty, hunger, climate change, water sanitation, and hygiene. A major focus was clean water and salinisation. Experts working in these fields have designed the WASH concept. WASH focuses on safe drinkable water, hygiene, and proper sanitation. The group has had a major impact on the sub-Saharan region of Africa, particularly the Ivory Coast. By 2030, they plan to have universal and equal access to safe and affordable drinking water.\nOn 1 January 2025 Ivory Coast announced that France will withdraw its troops from the country, an act that will reduce France's influence in the region. On February 20, 2025, France officially handed over its sole military base in Ivory Coast to local authorities, marking a significant shift in their bilateral relations. This decision aligns with France's broader strategy to reduce its military footprint in West Africa, following similar withdrawals from countries like Chad, Senegal, Mali, Niger, and Burkina Faso. The base, previously home to the 43rd Marine Infantry Battalion (43rd BIMA), has been transferred to Ivorian control and renamed Camp Thomas d'Aquin Ouattara, in honor of the nation's first army chief. This move reflects Ivory Coast's growing emphasis on national sovereignty and the modernization of its armed forces.\nMilitary.\nThe military is estimated to comprise 22,000 personnel (as of 2017).\nAs of 2012[ [update]], major equipment items reported by the Ivory Coast Army included 10 T-55 tanks (marked as potentially unserviceable), five AMX-13 light tanks, 34 reconnaissance vehicles, 10 BMP-1/2 armoured infantry fighting vehicles, 41 wheeled APCs, and 36+ artillery pieces.\nIn 2012, the Ivory Coast Air Force consisted of one Mil Mi-24 attack helicopter and three SA330L Puma transports (marked as potentially unserviceable).\nIn 2017, Ivory Coast signed the UN treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons.\nAdministrative divisions.\nSince 2011, Ivory Coast has been administratively organised into 12 districts plus two district-level autonomous cities. The districts are sub-divided into 31 regions; the regions are divided into 108 departments; and the departments are divided into 510 sub-prefectures. In some instances, multiple villages are organised into communes. The autonomous districts are not divided into regions, but they do contain departments, sub-prefectures, and communes. Since 2011, governors for the 12 non-autonomous districts have not been appointed. As a result, these districts have not yet begun to function as governmental entities.\nThe following is the list of districts, district capitals and each district's regions:\nLargest cities.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Largest_cities/styles.css\" /&gt;\nGeography.\nIvory Coast is a country in western sub-Saharan Africa. It borders Liberia and Guinea in the west, Mali and Burkina Faso in the north, Ghana in the east, and the Gulf of Guinea (Atlantic Ocean) in the south. The country lies between latitudes 4\u00b0 and 11\u00b0N, and longitudes 2\u00b0 and 9\u00b0W. Around 64.8% of the land is agricultural land; arable land amounted to 9.1%, permanent pasture 41.5%, and permanent crops 14.2%. Water pollution is one of the biggest issues that the country is currently facing.\nBiodiversity.\nThere are over 1,200 animal species including 223 mammals, 702 birds, 161 reptiles, 85 amphibians, and 111 species of fish, alongside 4,700 plant species. It is the most biodiverse country in West Africa, with the majority of its wildlife population living in the nation's rugged interior. The nation has nine national parks, the largest of which is Assgny National Park which occupies an area of around 17,000 hectares or 42,000 acres.\nThe country contains six terrestrial ecoregions: Eastern Guinean forests, Guinean montane forests, Western Guinean lowland forests, Guinean forest\u2013savanna mosaic, West Sudanian savanna, and Guinean mangroves. It had a 2018 Forest Landscape Integrity Index mean score of 3.64/10, ranking it 143rd globally out of 172 countries.\nEconomy.\nIvory Coast has, for the region, a relatively high income per capita (US$1,662 in 2017) and plays a key role in transit trade for neighbouring landlocked countries. As of the most recent survey in 2016, 46.1% of the population continues to be affected by multidimensional poverty. The country is the largest economy in the West African Economic and Monetary Union, constituting 40% of the monetary union's total GDP. Ivory Coast is the fourth-largest exporter of general goods in sub-Saharan Africa (following South Africa, Nigeria, and Angola).\nThe country is the world's largest exporter of cocoa beans. In 2009, cocoa-bean farmers earned $2.53 billion for cocoa exports and were projected to produce 630,000 metric tons in 2013. Ivory Coast also has 100,000 rubber farmers who earned a total of $105 million in 2012.\nClose ties to France since independence in 1960, diversification of agricultural exports, and encouragement of foreign investment have been factors in economic growth. In recent years, Ivory Coast has been subject to greater competition and falling prices in the global marketplace for its primary crops of coffee and cocoa. That, compounded with high internal corruption, makes life difficult for the grower, those exporting into foreign markets, and the labour force; instances of indentured labour have been reported in the country's cocoa and coffee production in every edition of the U.S. Department of Labor's \"List of Goods Produced by Child Labor or Forced Labor\" since 2009.\nIvory Coast's economy has grown faster than that of most other African countries since independence. One possible reason for this might be taxes on exported agriculture. Ivory Coast, Nigeria, and Kenya were exceptions as their rulers were themselves large cash-crop producers, and the newly independent countries desisted from imposing penal rates of taxation on exported agriculture. As such, their economies did well.\nAround 7.5 million people made up the workforce in 2009. The workforce took a hit, especially in the private sector, during the early 2000s with numerous economic crises since 1999. Furthermore, these crises caused companies to close and move locations, especially in the tourism industry, and transit and banking companies. Decreasing job markets posed a huge issue as unemployment rates grew. Unemployment rates rose to 9.4% in 2012. Solutions proposed to decrease unemployment included diversifying jobs in small trade. This division of work encouraged farmers and the agricultural sector. Self-employment policy, established by the Ivorian government, allowed for very strong growth in the field with an increase of 142% in seven years from 1995.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAccording to the 14 December 2021 census, the population was 29,389,150, up from 22,671,331 at the 2014 census. The first national census in 1975 counted 6.7 million inhabitants. According to a Demographic and Health Surveys nationwide survey, the total fertility rate stood at 4.3 children per woman in 2021 (with 3.6 in urban areas and 5.3 in rural areas), down from 5.0 children per woman in 2012.\nLanguages.\nIt is estimated that 78 languages are spoken in Ivory Coast. French, the official language, is taught in schools and serves as a lingua franca. A semi-creolised form of French, known as Nouchi, has emerged in Abidjan in recent years and spread among the younger generation. One of the most common indigenous languages is Dyula, which acts as a trade language in much of the country, particularly in the north, and is mutually intelligible with other Manding languages widely spoken in neighboring countries.\nEthnic groups.\nMacroethnic groupings in the country include Akan (42.1%), Voltaiques or Gur (17.6%), Northern Mand\u00e9s (16.5%), Kru-speaking peoples (11%), Southern Mand\u00e9s (10%), and others (2.8%, including 100,000 Lebanese and 45,000 French; 2004). Most of these categories are subdivided into different ethnicities. For example, the Akan grouping includes the Baoul\u00e9, the Voltaique category includes the Senufo, the Northern Mande category includes the Dyula and the Maninka, the Kru category includes the B\u00e9t\u00e9 and the Kru, and the Southern Mande category includes the Yacouba.\nAbout 77% of the population is considered Ivorian. Since Ivory Coast has established itself as one of the most successful West African nations, about 20% of the population (about 3.4\u00a0million) consists of workers from neighbouring Liberia, Burkina Faso, and Guinea. About 4% of the population is of non-African ancestry. Many are French, Lebanese, Vietnamese and Spanish citizens, as well as evangelical missionaries from the United States and Canada. In November 2004, around 10,000 French and other foreign nationals evacuated Ivory Coast due to attacks from pro-government youth militias. Aside from French nationals, native-born descendants of French settlers who arrived during the country's colonial period are present.\nReligion.\nBasilica of Our Lady of Peace in the capital city Yamoussoukro, one of the largest church in the world\nIvory Coast has a religiously diverse population. According to the latest 2021 census data, adherents of Islam (mainly Sunni) represented 42.5% of the total population, while followers of Christianity (mainly Catholic and Evangelical) comprised 39.8% of the population. An additional 12.6% of the population identified as irreligious, while 2.2% reported following animism (traditional African religions), 0.7% another religion, and 2.2% did not state their religion in the census. Excluding those who did not state their religion, the population was 43.5% Muslim, 40.7% Christian, 12.9% not religious, 2.2% animist, and 0.7% adherent of another religion.\nBetween the 1998 and 2021 censuses, the Muslim population of C\u00f4te d'Ivoire grew by 110% (i.e. the Muslim population was 2.1 times larger in 2021 than it was in 1998), whereas the Christian population grew by 150% (i.e. Christian population 2.5 times larger in 2021 compared to 1998); meanwhile, the animist population experienced a decline of 65.5%.\nA 2020 estimate by the Pew Research Center projected that Christians would represent 44% of the total population, while Muslims would represent 37.2% of the population. In addition, it estimated that 8.1% would be religiously unaffiliated, and 10.5% as followers of traditional African religions (animism). In 2009, according to U.S. Department of State estimates, Christians and Muslims each made up 35% to 40% of the population, while an estimated 25% of the population practised traditional (animist) religions.\nYamoussoukro is home to the largest church building in the world, the Basilica of Our Lady of Peace.\nHealth.\nLife expectancy at birth was 42 for males in 2004; for females it was 47. Infant mortality was 118 of 1000 live births. Twelve physicians are available per 100,000 people. About a quarter of the population lives below the international poverty line of US$1.25 a day. About 36% of women have undergone female genital mutilation. According to 2010 estimates, Ivory Coast has the 27th-highest maternal mortality rate in the world. The HIV/AIDS rate was 19th-highest in the world, estimated in 2012 at 3.20% among adults aged 15\u201349 years.\nEducation.\nAmong sub-Saharan African countries, Ivory Coast has one of the highest literacy rates. According to The World Factbook, in 2019, 89.9% of the population aged 15 and over could read and write. A large part of the adult population, in particular women, is illiterate. Many children between 6 and 10 years old are not enrolled in school. The majority of students in secondary education are male. At the end of secondary education, students can sit for the\" baccalaur\u00e9at\" examination. Universities include Universit\u00e9 F\u00e9lix Houphou\u00ebt-Boigny in Abidjan and the Universit\u00e9 Alassane Ouattara in Bouak\u00e9.\nScience and technology.\nAccording to the Ministry of Higher Education and Scientific Research, Ivory Coast devotes about 0.13% of GDP to GERD. Apart from low investment, other challenges include inadequate scientific equipment, the fragmentation of research organizations and a failure to exploit and protect research results. Ivory Coast was ranked 110th in the Global Innovation Index in 2025, down from 103rd in 2019. The share of the \"National Development Plan\" for 2012\u20132015 that is devoted to scientific research remains modest. Within the section on greater wealth creation and social equity (63.8% of the total budget for the \"Plan\"), just 1.2% is allocated to scientific research. Twenty-four national research programmes group public and private research and training institutions around a common research theme. These programmes correspond to eight priority sectors for 2012\u20132015, namely: health, raw materials, agriculture, culture, environment, governance, mining and energy; and technology.\nCulture.\nMusic.\nEach of the ethnic groups in the Ivory Coast has its own music genres, most showing strong vocal polyphony. Talking drums are common, especially among the Appolo, and polyrhythms, another African characteristic, are found throughout Ivory Coast being especially common in the southwest. Popular music genres from Ivory Coast include zoblazo, zouglou, and Coup\u00e9-D\u00e9cal\u00e9. A few Ivorian artists who have known international success are Magic Syst\u00e8me, Alpha Blondy, Meiway, Dobet Gnahor\u00e9, Tiken Jah Fakoly, DJ Arafat, AfroB, Serge Beynaud and Christina Goh, of Ivorian descent.\nSport.\nThe most popular sport is association football. The men's national football team has played in the World Cup three times, in Germany 2006, in South Africa 2010, and Brazil in 2014, and has won three times in the Africa Cup of Nations, most recently in the 2023 edition, when they were the host nation. C\u00f4te d'Ivoire has produced many well-known footballers like Didier Drogba and Yaya Tour\u00e9. The women's football team played in the 2015 Women's World Cup in Canada. The country has been the host of several major African sporting events, with the most recent being the 2013 African Basketball Championship. In the past, the country hosted the 1984 African Cup of Nations, in which the Ivory Coast finished fifth, and the 1985 African Basketball Championship, where the national basketball team won the gold medal.\n400m metre runner Gabriel Tiacoh won the silver medal in the men's 400 metres at the 1984 Olympics. The country hosted the 8th edition of Jeux de la Francophonie in 2017. In the sport of athletics, well known participants include Marie-Jos\u00e9e Ta Lou and Murielle Ahour\u00e9.\nRugby union is popular, and the national rugby union team qualified to play at the Rugby World Cup in South Africa in 1995. Ivory Coast has won three African Cup of Nation titles: one in 1992, another one in 2015, and the third one in 2024. Ivory Coast is known for Taekwondo with well-known competitors such as Cheick Ciss\u00e9, Ruth Gbagbi, and Firmin Zokou.\nCuisine.\nTraditional cuisine is very similar to that of neighbouring countries in West Africa in its reliance on grains and tubers. Cassava and plantains are significant parts of Ivorian cuisine. A type of corn paste called \"aitiu\" is used to prepare corn balls, and peanuts are widely used in many dishes. \"Atti\u00e9k\u00e9\" is a popular side dish made with grated cassava, a vegetable-based couscous. Common street food is \"alloco\", plantain fried in palm oil, spiced with steamed onions and chili, and eaten along with grilled fish or boiled eggs. Chicken is commonly consumed and has a unique flavor because of its lean, low-fat mass in this region. Seafood includes tuna, sardines, shrimp, and bonito, which is similar to tuna. \"Maf\u00e9\" is a common dish consisting of meat in peanut sauce.\nSlow-simmered stews with various ingredients are another common food staple. \"Kedjenou\" is a dish consisting of chicken and vegetables slow-cooked in a sealed pot with little or no added liquid, which concentrates the flavors of the chicken and vegetables and tenderises the chicken. It is usually cooked in a pottery jar called a canary, over a slow fire, or cooked in an oven. \"Bangui\" is a local palm wine.\nIvorians have a particular kind of small, open-air restaurant called a \"maquis\", which is unique to the region. A \"maquis\" normally features braised chicken, and fish covered in onions and tomatoes served with acheke or kedjenou.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "57745", "revid": "50729212", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57745", "title": "Hayman Fire", "text": "2002 wildfire in Colorado\nThe Hayman Fire was a forest fire started on June 8, 2002, northwest of Colorado Springs, Colorado, and southwest of Denver, Colorado, and was contained on June 28, 2002. For nearly two decades it was the largest wildfire in the state's recorded history, burning over 138,114 acres.\nHundreds of firefighters participated in fighting the fire, which cost nearly $40 million. The fire burned 133 homes and forced the evacuation of 5,340 people.\nSmoke could be seen and smelled across the state from Vail, northwest, to Burlington, east, and from Broomfield, north, to Walsenburg, south.\nThe fire was classified as contained on June 28, 2002. The cause was later determined to be arson.\nWhen a reporter asked then-Governor Bill Owens about the view of the fires from above, he said, \"It looks as if all of Colorado is burning today.\" Many western slope residents blamed Owens for driving away tourists with the press' truncated version of the quote (\"All of Colorado is burning.\") The Hayman fire was named for a mining ghost town near Tappan Gulch.\nImpact.\nThe fire resulted directly in the death of one civilian, and five firefighters were killed en route to the fire. Costs included $39.1 million in suppression costs and total private property losses valued at $40.4 million, and indirectly led to the death of five firefighters. Overall, 600 structures were burned in the fire including 133 homes, a commercial building, and 466 outbuildings. While the fire burned, record amounts of particulate matter were measured in the air.\nAs a result of the fire, flooding in the burn area increased. Consequently, many roads and bridges in the area were washed out. This included State Highway 67, the main highway that runs through the area. Other indirect destruction included sediment runoff into a reservoir that is used as a water source for Denver. The removal of this sediment cost $25 million.\nMost of the burn area was within Pike National Forest. The fire caused the closure of a large part of the land as well as nearby Eleven Mile State Park and Spinney State Park. Local tourism saw a sharp decline and it is estimated that local businesses lost 50% of their seasonal revenues as a result of the fire-induced closures.\nFatalities.\nAnn Dow, 50, suffered a fatal asthma attack on the evening of June 10, when heavy smoke from the fire drifted over Dow's home south of Florissant. She quickly lapsed into unconsciousness and paramedics could not revive her. Her death certificate lists the cause as \"acute asthma attack due to or as a consequence of smoke inhalation.\"\nFive firefighters died from injuries sustained from a June 21 traffic accident en route to the fire from Oregon: Zach Zigich, Retha Shirley, Jacob Martindale, Danial Rama, and Bart Bailey. They are listed in the memorial to fallen firefighters on the https://.\nCriminal prosecutions.\nTerry Barton, a forestry technician with the United States Forest Service, set the fire in a campfire ring during a total burn ban triggered by a National Weather Service red flag warning. Barton claimed that she was attempting to burn a letter from her estranged husband. This claim was disputed by one of her teenage daughters, who testified that a psychology teacher had told Barton to write her feelings in a letter and burn it. The fire quickly spread out of control and eventually torched over and burned across four different counties. A federal grand jury indicted Barton on four felony counts of arson.\nIn December 2002, Barton pleaded guilty to two of the charges: setting fire to federal forest land and lying to investigators and was given a six-year sentence in federal prison. U.S. District Judge Richard Matsch refused, however, to impose the $14 million restitution asked for by prosecutors, saying he would not sentence her to a \"life of poverty.\" Additionally, the State of Colorado sentenced Barton to 12 years in prison to run concurrently with the 6-year federal sentence. The state sentence was overturned on appeal, however, on grounds that the presiding judge had \"the appearance of prejudice\" because smoke from the fire had motivated him to voluntarily leave his home for one night. In March 2008, Barton was re-sentenced by a different judge to 15 years of probation and 1,000 hours of community service.\nSeveral insurance companies filed a $7 million suit against the government in the fall of 2008, claiming that Barton was negligent in her duties. In November, Judge Wiley Daniel ruled that the government was not responsible for Barton's actions because she was not acting as a government worker.\nIn August 2018, Barton's sentence was extended another 15 years in the form of unsupervised probation (the unsupervised probation was ordered to save legal fees that would then be redirected towards restitution). Judge William Brian ordered that Barton continue to make payments toward the $14.5 million in restitution she owed as of the 2018 re-sentencing. The judge also ordered that Barton get a full-time job.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "57746", "revid": "9337959", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57746", "title": "Jacobus Gallus", "text": "Slovene Renaissance composer\nJacobus Gallus (a.k.a. Jacob(us) Handl, Jacob(us) H\u00e4ndl; between 15 April and 31 July 1550\u00a0\u2013 18 July 1591) was a late-Renaissance composer of presumed Slovene ethnicity.&lt;ref name=\"Skei/Pokorn, Grove online\"&gt;Skei/Pokorn, Grove online&lt;/ref&gt; Born in Carniola, which at the time was one of the Habsburg lands in the Holy Roman Empire, he lived and worked in Moravia and Bohemia during the last decade of his life.\nLife.\nGallus's name has been Slovenianized as \"Jakob Petelin\" (\"petelin\" means 'rooster'; \"Handl\" and \"gallus\" mean the same in German and Latin, respectively). However, Gallus never used the name \"Petelin\". He was probably born in Reifnitz (now Ribnica, southern Slovenia), although Slovene folk tradition also claims his birthplace to be at \u0160entvi\u0161ka Gora in the Slovenian Littoral. He used the Latin form of his name, to which he often added the adjective \"Carniolus\", thus giving credit to his homeland Carniola.\nGallus most likely was educated at the Cistercian Sti\u010dna Abbey in Carniola. He left Carniola sometime between 1564 and 1566, traveling first to Austria, and later to Bohemia, Moravia and Silesia. For some time he lived at the Benedictine Melk Abbey in Lower Austria. He was a member of the Viennese court chapel in 1574, and was choirmaster (\"Kapellmeister\") to the bishop of Olomouc between 1579 (or 1580) and 1585. From 1585 to his death he worked in Prague as organist to the Church of St. John on the Balustrade (). Gallus died on 18 July 1591 in Prague.\nWork.\nGallus represented the Counter-Reformation in Bohemia, mixing the polyphonic style of the High Renaissance Franco-Flemish School with the style of the Venetian School. His output was both sacred and secular, and hugely prolific: over 500 works have been attributed to him. Some are for large forces, with multiple choirs of up to 24 independent parts.\nHis most notable work is the four-part \"Opus musicum\" (1586\u20131590), a collection of 374 motets that cover the liturgical needs of the entire ecclesiastical year. The motets were printed in the Prague printing house of Georgius Nigrinus, which also published 16 of his 20 extant masses. The motet \"O magnum mysterium\" comes from the first volume (printed in 1586), which covers the period from the first Sunday of Advent to the Septuagesima. His motets show evidence of influence by the Venetian polychoral style, with their use of the \"coro spezzato\" technique.\nHis wide-ranging, eclectic style blended archaism and modernity. He rarely used the \"cantus firmus\" technique, preferring the then-new Venetian polychoral manner, yet he was equally conversant with earlier imitative techniques. Some of his chromatic transitions foreshadowed the breakup of modality; his five-voice motet \"Mirabile mysterium\" contains chromaticism worthy of Carlo Gesualdo. He enjoyed word painting in the style of the madrigal, yet he could write the simple \"Ecce quomodo moritur justus\" later used by George Frideric Handel in his funeral anthem \"The Ways of Zion Do Mourn\".\nHis secular output, about 100 short pieces, was published in the collections \"Harmoniae morales\" (Prague 1589 and 1590) and \"Moralia\" (Nuremberg 1596). Some of these works were madrigals in Latin, an unusual language for the form (most madrigals were in Italian); others were songs in German, and others were compositions in Latin.\nCritical editions of Gallus works have been prepared by Edo \u0160kulj and published by the Research Centre of the Slovenian Academy of Sciences and Arts (ZRCSAZU).\nCommemoration.\nGallus has been commemorated with the naming of the central hall in the Cankar Centre \"Gallus Hall\" (). Part of the right embankment of the river Ljubljanica in Ljubljana, stretching from St. James's Bridge to the Cobbler's Bridge, has the name \"Gallus Embankment\" (). This is also the name of the left embankment of the river Bistrica in the town of Ribnica, his birthplace. A monument with a bronze head of the composer, work by the architect Jo\u017ee Ple\u010dnik and the sculptor Lojze Dolinar from 1932, as well as a stone plaque from 1973 also commemorate him there. The plaque was originally installed already in 1933 but destroyed during World War II. The Slovenian Public Fund of Cultural Activities annually awards the deserving musicians the Bronze, Silver, and Gold Gallus Badges () and the Bronze, Silver, and Gold Gallus Citations (). Gallus was depicted on the front side of the now-obsolete 200-tolar banknote of the Republic of Slovenia.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "57749", "revid": "49089944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57749", "title": "Socorro County, New Mexico", "text": "County in New Mexico, United States\nSocorro County () is a county in the U.S. state of New Mexico. As of the 2020 United States census, the population was 16,595. The county seat is Socorro. The county was formed in 1852 as one of the original nine counties of New Mexico Territory. Socorro was originally the name given to a Native American village (\"see\": Puebloan peoples) by Don Juan de O\u00f1ate in 1598. Having received vitally needed food and assistance from the native population, O\u00f1ate named the pueblo \"Socorro\" (\"succor\" in English).\nSocorro County is home to multiple scientific research institutions including New Mexico Institute of Mining and Technology, the National Radio Astronomy Observatory and its associated Very Large Array, the Magdalena Ridge Observatory, and the Langmuir Laboratory for Atmospheric Research. Federal public lands in Socorro County include parts of the Cibola National Forest, the Bosque del Apache National Wildlife Refuge, the Sevilleta National Wildlife Refuge, the Bureau of Land Management (BLM) Socorro Field Office, parts of the Salinas Pueblo Missions National Monument, and parts of the El Camino Real de Tierra Adentro National Historic Trail.\nHistory.\nSocorro County's history is intimately linked with the rich history of the surrounding area. Basham noted in his report documenting the archeological history of the Cibola National Forest's Magdalena Ranger District, which is almost entirely within Socorro County, that \u201c[t]he heritage resources on the district are diverse and representative of nearly every prominent human evolutionary event known to anthropology. Evidence for human use of district lands date back 14,000 years to the Paleoindian period providing glimpses into the peopling of the New World and megafaunal extinction.\u201c\nMuch of the now Magdalena Ranger District were a province of the Apache. Bands of Apache effectively controlled the Magdalena-Datil region from the seventeenth century until they were defeated in the Apache Wars in the late nineteenth century.\nOutlaw renegades Butch Cassidy and the Wild Bunch and notorious Apaches like Cochise and Geronimo have ties to Socorro County's San Mateo Mountains. Vicks Peak was named after Victorio, \u201ca Mimbre\u00f1o Apache leader whose territory included much of the south and southwest New Mexico.\u201d Famous for defying relocation orders in 1879 and leading his warriors \u201con a two-year reign of terror before he was killed,\u201d Victorio is at least as highly regarded as Geronimo or Cochise among Apaches. Perhaps most famous outlaw was the Apache Kid whose supposed grave lies within the Apache Kid Wilderness. Stories of depredations by the Apache Kid, and of his demise, became so common and dramatic that in southwestern folklore they may be exceeded only by tales of lost Spanish gold. Native Americans lingered in the San Mateos well into the 1900s. We know this by an essay written by Aldo Leopold in 1919 where he documents stumbling upon the remains of a recently abandoned Indian hunting camp.\nA mining rush followed the Apache wars \u2013 gold, silver, and copper were found in the mountains. It wasn't until this time that extensive use of the area by non-Native Americans occurred. While some mining activity, involving gold, silver, and copper, occurred in the southern part of the range near the end of the nineteenth century, the prospecting/mining remnants are barely visible today due to collapse, topographic screening, and vegetation regrowth. While miners combed the mountains for mineral riches during the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, stockmen drove tens of thousands of sheep and cattle to stockyards at the village of Magdalena, then linked by rail with Socorro. In fact, the last regularly used cattle trail in the United States stretched 125 miles westward from Magdalena. The route was formally known as the Magdalena Livestock Driveway, but more popularly known to cowboys and cattlemen as the Beefsteak Trail. The trail began use in 1865 and its peak was in 1919. The trail was used continually until trailing gave way to trucking and the trail officially closed in 1971.\nThe first test of a nuclear bomb was conducted at the Trinity site in southeastern Socorro county on July 16, 1945.\nGeography.\nAccording to the U.S. Census Bureau, the county has a total area of , of which is land and (0.03%) is water. It is the second-largest county in New Mexico by area, after Catron County.\nSocorro County ranges in elevation from approximately on the banks of the Rio Grande to at the top of South Baldy peak in the Magdalena Mountains. The southern portion of the Rocky Mountains extend into New Mexico and Socorro County. There are several mountain ranges that spread throughout the county. The Forest Service manages portions of four mountain ranges: the Bear, Datil, Magdalena, and San Mateo Mountains. Most of the land that comprises these mountains are within the Cibola National Forest. These ranges, as well as Ladron Peak located in Socorro County, are classified as sky islands.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\n2000 census.\nAs of the 2000 census, there were 18,078 people, 6,675 households, and 4,492 families residing in the county. The population density was . There were 7,808 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the county was 62.9% White, 0.6% Black or African American, 10.9% Native American, 1.1% Asian, 0.1% Pacific Islander, 20.1% from other races, and 4.3% from two or more races. 48.7% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.\nThere were 6,675 households, out of which 33.8% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 48.4% were married couples living together, 13.3% had a female householder with no husband present, and 32.7% were non-families. 26.8% of all households were made up of individuals, and 8.2% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.62 and the average family size was 3.20.\nIn the county, the population was spread out, with 28.4% under the age of 18, 12.6% from 18 to 24, 26.1% from 25 to 44, 22.0% from 45 to 64, and 10.9% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 32 years. For every 100 females there were 103.3 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 103.9 males.\nThe median income for a household in the county was $23,439, and the median income for a family was $29,544. Males had a median income of $28,490 versus $22,482 for females. The per capita income for the county was $12,826. About 24.1% of families and 31.7% of the population were below the poverty line, including 43.6% of those under age 18 and 24.3% of those age 65 or over.\n2010 census.\nAs of the 2010 census, there were 17,866\u00a0people, 7,014\u00a0households, and 4,349\u00a0families residing in the county. The population density was . There were 8,059 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the county was 75.1% white, 11.7% American Indian, 1.2% Asian, 1.1% black or African American, 8.1% from other races, and 2.8% from two or more races. Those of Hispanic or Latino origin made up 48.5% of the population. In terms of ancestry, 7.1% were English, 6.8% were German, and 4.2% were American.\nOf the 7,014\u00a0households, 30.4% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 43.1% were married couples living together, 12.9% had a female householder with no husband present, 38.% were non-families, and 30.8% of all households were made up of individuals. The average household size was 2.46 and the average family size was 3.09. The median age was 36.9 years.\nThe median income for a household in the county was $33,284 and the median income for a family was $41,964. Males had a median income of $40,295 versus $27,819 for females. The per capita income for the county was $17,801. About 22.7% of families and 26.8% of the population were below the poverty line, including 33.1% of those under age 18 and 19.0% of those age 65 or over.\nPolitics.\nIn the past, Socorro County had leaned toward the Democratic Party, though in recent elections, it has been shifting toward the Republican Party. The majority (51 percent) of voters registered in the 2012 General Election were Democrats, with the rest of registered voters breaking down as 30 percent Republican, 15 percent Declined To Say, and 3 percent Other. In 2012, Socorro County voted for President Obama 56 percent to 38 percent, with a trend of voting Democratic from 1992 through 2020. In 2024, Donald Trump carried the county with a narrow majority, the first time a Republican presidential candidate had done this since Bush in 1988.\nSocorro County voted for Senator Heinrich (D) 53 percent to 43 percent in 2012. While Rep. Pearce (R) won Socorro County 52 percent to 48 percent in 2012, Socorro supported Democrats for the U.S. House in both 2008 and 2010 (with 50.2% and 63% Democratic, respectively). The County supported Governor Martinez (R) 53 percent to 47 percent in 2010 but went for Governor Richardson (D) in both 2002 and 2006. Socorro has supported Democratic state senators in Districts 28 and 30 for every election since 2000. In contrast, the county has supported a Republican state representative in District 49 since 2000.\nThe current county commissioners of Socorro County are:\nSocorro County backed Democratic gubernatorial nominee Michelle Lujan Grisham in 2018 by 57.4%, defeating Republican Steve Pearce by nearly 15 points in the county. However, in 2022, Republicans rebounded considerably and Grisham lost Socorro county to Republican Mark Ronchetti, by a margin of just 38 votes (2,988 votes to 2,950 respectively). It was the only county in the state to flip Republican that year, even as Grisham handedly won re-election statewide.\nEcology, recreation and tourism.\nWith multiple mountain ranges, extents of grasslands and marshes providing a wide array of available habitats, Socorro County is home to an extensive variety of ecosystems and wildlife. Socorro County contains 826 species of wildlife, including 14 amphibians, 60 reptiles, 336 birds, and 96 mammals. Wildlife in the County includes coyote, deer, elk, pronghorn antelope, bighorn sheep, Barbary sheep, black bear, mountain lion, wild turkey, various furbearers, Mexican spotted owl, and quail.\nThere are three congressionally designated Wilderness areas located within Socorro County. The Apache Kid and the Withington Wilderness Areas are both located in the San Mateo Mountains within the Cibola National Forest's Magdalena Ranger District. The Bosque del Apache Wilderness comprises two separate sections, totaling 30,427 acres of the National Wildlife Refuge. There are an additional 172,143 acres of Forest Service Inventoried Roadless Areas and 159,891 acres of BLM Wilderness Study Areas in the county. These undeveloped lands without roads offer outstanding opportunities to experience the area's amazing natural heritage, to getaway and enjoy the outdoors and, for the hearty, to explore deep into the backcountry and challenge yourself in the area's big wild.\nThe high mountains, remote canyons, pristine forests and diverse wildlife found on the area's national forests, national wildlife refuges, national monuments, and BLM's national system of public lands provide for phenomenal recreation opportunities, including picnicking, hiking, backpacking, wildlife viewing, horseback-riding, and hunting. In fact, the four biggest elk in New Mexico were bagged in Socorro county and the Datil Mountains. The two most popular recreational activities on the Cibola National Forest are hiking/walking and viewing natural features with 35% and 15% of visitors citing these as their main activities, respectively. The Bosque del Apache National Wildlife Refuge hosts the Festival of the Cranes every November, celebrating the arrival of sandhill cranes and other migratory birds. Rare whooping cranes are also found occasionally on the Bosque del Apache.\nThe natural amenities in Socorro contribute to a strong tourism industry for the county. Visitors spent $47.4 million in Socorro County in 2011. Recreation alone accounted for more than $4 million in visitor spending in both 2010 and 2011. Tourism accounts for 8.8% of employment and 4.5% of labor income for the county. Additionally, tourism resulted in $7.7 million of total tax revenue, including $1.1 million in local tax revenue.\nCommunities.\nCensus-designated places.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nUnincorporated communities.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nPopulated Places.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nGhost towns.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nEducation.\nSchool districts include:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "57750", "revid": "4614394", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57750", "title": "Israeli army", "text": ""}
{"id": "57751", "revid": "31192532", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57751", "title": "Ian Livingstone", "text": "English author and entrepreneur (born 1949)\nSir Ian Livingstone (born 29 December 1949) is an English fantasy author and entrepreneur. He co-founded Games Workshop in 1975 and helped create Eidos Interactive as executive chairman of Eidos Plc in 1995. Along with Steve Jackson, he is also the co-creator of the \"Fighting Fantasy\" series of role-playing gamebooks, and the author of many books within that series. \nEarly life.\nLivingstone attended Altrincham Grammar School for Boys, where, according to him, he only earned one A-level, in Geography. He has kept his close links with the school and has visited it on numerous occasions.\nCareer.\nGames Workshop.\nLivingstone co-founded Games Workshop in early 1975 with flatmates John Peake and Steve Jackson. They began publishing the monthly newsletter \"Owl and Weasel\", and distributed copies of the first issue to fanzine \"Albion\" subscribers; Brian Blume received one of these copies, and sent them a copy of the new game \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" in return. Livingstone and Jackson found this game to be more imaginative than games produced in the UK at the time, and so worked out an arrangement with Blume for an exclusive deal to sell \"D&amp;D\" in Europe. They began distributing \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" and other TSR products later in 1975. Livingstone and Jackson organised a convention for their first time in late 1975, which became known as the first Games Day. Because they were selling products out of their flat, customers would come there looking for a store that did not exist; because of this their landlord evicted them in summer 1976.\nUnder the direction of Livingstone and Jackson, Games Workshop expanded from a bedroom mail order company to a successful gaming manufacturer and retail chain, with the first Games Workshop store opening in Hammersmith in 1977. In June of that year, partially to advertise the opening, Livingstone and Jackson launched the gaming magazine \"White Dwarf\", with Livingstone as the editor. Livingstone chose the title, which had meaning relevant to both the fantasy and science fiction genres: a \"white dwarf\" could be a reference to both a stellar phenomenon and to a fantasy character. Livingstone ended his run as editor after \"White Dwarf\" #74 (February 1986).\nIn 1980, Livingstone and Jackson began to develop the concept of the \"Fighting Fantasy\" gamebook series, the first volume of which (\"The Warlock of Firetop Mountain\") was published in 1982 by Puffin Books. Livingstone and Jackson sold Games Workshop in 1991 for million. The pair, together with Bryan Ansell, founded Citadel Miniatures in Newark to make miniatures for games. Livingstone has also invented several board games, including \"Boom Town\", \"Judge Dredd\", \"Automania\", \"Legend of Zagor\", and \"Dragonmasters\".\n\"Fighting Fantasy\".\nIn 1982, Jackson and Livingstone co-wrote \"The Warlock of Firetop Mountain\", the first book in the \"Fighting Fantasy\" series, but following an instruction from publishers Penguin to write more books \"as quickly as possible\" the pair wrote subsequent books separately. The series had sold over 18 million copies as of 2017, with Livingstone's \"Deathtrap Dungeon\" selling over 350,000 copies in its first year alone. Livingstone wrote another twelve \"Fighting Fantasy\" gamebooks, including \"The Forest of Doom\", \"City of Thieves\" and \"Caverns of the Snow Witch\" before marking the 30th anniversary of \"The Warlock of Firetop Mountain\" with a new gamebook, \"Blood of the Zombies\", in 2012, and with \"The Port of Peril\" in 2017 for the 35th anniversary.\nVideo games.\nIn the mid-1980s Livingstone did design work for video game publisher Domark; he returned to the company in 1993 as a major investor and board member. Livingstone later recounted, \"After the success of Games Workshop, I retired, got bored, and invested in Domark to fund their cartridge development. I got in at just the wrong time - it was all going flat.\" In 1995, Domark was acquired by the video technology company Eidos, which had been floated on the London Stock Exchange in 1990, and formed the major part of the newly created Eidos plc, known for Eidos Interactive. Livingstone resigned as executive chairman in 2002 and became creative director. In 2005 Eidos was taken over by SCi and Livingstone was the only former board member to be retained, taking on the role of product acquisition director. Livingstone secured many of the company's major franchises, including \"Tomb Raider\" and \"Hitman\". He contributed to the Tomb Raider project \"\" (an enhanced version of the original \"Tomb Raider\" game), which was released in 2007. In 2009, Japanese video-game company Square Enix completed a buyout of Eidos Interactive and Livingstone was promoted to Life President of Eidos, a position he resigned from in 2013.\nIn 2014 Livingstone appeared in the documentary feature film \"From Bedrooms to Billions\" (2014) a film that tells the story of the British Video Games Industry from 1979 to present. In 2021 Freeway Fighters received an adaptation on Viber and messenger, created by a Talk-a-Bot chatbot company over Viber and messenger. Livingstone was the non-executive chairman of Sumo Group from 2015 to 2022. He is a general partner at Hiro Capital, which invested in Skybound Entertainment in 2022.\nEducational.\nIn 2010 Livingstone was asked to act as the Skills Champion by government minister Ed Vaizey, tasked with producing a report reviewing the UK video games industry. The 'NextGen' report, co-authored with Alex Hope of visual effects firm Double Negative, was released in 2011; Livingstone described it as a \"complete bottom up review of the whole education system relating to games.\" A school named Livingstone Academy was planned for 2021.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "57752", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57752", "title": "Psychiatric drug", "text": ""}
{"id": "57754", "revid": "205121", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57754", "title": "Bi-polar disorder", "text": ""}
{"id": "57756", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57756", "title": "Laibach", "text": "Slovenian music group\nLaibach () is a Slovenian avant-garde music group associated with the industrial, martial, and neoclassical genres. Formed in 1980 in the mining town of Trbovlje, Slovenia (at the time the SR Slovenia within Yugoslavia), Laibach represents the musical wing of the Neue Slowenische Kunst (NSK) artist collective, a group which Laibach co-founded in 1984.\nFrom the early days, the band was subject to controversies and bans due to their use of iconography with parodies and pastiches of elements from totalitarianism, nationalism and militarism, a concept they have preserved throughout their career. Censored in Yugoslavia, receiving a dissident status and a cult following in their home country, the band embarked on international tours and gradually acquired international fame, which led to wider acceptance by Yugoslav public and to attention of the country's mainstream media. After Slovenia became independent in 1991, Laibach's status in the country has turned from rejection by a part of the public to promotion into a national cultural icon.\nEarly Laibach albums were industrial-oriented, marked by heavy rhythms and roaring vocals. Later in the mid-1980s, their sound became more richly layered, featuring samples from pop and classical music. The band's lyrics, variously written in Slovene, German and English, are usually delivered by the deep bass vocals of lead vocalist Milan Fras. Initially the lyrics handled war and military themes; later, the focus turned to any highly charged political issue of the moment, sending intentionally ambiguous messages. They recorded a number of cover versions of popular songs, often turning light melodies into sinister-sounding gothic tunes.\nThe band has seen numerous line-up changes, with Milan Fras (lead vocals), Dejan Knez (bass guitar, keyboards, drums), Ervin Marko\u0161ek (drums, keyboards, electronics) and Ivan \"Jani\" Novak (stage effects) forming the best-known line-up. They have worked with a number of collaborators and guest musicians. During their career, Laibach have also recorded film and theatre music and produced works of visual arts, while the band members have embarked on a number of side projects.\nHistory.\nThe beginnings: Laibach with Toma\u017e Hostnik (1980\u20131982).\nLaibach evolved from the band Salto Mortale, formed by Dejan Knez in 1978 in the mining industry town of Trbovlje. Laibach was officially formed on 1 June 1980. The members chose 1 June as the official date of the band's formation as it was Trbovlje's official holiday, marking the 1924 violent clashes between Trbovlje workers and the Organization of Yugoslav Nationalists. The name \"Laibach\", adopted after a suggestion from Knez's father, well-known painter Janez Knez, is the Austrian German name of the Slovenian capital Ljubljana, a name used during the period when Slovenia was a part of the Austrian Empire, as well as during the World War II occupation of Yugoslavia. Initially, the members of the band did not reveal their names, but during its initial phases, the band consisted of Dejan Knez (bass guitar, keyboards, drums, megaphone), Toma\u017e Hostnik (vocals), Ivan \"Jani\" Novak (stage effects, credited as \"engineer of the human soul\"), Andrej Lupinc (bass guitar), Sre\u0107ko Bajda (synthesizer), Marko Ko\u0161nik (synthesizer) and Marjan Ben\u010dina (synthesizer). In later interviews, the members stated that the band formation was sparked off by the suicide of Joy Division vocalist Ian Curtis, the death of Yugoslav president Josip Broz Tito and the beginning of the dissolution of Yugoslavia.\nSince its formation, Laibach had been preparing a multimedia project \"Rde\u010di revirji\" (\"Red District\"), a piece intended to challenge and provoke the political authorities in Trbovlje. The project was scheduled to be presented in the Workers' Hall in Trbovlje. However, the group's use of Kazimir Malevich's black crosses on their posters was determined by the authorities to be \"improper and irresponsible\", leading to considerable negative reaction in the media and the cancellation of the performance of \"Red District\".\nThe band's first live appearance and an exhibition entitled \"\u017drtve letalske nesre\u010de\" (\"Victims of an Air Accident\") took place in January 1982 at the Ljubljana club FV. It was followed by performances in Zagreb, in Lapidarij club, and in Belgrade, in Students' Cultural Center's foyer. For their live performances they used gramophones, radio devices and electronic instruments that they had built themselves, and the group's musical style was characterized by the Yugoslav music press as industrial rock. Instead of dry ice as a source of theatrical smoke, the group used original military smoke bombs, which was as unpleasant for themselves as for the audience. At a concert in Belgrade, the smoke forced part of the audience to escape through the venue's windows. In Zagreb, the use of smoke bombs on stage caused a search of the band's equipment conducted by the Yugoslav People's Army. The band stated that they used smoke bombs because they were \"dealing with military subjects\", which satisfied the officers in charge of the search. At this early stage of their career, Laibach's visuals employed mining iconography; eventually, the group would add such symbols as Triglav, deer horns and the Malevich's black cross encircled with a gear to their imagery.\nAt the time of their concerts in Ljubljana, Belgrade and Zagreb, the name Laibach and the posters with black crosses caused controversy, with some seeing this as a direct reference to the occupation of the country in World War II. The newspaper \"Delo\" published a reader's letter which stated: \"Is it possible that someone has allowed in Ljubljana, the first Yugoslav city to be awarded the Order of the People's Hero, some youth group to carry a name which forcibly tries to revoke the name Laibach?\". The band used this question as the opening for their performance on the Novi rock (\"New Rock\") festival in Ljubljana, held on 10 September 1982. For their performance at the festival, frontman Toma\u017e Hostnik wore a military uniform, and despite being hit in the face by a bottle, causing him serious injuries, managed to bring the performance to an end. A part of the Yugoslav music press described the concert as the \"symbolic end of punk rock\".\nOn 11 December 1982, at the YU Rock Moment festival in Zagreb, the band held the performance entitled \"Dotik zla\" (\"Touch of Evil\"). It was Hostnik's last performance with Laibach. Ten days later, he committed a ritual suicide by hanging himself from a hayrack\u2014one of the Slovenian national symbols\u2014near his hometown of Medvode. Laibach disapproved of his act of suicide and posthumously \"expelled\" Hostnik from the group. Despite this, the group would in the future often refer to him and dedicate various projects to him, including an installation entitled \"Apologia Laibach\", created around Hostnik's self-portrait.\nDissident status in Yugoslavia (1983\u20131985).\nThe group resumed its activities at the beginning of 1983, when they held an exhibition in the Pro\u0161ireni mediji (\"Expanded Media\") gallery in Zagreb. After a number of complaints, the management of the gallery attempted to persuade members of Laibach to remove part of the pieces, which they refused, and only four days after the opening, the management decided to close the exhibition. The band continued their concert activities with the vocalist Milan Fras. The group held a concert in Ljubljana's Freedom Hall, featuring guest performances by the English bands Last Few Days and 23 Skidoo. The 30-minutes long recording of dogs barking and snarling were used as the concert intro. The day after the performance, the group received considerable media coverage for a concert at the Zagreb Biennale entitled \"Mi kujemo bodo\u010dnost\" (\"We Forge the Future\"), during which the group used simultaneous projections of the propaganda film \"Revolucija \u0161e traja\" (\"The Revolution is Still Going On\") and a pornographic film. After the simultaneous appearance of late Josip Broz Tito and a penis on the screens, the performance was interrupted by the police, and the members of the band were forcibly removed from the stage.\nFollowing the performance at the Zagreb Biennale, the band published their \"manifesto\", entitled \"Akcija v imenu\" (\"Action in the Name Of\"), in the \"Nova revija\" literary magazine, largely thanks to Taras Kermauner, a philosopher, literary historian and one of the magazine editors. In the \"manifesto\" the band quoted Stalin (\"Artists are engineers of the human soul\") and Hitler (\"Art is sublime, leading to fanaticism\"). The subsequent debut television appearance on 23 June 1983, in the informative-political program \"TV tednik\" (\"TV Weekly\"), caused major negative reactions by the public. The members of the band appeared in the program sitting motionlessly, wearing army uniforms and armbands with black crosses. The host of \"TV tednik\" Jure Pengov stated: \"Maybe now someone will react and ban, exterminate this danger, these horrible ideas and beliefs\". After Laibach's appearance in \"TV tednik\", they were officially banned from using the name Laibach on their records and live appearances, the decision even being printed in the Official Gazette of SR Slovenia. The scandal even led to some of the group members hiding in Pleterje Charterhouse for a short period of time.\nThe group then, together with Last Few Days, started the international Occupied Europe Tour '83, which included sixteen dates in eight West European and Eastern Bloc countries. The performances provoked a lot of interest in the European media, especially with the band's totalitarian musical and visual style. The socialist background, effective live appearances and a dissident status in their home country provided the group with a swift increase of interest in the Western countries. By combining the imagery of socialist realism, Nazism\u2014which provoked the Slovene WW2 Veteran Organization in Yugoslavia\u2014and Italian futurism, the group created a unique aesthetic style which could not pass unnoticed by the public. In Poland, they provoked the public by declaring themselves the sympathizers of Wojciech Jaruzelski. The statement provoked someone to present them with feces rolled into newspapers during the press conference in Warsaw. At the time of the tour, the song lyrics were mostly in German, but having included cover versions of English language songs, the group would start focusing more on the latter.\nIn 1984, the band members moved to Great Britain, where they worked as labourers in London, worked at a pier in Belfast and appeared as extras in Stanley Kubrick's \"Full Metal Jacket\". Through the Belgian record label L.A.Y.L.A.H. Anitrecords, the group released their debut record, a 12\" single with Slovene language songs \"Boji\" (\"Fights\"), \"Sila\" (\"Force\") and \"Brat moj\" (\"My Brother\"). At the time, the band also appeared on the various artists album \"World National Anthems\" released by TRAX International, with their version of the Yugoslav national anthem \"Hej, Sloveni\". The band returned to Yugoslavia to prepare an exhibit at Ljubljana's Students' Cultural Center, entitled \"The Occupied Europe Tour Documents\", which opened on 5 May 1984. Simultaneously, the band released the live audio cassette \"Vstajenje v Berlinu\" (\"Resurrection in Berlin\").\nOn 7 October 1984, Laibach officially founded the informal art collective Neue Slowenische Kunst (German for \"New Slovene Art\") with visual arts group IRWIN and Scipion Nasice Sisters and Rde\u010di Pilot (\"Red Pilot\") theatre groups. They were later joined by Novi kolektivizam (\"New Collectivism\") design studio, Graditelji (\"Builders\") architecture bureau, Retrovizija (\"Retrovision\") film group and the Odeljenje za \u010disto in prakti\u010dno filozofijo (\"Section for Clean and Practical Philosophy\") group. The band also started two musical side projects, Germania and 300.000 V.K. On 21 December 1984, Laibach held a concert dedicated to the late Hostnik at the Mal\u010di Beli\u010d Hall in Ljubljana. Due to the fact that they were still banned from using the name Laibach, they announced the concert with posters featuring only a black cross, the initials of the hall, and date and time of the concert.\nThe following year, the group released their debut studio album, \"Laibach\", through the Ljubljana Students' Cultural Center's label Ropot. Due to the ban of the name Laibach, the cover featured the group's trademark black cross without any text. On one of the album tracks, the band used a sample from a speech by Josip Broz Tito, however, it was removed by the state censors. During the same year, the German label WUS released Laibach compilation album \"Rekapitulacija 1980\u20131984\" (\"Recapitulation 1980\u20131984\"). The recording of their performance at the Neu Konservatiw festival in Hamburg on 15 June 1985 was released on the live album \"Neu Konservatiw\". At the end of the year, the band once more held a number of performances in West Germany, this time under the title \"Die erste bombardierung \u2013 Laibach \u00fcber dem Deutschland\" (\"The First Bombing \u2013 Laibach Over Germany\"). The concerts featured hunting imagery, like axes and trophy antlers, and during the concerts, the band members sawed wood on stage, surrounded by live tranquilized rabbits. \nOn 6 February 1986, with the Scipion Nasice Sisters Theatre, the group premiered their own play \"Krst pod Triglavom\" (\"Baptism Under Triglav\") at the Ljubljana's Cankar Hall. The performance was followed by a round table about the ban of the name Laibach, organized in Ljubljana. The discussion featured academics, representatives of political organizations and authorities, including the president of the Assembly of the City of Ljubljana Tina Tomlje. In a TV interview, Tomlje stated that she was informed of the quality of the band's works and of the success they had achieved abroad, but that they would not be allowed to perform in Ljubljana under the name Laibach. Soon after, the group released their second studio album, \"Nova Akropola\" (\"The New Acropolis\"), via British independent record label Cherry Red Records. After the album release, the League of Socialist Youth of Slovenia on their 12th congress demanded the ban on the usage of the name Laibach to be lifted. The ban was officially lifted on 4 April 1985, and the group performed their first legal concert in Slovenia under the name Laibach already on the following day, in Hum, entitled \"Krvava gruda, plodna zemlja\" (\"Bloody Land, Fertile Soil\"). On the Yugoslav Youth Day, the League of Socialist Youth of Slovenia awarded Neue Slowenische Kunst with a plaque, and the League's official magazine \"Mladina\" awarded the collective with the Zlata ptica (\"The Golden Bird\") award.\nInternational breakthrough, acceptance and wide popularity in Yugoslavia (1986\u20131991).\nLaibach's following release was the live album \"The Occupied Europe Tour 1985\", featuring a choice of recordings from their concerts in Ljubljana, Hamburg and London. In June 1986, the band held four concerts in England, the mini-tour being entitled \"Laibach Over America\". During their staying in London, they recorded three songs for a John Peel session, and performed with the Michael Clark dance company in London and Manchester, in the company's play \"No Fire Escape from Hell\". On 10 October 1986, the group performed in Graz, Austria, on the festival entitled Concert for the Abolishment of Fascist Trade Unions. \nHaving signed for Mute Records, Laibach started recording their third studio album, \"Opus Dei\", working with composer Slavko Avsenik Jr. The inner sleeve of the cover featured a swastika consisting of four bloodied axes designed by John Heartfield, an anti-Nazi artist. The record was sold secretly in some European countries, as the meaning of the cover was not recognized. The group achieved commercial success with the cover versions of \"Live Is Life\" by Opus, entitled \"Life Is Life\", and \"One Vision\" by Queen, entitled \"Geburt einer Nation\" (\"Birth of a Nation\"), which would mark the direction of their future releases. The track \"How the West Was Won\" was also well-received by the audience. The usage of the name \"Opus Dei\" caused the Catholic institution of the same name to sue the group, but the case was eventually decided in favor of Laibach. Following the album release, the group embarked on the United States of Europe Tour, during which they stated at a press conference in France that their influences are Tito, Toto, and Tati. On 7 April 1987, they recorded three more songs for a John Peel session. During May, they once again performed in Clark's company \"No Fire Escape from Hell\" play, in Brighton and Leicester. On 28 July, they presented the work of Neue Slowenische Kunst at the London International Festival of Theatre. With Clark's company they performed in Los Angeles, holding three performances in September 1987. In the United States they were invited to a reception hosted by the British ambassador. They appeared on the reception wearing their uniforms, and the actor Walter Gotell (known for his role of General Gogol in James Bond film series), who was also present on the reception, saw this as a provocation. In Yugoslavia, the play was performed at the Belgrade International Theatre Festival, however, performance by Laibach and Tito's speeches were omitted. In September 1987, the band also performed in Hamburg's Deutsches Schauspielhaus production of \"Macbeth\", for which they also wrote the music. The music from the play would be released two years later on the album \"Macbeth\".\nIn Yugoslavia, \"Opus Dei\" was released in November 1987 by the state-owned major label ZKP RTLJ. The release was followed by the double album \"Krst pod Triglavom \u2013 Baptism\", featuring the music from the play of the same title. The members of the band were invited to a meeting with Jo\u017ee Osterman, Secretary of the League of Socialist Working People of Ljubljana, who tried to persuade them to change their name to Ljubljana, as, despite the lifting of the ban on the name Laibach, the group's name still sparked occasional controversies in their home country. Despite them, the band held a sold-out concert in Ljubljana entitled \"Svoji ka svojim\" (\"To Their Own\"), and Yugoslav lifestyle and entertainment magazine \"Start\" pronounced members of the group the fourth on the list of Best Dressed Men in Yugoslavia. After the performance in Ljubljana, the band went on another European tour, during which they appeared at the end of every concert with horned helmets. On their performance at the Vienna Festival, they provoked the audience with the intro: \"Austrians, You Are Germans\", which almost forced organizers to interrupt the concert. Their performance in Amsterdam was a part of European Capital of Culture program. During the band's performance on a five-meter\u2013high stage, the performance crew roasted an ox on a stake on the hall's balcony.\nIn October 1988, the group released the album \"Let It Be\", featuring cover versions of all the songs from the Beatles album of the same name, with the exception of the title track, which they did not record owing to lack of studio time, and \"Maggie Mae\"; under the title \"Maggie Mae\", the band released their versions of German folk songs \"Auf der L\u00fcneburger Heide\" and \"Was Gleicht Wohl Auf Erden\". Their version of \"Across the Universe\" featured Anja Rupel of the Ljubljana-based synth-pop band Videosex on vocals. A part of the recorded material from the album would be broadcast by Paul McCartney before his concerts.\nIn 1989, the band went on a North American tour. On their concert in Toronto, they were joined by Austrian artist and art theoretician Peter Weibel, who appeared on stage half-naked with a horned helmet on his head. After their return from North America, they went on a Yugoslav tour, starting with a sold-out concert in Ljubljana's Tivoli Hall. Their performance in Zagreb started with the traditional Serbian instrument gusle, and in Belgrade, the NSK philosopher Peter Mlakar held a speech which was a cynical parody of Slobodan Milo\u0161evi\u0107's speeches in SAP Kosovo.\nThe following year, the group released \"Sympathy for the Devil\", an album of different cover versions of the Rolling Stones song of the same name. The release was followed by European and North American tour. Upon returning to Yugoslavia, the group embarked on a tour across industrial regions of Slovenia. Their concert in \u0160entjurje was visited by only five people due to poor promotion, but the band nevertheless performed the whole set. The band celebrated their tenth anniversary with a concert held on 21 December 1990 in Trbovlje, at the town's thermal power station, which was their first concert in their hometown. At -15\u00b0C, the visitors of the concerts were welcomed by a brass band and majorettes. 16 years later Chris Bohn of \"The Wire\" magazine proclaimed this show as one of the 60 most powerful concerts of all times. After this concert, the group undertook a tour of Bosnia and Herzegovina.\nSlovenian independence and beyond: new releases and new controversies (1991\u2013present).\nIn 1992, the group released \"Kapital\", an album dealing with materialism in contemporary society. The band released the album on vinyl record, audio cassette and compact disc, recording different versions of the same songs for each format of the album. During the same year, they proclaimed the State of NSK, promoting its flag, money, postage stamps and passports. The following year, Mute Records released the \"Ljubljana\u2013Zagreb\u2013Beograd\" live album, featuring recordings from the 1982 concerts in the three cities, presenting a document of politically active rock from the group's early career, especially with the songs \"Tito-Tito\", \"Dr\u017eava\" (\"The State\"), and \"Rde\u010di molk\" (\"Red Silence\").\nIn 1994, they released the album \"NATO\", which commented on the current political events in Eastern Europe, former Yugoslavia and the actions of the NATO pact, filtered through their blend of techno and pop. The album featured cover versions of Europe's \"The Final Countdown\", Bolland &amp; Bolland's \"In the Army Now\", Don Fardon's \"Indian Reservation\" (renamed to \"National Reservation\"), and Stanislav Bini\u010dki's composition \"Mar\u0161 na Drinu\" (\"March on the Drina\"). During the same year, the band also recorded the song \"Zrcalo sveta (Das Spiegelglas der Welt)\" (\"Mirror of the World\") for the Kraftwerk tribute album \"Trans Slovenia Express\", featuring songs by Slovenian acts. The group went on the Occupied Europe NATO Tour 1994-95, provoking the audience in Zagreb and Sarajevo with their performances of \"Mar\u0161 na Drinu\", a Serbian World War I patriotic march. The tour resulted in the box set comprising a live CD and a VHS tape, which featured a selection of recordings from the two-year tour, including the performance in Sarajevo on the date of the signing of the Dayton Agreement. In 1995, the group for a while considered splitting into several simultaneous lineups so that they could perform in different places at the same time, but the idea was abandoned.\nThe following year, the group released \"Jesus Christ Superstars\", featuring their version of Andrew Lloyd Webber's rock opera \"Jesus Christ Superstar\". The group promoted the album in the United States with an eighteen-date tour, followed by a tour across Germany. On 15 May 1997, the band performed with the Slovenian Symphony Orchestra, conducted by Marko Letonja, and the Tone Tom\u0161i\u010d Choir, for the opening ceremony of the Ljubljana European Month of Culture, presenting orchestral versions of their earliest material, which they rarely performed live, arranged by Uro\u0161 Rojko and Aldo Kumar with the members of the group. During the same year, the live album \"M.B. 21 December 1984\" was released, featuring recordings from the 1984 secret concert in Ljubljana's Mal\u010di Beli\u010d Hall, the February 1985 concert at the Berlin Atonal festival, and the April 1985 performance at the Zagreb club Kulu\u0161i\u0107. The performances had featured guest appearance by Jo\u017ee Pegam on clarinet and trumpet, and some songs included samples of Tito's speeches. On 14 November 1997, at a concert in Belgrade, another Peter Mlakar speech received a decidedly mixed audience reaction, in which he asked the audience to \"eat the pig and digest it once and for all\", referring to the then-president of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia Slobodan Milo\u0161evi\u0107.\nIn 2003, the group released the album \"WAT\" (an acronym for \"We Are Time\"), which, alongside new material, featured the song \"Tanz mit Laibach\" (German for \"Dance with Laibach\"), inspired by the song \"Der Mussolini\" by the German band D.A.F. Part of the album lyrics were written by Peter Mlakar, and part of the music was composed by the album producer Iztok Turk (former member of Videosex) and the DJs Umek, Bizzy and Dojaja. In 2003, one of the forming members of the group, Dejan Knez, left Laibach. In 2004, the group released the double compilation album \"Anthems\", featuring a career-spanning selection of material, as well as the previously unreleased cover of Drafi Deutscher song \"Mama Leone\" and remixes of Laibach songs by Random Logic, Umek, Octex, Iztok Turk and others. The compilation also features a thorough group biography written by Alexei Monroe. In 2004, the band released two DVDs: the first, entitled \"Laibach\", featured music videos and \"A Film about WAT\", directed by Sa\u0161o Podgor\u0161ek, and the second, entitled \"2\", featured a recording from the Occupied Europe NATO Tour concert in Ljubljana held on 26 October 1995 and the documentary film \"A Film from Slovenia\", directed by Daniel Landin and Peter Vezjak.\nDuring 2006, the group released the album \"Volk\" (the title meaning \"Wolf\" in Slovene and \"People\" in German), featuring cover versions of national anthems, including the NSK \"state anthem\" \"Das Lied der Deutschen\", originally written in 1797 and used as German national anthem during the Weimar Republic. Each cover featured a guest vocalist singing the anthem in their own language, with the exception of the cover of the \"State Anthem of the Russian Federation\", which was entitled \"Rossiya\" and featured a choir composed mostly of the children of Russian and Ukrainian diplomats in Slovenia. During the same year, on 1 June, the group performed J. S. Bach's \"The Art of Fugue\" in Bach's hometown Leipzig, and their interpretation of the work was released on the album \"Laibachkunstderfuge\" in 2008. In 2007, the group released the DVD \"Live at the CC Club\", featuring the recording of their London concert held on 16 April 2007. The 2008 DVD \"Volk Dead in Trbovlje\" featured the recording of the band's performance held in Trbovlje's Worker's Hall on 23 March 2007, as well as music videos for the songs from \"Volk\" and a documentary about the tour entitled \"Volk Tour Medley\", all directed by Sa\u0161o Podgor\u0161ek. \nIn 2011, the group released the box set \"Gesamtkunstwerk \u2013 Dokument 81\u201382\" (\"Total Work of Art \u2013 Document 81\u201382\"), featuring five vinyl records and a DVD with unreleased studio recordings from the early phases of their career. The compilation was released in a limited number of 600 copies only. During the same year, the band recorded a cover of Bob Dylan's \"Ballad of a Thin Man\", recorded for the tribute album \"Projekt Bob Dylan: Postani prostovoljec!\" (\"Project Bob Dylan: Become a Volunteer!\"), commissioned by the American Embassy in Ljubljana in honor of Dylan's 70th birthday. The band was hired by director Timo Vuorensola to compose music for his science fiction comedy film \"Iron Sky\", and it was released on the soundtrack album \"Iron Sky\" in 2012. The double album \"Iron Sky Director's Cut\" featured their music originally composed for \"Iron Sky\", but eventually not used in the film. On 14 April 2012, in the Tate Modern Turbine Hall the band held a concert which was envisioned as the recreation of their 1983 concert at Zagreb Biennalle, with guest appearances by some of the group's early members. The recording of the concert was released on the double live album \"Monumental Retro-Avant-Garde\".\nIn 2014, Laibach released the album \"Spectre\", the title referring to the first line of \"The Communist Manifesto\". The band dedicated the album songs \"Eurovision\", \"The Whistleblowers\" (musically based on \"Colonel Bogey March\"), \"We Are Millions and Millions Are One\" (featuring new member Mina \u0160piler on lead vocals) and \"No History\" to Julian Assange and Edward Snowden. The deluxe edition of the album featured four bonus tracks, including a cover of Blind Lemon Jefferson's \"See That My Grave Is Kept Clean\" and Serge Gainsbourg's \"Love on the Beat\", and a book entitled \"Spectre Playbook\", a Laibach \"manifesto\" with a goal of uniting social activists from around the world. The album \"Spectremix\", released in 2015, featured \"Spectre\" songs remixes by Marcel Dettmann, Gramatik, Iztok Turk and other artists. During 2014, the band was invited by National Cultural Centre of Poland to record music for the commemoration of the 70th anniversary of the outbreak of the Warsaw Uprising. The band released the material on the EP \"1 VIII 1944 Warszawa\", featuring a version of the classic song of the insurgency \"Warszawskie Dzieci\" (\"Children of Warsaw\"), \nIn August 2015, on the initiative of Norwegian director Morten Traavik, the band performed in Pyongyang, North Korea. The band held two concerts, on 19 and 20 August, at Kim Won Gyun Musical Conservatory in Nampo-dong, Pyongyang, to coincide with the 70th anniversary of the end of Japanese rule of Korea. The concerts saw large attention of the Western media, a part of which described Laibach's upcoming performance as the first performance of a Western rock band in North Korea, although this was later revealed to be a misinformation. The concerts were the subject of the documentary film \"Liberation Day\" by Morten Traavik and U\u0123is Olte, which premiered in 2016. In 2017, the band performed in South Korea, becoming the only musical band in the world to have performed in both countries.\nIn July 2017, Laibach released the album \"Also Sprach Zarathustra\". The songs on the album were originally composed for a theatrical production of \"Thus Spoke Zarathustra\", based on Friedrich Nietzsche's novel of the same name, directed by Matja\u017e Berger and premiering in the Anton Podbev\u0161ek Theatre in Novo Mesto. In 2018, the group released the album \"The Sound of Music\", featuring their versions of the songs from the film of the same name. The band had previously performed these songs on their North Korea performances, choosing them because they are well-known in the country. The album included their version of the Korean folk song \"Arirang\", in which the band used traditional Korean instrument gayageum.\nIn 2020, the band released the box set \"Revisited\", featuring a reissue of their debut album with bonus tracks, new versions of their songs from the first half of the 1980s, and two live recordings \u2013 one with the Radio-Television Slovenia Symphony Orchestra, and the other with the Lviv Philharmonic Orchestra. The box set included the release entitled \"Underground\", with a recording of one of three performances the group held in 2017 in Velenje Mine, 200 meters under the ground. The 2021 live album \"We Forge the Future \u2013 Live at Reina Sofia\" featured the recording of the concert held at Madrid's Museo Nacional Centro de Arte Reina Sof\u00eda on 26 November 2017 and dedicated to their 1983 Zagreb Biennale performance. The release featured the book \"Terror of History\", with texts by journalist Igor Vidmar, author Marcel Stefan\u010di\u0107 and former president of Slovenia Milan Ku\u010dan. In 2022, Laibach released the album \"Wir sind das Volk (ein Musical aus Deutschland)\" (\"We are the People (a Musical of Germany)\") with the music from the theatre play \"We Are the People\", based on the works of Heiner M\u00fcller, which premiered in Berlin's Hebbel am Ufer center on 8 February 2020. On their 5 and 6 September 2022 performances at the Ljubljana Summer Festival, the band presented their symphonic work \"Alamut\", based on the 1938 novel \"Alamut\" by Vladimir Bartol. The symphony was created in cooperation with Iranian composers Nima A.Rowshan and Idin Samimi Mofakham. The band performed the symphony with the Radio-Television of Slovenia Symphony Orchestra, vocal group Gallina, Tehran choir Human Voice Ensemble and AccordiOna accordion orchestra. Following the premiere in Ljubljana, \"Alamut\" got its first European tour the following year.\nLaibach was scheduled to perform in Kyiv on 31 March 2023. However, the band's description of the Russo-Ukrainian War as a proxy war angered many Ukrainians and the concert was canceled. In 2023, the band released their latest studio album \"Sketches from the Red District\" and the EP \"Love Is Still Alive\", the latter featuring the songs written by the band for the 2019 \"Iron Sky\" sequel \"\". In 2024, the band released several singles: an atonal cover of Billie Holiday's \"Strange Fruit\", a cover of \"White Christmas\", recorded with Slovenian electronic duo Silence, and a Slovene language cover of Bijelo Dugme song \"Top\" (\"Cannon\"), entitled \"S topom te bom ciljal moja mala\" (\"I Will Shoot You With a Cannon, Baby\"). The latter was recorded in cooperation with Bijelo Dugme's leader Goran Bregovi\u0107 as a part of marking 50 years since Bijelo Dugme formation. The song featured Laibach's old collaborator Vasja Ulrih on lead vocals, with the accompanying music video, featuring excerpts from Laibach and Bijelo Dugme music videos and live recordings, compiled by Bregovi\u0107 and Laibach.\nOn October 23, 2025 Laibach launched a new single Yom Kippur featuring Palestinian Children\u2019s Choir. \nMusical style.\nEarly Laibach works were described as industrial rock by Yugoslav music press. The band's early releases were marked by heavy rhythms and roaring vocals. In the mid-1980s, with incorporating the covers of popular songs into their repertoire, the band's sound became more richly layered, featuring samples from pop and classical music.\nLaibach's cover versions are often used to subvert the original message or intention of the song, a notable example being their version of the song \"Live Is Life\" by the Austrian pop rock band Opus. Laibach recorded two versions of the song, titled \"Leben hei\u00dft Leben\" and \"Opus Dei\". The first, the opening song on the Laibach album \"Opus Dei\", was sung in German. The second was promoted as a single, and its promotional video (which used the title \"Life Is Life\") was played extensively on American cable channel MTV. \"Opus Dei\" retained some of the original song's English lyrics, but was delivered in a musical style that left the meaning of the lyrics open to interpretation. Whereas the original is a feel-good pop anthem, Laibach's interpretation twists the melody into a triumphant military march. With the exception of the promotional video, the refrain is at one point translated into German, giving an example of the sensitivity of lyrics to their context. The \"Opus Dei\" album also features a cover of Queen's \"One Vision\" with lyrics translated into German under the title '\"Geburt einer Nation\" (\"Birth of a Nation\"), revealing the ambiguity of lines like \"One race one hope / One real decision\".\nLaibach not only references modern artists through reinterpretation, but also samples or reinvents older musical pieces. For example, their song \"Anglia\", released on \"Volk\", is based on the national anthem of the United Kingdom, \"God Save the Queen\". They have also toured with an audio-visual performance centered on Johann Sebastian Bach's \"Die Kunst der Fuge\". Since this work has no specifications of acquired instruments and is furthermore based on mathematical principles, Laibach has argued that the music can be seen as proto-techno. Therefore, the band found \"Die Kunst der Fuge\" to be ideal for an interpretation using computers and software. In 2009, Laibach reworked Richard Wagner's \"Overture to Tannh\u00e4user\", \"Siegfried-Idyll\" and \"The Ride Of The Valkyries\" in collaboration with the RTV Slovenia Symphonic Orchestra, conducted by Izidor Leitinger. Laibach's version is titled \"VolksWagner\".\nIn addition to cover songs, Laibach has remixed songs by other bands. These include two songs by the Florida death metal band Morbid Angel that appear on the Morbid Angel EP \"Laibach Re-mixes\".\nAesthetics, image and controversy.\nAt the early stage of their career, Laibach's visuals employed socialist realist mining iconography, and later the band incorporated, alongside influences from socialist realism, influences from Nazi art and Italian futurism to their imagery. On their early promotional posters the band used black crosses from the works of Russian avant-garde artist and art theorist Kazimir Malevich, later incorporating a black cross into their logo, consisting of a cross encircled with a gear. In the mid-1980s, when the usage of the name Laibach was banned in Yugoslavia, the group used posters with black crosses without band name to advertise their performances, and their debut album was released with the black cross and without any text on the cover. Cross imagery, and variations on the cross are apparent in many Laibach recordings and publications. Some Laibach releases feature artwork by the communist and early Dada artist John Heartfield. The usage of Heartfield's anti-Nazi work depicting swastika consisting of four bloodied axes on the inner sleeve of the album \"Opus Dei\" caused controversies in some European countries.\nThe visual imagery of Laibach's art has been described as \"radically ambiguous\". An early example of this ambiguity would be the woodcut entitled \"The Thrower\", also known as \"Metalec\" (\"The Metal Worker\"). This work features a monochrome silhouette of a figure with a clenched fist holding a hammer aloft. The work could be seen both as promoting industrial protest or as a symbol of industrial pride. Another aspect of this woodcut is the large typefaced word \"LAIBACH\", evoking memories of the Nazi occupation of Slovenia. This piece was featured prominently during the band's 1983 interview for \"TV tednik\".\nLaibach has frequently been accused of both far left and far right political stances due to their use of uniforms and totalitarian-style aesthetics. They were also accused of being neo-nationalists. When confronted with such accusations, Laibach is quoted as replying with the ambiguous response \"We are fascists as much as Hitler was a painter\". Laibach concerts have sometimes aesthetically appeared as political rallies, and the members of Laibach are notorious for rarely stepping out of character. When interviewed, they often answer in wry manifestos, showing a paradoxical lust for, and condemnation of, authority.\nFinnish author and nationalist Tuomas T\u00e4hti disclosed in his 2019 book \"Nationalistin henkinen horisontti\" that Laibach member Ivan \"Jani\" Novak told him in March 2015 that the band is a communist group and most of their work is connected to communism.\nBritish musician and journalist Richard Wolfson wrote of the group:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Laibach's method is extremely simple, effective and horribly open to misinterpretation. First of all, they absorb the mannerisms of the enemy, adopting all the seductive trappings and symbols of state power, and then they exaggerate everything to the edge of parody... Next they turn their focus to highly charged issues\u2014the West's fear of immigrants from Eastern Europe, the power games of the EU, the analogies between Western democracy and totalitarianism.\nSlovenian philosopher Slavoj \u017di\u017eek stated about the group after their performance in North Korea:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Quite often libertarian leftists were embarrassed by Laibach. On the one hand, of course, they had to support Laibach. But they were very uneasy about how to take Laibach. Their primordial fear\u2014which is for me the first sign that they didn't understand anything about Laibach\u2014was to claim that Laibach is a great ironic spectacle of subtly mocking, making fun of authority and so on. But then, almost always in my experience\u2014I experienced this with my leftist friends\u2014they added a worry: \"What if people will not get it properly, what if people would take Laibach too seriously and perceive, or rather mispercieve, what is their ironic spectacle as real celebration of totalitarianism?\" No, I think things are much more complex. Laibach is not simply making fun of totalitarianism. Laibach is bringing out the authoritarian feature which is present in most societies, even in the most democratic societies. [...] I think that Laibach is deeply aware [...] of this deep ambiguity of even the most democratic power. And they are trying to bring this authoritarian streak out even with a certain open fascination. There is no distance there. They are not making fun of it. They are openly enjoying it. So that's the traumatic message of Laibach: staging the real of power. [...] Usual left liberal critics or public of Laibach, they are reading Laibach along the lines of this standard humanist gap, searching behind the strict, totalitarian mask of Laibach for warm, humane persons. They want to find behind the mask of Laibach\u2014all this low bass industrial totalitarian music\u2014this guarantee: \"Don't be afraid, behind this mask they are just ordinary warm people like ourselves.\" No, the message of Laibach is just the opposite one. It's not: \"Don't be afraid, beneath our totalitarian mask we are warm, normal, compassionate people like you\". No, it's\u2014even if we look at our everyday life in the West, like normal, compassionate people, all the disgusting spectacles that we are doing in the West, charity, helping others and so on\u2014we are really what we play to be. We are monsters, there is no humanity behind it. So, you see, it's not about North Korea. You will not learn a lot from Laibach about North Korea. You will learn a lot about our own anxieties and hypocrisies.\nLegacy, influence and innovation.\nDespite emerging on the rich and vibrant Yugoslav rock scene, Laibach is widely considered to be the only Yugoslav band to achieve large popularity in Western Europe during the existence of SFR Yugoslavia. The band has influenced a number of acts, has been paid tribute by several projects and has been a subject of several books and documentary films.\nTributes.\nIn 1999, a tribute album to Laibach entitled \"Schlecht und Ironisch \u2013 Laibach Tribut\" (\"Bad and Ironic \u2013 Laibach Tribute\") was released. Canadian industrial doom metal band Zaraza released a Laibach tribute EP entitled \"Montrealska Akropola \u2013 A Tribute to Laibach\" (\"Montreal Acropolis \u2013 A Tribute to Laibach\") in 2004.\nMartial music.\nSome early material by Laibach and later neoclassical releases by the band, such as the album \"Macbeth\", were influential on certain artists within the martial industrial music genre.\nRammstein.\nLaibach is often cited as an influence for the popular German Neue Deutsche H\u00e4rte band Rammstein. The parallel is regularly made between the bands regarding their aesthetics and deep male vocals both groups share and with their respective backgrounds of originating from former socialist countries.\nWhen asked about the topic in an interview, Rammstein guitarist Richard Kruspe claimed Rammstein to have a more emotional approach instead of the more \"intellectual\" style of Laibach. In the same interview the keyboard player of Rammstein Christian Lorenz drew a parallel between the deep voices of Till Lindemann and Milan Fras but considered this to be the only similarity between the two music groups. The documentary film \"Liberation Day\" ends with a notice stating that a member of a certain industrial metal band was supposed to be interviewed for the film about the influence Laibach had on their earlier work, but it had to be removed due to the prospect of arrest or a fine from the district court of Berlin towards the makers of the film. This, and the early promotional material for the film suggest that it was Paul Landers who was to appear in the film. \nWhen members of Laibach were asked by an interviewer about Rammstein \"stealing\" from them, they responded: \"Laibach does not believe in originality... Therefore, Rammstein could not 'steal' much from us. They simply let themselves get inspired by our work, which is absolutely a legitimate process. We are glad that they made it. In a way, they have proven once again that a good 'copy' can make more money on the market than the 'original'. Anyhow, today we share the territory: Rammstein seem to be a kind of Laibach for adolescents and Laibach are Rammstein for grown-ups.\" Laibach would later provide a remix for the Rammstein single \"Ohne dich\".\nRankings.\nLaibach album \"Sympathy for the Devil\" was proclaimed in 2006 the 7th on \"The Mail on Sunday\" list of Ten Greatest Tribute Albums of All Time. The album \"Opus Dei\" was included in 2008 in the book \"1001 Albums You Must Hear Before You Die\". The same album was polled in 2015 as the 86th on the list of 100 Greatest Yugoslav Albums published by the Croatian edition of \"Rolling Stone\".\nBooks and documentaries.\nLaibach has been the subject of several books:\nThe band has also been the subject of several documentaries:\nMembers.\nLaibach evolved from the band Salto Mortale, formed in 1978 by Dejan Knez. The first incarnation of Laibach formed in 1980 included Dejan Knez, Toma\u017e Hostnik, Sre\u010dko Bajda, Andrej Lupinc, and Marko Ko\u0161nik. Soon after that, Knez's relative Ivan \"Jani\" Novak and Milan Fras joined the band. First a quintet, Laibach quickly became a quartet and declared that the group had four members: \"Vier Personen\".\nFrom mid-1980s to mid-1990s, while the core quartet included Dejan Knez, Milan Fras, Ervin Marko\u0161ek and Ivan \"Jani\" Novak, the members frequently used the pseudonyms Dachauer, Keller, Saliger and Eber. The pseudonym Ivo Saliger was originally used by original singer Toma\u017e Hostnik and more recently by Ivan Novak. The pseudonym Elk Eber has been used by Dejan Knez. Former member Andrej Lupinc has continued to use the pseudonym Keller after leaving the band. Occasionally, other musicians supplemented the core group, some of whom included Oto Rimele (former guitarist for La\u010dni Franz), Nikola Sekulovi\u0107 (bass player for Demolition Group), and Anja Rupel (vocalist for Videosex and a solo artist).\nOn 20 June 2015, the band held a sound performance entitled \"Musical Nocturne\" with their most famous line-up of Knez, Novak, Fras and Marko\u0161ek.\nOn 9 May 2025, Laibach held a concert in Cukrarna gallery in Ljubljana \"We Forge the Future, Reconstruction of a historical concert\", which was a reconstruction of their 1983 Zagreb Biennale concert. Dejan Knez, Ivan Novak, Iztok Turk, Sre\u010dko Bajda, Luka Jamnik and Vitja Bal\u017ealorsky appeared on stage.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAdditional sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "57757", "revid": "42412221", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57757", "title": "Ebola River", "text": "River in Democratic Republic of the Congo\nThe Ebola River ( or ), also commonly known by its Ngbandi name Legbala, is the headstream of the Mongala River, a tributary of the Congo River, in northern Democratic Republic of the Congo. It is roughly in length.\nThe name \"Ebola\" is a French corruption of \"Legbala\", its name in Ngbandi which means 'white water'. During the Belgian administration these names were interchangeable along with the French names \"Eau Blanche\" and rarely \"L'\u00c9bola\".\nIn 1976, Ebola virus was first identified in Yambuku, from the Ebola River, but the virologist Karl Johnson decided to name it after the river so that the town would not be associated with the disease's stigma. Thus, the river is eponymous to the terms Ebola virus, \"Ebolavirus\", and Ebola virus disease (usually referred to as simply \"Ebola\").\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Sister-inline/styles.css\"/&gt; Media related to at Wikimedia Commons"}
{"id": "57759", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57759", "title": "Biophoton", "text": "Photon from a biological source\nBiophotons (from the Greek \u03b2\u03af\u03bf\u03c2 meaning \"life\" and \u03c6\u1ff6\u03c2 meaning \"light\") are photons of light in the ultraviolet and visible light range that are produced by a biological system. They are non-thermal in origin, and the emission of biophotons is technically a type of bioluminescence, though the term \"bioluminescence\" is generally reserved for higher luminance systems (typically with emitted light visible to the naked eye, using biochemical means such as luciferin/luciferase). The term \"biophoton\" used in this narrow sense should not be confused with the broader field of biophotonics, which studies the general interaction of light with biological systems.\nBiological tissues typically produce an observed radiant emittance in the visible and ultraviolet frequencies ranging from 10\u221217 to 10\u221223 W/cm2 (approx 1\u20131000 photons/cm2/second). This low level of light has a much weaker intensity than the visible light produced by bioluminescence, but biophotons are detectable above the background of thermal radiation that is emitted by tissues at their normal temperature. Biophoton emission is also known as \"ultraweak photon emission\" (UPE).\nWhile detection of biophotons has been reported by several groups, hypotheses that such biophotons indicate the state of biological tissues and facilitate a form of cellular communication are still under investigation, Alexander Gurwitsch, who discovered the existence of biophotons, was awarded the Stalin Prize in 1941 for his work.\nDetection and measurement.\nPhoton Multipliers.\nBiophotons may be detected with photomultipliers or by means of an ultra low noise CCD camera to produce an image, using an exposure time of typically 15 minutes for plant materials. Photomultiplier tubes have been used to measure biophoton emissions from fish eggs, and some applications have measured biophotons from animals and humans. Electron Multiplying CCD (EM-CCD) optimized for the detection of ultraweak light have also been used to detect the bioluminescence produced by yeast cells at the onset of their growth.\nThe typical observed radiant emittance of biological tissues in the visible and ultraviolet frequencies ranges from 10\u221217 to 10\u221223 W/cm2 with a photon count from a few to nearly 1000 photons per cm2 per second in the range of 200\u00a0nm to 800\u00a0nm.\nPhotoencephalography.\nPhotoencephalography is an emerging technique used to track ultraweak biophoton emissions, particularly those originating from the human brain. By detecting these faint light signals, it provides a non-invasive method for studying neural activity.\nProposed physical mechanisms.\nChemi-excitation via oxidative stress by reactive oxygen species or catalysis by enzymes (i.e., peroxidase, lipoxygenase) is a common event in the biomolecular milieu. Such reactions can lead to the formation of triplet excited species, which release photons upon returning to a lower energy level in a process analogous to phosphorescence. That this process is a contributing factor to spontaneous biophoton emission has been indicated by studies demonstrating that biophoton emission can be increased by depleting assayed tissue of antioxidants or by addition of carbonyl derivatizing agents. Further support is provided by studies indicating that emission can be increased by addition of reactive oxygen species.\nPlants.\nImaging of biophotons from leaves has been used as a method for assaying R gene responses. These genes and their associated proteins are responsible for pathogen recognition and activation of defense signaling networks leading to the hypersensitive response, which is one of the mechanisms of the resistance of plants to pathogen infection. It involves the generation of reactive oxygen species (ROS), which have crucial roles in signal transduction or as toxic agents leading to cell death.\nBiophotons have been also observed in the roots of stressed plants. In healthy cells, the concentration of ROS is minimized by a system of biological antioxidants. However, heat shock and other stresses changes the equilibrium between oxidative stress and antioxidant activity, for example, the rapid rise in temperature induces biophoton emission by ROS.\nHypothesized involvement in cellular communication.\nIn the 1920s, the Russian embryologist Alexander Gurwitsch reported \"ultraweak\" photon emissions from living tissues in the UV-range of the spectrum. He named them \"mitogenetic rays\" because his experiments convinced him that they had a stimulating effect on cell division.\nIn the 1970s Fritz-Albert Popp and his research group at the University of Marburg (Germany) showed that the spectral distribution of the emission fell over a wide range of wavelengths, from 200 to 750\u00a0nm. Popp's work on the biophoton emission's statistical properties, namely the claims on its coherence, was criticised for lack of scientific rigour.\nOne biophoton mechanism focuses on injured cells that are under higher levels of oxidative stress, which is one source of light, and can be deemed to constitute a \"distress signal\" or background chemical process, but this mechanism is yet to be demonstrated. The difficulty of teasing out the effects of any supposed biophotons amid the other numerous chemical interactions between cells makes it difficult to devise a testable hypothesis. A 2010 review article discusses various published theories on this kind of signaling.\nThe hypothesis of cellular communication by biophotons was highly criticised for failing to explain how cells could detect photonic signals several orders of magnitude weaker than the natural background illumination.\nApplications.\nMonitoring ultra-weak photon emission offers a low-cost, label-free approach for tracking pharmacological interventions and drug therapies across diseases involving a ROS response.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "57761", "revid": "9337959", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57761", "title": "Valproate", "text": "Medication used for epilepsy, bipolar disorder and migraine\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Infobox drug/styles.css\"/&gt;\nValproate (valproic acid, VPA, sodium valproate, and valproate semisodium forms) are medications primarily used to prevent migraine headaches, to treat epilepsy and as a mood stabilizer in the treatment of bipolar disorder. They are useful for the prevention of seizures in those with absence seizures, partial seizures, and generalized seizures. They can be given intravenously or by mouth, and the tablet forms exist in both long- and short-acting formulations.\nCommon side effects of valproate include nausea, vomiting, somnolence, and dry mouth. Serious side effects can include liver failure, and regular monitoring of liver function tests is therefore recommended. Other serious risks include pancreatitis and an increased suicide risk. Valproate is known to cause serious abnormalities or birth defects in the unborn child if taken during pregnancy, and is contra-indicated for women of childbearing age unless the drug is essential to their medical condition and the person is also prescribed a contraceptive. Reproductive warnings have also been issued for men using the drug. The United States Food and Drug Administration has indicated a black box warning given the frequency and severity of the side effects and teratogenicity. Additionally, there is also a black box warning due to risk of hepatotoxicity and pancreatitis. As of 2022 the drug was still prescribed in the UK to potentially pregnant women, but use declined by 51% from 2018\u201319 to 2020\u201321. Valproate has been in use in Japan for the prophylaxis of migraine since 2011. It is approved as an antimanic and antiseizure in Japan as well. In UK, valproate is approved for bipolar mania and epilepsy, and both valproate and divalproex are approved, although divalproex sodium is known as valproate semisodium.\nValproate's precise mechanism of action is unclear. Proposed mechanisms include affecting GABA levels, blocking voltage-gated sodium channels, inhibiting histone deacetylases, and increasing LEF1. Valproic acid is a branched short-chain fatty acid (SCFA), a derivative of valeric acid.\nValproate was originally synthesized in 1881 and came into medical use in 1962. It is on the World Health Organization's List of Essential Medicines. It is available as a generic medication. In 2022, it was the 160th most commonly prescribed medication in the United States, with more than 3million prescriptions.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nMedical uses.\nValproate or valproic acid is used primarily to treat epilepsy and bipolar disorder and to prevent migraine headaches.\nEpilepsy.\nValproate has a broad spectrum of anticonvulsant activity, although it is primarily used as a first-line treatment for tonic\u2013clonic seizures, absence seizures and myoclonic seizures and as a second-line treatment for partial seizures and infantile spasms. It has also been successfully given intravenously to treat status epilepticus.\nIn the US, valproic acid is also prescribed as an anti-epileptic drug indicated for the treatment of manic episodes associated with bipolar disorder; monotherapy and adjunctive therapy of complex partial seizures and simple and complex absence seizures; adjunctive therapy in people with multiple seizure types that include absence seizures.\nMental illness.\nValproate products are used to treat manic or mixed episodes of bipolar disorder.\nA 2016 systematic review compared the efficacy of valproate as an add-on for people with schizophrenia:\nOther neurological indications.\nBased upon five case reports, valproic acid may have efficacy in controlling the symptoms of the dopamine dysregulation syndrome that arise from the treatment of Parkinson's disease with levodopa.\nValproate is not commonly used to prevent or treat migraine headaches, but it may be prescribed if other medications are not effective.\nOther.\nThe medication has been tested in the treatment of AIDS and cancer, owing to its histone-deacetylase-inhibiting effects. It has cardioprotective, kidney protective, antiinflammatory, and antimicrobial effects.\nContraindications.\nContraindications include:\nAdverse effects.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nMost common adverse effects include:\nSerious adverse effects include:\nValproic acid has a black box warning for hepatotoxicity, pancreatitis, and fetal abnormalities.\nThere is evidence that valproic acid may cause premature growth plate ossification in children and adolescents, resulting in decreased height. Valproic acid can also cause mydriasis, a dilation of the pupils. There is evidence that shows valproic acid may increase the chance of polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) in women with epilepsy or bipolar disorder. Studies have shown this risk of PCOS is higher in women with epilepsy compared to those with bipolar disorder. Weight gain is also possible.\nElderly.\nValproate may cause increased somnolence in the elderly. In a trial of valproate in elderly patients with dementia, a significantly higher portion of valproate patients had somnolence compared to placebo. In approximately one-half of such patients, there was associated reduced nutritional intake and weight loss.\nOverdose and toxicity.\nExcessive amounts of valproic acid can result in somnolence, tremor, stupor, respiratory depression, coma, metabolic acidosis, and death. In general, serum or plasma valproic acid concentrations are in a range of 20\u2013100\u00a0mg/L during controlled therapy, but may reach 150\u20131500\u00a0mg/L following acute poisoning. Monitoring of the serum level is often accomplished using commercial immunoassay techniques, although some laboratories employ gas or liquid chromatography.\nIn contrast to other antiepileptic drugs, at present there is little favorable evidence for salivary therapeutic drug monitoring. Salivary levels of valproic acid correlate poorly with serum levels, partly due to valproate's weak acid property (p\"K\"a of 4.9).\nIn severe intoxication, hemoperfusion or hemofiltration can be an effective means of hastening elimination of the drug from the body. Supportive therapy should be given to all patients experiencing an overdose and urine output should be monitored. Supplemental -carnitine is indicated in patients having an acute overdose and also prophylactically in high risk patients. Acetyl--carnitine lowers hyperammonemia less markedly than -carnitine. \nInteractions.\nValproate inhibits CYP2C9, glucuronyl transferase, and epoxide hydrolase and is highly protein bound and hence may interact with drugs that are substrates for any of these enzymes or are highly protein bound themselves. It may also potentiate the CNS depressant effects of alcohol. It should not be given in conjunction with other antiepileptics due to the potential for reduced clearance of other antiepileptics (including carbamazepine, lamotrigine, phenytoin and phenobarbitone) and itself. It may also interact with:\nPharmacology.\nPharmacodynamics.\nAlthough the mechanism of action of valproate is not fully understood, traditionally, its anticonvulsant effect has been attributed to the blockade of voltage-gated sodium channels and increased brain levels of the inhibitory synaptic neurotransmitter gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA). The GABAergic effect is also believed to contribute towards the anti-manic properties of valproate. In animals, sodium valproate raises cerebral and cerebellar levels of GABA, possibly by inhibiting GABA degradative enzymes, such as GABA transaminase, succinate-semialdehyde dehydrogenase and by inhibiting the re-uptake of GABA by neuronal cells.\nPrevention of neurotransmitter-induced hyperexcitability of nerve cells via Kv7.2 channel and AKAP5 may also contribute to its mechanism. Valproate has been shown to protect against a seizure-induced reduction in phosphatidylinositol (3,4,5)-trisphosphate (PIP3) as a potential therapeutic mechanism.\nValproate is a histone deacetylase inhibitor. By inhibition of histone deacetylase, it promotes more transcriptionally active chromatin structures, that is it exerts an epigenetic effect. This has been proven in mice: Valproic acid induced histone hyperacetylation had brain function effects on the next generation of mice through changes in sperm DNA methylation. Intermediate molecules include VEGF, BDNF, and GDNF.\nEndocrine actions.\nValproic acid has been found to be an antagonist of the androgen and progesterone receptors, and hence as a nonsteroidal antiandrogen and antiprogestogen, at concentrations much lower than therapeutic serum levels. In addition, the drug has been identified as a potent aromatase inhibitor, and suppresses estrogen concentrations. These actions are likely to be involved in the reproductive endocrine disturbances seen with valproic acid treatment.\nValproic acid has been found to directly stimulate androgen biosynthesis in the gonads via inhibition of histone deacetylases and has been associated with hyperandrogenism in women and increased 4-androstenedione levels in men. High rates of polycystic ovary syndrome and menstrual disorders have also been observed in women treated with valproic acid.\nPharmacokinetics.\nTaken by mouth, valproate is rapidly and virtually completely absorbed from the gut. When in the bloodstream, 80\u201390% of the substance are bound to plasma proteins, mainly albumin. Protein binding is saturable: it decreases with increasing valproate concentration, low albumin concentrations, the patient's age, additional use of other drugs such as aspirin, as well as liver and kidney impairment. Concentrations in the cerebrospinal fluid and in breast milk are 1 to 10% of blood plasma concentrations.\nThe vast majority of valproate metabolism occurs in the liver. Valproate is known to be metabolized by the cytochrome P450 enzymes CYP2A6, CYP2B6, CYP2C9, and CYP3A5. It is also known to be metabolized by the UDP-glucuronosyltransferase enzymes UGT1A3, UGT1A4, UGT1A6, UGT1A8, UGT1A9, UGT1A10, UGT2B7, and UGT2B15. Some of the known metabolites of valproate by these enzymes and uncharacterized enzymes include (see image):\nAll in all, over 20 metabolites are known.\nIn adult patients taking valproate alone, 30\u201350% of an administered dose is excreted in urine as the glucuronide conjugate. The other major pathway in the metabolism of valproate is mitochondrial beta oxidation, which typically accounts for over 40% of an administered dose. Typically, less than 20% of an administered dose is eliminated by other oxidative mechanisms. Less than 3% of an administered dose of valproate is excreted unchanged (i.e., as valproate) in urine. Only a small amount is excreted via the faeces. Elimination half-life is 16\u00b13 hours and can decrease to 4\u20139 hours when combined with enzyme inducers.\nChemistry.\nValproic acid is a branched short-chain fatty acid and the 2-\"n\"-propyl derivative of valeric acid.\nHistory.\nValproic acid was first synthesized in 1882 by Beverly S. Burton as an analogue of valeric acid, found naturally in valerian. Valproic acid is a carboxylic acid, a clear liquid at room temperature. For many decades, its only use was in laboratories as a \"metabolically inert\" solvent for organic compounds. In 1962, the French researcher Pierre Eymard serendipitously discovered the anticonvulsant properties of valproic acid while using it as a vehicle for a number of other compounds that were being screened for antiseizure activity. He found it prevented pentylenetetrazol-induced convulsions in laboratory rats. It was approved as an antiepileptic drug in 1967 in France and has become the most widely prescribed antiepileptic drug worldwide. Valproic acid has also been used for migraine prophylaxis and bipolar disorder.\nSociety and culture.\nValproate is available as a generic medication.\nOff-label uses.\nIn 2012, pharmaceutical company Abbott paid $1.6 billion in fines to US federal and state governments for illegal promotion of off-label uses for Depakote, including the sedation of elderly nursing home residents.\nSome studies have suggested that valproate may reopen the critical period for learning absolute pitch and possibly other skills such as language.\nFormulations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Infobox drug/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Infobox drug/styles.css\"/&gt;\nValproate exists in two main molecular variants: \"sodium valproate\" and \"valproic acid without sodium\" (often implied by simply \"valproate\"). A mixture between these two is termed \"semisodium valproate\". It is unclear whether there is any difference in efficacy between these variants, except from the fact that about 10% more mass of \"sodium valproate\" is needed than \"valproic acid without sodium\" to compensate for the sodium itself. In USA, Europe and many countrie the three variantes of valproate are sold: valproic acid, sodium valproate and valproate semisodium also known as divalproex sodium, the latter is believed to have fewer gastrointestinal side-effects. Divalproex sodium tablets are a formulation comprising valproate sodium and valproic acid in a 1:1 molar relationship.\nMagnesium valproate is also available in China.\nTerminology.\nValproate is a negative ion. The conjugate acid of valproate is valproic acid (VPA). Valproic acid is fully ionized into valproate at the physiologic pH of the human body, and valproate is the active form of the drug. Sodium valproate is the sodium salt of valproic acid. Divalproex sodium is a coordination complex composed of equal parts of valproic acid and sodium valproate.\nBrand names of valproic acid.\nBranded products include:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nBrand names of sodium valproate.\nNew Zealand.\nAll the above formulations are Pharmac-subsidised.\nEurope.\nIn much of Europe, D\u00e9pakine and Depakine Chrono (tablets) are equivalent to Epilim and Epilim Chrono above.\nIsrael.\nDepalept and Depalept Chrono (extended release tablets) are equivalent to Epilim and Epilim Chrono above. Manufactured and distributed by Sanofi-Aventis.\nResearch.\nA 2023 systematic review of the literature identified only one study in which valproate was evaluated in the treatment of seizures in infants aged 1 to 36 months. In a randomized control trial, valproate alone was found to show poorer outcomes for infants than valproate plus levetiracetam in terms of reduction of seizures, freedom from seizures, daily living ability, quality of life, and cognitive abilities.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "57762", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57762", "title": "Psychiatric medication", "text": "Medication used to treat mental disorders\nA psychiatric or psychotropic medication is a psychoactive drug taken to exert an effect on the chemical makeup of the brain and nervous system. Thus, these medications are used to treat mental illnesses. These medications are typically made of synthetic chemical compounds and are usually prescribed in psychiatric settings, potentially involuntarily during commitment. Since the mid-20th century, such medications have been leading treatments for a broad range of mental disorders and have decreased the need for long-term hospitalization, thereby lowering the cost of mental health care. The recidivism or rehospitalization of the mentally ill is at a high rate in many countries, and the reasons for the relapses are under research.\nA 2022 umbrella review of over 100 meta-analyses found that both psychotherapies and pharmacotherapies for adult mental disorders generally yield small effect sizes, suggesting current treatment research may have reached a ceiling and needs a paradigm shift.\nHistory.\nSeveral significant psychiatric drugs were developed in the mid-20th century. In 1948, lithium was first used as a psychiatric medicine. One of the most important discoveries was chlorpromazine, an antipsychotic that was first given to a patient in 1952. In the same decade, Julius Axelrod carried out research into the interaction of neurotransmitters, which provided a foundation for the development of further drugs. The popularity of these drugs have increased significantly since then, with millions prescribed annually.\nThe introduction of these drugs brought profound changes to the treatment of mental illness. It meant that more patients could be treated without the need for confinement in a psychiatric hospital. It was one of the key reasons why many countries moved towards deinstitutionalization, closing many of these hospitals so that patients could be treated at home, in general hospitals and smaller facilities. Use of physical restraints such as straitjackets also declined.\nAs of 2013, the 10 most prescribed psychiatric drugs by number of prescriptions were alprazolam, sertraline, citalopram, fluoxetine, lorazepam, trazodone, escitalopram, duloxetine, bupropion XL, and venlafaxine XR.\nAdministration.\nPsychiatric medications are prescription medications, requiring a prescription from a physician, such as a psychiatrist, or a psychiatric nurse practitioner, PMHNP, before they can be obtained. Some U.S. states and territories, following the creation of the prescriptive authority for psychologists movement, have granted prescriptive privileges to clinical psychologists who have undergone additional specialised education and training in medical psychology. In addition to the familiar dosage in pill form, psychiatric medications are evolving into more novel methods of drug delivery. New technologies include transdermal, transmucosal, inhalation, suppository or depot injection supplements.\nResearch.\nPsychopharmacology studies a wide range of substances with various types of psychoactive properties. The professional and commercial fields of pharmacology and psychopharmacology do not typically focus on psychedelic or recreational drugs, and so the majority of studies are conducted on psychiatric medication. While studies are conducted on all psychoactive drugs by both fields, psychopharmacology focuses on psychoactive and chemical interactions within the brain. Physicians who research psychiatric medications are psychopharmacologists, specialists in the field of psychopharmacology.\nA 2022 umbrella review of over 100 meta-analyses found that both psychotherapies and pharmacotherapies for adult mental disorders generally yield small effect sizes, suggesting current treatment research may have reached a ceiling and needs a paradigm shift.\nAdverse and withdrawal effects.\nPsychiatric disorders, including depression, psychosis, and bipolar disorder, are common and gaining more acceptance in the United States. The most commonly used classes of medications for these disorders are antidepressants, antipsychotics, and lithium. Unfortunately, these medications are associated with significant neurotoxicities.\nPsychiatric medications carry risk for neurotoxic adverse effects. The occurrence of neurotoxic effects can potentially reduce drug compliance. Some adverse effects can be treated symptomatically by using adjunct medications such as anticholinergics (antimuscarinics). Some rebound or withdrawal adverse effects, such as the possibility of a sudden or severe emergence or re-emergence of psychosis in antipsychotic withdrawal, may appear when the drugs are discontinued, or discontinued too rapidly.\nMedicine combinations with clinically untried risks.\nWhile clinical trials of psychiatric medications, like other medications, typically test medicines separately, there is a practice in psychiatry (more so than in somatic medicine) to use polypharmacy in combinations of medicines that have never been tested together in clinical trials (though all medicines involved have passed clinical trials separately). It is argued that this presents a risk of adverse effects, especially brain damage, in real-life mixed medication psychiatry that are not visible in the clinical trials of one medicine at a time (similar to mixed drug abuse causing significantly more damage than the additive effects of brain damages caused by using only one illegal drug). Outside clinical trials, there is evidence for an increase in mortality when psychiatric patients are transferred to polypharmacy with an increased number of medications being mixed.\nTypes.\nThere are five main groups of psychiatric medications.\nAntidepressants.\nAntidepressants are drugs used to treat clinical depression, and they are also often used for anxiety and other disorders. Most antidepressants will hinder the breakdown of serotonin, norepinephrine, and/or dopamine. A commonly used class of antidepressants are called selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs), which act on serotonin transporters in the brain to increase levels of serotonin in the synaptic cleft. Another is the serotonin-norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs), which increase both serotonin and norepinephrine. Antidepressants will often take 3\u20135 weeks to have a noticeable effect as the regulation of receptors in the brain adapts. There are multiple classes of antidepressants which have different mechanisms of action. Another type of antidepressant is a monoamine oxidase inhibitor (MAOI), which is thought to block the action of monoamine oxidase, an enzyme that breaks down serotonin and norepinephrine. MAOIs are not used as first-line treatment due to the risk of hypertensive crisis related to the consumption of foods containing the amino acid tyramine.\nCommon antidepressants:\nAntipsychotics.\nAntipsychotics are drugs used to treat various symptoms of psychosis, such as those caused by psychotic disorders or schizophrenia. Atypical antipsychotics are also used as mood stabilizers in the treatment of bipolar disorder, and they can augment the action of antidepressants in major depressive disorder.\nAntipsychotics are sometimes referred to as neuroleptic drugs and some antipsychotics are branded \"major tranquilizers\".\nThere are two categories of antipsychotics: typical antipsychotics and atypical antipsychotics. Most antipsychotics are available only by prescription.\nCommon antipsychotics:\nAnxiolytics and hypnotics.\nBenzodiazepines are effective as hypnotics, anxiolytics, anticonvulsants, myorelaxants and amnesics. Having less proclivity for overdose and toxicity, they have widely supplanted barbiturates, although barbiturates (such as pentobarbital) are still used for euthanasia.\nDeveloped in the 1950s onward, benzodiazepines were originally thought to be non-addictive at therapeutic doses, but are now known to cause withdrawal symptoms similar to barbiturates and alcohol. Benzodiazepines are generally recommended for short-term use.\nZ-drugs are a group of drugs with effects generally similar to benzodiazepines, which are used in the treatment of insomnia.\nCommon benzodiazepines and z-drugs include:\nMood stabilizers.\nIn 1949, the Australian John Cade discovered that lithium salts could control mania, reducing the frequency and severity of manic episodes. This introduced the now popular drug lithium carbonate to the mainstream public, as well as being the first mood stabilizer to be approved by the U.S. Food &amp; Drug Administration. \nBesides lithium, several anticonvulsants and atypical antipsychotics have mood stabilizing activity. The mechanism of action of mood stabilizers is not well understood.\nCommon non-antipsychotic mood stabilizers include:\nStimulants.\nA stimulant is a drug that stimulates the central nervous system, increasing arousal, attention and endurance. Stimulants are used in psychiatry to treat attention deficit-hyperactivity disorder. Because the medications can be addictive, patients with a history of drug abuse are typically monitored closely or treated with a non-stimulant.\nCommon stimulants:\nControversies.\nProfessionals, such as David Rosenhan, Peter Breggin, Paula Caplan, Thomas Szasz, Giorgio Antonucci and Stuart A. Kirk, sustain that psychiatry engages \"in the systematic medicalization of normality\". More recently these concerns have come from insiders who have worked for and promoted the APA (e.g., Robert Spitzer, Allen Frances).\nScholars such as Cooper, Foucalt, Goffman, Deleuze and Szasz believe that pharmacological \"treatment\" is only a placebo effect, and that administration of drugs is just a religion in disguise and ritualistic chemistry. Other scholars have argued against psychiatric medication in that significant aspects of mental illness are related to the psyche or environmental factors, but medication works exclusively on a pharmacological basis.\nAntipsychotics have been associated with decreases in brain volume over time, which may indicate a neurotoxic effect. However, untreated psychosis has also been associated with decreases in brain volume and treatments have been shown improve cognitive functioning.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "57763", "revid": "18426370", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57763", "title": "Aerosol", "text": "Suspension of fine solid particles or liquid droplets in a gas\nAn aerosol is a suspension of fine solid particles or liquid droplets in air or another gas. Aerosols can be generated from natural or human causes. The term \"aerosol\" commonly refers to the mixture of particulates in air, and not to the particulate matter alone. Examples of natural aerosols are fog, mist or dust. Examples of human caused aerosols include particulate air pollutants, mist from the discharge at hydroelectric dams, irrigation mist, perfume from atomizers, smoke, dust, sprayed pesticides, and medical treatments for respiratory illnesses.\nSeveral types of atmospheric aerosol have a significant effect on Earth's climate: volcanic, desert dust, sea-salt, that originating from biogenic sources and human-made. Volcanic aerosol forms in the stratosphere after an eruption as droplets of sulfuric acid that can prevail for up to two years, and reflect sunlight, lowering temperature. Desert dust, mineral particles blown to high altitudes, absorb heat and may be responsible for inhibiting storm cloud formation. Human-made sulfate aerosols, primarily from burning oil and coal, affect the behavior of clouds. When aerosols absorb pollutants, it facilitates the deposition of pollutants to the surface of the earth as well as to bodies of water. This has the potential to be damaging to both the environment and human health.\nShip tracks are clouds that form around the exhaust released by ships into the still ocean air. Water molecules collect around the tiny particles (aerosols) from exhaust to form a cloud seed. More and more water accumulates on the seed until a visible cloud is formed. In the case of ship tracks, the cloud seeds are stretched over a long narrow path where the wind has blown the ship's exhaust, so the resulting clouds resemble long strings over the ocean.\nThe warming caused by human-produced greenhouse gases has been somewhat offset by the cooling effect of human-produced aerosols. In 2020, regulations on fuel significantly cut sulfur dioxide emissions from international shipping by approximately 80%, leading to an unexpected global geoengineering termination shock.\nThe liquid or solid particles in an aerosol have diameters typically less than 1\u00a0\u03bcm. Larger particles with a significant settling speed make the mixture a suspension, but the distinction is not clear. In everyday language, \"aerosol\" often refers to a dispensing system that delivers a consumer product from a spray can.\nDiseases can spread by means of small droplets in the breath, sometimes called bioaerosols.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nDefinitions.\nAerosol is defined as a suspension system of solid or liquid particles in a gas. An aerosol includes both the particles and the suspending gas, which is usually air. Meteorologists and climatologists often refer to them as particle matter, while the classification in sizes ranges like PM2.5 or PM10, is useful in the field of atmospheric pollution as these size range play a role in ascertain the harmful effects in human health. Frederick G. Donnan presumably first used the term \"aerosol\" during World War I to describe an aero-solution, clouds of microscopic particles in air. This term developed analogously to the term hydrosol, a colloid system with water as the dispersed medium. \"Primary aerosols\" contain particles introduced directly into the gas; \"secondary aerosols\" form through gas-to-particle conversion.\nKey aerosol groups include sulfates, organic carbon, black carbon, nitrates, mineral dust, and sea salt, they usually clump together to form a complex mixture. Various types of aerosol, classified according to physical form and how they were generated, include dust, fume, mist, smoke and fog.\nThere are several measures of aerosol concentration. Environmental science and environmental health often use the \"mass concentration\" (\"M\"), defined as the mass of particulate matter per unit volume, in units such as \u03bcg/m3. Also commonly used is the \"number concentration\" (\"N\"), the number of particles per unit volume, in units such as number per m3 or number per cm3.\nParticle size has a major influence on particle properties, and the aerosol particle radius or diameter (\"dp\") is a key property used to characterise aerosols.\nAerosols vary in their dispersity. A \"monodisperse\" aerosol, producible in the laboratory, contains particles of uniform size. Most aerosols, however, as \"polydisperse\" colloidal systems, exhibit a range of particle sizes. Liquid droplets are almost always nearly spherical, but scientists use an \"equivalent diameter\" to characterize the properties of various shapes of solid particles, some very irregular. The equivalent diameter is the diameter of a spherical particle with the same value of some physical property as the irregular particle. The \"equivalent volume diameter\" (\"de\") is defined as the diameter of a sphere of the same volume as that of the irregular particle. Also commonly used is the aerodynamic diameter,\u00a0 \"da\".\nGeneration and applications.\nPeople generate aerosols for various purposes, including:\nSome devices for generating aerosols are:\nIn the atmosphere.\nSeveral types of atmospheric aerosol have a significant effect on Earth's climate: volcanic, desert dust, sea-salt, that originating from biogenic sources and human-made. Volcanic aerosol forms in the stratosphere after an eruption as droplets of sulfuric acid that can prevail for up to two years, and reflect sunlight, lowering temperature. Desert dust, mineral particles blown to high altitudes, absorb heat and may be responsible for inhibiting storm cloud formation. Human-made sulfate aerosols, primarily from burning oil and coal, affect the behavior of clouds.\nAlthough all hydrometeors, solid and liquid, can be described as aerosols, a distinction is commonly made between such dispersions (i.e. clouds) containing activated drops and crystals, and aerosol particles. The atmosphere of Earth contains aerosols of various types and concentrations, including quantities of:\nAerosols can be found in urban ecosystems in various forms, for example:\nThe presence of aerosols in the Earth's atmosphere can influence its climate, as well as human health.\nEffects.\nVolcanic eruptions release large amounts of sulphuric acid, hydrogen sulfide and hydrochloric acid into the atmosphere. These gases represent aerosols and eventually return to earth as acid rain, having a number of adverse effects on the environment and human life.\nWhen aerosols absorb pollutants, it facilitates the deposition of pollutants to the surface of the earth as well as to bodies of water. This has the potential to be damaging to both the environment and human health.\nAerosols interact with the Earth's energy budget in two ways, directly and indirectly.\n* E.g., a \"direct\" effect is that aerosols scatter and absorb incoming solar radiation. This will mainly lead to a cooling of the surface (solar radiation is scattered back to space) but may also contribute to a warming of the surface (caused by the absorption of incoming solar energy). This will be an additional element to the greenhouse effect and therefore contributing to the global climate change.\n* The \"indirect\" effects refer to the aerosol interfering with formations that interact directly with radiation. For example, they are able to modify the size of the cloud particles in the lower atmosphere, thereby changing the way clouds reflect and absorb light and therefore modifying the Earth's energy budget.\n* There is evidence to suggest that anthropogenic aerosols actually offset the effects of greenhouse gases in some areas, which is why the Northern Hemisphere shows slower surface warming than the Southern Hemisphere, although that just means that the Northern Hemisphere will absorb the heat later through ocean currents bringing warmer waters from the South. On a global scale however, aerosol cooling decreases greenhouse-gases-induced heating without offsetting it completely.\nShip tracks are clouds that form around the exhaust released by ships into the still ocean air. Water molecules collect around the tiny particles (aerosols) from exhaust to form a cloud seed. More and more water accumulates on the seed until a visible cloud is formed. In the case of ship tracks, the cloud seeds are stretched over a long narrow path where the wind has blown the ship's exhaust, so the resulting clouds resemble long strings over the ocean.\nThe warming caused by human-produced greenhouse gases has been somewhat offset by the cooling effect of human-produced aerosols. In 2020, regulations on fuel significantly cut sulfur dioxide emissions from international shipping by approximately 80%, leading to an unexpected global geoengineering termination shock.\nAerosols in the 20\u00a0\u03bcm range show a particularly long persistence time in air conditioned rooms due to their \"jet rider\" behaviour (move with air jets, gravitationally fall out in slowly moving air); as this aerosol size is most effectively adsorbed in the human nose, the primordial infection site in COVID-19, such aerosols may contribute to the pandemic.\nAerosol particles with an effective diameter smaller than 10\u00a0\u03bcm can enter the bronchi, while the ones with an effective diameter smaller than 2.5\u00a0\u03bcm can enter as far as the gas exchange region in the lungs, which can be hazardous to human health.\nSize distribution.\nFor a monodisperse aerosol, a single number\u2014the particle diameter\u2014suffices to describe the size of the particles. However, more complicated particle-size distributions describe the sizes of the particles in a polydisperse aerosol. This distribution defines the relative amounts of particles, sorted according to size. One approach to defining the particle size distribution uses a list of the sizes of every particle in a sample. However, this approach proves tedious to ascertain in aerosols with millions of particles and awkward to use. Another approach splits the size range into intervals and finds the number (or proportion) of particles in each interval. These data can be presented in a histogram with the area of each bar representing the proportion of particles in that size bin, usually normalised by dividing the number of particles in a bin by the width of the interval so that the area of each bar is proportionate to the number of particles in the size range that it represents. If the width of the bins tends to zero, the frequency function is:\nformula_1\nwhere\nformula_2 is the diameter of the particles\nformula_3 is the fraction of particles having diameters between formula_4 and formula_4 + formula_6\nformula_7 is the frequency function\nTherefore, the area under the frequency curve between two sizes a and \"b\" represents the total fraction of the particles in that size range:\nformula_8\nIt can also be formulated in terms of the total number density \"N\":\nformula_9\nAssuming spherical aerosol particles, the aerosol surface area per unit volume (\"S\") is given by the second moment:\nformula_10\nAnd the third moment gives the total volume concentration (\"V\") of the particles:\nformula_11\nThe particle size distribution can be approximated. The normal distribution usually does not suitably describe particle size distributions in aerosols because of the skewness associated with a long tail of larger particles. Also for a quantity that varies over a large range, as many aerosol sizes do, the width of the distribution implies negative particles sizes, which is not physically realistic. However, the normal distribution can be suitable for some aerosols, such as test aerosols, certain pollen grains and spores.\nA more widely chosen log-normal distribution gives the number frequency as:\nformula_12\nwhere:\nformula_13 is the standard deviation of the size distribution and\nformula_14 is the arithmetic mean diameter.\nThe log-normal distribution has no negative values, can cover a wide range of values, and fits many observed size distributions reasonably well.\nOther distributions sometimes used to characterise particle size include: the Rosin-Rammler distribution, applied to coarsely dispersed dusts and sprays; the Nukiyama\u2013Tanasawa distribution, for sprays of extremely broad size ranges; the power function distribution, occasionally applied to atmospheric aerosols; the exponential distribution, applied to powdered materials; and for cloud droplets, the Khrgian\u2013Mazin distribution.\nPhysics.\nTerminal velocity of a particle in a fluid.\nFor low values of the Reynolds number (&lt;1), true for most aerosol motion, Stokes' law describes the force of resistance on a solid spherical particle in a fluid. However, Stokes' law is only valid when the velocity of the gas at the surface of the particle is zero. For small particles (&lt; 1\u00a0\u03bcm) that characterize aerosols, however, this assumption fails. To account for this failure, one can introduce the Cunningham correction factor, always greater than 1. Including this factor, one finds the relation between the resisting force on a particle and its velocity:\nformula_15\nwhere\nformula_16 is the resisting force on a spherical particle\nformula_17 is the dynamic viscosity of the gas\nformula_18 is the particle velocity\nformula_19 is the Cunningham correction factor.\nThis allows us to calculate the terminal velocity of a particle undergoing gravitational settling in still air. Neglecting buoyancy effects, we find:\nformula_20\nwhere\nformula_21 is the terminal settling velocity of the particle.\nThe terminal velocity can also be derived for other kinds of forces. If Stokes' law holds, then the resistance to motion is directly proportional to speed. The constant of proportionality is the mechanical mobility (\"B\") of a particle:\nformula_22\nA particle traveling at any reasonable initial velocity approaches its terminal velocity exponentially with an \"e\"-folding time equal to the relaxation time:\nformula_23\nwhere:\nformula_24 is the particle speed at time t\nformula_25 is the final particle speed\nformula_26 is the initial particle speed\nTo account for the effect of the shape of non-spherical particles, a correction factor known as the \"dynamic shape factor\" is applied to Stokes' law. It is defined as the ratio of the resistive force of the irregular particle to that of a spherical particle with the same volume and velocity:\nformula_27\nwhere:\nformula_28 is the dynamic shape factor\nAerodynamic diameter.\nThe aerodynamic diameter of an irregular particle is defined as the diameter of the spherical particle with a density of 1000\u00a0kg/m3 and the same settling velocity as the irregular particle.\nNeglecting the slip correction, the particle settles at the terminal velocity proportional to the square of the aerodynamic diameter, \"da\":\nformula_29\nwhere\nformula_30 = standard particle density (1000\u00a0kg/m3).\nThis equation gives the aerodynamic diameter:\nformula_31\nOne can apply the aerodynamic diameter to particulate pollutants or to inhaled drugs to predict where in the respiratory tract such particles deposit. Pharmaceutical companies typically use aerodynamic diameter, not geometric diameter, to characterize particles in inhalable drugs. \nDynamics.\nThe previous discussion focused on single aerosol particles. In contrast, \"aerosol dynamics\" explains the evolution of complete aerosol populations. The concentrations of particles will change over time as a result of many processes. External processes that move particles outside a volume of gas under study include diffusion, gravitational settling, and electric charges and other external forces that cause particle migration. A second set of processes internal to a given volume of gas include particle formation (nucleation), evaporation, chemical reaction, and coagulation.\nA differential equation called the \"Aerosol General Dynamic Equation\" (GDE) characterizes the evolution of the number density of particles in an aerosol due to these processes.\n formula_32\nChange in time = Convective transport + brownian diffusion + gas-particle interactions + coagulation + migration by external forces\nWhere:\nformula_33 is number density of particles of size category formula_34\nformula_35 is the particle velocity\nformula_36 is the particle Stokes-Einstein diffusivity\nformula_37 is the particle velocity associated with an external force\nCoagulation.\nAs particles and droplets in an aerosol collide with one another, they may undergo coalescence or aggregation. This process leads to a change in the aerosol particle-size distribution, with the mode increasing in diameter as total number of particles decreases. On occasion, particles may shatter apart into numerous smaller particles; however, this process usually occurs primarily in particles too large for consideration as aerosols.\nDynamics regimes.\nThe Knudsen number of the particle define three different dynamical regimes that govern the behaviour of an aerosol:\nformula_38\nwhere formula_39 is the mean free path of the suspending gas and formula_40 is the diameter of the particle. For particles in the \"free molecular regime\", \"Kn\" \u00bb 1; particles small compared to the mean free path of the suspending gas. In this regime, particles interact with the suspending gas through a series of \"ballistic\" collisions with gas molecules. As such, they behave similarly to gas molecules, tending to follow streamlines and diffusing rapidly through Brownian motion. The mass flux equation in the free molecular regime is:\nformula_41\nwhere \"a\" is the particle radius, \"P\"\u221e and \"PA\" are the pressures far from the droplet and at the surface of the droplet respectively, \"kb\" is the Boltzmann constant, \"T\" is the temperature, \"CA\" is mean thermal velocity and \"\u03b1\" is mass accommodation coefficient. The derivation of this equation assumes constant pressure and constant diffusion coefficient.\nParticles are in the \"continuum regime\" when Kn \u00ab 1. In this regime, the particles are big compared to the mean free path of the suspending gas, meaning that the suspending gas acts as a continuous fluid flowing round the particle. The molecular flux in this regime is:\nformula_42\nwhere \"a\" is the radius of the particle \"A\", \"MA\" is the molecular mass of the particle \"A\", \"DAB\" is the diffusion coefficient between particles \"A\" and \"B\", \"R\" is the ideal gas constant, \"T\" is the temperature (in absolute units like kelvin), and \"PA\u221e\" and \"PAS\" are the pressures at infinite and at the surface respectively.\nThe \"transition regime\" contains all the particles in between the free molecular and continuum regimes or \"Kn\" \u2248 1. The forces experienced by a particle are a complex combination of interactions with individual gas molecules and macroscopic interactions. The semi-empirical equation describing mass flux is:\nformula_43\nwhere \"I\"cont is the mass flux in the continuum regime. This formula is called the Fuchs-Sutugin interpolation formula. These equations do not take into account the heat release effect.\nPartitioning.\nAerosol partitioning theory governs condensation on and evaporation from an aerosol surface, respectively. Condensation of mass causes the mode of the particle-size distributions of the aerosol to increase; conversely, evaporation causes the mode to decrease. Nucleation is the process of forming aerosol mass from the condensation of a gaseous precursor, specifically a vapor. Net condensation of the vapor requires supersaturation, a partial pressure greater than its vapor pressure. This can happen for three reasons:\nThere are two types of nucleation processes. Gases preferentially condense onto surfaces of pre-existing aerosol particles, known as heterogeneous nucleation. This process causes the diameter at the mode of particle-size distribution to increase with constant number concentration. With sufficiently high supersaturation and no suitable surfaces, particles may condense in the absence of a pre-existing surface, known as homogeneous nucleation. This results in the addition of very small, rapidly growing particles to the particle-size distribution.\nActivation.\nWater coats particles in aerosols, making them \"activated\", usually in the context of forming a cloud droplet (such as natural cloud seeding by aerosols from trees in a forest). Following the Kelvin equation (based on the curvature of liquid droplets), smaller particles need a higher ambient relative humidity to maintain equilibrium than larger particles do. The following formula gives relative humidity at equilibrium:\nformula_44\nwhere formula_45 is the saturation vapor pressure above a particle at equilibrium (around a curved liquid droplet), \"p\"0 is the saturation vapor pressure (flat surface of the same liquid) and \"S\" is the saturation ratio.\nKelvin equation for saturation vapor pressure above a curved surface is:\nformula_46\nwhere \"rp\" droplet radius, \"\u03c3\" surface tension of droplet, \"\u03c1\" density of liquid, \"M\" molar mass, \"T\" temperature, and \"R\" molar gas constant.\nSolution to the general dynamic equation.\nThere are no general solutions to the general dynamic equation (GDE); common methods used to solve the general dynamic equation include:\nDetection.\nAerosols can either be measured in-situ or with remote sensing techniques either ground-based on airborne-based.\n\"In situ\" observations.\nSome available in situ measurement techniques include:\nRemote sensing approach.\nRemote sensing approaches include:\nSize selective sampling.\nParticles can deposit in the nose, mouth, pharynx and larynx (the head airways region), deeper within the respiratory tract (from the trachea to the terminal bronchioles), or in the alveolar region. The location of deposition of aerosol particles within the respiratory system strongly determines the health effects of exposure to such aerosols. This phenomenon led people to invent aerosol samplers that select a subset of the aerosol particles that reach certain parts of the respiratory system.\nExamples of these subsets of the particle-size distribution of an aerosol, important in occupational health, include the inhalable, thoracic, and respirable fractions. The fraction that can enter each part of the respiratory system depends on the deposition of particles in the upper parts of the airway. The inhalable fraction of particles, defined as the proportion of particles originally in the air that can enter the nose or mouth, depends on external wind speed and direction and on the particle-size distribution by aerodynamic diameter. The thoracic fraction is the proportion of the particles in ambient aerosol that can reach the thorax or chest region. The respirable fraction is the proportion of particles in the air that can reach the alveolar region. To measure the respirable fraction of particles in air, a pre-collector is used with a sampling filter. The pre-collector excludes particles as the airways remove particles from inhaled air. The sampling filter collects the particles for measurement. It is common to use cyclonic separation for the pre-collector, but other techniques include impactors, horizontal elutriators, and large pore membrane filters.\nTwo alternative size-selective criteria, often used in atmospheric monitoring, are PM10 and PM2.5. PM10 is defined by ISO as \"particles which pass through a size-selective inlet with a 50% efficiency cut-off at 10\u00a0\u03bcm aerodynamic diameter\" and PM2.5 as \"particles which pass through a size-selective inlet with a 50% efficiency cut-off at 2.5\u00a0\u03bcm aerodynamic diameter\". PM10 corresponds to the \"thoracic convention\" as defined in ISO 7708:1995, Clause 6; PM2.5 corresponds to the \"high-risk respirable convention\" as defined in ISO 7708:1995, 7.1. The United States Environmental Protection Agency replaced the older standards for particulate matter based on Total Suspended Particulate with another standard based on PM10 in 1987 and then introduced standards for PM2.5 (also known as fine particulate matter) in 1997.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "57764", "revid": "40330219", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57764", "title": "Middle English creole hypothesis", "text": "Linguistic hypothesis on the origin of the English language\nThe Middle English creole hypothesis is a proposal that Middle English was a creole, which is usually defined as a language that develops during contact between two groups speaking different languages and that loses much of the grammatical elaboration of its source languages in the process. The vast differences between Old English and Middle English, and English's status as one of the least structurally elaborated of the Germanic languages, have led some historical linguists to argue that the language underwent creolisation at around the 11th century, shortly after the Norman conquest of England. Other linguists suggest that creolisation began earlier, during the Scandinavian incursions of the 9th and 10th centuries.\nMuch of the debate over the Middle English creole hypothesis revolves around how terms like \"creole\" or \"creolisation\" should be defined. While there does not exist a consensus that Middle English should be classified as a creole, there does exist a consensus that Old English underwent fairly radical grammatical simplification in the process of evolving into Middle English, and that this evolution was due in large part to contact with speakers from other language groups.\nMiddle English as an Anglo-Norman creole.\nThis hypothesis was first proposed by C.-J. Bailey and K. Maroldt in 1977, followed by Nicole Domingue and Patricia Poussa. These authors argued that Middle English was a creole that developed when the Anglo-Norman-speaking invaders learned Old English imperfectly and expanded their reduced English into a full language. Evidence cited in support of the hypothesis was the heavy admixture of Norman words into the English lexicon, including some basic words such as the words for uncle, niece, danger, trouble, cause; the frequent loss of Old English verb and adjective affixes in favor of loans from Norman (e.g. \"enclosid\", \"inpacient\", \"disheritance\"); a number of grammatical changes that appear to have been modeled after Norman, such as expression of the perfect aspect using the verb \"have\" (as in \"she has eaten\"), the use of \"of\" to express the genitive (as in French ), and constructions such as \"it is me\", \"it is him\" (compare modern French , ); and English's complete loss of case and gender markers on nouns.\nDefining \"creole\" and \"creolisation\".\nLinguists' conception of what constitutes a creole has changed substantially in the years since Bailey &amp; Maroldt's original proposal, and the question of whether Middle English is a French creole depends to some extent on how one defines the term \"creole\".\nBroadly speaking, two definitions of creole and creolisation are current in the linguistic literature:\nMiddle English comes reasonably close to satisfying the three criteria that define McWhorter's creole prototype. For instance, by the end of the twelfth century, grammatical gender was all but lost in northern English dialects, and two centuries later it had disappeared even in the south. However Middle English did not lose all of Old English's noncompositional derivational morphology; for instance, Old English \"understandan\" \u2192 Middle English \"understanden\" \u2192 English \"understand\". Nevertheless, Middle English is highly simplified compared with Old English, suggesting, according to McWhorter, a contact-based explanation, though not necessarily contact with French:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nScandinavian influence.\nWhile they emphasised the influence of French, both Bailey &amp; Maroldt and Poussa also discussed the possibility that it was contact between Old English speakers and the invading Vikings during the ninth and tenth centuries, that was responsible for much of the loss of Germanic inheritance, followed only later by a Norman French influence. According to this scenario, Middle English would be more appropriately described as an Old Norse creole rather than a Norman French creole.\nA number of arguments have been advanced in support of the hypothesis that Scandinavian contact profoundly influenced the course of English's evolution prior to the Norman invasion:\nMcWhorter, in summarizing the evidence for Scandinavian influence, writes that \"the evidence strongly suggests that extensive second-language acquisition by Scandinavians from the eighth century onwards simplified English grammar to a considerable extent\". More specifically, the claim is that the inflectional and other losses in English resulted from Old Norse speakers' incomplete acquisition of English.\nCreolisation of English might have occurred due to interaction between Common Brittonic and English, however evidence supporting the influence of the Celtic languages on English is hampered by a lack of written sources.\nMiddle English as a semi-creole.\nA number of linguists, such as John Holm, have argued that creolisation occurs along a cline, that is, that a language can be creolised to various degrees. Even if Middle English does not fully satisfy the criteria that would make it a creole, it has been argued that it might still be characterisable as a \"semi-creole\". A semi-creole is defined as a language that harbors symptoms of a break in transmission due to large-scale adult acquisition, without those symptoms being extreme enough to put it in the creole class. Such languages are often thought of as dialects of the lexifier language rather than as different languages. Recognized examples of semi-creoles include Afrikaans (Dutch as morphologically streamlined by contact with Khoisan), Reunionnais French, Lingala, and Shaba Swahili. McWhorter argues that English is even more extreme than Afrikaans in having shed much of its Germanic content, and therefore that the case for describing English as a semi-creole is even stronger than for Afrikaans.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "57765", "revid": "42360589", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57765", "title": "Battle of the Atlantic", "text": "Attempt by Germany during World War II to cut supply lines to Britain\nThe Battle of the Atlantic, the longest continuous military campaign in World War II, ran from 1939 to the defeat of Nazi Germany in 1945, covering a major part of the naval history of World War II. At its core was the Allied naval blockade of Germany, announced the day after the declaration of war, and Germany's subsequent counterblockade. The campaign peaked from mid-1940 to the end of 1943.\nThe Battle of the Atlantic pitted U-boats and other warships of the German (navy) and aircraft of the (air force) against the Royal Navy, Royal Canadian Navy, United States Navy, and Allied merchant shipping. Convoys, coming mainly from North America and predominantly going to the United Kingdom and the Soviet Union, were protected for the most part by the British and Canadian navies and air forces. These forces were aided by ships and aircraft of the United States beginning on 13 September 1941. The Germans were joined by submarines of the Italian (royal navy) after Germany's Axis ally Italy entered the war on 10 June 1940.\nAs an island country, the United Kingdom was highly dependent on imported goods. Britain required more than a million tons of imported material per week in order to survive and fight. The Battle of the Atlantic involved a tonnage war: the Allies struggled to supply Britain while the Axis targeted merchant shipping critical to the British war effort. Rationing in the United Kingdom was also used with the aim of reducing demand, by reducing wastage and increasing domestic production and equality of distribution. From 1942 onwards, the Axis also sought to prevent the build-up of Allied supplies and equipment in the UK in preparation for the invasion of occupied Europe. The defeat of the U-boat threat was a prerequisite for pushing back the Axis in western Europe. The outcome of the battle was a strategic victory for the Allies\u2014the German tonnage war failed\u2014but at great cost: 3,500\u00a0merchant ships and 175\u00a0warships were sunk in the Atlantic for the loss of 783\u00a0U-boats and 47 German surface warships, including 4 battleships (, , , and ), 9 cruisers, 7 raiders, and 27 destroyers. This front was the main consumer of the German war effort: Germany spent more money to produce naval vessels than every type of ground vehicle combined, including tanks.\nThe Battle of the Atlantic has been called the \"longest, largest, and most complex\" naval battle in history. Starting immediately after the European war began, during the Phoney War, the Battle lasted over five years before the German surrender in May 1945. It involved thousands of ships in a theatre covering millions of square miles of ocean. The situation changed constantly, with one side or the other gaining advantage, as participating countries surrendered, joined and even changed sides in the war, and as new weapons, tactics, countermeasures and equipment were developed. The Allies gradually gained the upper hand, overcoming German surface-raiders by the end of 1942 and defeating the U-boats by mid-1943, though losses due to U-boats continued until the war's end. British Prime Minister Winston Churchill later wrote, \"The only thing that really frightened me during the war was the U-boat peril. I was even more anxious about this battle than I had been about the glorious air fight called the 'Battle of Britain'.\"\nName.\nOn 5 March 1941, the First Lord of the Admiralty, A. V. Alexander, asked Parliament for \"many more ships and great numbers of men\" to fight \"the Battle of the Atlantic\", which he compared to the Battle of France fought the previous summer. The first meeting of the Cabinet's \"Battle of the Atlantic Committee\" was on 19 March. Churchill claimed to have coined the phrase \"Battle of the Atlantic\" shortly before Alexander's speech, but there are several examples of earlier usage.\nBackground.\nFollowing the use of unrestricted submarine warfare by Germany in the First World War, countries tried to limit or abolish submarines. The effort failed. Instead, the London Naval Treaty required submarines to abide by \"cruiser rules\", which demanded they surface, search and place ship crews in \"a place of safety\" (for which lifeboats did not qualify, except under particular circumstances) before sinking them, unless the ship in question showed \"persistent refusal to stop...or active resistance to visit or search\". These regulations did not prohibit arming merchantmen, but doing so, or having them report contact with submarines (or raiders), made them \"de facto\" naval auxiliaries and removed the protection of the cruiser rules.\nThe Treaty of Versailles forbade the Germans to operate U-boats and reduced the German surface fleet to a few obsolete ships. When three of these obsolete ships had to be replaced, the Germans opted to construct the Deutschland-class of (armoured ships) or \"pocket battleships\" as they were nicknamed by foreign navies. These ships were designed for commerce raiding on distant seas, to operate as a raider hunting for independently sailing ships, and to avoid combat with superior forces.\nThe Anglo-German Naval Agreement of 1935 allowed Hitler to renounce the Treaty of Versailles, and to build a fleet 35% the size of Britain's. A building programme for four battleships, two aircraft carriers, five heavy cruisers, destroyers and U-boats was immediately initiated. After the agreement, Hitler thought conflict with the UK very unlikely; consequently, the fleet was designed for commerce raiding against the French, not to challenge command of the sea. The commander of the German U-boats, Karl D\u00f6nitz, had his own opinions. In contrast with Hitler and Erich Raeder, chief of the German navy, he considered war with the UK inevitable and that a large surface fleet was not needed, believing U-boats could defeat the British. According to his calculations, a fleet of 300 medium Type VII U-boats could sink a million tons of ships a month and within a year sink enough of the about 3,000 British merchant ships (comprising 17.5 million tons) to strangle the British economy. In the First World War, U-boats had been defeated mainly by the convoy system, but D\u00f6nitz thought this could be overcome with the , wherein a patrol line of U-boats would search for a convoy before converging and attacking together at night from the surface. Neither aircraft nor early forms of sonar (called ASDIC by the British) were then considered serious threats. ASDIC could not detect a surfaced submarine and its range was less than that of an electric torpedo, aircraft could not operate at night and, during the day, an alert U-boat could dive before the aircraft attacked. D\u00f6nitz failed to persuade Raeder, so each time the U-boat fleet was expanded, Raeder opt to build a mix of coastal, medium and large submarines, even minelayers and U-cruisers. Even when in 1938 Hitler realised he would sooner or later have to oppose the UK and launched his Plan Z, only a minority of the planned 239 U-boats were medium U-boats.\nAnti-submarine warfare.\nWith the introduction of ASDIC, the British Admiralty believed the submarine threat effectively neutralized. Consequently, the number of destroyers and convoy escorts was reduced and the anti-submarine branch seen as third rate. Destroyers were also equipped with ASDIC, but it was expected that these ships would be used in fleet actions rather than anti-submarine warfare, so they were not extensively trained in their use. Trials with ASDIC were usually conducted in ideal conditions and the Admiralty failed to appreciate ASDIC's flaws. Its range was limited, worked poorly at speeds above eight knots, was hampered by rough weather and required a very skilled operator to distinguish echoes from thermoclines, whales, shoals of fish and wrecks. Early versions could not look directly down, so contact would be lost during the final stages of a depth charge attack. The basic set could detect range and bearing, but target depth could only be estimated from the range at which contact was lost.\nAn escort swept its ASDIC beam in an arc from one side of its course to the other, stopping the transducer every few degrees to send out a signal. On detection of a submarine, the escort would close in at moderate speed and increase its speed to attack. The intention was to pass over the submarine, rolling depth charges from chutes at the stern, while throwers fired further charges to either side, laying a pattern of depth charges. To disable a submarine, a depth charge had to explode within about . Since early ASDIC equipment was poor at determining depth, it was usual to vary the depth settings on part of the pattern.\nAs the threat of war loomed in early 1939, Britain realised it could not rely on the London Naval Treaty, which outlawed unrestricted submarine warfare. The organisational infrastructure for convoys had been maintained since World War I, with a thorough and systematic upgrade in the second half of the 1930s, but not enough escorts were available for convoy escorting, and a crash programme for building Tree-class trawlers, Flower-class corvettes and Hunt-class destroyers was initiated. Merchant ships that were either too fast or too slow for convoys, were to be equipped with a self-defence gun against surfaced submarine attacks, thus forcing an attacking U-boat to spend its precious torpedoes. This removed these ships from the protection of the cruiser rules under the prize law.\nDespite this lack of readiness, in 1939 the Royal Navy probably had as many ASDIC equipped warships in service as all the other navies of the world combined.\nSimilarly the role of aircraft had been neglected; the Royal Air Force had organised a Coastal Command to support the Royal Navy, but it possessed insufficient aircraft, had no long range aircraft nor were aircraft crew trained in anti-submarine warfare. The only weapon against submarines was inadequate bombs. Finally, it was not forgotten that in World War I, mines had sunk more U-boats than any other weapon. Plans were drafted for mine fields in the Channel and along the east coast in defence of shipping lanes, and also offensive mine barrages on the German U-boat lanes towards the Atlantic Ocean.\nEarly skirmishes (September 1939 \u2013 May 1940).\nIn 1939, the lacked the strength to challenge the combined British Royal Navy and French Navy () for command of the sea. Instead, German naval strategy relied on commerce raiding using capital ships, armed merchant cruisers, submarines and aircraft. Many German warships were already at sea when war was declared in September 1939, including most of the available U-boats and the \"pocket battleships\" and which had sortied into the Atlantic in August. These ships immediately attacked British and French shipping. sank the ocean liner within hours of the declaration of war\u2014in breach of her orders not to sink passenger ships. The U-boat fleet, which was to dominate so much of the Battle of the Atlantic, was small at the beginning of the war; many of the 57\u00a0available U-boats were the small and short-range Type IIs, useful primarily for minelaying and operations in British coastal waters. Much of the early German anti-shipping activity involved minelaying by destroyers, aircraft and U-boats off British ports.\nWith the outbreak of war, the British and French immediately began a blockade of Germany, with little immediate effect on German industry. The Royal Navy quickly introduced a convoy system for the protection of trade that gradually extended out from the British Isles, eventually reaching as far as Panama, Bombay and Singapore. Convoys allowed the Royal Navy to concentrate its escorts near the one place the U-boats were guaranteed to be found, the convoys. Each convoy consisted of between 30 and 70 mostly unarmed merchant ships.\nSome British naval officials, particularly the First Lord of the Admiralty, Winston Churchill, sought a more offensive strategy. The Royal Navy formed anti-submarine hunting groups based on aircraft carriers to patrol the shipping lanes in the Western Approaches and hunt for German U-boats. This strategy was deeply flawed because a U-boat, with its tiny silhouette, was likely to spot the surface warships and submerge long before it was sighted. The carrier aircraft were little help; although they could spot submarines on the surface, at this stage of the war they had no adequate weapons to attack them, and any submarine found by an aircraft was long gone by the time surface warships arrived. The hunting group strategy proved a disaster within days. On 14 September 1939, Britain's most modern carrier, , narrowly avoided being sunk when three torpedoes from exploded prematurely. \"U-39\" was forced to surface and scuttle by the escorting destroyers, becoming the first U-boat loss of the war. Another carrier, , was sunk three days later by .\nGerman success in sinking \"Courageous\" was surpassed a month later when G\u00fcnther Prien in penetrated the British base at Scapa Flow and sank the old battleship at anchor immediately becoming a hero in Germany.\nIn the South Atlantic, British forces were stretched by the cruise of \"Admiral Graf Spee\", which sank nine merchant ships of \u00a0gross register tons\u00a0(GRT) in the South Atlantic and Indian Ocean during the first three months of war. The British and French formed hunting groups including three\u00a0battlecruisers, three\u00a0aircraft carriers, and 15\u00a0cruisers to seek the raider and her sister \"Deutschland\", which was operating in the North Atlantic. These hunting groups had no success until \"Admiral Graf Spee\" was caught off the mouth of the River Plate between Argentina and Uruguay by an inferior British force. After suffering damage in the subsequent action, she took shelter in neutral Montevideo harbour and was scuttled on 17 December 1939.\nAfter this initial burst of activity, the Atlantic campaign quietened. Admiral Karl D\u00f6nitz, commander of the U-boat fleet, had planned a maximum submarine effort for the first month of the war, with almost all the available U-boats out on patrol in September. That level of deployment could not be sustained; the boats needed to return to harbour to refuel, re-arm, re-stock supplies, and refit. The harsh winter of 1939\u201340 froze many of the Baltic ports, seriously hampering the German offensive by trapping several new U-boats in the ice. Hitler's plans to invade Norway and Denmark in early 1940 led to the withdrawal of the fleet's surface warships and most of the ocean-going U-boats for fleet operations in Operation Weser\u00fcbung.\nThe resulting Norwegian campaign revealed serious flaws in the German U-boat torpedoes: both the impact pistol and the magnetic influence pistol (detonation mechanism) were defective, and the torpedoes did not run at the proper depth, often undershooting targets. Only one British warship was sunk by U-boats in more than 38\u00a0attacks. The news spread through the U-boat fleet and undermined morale. Since the effectiveness of the magnetic pistol was already reduced by the degaussing of Allied ships, D\u00f6nitz decided to use new contact pistols copied from British torpedoes found in the captured submarine . The depth setting mechanism was improved but only in January 1942 were the last complications with that mechanism discovered and fixed, making the torpedo more reliable.\nBritish situation.\nThe German occupation of Norway in April 1940, the rapid conquest of the Low Countries and France in May and June, and the Italian entry into the war on the Axis side in June transformed the war at sea in general and the Atlantic campaign in particular in three main ways:\nCompletion of Hitler's campaign in Western Europe meant U-boats withdrawn from the Atlantic for the Norwegian campaign could return to the war on trade. Therefore, the number of U-boats in the Atlantic began to rise while the availability of convoy escorts greatly decreased. The only consolation for the British was that the large merchant fleets of occupied countries like Norway and the Netherlands came under British control. After the German occupation of Denmark and Norway, Britain occupied Iceland and the Faroe Islands, establishing bases and preventing a German takeover.\nIt was in these circumstances that Winston Churchill, who had become prime minister on 10 May 1940, first wrote to President Franklin Roosevelt to request the loan of fifty obsolescent US Navy destroyers. This led to the \"Destroyers for Bases Agreement\", effectively a sale portrayed as a loan for political reasons, which operated in exchange for 99-year leases on certain British bases in Newfoundland, Bermuda and the West Indies. This was a profitable bargain for the United States and militarily beneficial for Britain, freeing up British military assets to return to Europe. A significant percentage of the US population opposed entering the war, and some American politicians (including the US Ambassador to Britain, Joseph P. Kennedy) believed Britain and its allies might lose. The first of these destroyers were only taken over by their British and Canadian crews in September, and all needed to be rearmed and fitted with ASDIC. It was many months before these ships contributed to the campaign.\n'The Happy Time' (June 1940 \u2013 February 1941).\nThe early U-boat operations from the French bases were spectacularly successful. This was the heyday of the great U-boat aces like G\u00fcnther Prien of \"U-47\", Otto Kretschmer (), Joachim Schepke (), Engelbert Endrass (), Victor Oehrn () and Heinrich Bleichrodt (). U-boat crews became heroes in Germany. From June until October 1940, over 270 Allied ships were sunk; this period was referred to by U-boat crews as \"the Happy Time\" (\"\"). Churchill would later write: \"...the only thing that ever frightened me during the war was the U-boat peril\".\nThe biggest challenge for U-boats was to find the convoys in the vastness of the ocean. The Germans had a handful of very long-range Focke-Wulf Fw 200 Condor aircraft based at Bordeaux and Stavanger, which were used for reconnaissance. The Condor was a converted civilian airliner\u2014a stop-gap solution for . Due to ongoing friction between the and , the primary source of convoy sightings was the U-boats themselves. Since a submarine's bridge was very close to the water, their range of visual detection was short.\nThe best source proved to be the codebreakers of who had succeeded in deciphering the British Naval Cypher No. 3, allowing the Germans to estimate where and when convoys could be expected.\nIn response, the British applied the techniques of operations research and developed some counterintuitive solutions for protecting convoys. Realising the area of a convoy increased by the square of its perimeter, they determined that the same number of ships and escorts would be better protected in a single convoy than two. A large convoy was as difficult to locate as a small one. Reduced frequency also reduced the chances of detection, as fewer large convoys could carry the same amount of cargo, while large convoys take longer to assemble. Therefore, a few large convoys with apparently few escorts were safer than many small convoys with a higher ratio of escorts to merchantmen.\nInstead of attacking the Allied convoys singly, U-boats were directed to work in wolf packs () coordinated by radio. The boats spread out into a long patrol line that bisected the path of the Allied convoy routes. Once in position, the crew studied the horizon through binoculars looking for masts or smoke, or used hydrophones to pick up propeller noises. When one boat sighted a convoy, it would report the sighting to U-boat headquarters, shadowing and continuing to report as needed until other boats arrived, typically at night. Instead of being faced by single submarines, the convoy escorts then had to cope with groups of up to half a dozen U-boats attacking simultaneously. The most daring commanders, such as Kretschmer, penetrated the escort screen and attacked from within the columns of merchantmen. The escort vessels, which were too few in number and often lacking in endurance, had no answer to multiple submarines attacking on the surface at night, as their ASDIC worked well only against underwater targets. Early British marine radar, working in the metric bands, lacked target discrimination and range. Corvettes were too slow to catch a surfaced U-boat.\nPack tactics were first used successfully in September and October 1940 to devastating effect, in a series of convoy battles. On 21 September, convoy HX 72 of 42\u00a0merchantmen was attacked by a pack of four U-boats, which sank eleven ships and damaged two over the course of two nights. In October, the slow convoy SC 7, with an escort of two sloops and two corvettes, was overwhelmed, losing 59% of its ships. The battle for HX 79 in the following days was in many ways worse for the escorts than for SC\u00a07. The loss of a quarter of the convoy without any loss to the U-boats, despite a very strong escort (two destroyers, four corvettes, three trawlers, and a minesweeper) demonstrated the effectiveness of the German tactics against the inadequate British anti-submarine methods. On 1 December, seven German and three Italian submarines caught HX 90, sinking 10\u00a0ships and damaging three others.\nAt the end of 1940, the Admiralty viewed the number of ships sunk with growing alarm. Damaged ships might survive but could be out of commission for long periods. Two million gross tons of merchant shipping\u201413% of the fleet available to the British\u2014were under repair and unavailable, which had the same effect in slowing down cross-Atlantic supplies.\nNor were the U-boats the only threat. Following some early experience in support of the war at sea during Operation Weser\u00fcbung, the began to take a toll of merchant ships. Martin Harlinghausen and his recently established command\u2014\u2014contributed small numbers of aircraft to the Battle of the Atlantic from 1941 onwards. These were primarily Fw\u00a0200 Condors. The Condors also bombed convoys that were beyond land-based fighter cover and thus defenceless. Initially, the Condors were very successful, claiming 365,000\u00a0tons of shipping in early 1941. These aircraft were few in number, and directly under control; the pilots had little specialised training for anti-shipping warfare, limiting their effectiveness.\nItalian submarines in the Atlantic.\nThe Germans received help from their allies. From August 1940, a flotilla of 27 Italian submarines operated from the BETASOM base in Bordeaux to attack Allied shipping in the Atlantic, initially under the command of Rear Admiral Angelo Parona, then of Rear Admiral Romolo Polacchini and finally of ship-of-the-line captain Enzo Grossi. The Italian submarines had been designed to operate in a different way than U-boats, and they had flaws that needed to be corrected (for example huge conning towers, slow speed when surfaced, lack of modern torpedo fire control), which meant that they were ill-suited for convoy attacks, and performed better when hunting down isolated merchantmen on distant seas, taking advantage of their superior range and living standards. Initial operation met with little success (only 65343\u00a0GRT sunk between August and December 1940), but the situation improved gradually, and up to August 1943 the 32 Italian submarines that operated there sank 109\u00a0ships of 593,864\u00a0tons, for 17 subs lost in return, giving them a subs-lost-to-tonnage sunk ratio similar to Germany's in the same period, and higher overall. The Italians were also successful with their use of \"human torpedo\" chariots, disabling several British ships in Gibraltar.\nDespite these successes, the Italian intervention was not favourably regarded by D\u00f6nitz, who characterised Italians as \"inadequately disciplined\" and \"unable to remain calm in the face of the enemy\". They were unable to co-operate in wolf pack tactics or even reliably report contacts or weather conditions, and their area of operation was moved away from that of the Germans.\nAmongst the more successful Italian submarine commanders who operated in the Atlantic were Carlo Fecia di Cossato, commander of the , and Gianfranco Gazzana-Priaroggia, commander of and then of .\nGreat surface raiders.\nDespite their success, U-boats were still not recognised as the foremost threat to the North Atlantic convoys. With the exception of men like D\u00f6nitz, most naval officers on both sides regarded surface warships as the ultimate commerce destroyers.\nFor the first half of 1940, there were no German surface raiders in the Atlantic because the German Fleet had been concentrated for the invasion of Norway. The sole pocket battleship raider, \"Admiral Graf Spee\", had been stopped at the Battle of the River Plate by an inferior and outgunned British squadron. From mid-1940 a small but steady stream of warships and armed merchant raiders set sail from Germany for the Atlantic.\nThe power of a raider against a convoy was demonstrated by the fate of convoy HX 84, attacked by the pocket battleship on 5 November 1940. \"Admiral Scheer\" quickly sank five ships and damaged several others as the convoy scattered. Only the sacrifice of the escorting armed merchant cruiser (whose commander, Edward Fegen, was awarded a posthumous Victoria Cross) and failing light allowed the other merchantmen to escape. The British suspended North Atlantic convoys and the Home Fleet put to sea in an unsuccessful attempt to intercept \"Admiral Scheer,\" which disappeared into the South Atlantic. She reappeared in the Indian Ocean the following month.\nOther German surface raiders now began to make their presence felt. On Christmas Day 1940, the cruiser attacked the troop convoy WS\u00a05A, but was driven off by the escorting cruisers. \"Admiral Hipper\" had more success two months later, on 12 February 1941, when she found the unescorted convoy SLS 64 of 19\u00a0ships, sinking seven. In January 1941, the battleships and put to sea from Germany to raid the shipping lanes in Operation Berlin. With so many German raiders at large in the Atlantic, the British were forced to provide battleship escorts to as many convoys as possible. This twice saved convoys from slaughter by the German battleships. In February, the old battleship deterred an attack on HX 106. A month later, SL 67 was saved by the presence of .\nIn May, the Germans mounted the most ambitious raid of all: Operation Rhein\u00fcbung. The new battleship and the cruiser put to sea to attack convoys. A British fleet intercepted the raiders off Iceland. In the Battle of the Denmark Strait, the battlecruiser was blown up and sunk, but \"Bismarck\" was damaged and had to run to France. \"Bismarck\" nearly reached her destination, but was disabled by an airstrike from the carrier \"Ark Royal\", and then sunk by the Home Fleet the next day. Her sinking marked the end of the warship raids. The advent of long-range search aircraft, notably the unglamorous but versatile PBY Catalina, largely neutralised surface raiders.\nIn February 1942, \"Scharnhorst\", \"Gneisenau\" and \"Prinz Eugen\" moved from Brest back to Germany in the \"Channel Dash\". While this was an embarrassment for the British, it was the end of the German surface threat in the Atlantic. The loss of \"Bismarck\", the destruction of the network of supply ships that supported surface raiders, the repeated damage to the three ships by air raids, the entry of the United States into the war, Arctic convoys, and the perceived invasion threat to Norway had persuaded Hitler and the naval staff to withdraw.\nEscort groups (March\u2013May 1941).\nThe disastrous convoy battles of October 1940 forced a change in British tactics. The most important of these was the introduction of permanent escort groups to improve the coordination and effectiveness of ships and men in battle. British efforts were helped by a gradual increase in the number of escort vessels available as the old ex-American destroyers and the new British- and Canadian-built s were now coming into service in numbers. Many of these ships became part of the huge expansion of the Royal Canadian Navy, which grew from a handful of destroyers at the outbreak of war to take an increasing share of convoy escort duty. Others of the new ships were crewed by Free French, Norwegian and Dutch, but these were a tiny minority of the total number, and directly under British command. By 1941 American public opinion had begun to swing against Germany, but the war was still essentially Great Britain and the Empire against Germany.\nInitially, the new escort groups consisted of two or three destroyers and half a dozen corvettes. Since two or three of the group would usually be in dock repairing weather or battle damage, the groups typically sailed with about six ships. The training of the escorts also improved as the realities of the battle became obvious. A new base was set up at Tobermory in the Hebrides to prepare the new escort ships and their crews for the demands of battle under the strict regime of Vice-Admiral Gilbert O. Stephenson.\nIn February 1941, the Admiralty moved the headquarters of Western Approaches Command from Plymouth to Liverpool, where much closer contact with, and control of, the Atlantic convoys was possible. Greater cooperation with supporting aircraft was also achieved. In April, the Admiralty took over operational control of Coastal Command aircraft. Tactically, new short-wave radar sets that could detect surfaced U-boats and were suitable for both small ships and aircraft began to arrive during 1941.\nThe impact of these changes first began to be felt in the battles in early 1941. In early March, Prien in \"U-47\" failed to return from patrol. Two weeks later, in the battle of Convoy HX 112, the newly formed 3rd Escort Group of four destroyers and two corvettes held off the U-boat pack. \"U-100\" was detected by the primitive radar on the destroyer , rammed and sunk. Shortly afterwards \"U-99\" was also caught and sunk, its crew captured. D\u00f6nitz had lost his three leading aces: Kretschmer, Prien, and Schepke.\nD\u00f6nitz now moved his wolf packs further west, in order to catch the convoys before the anti-submarine escort joined. This new strategy was rewarded at the beginning of April when the pack found Convoy SC 26 before its anti-submarine escort had joined. Ten ships were sunk, but another U-boat was lost.\nThe field of battle widens (June\u2013December 1941).\nGrowing American activity.\nIn June 1941, the British decided to provide convoy escort for the full length of the North Atlantic crossing. To this end, the Admiralty asked the Royal Canadian Navy on 23 May, to assume the responsibility for protecting convoys in the western zone and to establish the base for its escort force at St. John's, Newfoundland. On 13 June 1941, Commodore Leonard Murray, Royal Canadian Navy, assumed his post as Commodore Commanding Newfoundland Escort Force, under the overall authority of the Commander-in-Chief, Western Approaches, at Liverpool. Six Canadian destroyers and 17\u00a0corvettes, reinforced by seven destroyers, three sloops, and five corvettes of the Royal Navy, were assembled for duty in the force, which escorted the convoys from Canadian ports to Newfoundland and then on to a meeting point south of Iceland, where the British escort groups took over.\nBy 1941, the United States was taking an increasing part in the war, despite its nominal neutrality. In April 1941 President Roosevelt extended the Pan-American Security Zone east almost as far as Iceland. British forces occupied Iceland when Denmark fell to the Germans in 1940; the US was persuaded to provide forces to relieve British troops on the island. American warships began escorting Allied convoys in the western Atlantic as far as Iceland, and had several hostile encounters with U-boats.\nIn June 1941, the US realised the tropical Atlantic had become dangerous for unescorted American as well as British ships. On 21 May, , an American vessel carrying no military supplies, was sunk by west of Freetown, Sierra Leone. When news of the sinking reached the US, few shipping companies felt truly safe anywhere. As \"Time\" magazine noted in June 1941, \"if such sinkings continue, U.S. ships bound for other places remote from fighting fronts, will be in danger. Henceforth the U.S. would either have to recall its ships from the ocean or enforce its right to the free use of the seas.\"\nA Mid-Ocean Escort Force of British, Canadian, and American destroyers and corvettes was organised following the declaration of war by the United States in December 1941.\nAt the same time, the British were working on technical developments to address the German submarine superiority. Though these were British inventions, the critical technologies were provided freely to the US, which then renamed and manufactured them. Likewise, the US provided the British with Catalina flying boats and Liberator bombers that were important contributions to the war effort.\nCatapult aircraft merchantmen.\nAircraft ranges were constantly improving, but the Atlantic was far too large to be covered completely by land-based types. A stop-gap measure was instituted by fitting ramps to the front of some of the cargo ships known as \"catapult aircraft merchantmen\" (CAM ships), equipped with a lone expendable Hurricane fighter aircraft. When a German bomber approached, the fighter was launched off the end of the ramp with a large rocket to shoot down or drive off the German aircraft, the pilot then ditching in the water and\u2014in the best case\u2014recovered by ship. Nine combat launches were made, resulting in the destruction of eight Axis aircraft for the loss of one Allied pilot.\nAxis aircraft, mostly Fw 200 Condors, performing shadow surveillance\u2014tailing the convoy out of range of the convoy's guns\u2014posed a serious risk of reporting back the convoy's course and position so that U-boats could then be directed on to the convoy. Although CAM ships and their Hurricanes did not down a great number of enemy aircraft, they were intended to deter or dispel this surveillance threat, and, in this specialized function, may have covered their cost in fewer ship losses overall.\nHigh-frequency direction-finding.\nOne of the more important developments was ship-borne direction-finding radio equipment, known as HF/DF (high-frequency direction-finding, or Huff-Duff), which started to be fitted to escorts from February 1942. These sets were common items of equipment by early 1943. HF/DF let an operator determine the direction of a radio signal, regardless of whether the content could be read. Since the wolf pack relied on U-boats reporting convoy positions by radio, there was a steady stream of messages to intercept. An escort could then run in the direction of the signal and attack the U-boat, or at least force it to submerge (causing it to lose contact), which might prevent an attack on the convoy. When two ships fitted with HF/DF accompanied a convoy, a fix on the transmitter's position, not just direction, could be determined. The standard approach of anti-submarine warships was immediately to \"run-down\" the bearing of a detected signal, hoping to spot the U-boat on the surface and make an immediate attack. Range could be estimated by an experienced operator from the signal strength. Usually, the target was found visually. If the submarine was slow to dive, the guns were used; otherwise, an ASDIC search was started where the swirl of water of a crash-diving submarine was observed. In good visibility, a U-boat might try and outrun an escort on the surface whilst out of gun range\u00a0\u2013 most U-boat types had a faster maximum speed on the surface than, for instance, a Flower-class corvette, while a Black Swan-class sloop was only marginally faster.\nThe British also made extensive use of shore HF/DF stations to keep convoys updated with positions of U-boats. HF/DF was also installed on American ships.\nThe radio technology behind direction finding was simple and well understood by both sides, but the technology commonly used before the war used a manually-rotated aerial to fix the direction of the transmitter. This was delicate work, took quite a time to accomplish to any degree of accuracy, and since it only revealed the line along which the transmission originated a single set could not determine if the transmission was from the true direction or its reciprocal 180\u00a0degrees in the opposite direction. Two sets were required to fix the position. Believing this to still be the case, German U-boat radio operators considered themselves fairly safe if they kept messages short. The British developed an oscilloscope-based indicator which instantly fixed the direction and its reciprocal the moment a radio operator touched his Morse key. It worked simply with a crossed pair of conventional and fixed directional aerials, the oscilloscope display showing the relative received strength from each aerial as an elongated ellipse showing the line relative to the ship. The innovation was a 'sense' aerial, which, when switched in, suppressed the ellipse in the 'wrong' direction, leaving only the correct bearing. With this, there was hardly any need to triangulate\u2014the escort could just run down the precise bearing provided, estimating range from the signal strength, and use look-outs or radar for final positioning. Many U-boat attacks were suppressed and submarines sunk in this way.\nEnigma cipher.\nThe way D\u00f6nitz conducted the U-boat campaign required relatively large volumes of radio traffic between U-boats and headquarters. This was thought to be safe, as the radio messages were encrypted using the Enigma cipher machine, which the Germans considered unbreakable. In addition, the used much more secure operating procedures than the (Army) or (Air Force). The machine's three rotors were chosen from a set of eight (rather than the other services' five). The rotors were changed every other day using a system of key sheets and the message settings were different for every message and determined from \"bigram tables\" that were issued to operators. In 1939, it was generally believed at the British Government Code and Cypher School at Bletchley Park that naval Enigma could not be broken. Only the head of the German Naval Section, Frank Birch, and the mathematician Alan Turing believed otherwise.\nThe British codebreakers needed to know the wiring of the special naval Enigma rotors. The capture of several Enigma rotors during the sinking of by in February 1940 provided this information. In early 1941, the Royal Navy made a concerted effort to assist the codebreakers, and on 9 May crew members of the destroyer boarded and recovered cryptologic material, including bigram tables and current Enigma keys. The captured material allowed all U-boat traffic to be read for several weeks, until the keys ran out; the familiarity codebreakers gained with the usual content of messages helped in breaking new keys.\nIn August 1940, the British began use of their \"bombe\" computer which, when presented with an intercepted German Enigma message, suggested possible settings with which the Enigma cipher machine had been programmed. A reverse-engineered Enigma machine in British hands could then be programmed with each set of suggested settings in turn until the message was successfully deciphered.\nThroughout late 1941, Enigma intercepts (combined with HF/DF) enabled the British to plot the positions of U-boat patrol lines and route convoys around them. Merchant ship losses dropped by over two-thirds in July 1941, and losses remained low until November.\nThis Allied advantage was offset by the growing numbers of U-boats coming into service. The Type VIIC began reaching the Atlantic in large numbers in 1941; by the end of 1945, 568 had been commissioned. Although the Allies could protect their convoys in late 1941, they were not sinking many U-boats. The Flower-class corvette escorts could detect and defend, but were not fast enough to attack effectively.\nU-boat captured by an aircraft.\nA Coastal Command Hudson of No. 269 Squadron RAF captured \"U-570\" on 27 August 1941 about south of Iceland. Squadron Leader J. Thompson sighted the U-boat on the surface, immediately dived at his target, and released four depth charges as the submarine crash dived. The U-boat surfaced again, crewmen appeared on deck, and Thompson engaged them with his aircraft's guns. The crewmen returned to the conning tower under fire. A few moments later, a white flag and a similarly coloured board were displayed. Thompson called for assistance and circled the German vessel. A Catalina from 209 Squadron took over watching the damaged U-boat until the arrival of the armed trawler \"Kingston Agate\" under Lt Henry Owen L'Estrange. The following day the U-boat was beached in an Icelandic cove. No codes or secret papers were recovered, but the British now possessed a complete U-boat. After a refit, \"U-570\" was commissioned into the Royal Navy as .\nMediterranean diversion.\nIn October 1941, Hitler ordered D\u00f6nitz to move U-boats into the Mediterranean Sea to support German operations in that theatre. The resulting concentration near Gibraltar produced a series of battles around the Gibraltar and Sierra Leone convoys. In December 1941, Convoy HG 76 sailed, escorted by the 36th Escort Group of two sloops and six corvettes under Captain Frederic John Walker, reinforced by the first of the new escort carriers, , and three destroyers from Gibraltar. The convoy was immediately intercepted by the waiting U-boat pack, resulting in a brutal five-day battle. Walker was a tactical innovator and his ships' crews were highly trained. The presence of an escort carrier meant U-boats were frequently sighted and forced to dive before they could get close to the convoy, at least until \"Audacity\" was sunk after two days. The five-day battle cost the Germans five U-boats (four sunk by Walker's group), while the British lost \"Audacity\", a destroyer, and only two merchant ships. The battle was the first clear Allied convoy victory.\nThrough dogged effort, the Allies slowly gained the upper hand until the end of 1941. Although Allied warships failed to sink U-boats in large numbers, most convoys evaded attack completely. Shipping losses were high, but manageable.\nOperation Drumbeat (January\u2013June 1942).\nThe attack on Pearl Harbor and the subsequent German declaration of war on the United States had an immediate effect on the campaign. D\u00f6nitz planned to attack shipping off the American East Coast. He had only five Type IX boats able to reach US waters for Operation Drumbeat (\"Paukenschlag\"), sometimes called the \"second happy time\" by the Germans.\nThe US, having no direct experience of modern naval war on its own shores, did not employ a blackout. U-boats stood off shore at night and picked out ships silhouetted against city lights. Admiral Ernest King, Commander-in-Chief United States Fleet (Cominch), who disliked the British, initially rejected Royal Navy calls for a coastal blackout or convoy system. King has been criticised for this decision, but his defenders argue the US destroyer fleet was limited (partly because of the sale of 50 old destroyers to Britain earlier in the war), and King claimed it was far more important that destroyers protect Allied troop transports than merchant shipping. His ships were also busy convoying Lend-Lease material to the Soviet Union, as well as fighting the Japanese in the Pacific. King could not require coastal blackouts\u2014the Army had legal authority over all civil defence\u2014 and did not follow advice the Royal Navy (or Royal Canadian Navy) provided that even unescorted convoys would be safer than merchants sailing individually. No troop transports were lost, but merchant ships sailing in US waters were left exposed and suffered accordingly. Britain eventually had to build coastal escorts and provide them to the US in a \"reverse Lend Lease\", since King was unable (or unwilling) to make any provision himself.\nThe first U-boats reached US waters on 13 January 1942. By the time they withdrew on 6 February, they had sunk 156,939\u00a0tonnes of shipping without loss. The first batch of Type IXs was followed by more Type IXs and Type VIIs supported by Type XIV \"Milk Cow\" tankers which provided refuelling at sea. They sank 397 ships totalling over 2\u00a0million tons. In 1943, the United States launched over 11\u00a0million tons of merchant shipping; that number declined in the later war years, as priorities moved elsewhere.\nIn May, King (by this time both Cominch and CNO) finally scraped together enough ships to institute a convoy system. This quickly led to the loss of seven U-boats. The US did not have enough ships to cover all the gaps; the U-boats continued to operate freely during the Battle of the Caribbean and throughout the Gulf of Mexico (where they effectively closed several US ports) until July, when the British-loaned escorts began arriving. These included 24 anti-submarine armed trawlers. The institution of an interlocking convoy system on the American coast and in the Caribbean Sea in mid-1942 resulted in an immediate drop in attacks in those areas. As a result of the increased coastal convoy escort system, the U-boats' attention was shifted back to the Atlantic convoys. For the Allies, the situation was serious but not critical throughout much of 1942.\nBattle returns to the mid-Atlantic (July 1942 \u2013 February 1943).\nWith the US finally arranging convoys in their sector of the Atlantic, ship losses to the U-boats quickly dropped, and D\u00f6nitz realised his U-boats were better used elsewhere. On 19 July 1942, he ordered the last boats to withdraw from the United States Atlantic coast; by the end of July 1942 he had shifted his attention back to the North Atlantic, where Allied aircraft could not provide cover\u2014i.e. the Black Pit. Convoy SC 94 marked the return of the U-boats to the convoys from Canada to Britain. The command centre for the submarines operating in the West, including the Atlantic also changed, moving to a newly constructed command bunker at the Ch\u00e2teau de Pignerolle just east of Angers on the Loire river. The headquarters was commanded by Hans-Rudolf R\u00f6sing.\nThere were enough U-boats spread across the Atlantic to allow several wolf packs to attack many different convoy routes. Often as many as 10 to 15 boats would attack in one or two waves, following convoys like SC 104 and SC 107 by day and attacking at night. Convoy losses quickly increased and in October 1942, 56 ships of over 258,000\u00a0tonnes were sunk in the \"air gap\" between Greenland and Iceland.\nU-boat losses also climbed. In the first six months of 1942, 21 were lost, less than one for every 40 merchant ships sunk. In the last six months of 1942, 66 were sunk, one for every 10 merchant ships, almost as many as in the previous two years together.\nOn 19 November 1942, Admiral Noble was replaced as Commander-in-Chief of Western Approaches Command by Admiral Sir Max Horton. Horton used the growing number of escorts becoming available to organise \"support groups\", to reinforce convoys that came under attack. Unlike the regular escort groups, support groups were not directly responsible for the safety of any particular convoy. This gave them much greater tactical flexibility, allowing them to detach ships to hunt submarines spotted by reconnaissance or picked up by HF/DF. Where regular escorts would have to break off and stay with their convoy, the support group ships could keep hunting a U-boat for many hours. One tactic introduced by Captain John Walker was the \"hold-down\", where a group of ships would patrol over a submerged U-boat until its air ran out and it was forced to the surface; this might take two or three days.\nAfter Convoy ON 154, winter weather provided a brief respite from the fighting in January before convoys SC 118 and ON 166 in February 1943, but in the spring, convoy battles started up again with the same ferocity. There were so many U-boats on patrol in the North Atlantic, it was difficult for convoys to evade detection, resulting in a succession of vicious battles.\nWestern Approaches Tactical Unit.\nBetween February 1942 and July 1945, about 5,000 naval officers played war games at \"Western Approaches Tactical Unit\". Many game graduates believed that the battle they fought on the linoleum floor was essential to their subsequent victory at sea. In November 1942, Admiral Horton tested \"Beta Search\" in a wargame. Janet Okell and Jean Laidlaw played the role of the escorts. Five times in a row Okell and Laidlaw sank the submarine of Admiral Horton, the commander-in chief of Western Approaches.\nAhead-throwing weapons.\nAt the start of World War II, the depth charge was the only weapon available to a vessel for destroying a submerged submarine. Depth charges were dropped over the stern and thrown to the side of a warship travelling at speed. Early models of ASDIC/sonar searched only ahead, astern and to the sides of the vessel that was using it: there was no downward-looking capability. This caused a delay between the last fix obtained on the submarine and the warship's arrival atop that position, after which depth charges could be deployed and sink to the depth at which they set to explode. During these two delays, a capable submarine commander would manoeuvre rapidly to a different position, avoiding the explosions. The depth charges then left an area of disturbed water, through which it was difficult to regain ASDIC/sonar contact. In response to this problem, one of the solutions developed by the Royal Navy was the ahead-throwing anti-submarine weapon\u2014the first of which was Hedgehog.\nHedgehog.\nHedgehog was a multiple spigot mortar, which fired contact-fused bombs ahead of the firing ship while the target was still within the ASDIC beam. These started to be installed on anti-submarine ships from late 1942. The warship could approach slowly (as it did not have to clear the area of exploding depth charges to avoid damage) and so its position was less obvious to the submarine commander as it was making less noise. Because Hedgehog only exploded if it hit the submarine, if the target was missed, there was no disturbed water complicate tracking\u2014and contact would not have been lost in the first place.\nSquid.\nIntroduced in late 1943, Squid improved upon Hedgehog's design. A three-barrelled mortar, it projected charges ahead or abeam; the charges' firing pistols set automatically just before launch. More advanced installations linked Squid to the latest ASDIC sets so that the weapon was fired automatically.\nLeigh Light.\nDetection by radar-equipped aircraft could suppress U-boat activity over a wide area, but an aircraft attack could only be successful with good visibility. U-boats were relatively safe from aircraft at night for two reasons: 1) radar then in use could not detect them at less than ; 2) flares deployed to illuminate any attack gave adequate warning for evasive manoeuvres. The introduction of the Leigh Light by the British in January 1942 solved the second problem, thereby becoming a significant factor in the Battle for the Atlantic. Developed by RAF officer H. Leigh, it was a powerful and controllable searchlight mounted primarily to Wellington bombers and B-24 Liberators. These aircraft first located enemy submarines using air-to-surface-vessel (ASV) radar. Then, about from the target, the Leigh Light would be switched on. It immediately and accurately illuminated the enemy, giving U-boat commanders less than 25\u00a0seconds to react before they were attacked with depth charges. The first confirmed kill using this technology was \"U-502\" on 5 July 1942.\nThe Leigh Light enabled the British to attack enemy subs on the surface at night, forcing German and Italian commanders to remain underwater especially when coming into port at sub bases in the Bay of Biscay. U-boat commanders who survived such attacks reported a particular fear of this weapon since aircraft could not be seen at night, and the noise of an approaching aircraft was inaudible above the sound of the sub's engines. The common practice of surfacing at night to recharge batteries and refresh air was mostly abandoned as it was safer to perform these tasks during daylight hours when enemy planes could be spotted.\nMetox receiver.\nBy August 1942, U-boats were being fitted with radar detectors to enable them to avoid ambushes by radar-equipped aircraft or ships. The first such receiver, named Metox after its French manufacturer, could pick up the metric radar bands used by early radars. This enabled U-boats to avoid detection by Canadian escorts, which were equipped with obsolete radar sets, and allowed them to track convoys where these sets were in use.\nIt also caused problems for the Germans, sometimes detecting stray radar emissions from distant ships or planes. This caused U-boats to submerge when they were not in danger, preventing them from recharging batteries or using their surfaced speed.\nMetox provided the U-boat commander with an advantage that had not been anticipated by the British. The Metox set beeped at the pulse rate of the hunting aircraft's radar, about once per second. When the radar operator came within of the U-boat, he changed the range of his radar. With the change of range, the radar doubled its pulse frequency and as a result, the Metox beeping frequency also doubled, warning the commander that he had been detected and that the approaching aircraft was nine miles away.\nGermans break Admiralty codes.\nIn 1941, American intelligence informed Rear Admiral John Henry Godfrey that the UK naval codes could be broken. In March 1942, the Germans broke Naval Cipher 3, used for Anglo-American communication. Eighty per cent of the Admiralty messages from March 1942 to June 1943 were read by the Germans. Sinking of Allied merchant ships increased dramatically.\nG\u00fcnter Hessler, Admiral D\u00f6nitz's son-in-law and first staff officer at U-boat Command, said:\n\"We had reached a stage when it took one or two days to decrypt the British radio messages. On occasions only a few hours were required. We could sometimes deduce when and how they would take advantage of the gaps in our U-boat dispositions. Our function was to close those gaps just before the convoys were due.\" The code breakers of Bletchley Park assigned only two people to evaluate whether the Germans broke the code. After five months, they determined that the codes were broken. In August 1942, the UK Admiralty was informed, but did not change the codes until June 1943.\nCaptain Raymond Dreyer, deputy staff signals officer at Western Approaches, the British HQ for the Battle of the Atlantic in Liverpool, said, \"Some of their most successful U-boat pack attacks on our convoys were based on information obtained by breaking our ciphers.\"\nEnigma in 1942.\nOn 1 February 1942, the switched the U-boats to a new Enigma network, TRITON, which used new, four-rotor Enigma machines. This new key could not be read by codebreakers; the Allies no longer knew where the U-boat patrol lines were. This made it far more difficult to evade contact, and wolf packs ravaged many convoys. This persisted for ten months. To obtain information on submarine movements the Allies had to make do with HF/DF fixes and decrypts of messages encoded on earlier Enigma machines. These messages included signals from coastal forces about U-boat arrivals and departures at their bases in France, and reports from the U-boat training command. From these clues, Commander Rodger Winn's Admiralty Submarine Tracking Room estimated submarine movements, but this information was not enough.\nOn 30 October, crewmen from salvaged Enigma material from as she foundered off Port Said. This allowed codebreakers to break TRITON. By December 1942, Enigma decrypts were again disclosing U-boat patrol positions, and shipping losses declined dramatically once more.\nClimax of the campaign (March\u2013May 1943, \"Black May\").\nOn 10 March 1943, the Germans added a refinement to the U-boat Enigma key, blinding Allied codebreakers at Bletchley Park for 9 days. That month saw the battles of convoys UGS 6, HX 228, SC 121, SC 122 and HX 229. 120 ships were sunk worldwide, 82\u00a0ships of 476,000\u00a0tons in the Atlantic, while 12\u00a0U-boats were destroyed.\nThe supply situation in Britain was such that there was talk of being unable to continue the war, with supplies of fuel being particularly low. The situation was so bad that the British considered abandoning convoys entirely. The next two months saw a complete reversal of fortunes.\nIn April, losses of U-boats increased and their kills fell significantly. Only 39 ships of 235,000\u00a0tons were sunk in the Atlantic, and 15\u00a0U-boats were destroyed. By May, wolf packs no longer had the advantage and that month became known as Black May in the U-boat Arm (). The turning point was the battle centred on slow convoy ONS 5 (April\u2013May 1943). Made up of 43\u00a0merchantmen escorted by 16 warships, it was attacked by a pack of 30\u00a0U-boats. Although 13\u00a0merchant ships were lost, six U-boats were sunk by the escorts or Allied aircraft. Despite a storm which scattered the convoy, the merchantmen reached the protection of land-based air cover, causing D\u00f6nitz to call off the attack. Two weeks later, SC 130 saw at least three U-boats destroyed and at least one U-boat damaged for no losses. Faced with disaster, D\u00f6nitz called off operations in the North Atlantic, admitting \"We had lost the Battle of the Atlantic\".\nOn 13 April RAF Coastal Command started its second Bay Offensive with operation Derange. Seventy-five long range aircraft equipped with the new centrimetric ASV Mark III radar with PPI display patrolled regions in the Bay of Biscay with known concentrations (through Enigma decrypts) of U-boats in transit. The German Metox radar detector operated only in the metric band and did not detect the new centrimetric radar emissions. As a result, many U-boats were surprised and attacked. In response D\u00f6nitz ordered U-boats to stay on the surface and directly combat aircraft. Some U-boats were converted to \"\"flak\" boats\" with extra and new anti-aircraft guns, but to no avail: In May five U-boats were sunk and another seven forced to abort.\nIn all, 43\u00a0U-boats were destroyed in May, 34 in the Atlantic. This comprised 25% of the U-boat Arm's total operational strength. The Allies lost 58\u00a0ships in the same period, 34 of these (totalling 134,000\u00a0tons) in the Atlantic.\nConvergence of technologies.\nThe Battle of the Atlantic was won by the Allies in two months. There was no single reason for this; what had changed was a sudden convergence of technologies, combined with an increase in Allied resources.\nThe mid-Atlantic gap that had previously been unreachable by aircraft was closed by long-range B-24 Liberators. On 18 March 1943, Roosevelt ordered King to transfer 60 Liberators from the Pacific theatre to the Atlantic to combat German U-boats; one of only two direct orders he gave to his military commanders in WWII (the other was regarding Operation Torch). At the May 1943 Trident conference, Admiral King requested General Henry H. Arnold to send a squadron of ASW-configured B-24s to Newfoundland to strengthen the air escort of North Atlantic convoys. General Arnold ordered his squadron commander to engage only in \"offensive\" search and attack missions and not in the escort of convoys. In June, General Arnold suggested the Navy assume responsibility for ASW operations. Admiral King requested the Army's ASW-configured B-24s in exchange for an equal number of unmodified Navy B-24s. Agreement was reached in July and the exchange was completed in September 1943.\nFurther air cover was provided by the introduction of merchant aircraft carriers (MAC ships), which carried Fairey Swordfish, and although these Swordfish did not manage to score a U-boat kill, their presence deterred or drove off U-boat attacks as well as raising the morale of the merchant marine. Soon there were growing numbers of American-built escort carriers, primarily flying Grumman F4F Wildcats and Grumman TBF Avengers. Both types of carriers sailed with the convoys and provided much-needed air cover and patrols all the way across the Atlantic, plus escort carriers often formed hunter-killer groups not tied to a convoy getting them the freedom to seek out U-boats.\nLarger numbers of escorts became available, both as a result of American building programmes and the release of escorts committed to the North African landings during November and December 1942. In particular, destroyer escorts (DEs) (similar British ships were known as frigates) were designed to be built economically, compared to fleet destroyers and sloops whose warship-standards construction and sophisticated armaments made them too expensive for mass production. Destroyer escorts and frigates were also better designed for mid-ocean anti-submarine warfare than corvettes, which, although maneuverable and seaworthy, were too short, slow, and inadequately armed to match the DEs. Not only would there be sufficient numbers of escorts to securely protect convoys, they could also form hunter-killer groups (often centered on escort carriers) to aggressively hunt U-boats.\nDuring May 1943, the US Navy began using a high-speed bombe of its own design which could deduce the settings of the new four-rotor German Enigma cipher machines. By September 1944, 121 of the new high-speed bombes were at work.\nD\u00f6nitz's aim in this tonnage war was to sink Allied ships faster than they could be replaced; as losses fell and production rose, particularly in the United States, this became impossible.\nSouth Atlantic (May 1942 \u2013 September 1943).\nDespite U-boat operations in the region (centred in the Atlantic Narrows between Brazil and West Africa) beginning late 1940, only in the following year did these start to raise serious concern in Washington. This perceived threat caused the US to consider the introduction of her forces along Brazil's coast. After negotiations with Brazilian Foreign Minister Osvaldo Aranha (on behalf of dictator Get\u00falio Vargas), this was achieved in the second half of 1941.\nGermany and Italy subsequently extended their submarine attacks to include Brazilian ships wherever they were, and from April 1942 were found in Brazilian waters. On 22 May 1942, the first Brazilian attack (although unsuccessful) was carried out by Brazilian Air Force aircraft on the . After a series of attacks on merchant vessels off the Brazilian coast by , Brazil officially entered the war on 22 August 1942, offering an important addition to the Allied strategic position in the South Atlantic.\nAlthough the Brazilian Navy was small, it had modern minelayers suitable for coastal convoy escort and aircraft which needed only small modifications to become suitable for maritime patrol. During its three years of war, mainly in Caribbean and South Atlantic, alone and in conjunction with the US, Brazil escorted 3,167 ships in 614 convoys, totalling 16,500,000 tons, with losses of 0.1%. Nine hundred and seventy-two seamen and civilian passengers were lost aboard the 32 Brazilian merchant vessels attacked by enemy submarines. American and Brazilian air and naval forces worked closely together until the end of the Battle. One example was the sinking of in July 1943, by a coordinated action of Brazilian and American aircraft. In Brazilian waters, eleven other Axis submarines were known to be sunk between January and September 1943\u2014the Italian and ten German boats: , , , \"U-507\", , , , , , and .\nBy late 1943, the decreasing number of Allied shipping losses in the South Atlantic coincided with the increasing elimination of Axis submarines operating there. From then on, the battle in the region was lost by Germany, even though most of the remaining submarines in the region received an official order of withdrawal only in August 1944, and with the last Allied merchant ship, \"Baron Jedburgh\", sunk by \"U-532\" on 10 March 1945.\nFinal years (June 1943 \u2013 May 1945).\nAfter the defeat on the North Atlantic convoy lanes, it became clear to D\u00f6nitz and Hitler that a new generation of U-boats was urgently needed. There was a programme to develop Walter U-boats which achieved high underwater speeds with a revolutionary hydrogen peroxide air-independent propellant system, but it faced many technical setbacks and these U-boats would not become available in time. Instead it was decided to modify these designs where the new propulsion system was replaced with much larger battery capacity for a conventional U-boat propulsion system, the types. Since the design was ready, it was hoped that by mass-producing the U-boat in prefabricated sections, these new Type XXI oceangoing and coastal Type XXIII would become operational in mid-1944. In the meantime, as a stopgap measure until these \"Elektroboote\" became available, the existing U-boat designs were gradually equipped with a (snorkel), which allowed U-boats to run their diesel engines whilst submerged and recharge their batteries.\nThe U-boats left the North Atlantic convoy lanes and shifted their attacks to the American-Mediterranean convoys in the Central Atlantic. The Allies learned from this move through intelligence and anticipated by ordering three US Navy task Groups centred around the escort carriers \"Card\", \"Bogue\" and \"Santee\" to the region. These escort carriers protected the convoys, but were not part of its close escort and were allowed to search and destroy U-boats and their supporting U-boat tankers on HF/DF bearings. Only 1 ship was lost, but the escort carriers sank 17 U-boats. After this defeat, D\u00f6nitz halted all wolfpack operations in the beginning of August until U-boats could be upgraded with better weapons and measures. At the same time the British were allowed to access the harbours at the Portuguese Azores Islands and to operate Allied military aircraft based in the Azores, which closed the air gap in the Mid-Atlantic and made operations there equally hazardous. From June to September 1943 Coastal Command kept up its Bay offensive with operations Musketry, Seaslug and Percussion. By the first week of August 1941 U-boats were sunk in the Bay of Biscay. The Bay offensive was intensified by sending escort and support groups into the Bay but these ships were driven off by German Dornier Do 217 aircraft armed with Henschel Hs 293 guided glide bomb, which claimed several victims.\nIn September 1943 D\u00f6nitz hoped to surprise the Allies by sending the Wolfpack Leuthen back to the North Atlantic convoy lanes. These U-boats were equipped with T5 \"Zaunk\u00f6nig\" acoustic torpedoes, better anti-aircraft guns, a new \"Wanze\" radar detector and \"Afrodite\" radar decoys. In an adaptation of their wolfpack tactics, they were ordered first to attack convoy escorts with their acoustic torpedoes before attacking the merchant ships. The group achieved surprise and success in its first attack on convoys ONS 18 and ON 202, but all subsequent attacks were beaten off with heavy loss for the Germans. Other wolfpacks Rossbach, Schlieffen and Siegfried were formed and kept the new campaign going but could achieve little for heavy losses. Only eight\u00a0ships of 56,000\u00a0tons and six\u00a0warships had been sunk for the loss of 39\u00a0U-boats, a catastrophic loss ratio. In November D\u00f6nitz finally recognized wolfpack attacks were not viable anymore in the face of heavy convoy escort and dispersed his U-boats.\nFrom January 1944 onwards, D\u00f6nitz tried to preserve his U-Boat strength in order to be able to repel an expected invasion in both Norway and France. The number of patrols by his Atlantic U-boats fell from 41 in January to 10 in May. Since U-boats were still diverted to the Mediterranean or kept in reserve in Norway and since operational losses were high, the number of available U-boats in the Atlantic force sank in the same period from 121 to 89. D\u00f6nitz had hoped the could pick up the offensive on the convoy lanes again in 1944, but the construction of these boats was delayed by shortages of skilled workers and Allied bombing on shipyards and U-boat engine factories. Only in April 1944 was the first type XXI launched and its submerged speed and diving depth proved to be inferior to the designed performance.\nOn D-Day, Atlantic operations were suspended and all available 36 U-boats, later reinforced with another seven, were sent out to confront Operation Neptune. For the loss of thirteen of their own, these U-boats sank only eight of the 5,339 vessels participating in the invasion of Normandy. Air patrols made operations for U-boats not equipped with a impossible and these had to be recalled. A further eleven U-boats arrived from Norway in the second week of the invasion, but they sank only two ships for the loss of seven U-boats. With the Allied advance in France, the U-boat bases in Brest and Bordeaux were lost in August\u2013September. The other three bases in Lorient, St-Nazaire and La Pallice were evacuated but remained in German hands until the end of the war. No operations could be mounted from these bases and the remaining 30 U-boats were evacuated to Norway. Between 16 May and 1 November 72 U-boats were lost, whilst they could only sink twelve small warships and fourteen merchant ships for 60,000 tons.\nNorway was too far away from the convoy lanes in order to organise group attacks by the U-Boats. In order to keep up the offensive pending the arrival of the , 68 patrols were organised from Norway towards British waters between July and December 1944. Only Type VII U-boats could be used as Allied air superiority excluded continuous cruising on surface. Sixteen U-boats were lost. In the same period, seventeen of the longer range type IX U-boats were sent to Canada and the Azores. These U-boats had also , and were equipped with new technology : they had new 'Fliege' and 'M\u00fccke' radar detectors and a new 'Hohentwiel' search radar. They sank six warships and nine merchants ships for the loss of seven U-boats.\nIn 1945 D\u00f6nitz continued with the same approach: type VII U-boats mounted 113 patrols to British waters from Norway and Germany. Sixty-five U-boats were lost by the end of the war. Another nineteen type IX U-boats sailed for the Americas; these U-boats sank three small warships and three merchants for the loss of nine of their own. Of the much awaited , only five Type XXIII coastal made seven patrols in 1945 which sank five small freighters. Only one of the big type XXI embarked upon a patrol before the end of the war but it did not see action. In the last month of the war, many U-boats fled the Baltic ports as they were overrun by the Red army. Eight and nine other U-boats were sunk by Allied aircraft as they fled towards bases in Norway.\nThe last actions in American waters took place on 5\u20136 May 1945, which saw the sinking of the steamer and the destruction of and in separate incidents. The last actions of the Battle of the Atlantic were on 7\u20138 May. was the last U-boat sunk in action, by an RAF\u00a0Catalina; while the Norwegian minesweeper and the freighters and were torpedoed in separate incidents, hours before the German surrender.\nAt the end of the war, 222 U-boats were scuttled by their crews. The remaining 174 U-boats, at sea or in port, were surrendered to the Allies. Most were destroyed in \"Operation Deadlight\" after the war, but some served in Allied navies. Six were in Japan at the time of the German surrender and were captured by the Japanese.\nGerman tactical and technical changes.\nThe development of torpedoes also improved with the pattern-running -Torpedo (FAT), which ran a pre-programmed course criss-crossing the convoy path and the G7es acoustic torpedo (known to the Allies as German Naval Acoustic Torpedo, GNAT), which homed on the propeller noise of a target. This was initially very effective, but the Allies quickly developed countermeasures, both tactical (\"Step-Aside\") and technical (\"Foxer\").\nOutcomes.\nThe Germans failed to stop the flow of strategic supplies to Britain. This failure resulted in the build-up of troops and supplies needed for the D-Day landings. The defeat of the U-boat was a necessary precursor for accumulation of Allied troops and supplies to ensure Germany's defeat.\nBetween 1939 and 1945, 72,200 Allied naval and merchant seamen died. The Germans lost about 30,000 U-boat sailors killed, three-quarters of the 40,000-man U-boat fleet.\nThe Admiralty later estimated that ceding the three Treaty Ports to Ireland in 1938 led to the loss of 368 Allied ships and 5,070 lives during the war.\nSurface fleet losses.\nThe German surface fleet commissioned 16 capital ships before or during the war: 4 battleships, 6 heavy cruisers and 6 light cruisers. Of these, only the and were sunk in battle on the Atlantic Ocean. Three cruisers were sunk during the April 1940 invasion of Norway and was sunk in the Arctic. Apart from the heavy cruiser and light cruiser all other ships were destroyed in port by bombers.\nThe British and Allied fleets fought battles all over the world and lost many ships, but only three ships were lost in battle against German surface ships : the battlecruiser \"Hood\" and the light cruisers Sydney and \"Charybdis\".\nU-boats sank 175 Allied warships in total, in all theatres of operations. Many of these were sunk in the Mediterranean or the Arctic. The adversaries of U-boats were mostly small anti-submarine ships like destroyers, destroyer escorts, frigates and corvettes, but on a few occasions U-boats could sink capital ships in the Atlantic: the battleship \"Royal Oak\" was sunk in harbour, the aircraft carrier \"Courageous\" was sunk while on anti-submarine patrol, the escort carriers \"Audacity\", \"Avenger\" and \"Block Island\" were sunk while escorting convoys, and the light cruiser \"Dunedin\" was sunk searching for German raiders.\nMerchant Navy.\nUnited Kingdom.\nDuring the Second World War nearly one third of the world's merchant shipping was British. Over 30,000 men from the British Merchant Navy died between 1939 and 1945. More than 2,400 British ships were sunk. The ships were crewed by sailors from all over the British Empire, including 25% from India and China, and 5% from the West Indies, Middle East and Africa. The British officers wore uniforms very similar to those of the Royal Navy. The ordinary sailors had no uniform and when on leave in Britain they sometimes suffered taunts and abuse from civilians who thought the crewmen were shirking their duty to enlist in the armed forces. To counter this, the crewmen were issued with an 'MN' lapel badge to indicate they were serving in the Merchant Navy.\nThe British merchant fleet was made up of vessels from the many and varied private shipping lines, examples being the tankers of the British Tanker Company and the freighters of Ellerman and Silver Lines. The British government, via the Ministry of War Transport (MoWT), also had new ships built during the course of the war, these being known as Empire ships.\nUnited States.\nIn addition to its existing merchant fleet, United States shipyards built 2,710 Liberty ships totalling 38.5 million tons, vastly exceeding the 14 million tons of shipping the German U-boats were able to sink during the war.\nCanada.\nInformation obtained by British agents regarding German shipping movements led Canada to conscript all its merchant vessels two weeks before declaring war, with the Royal Canadian Navy taking control of all shipping on 26 August 1939. At the outbreak of the war, Canada possessed 38 ocean-going merchant vessels. By the end of hostilities, in excess of 400 cargo ships had been built in Canada. More than 70 Canadian merchant vessels were lost. An estimated 1,500 merchant sailors were killed, including eight women.\nAt the end of the war, Rear Admiral Leonard Murray, Commander-in-Chief Canadian North Atlantic, remarked, \"...the Battle of the Atlantic was not won by any Navy or Air Force, it was won by the courage, fortitude and determination of the British and Allied Merchant Navy.\"\nNorway.\nBefore the war, Norway's Merchant Navy was the fourth largest in the world and its ships were the most modern. The Germans and the Allies both recognised the great importance of Norway's merchant fleet, and following Germany's invasion of Norway in April 1940, both sides sought control of the ships. Norwegian Nazi puppet leader Vidkun Quisling ordered all Norwegian ships to sail to German, Italian or neutral ports. He was ignored. All Norwegian ships decided to serve at the disposal of the Allies. The vessels of the Norwegian Merchant Navy were placed under the control of the government-run Nortraship, with headquarters in London and New York.\nNortraship's modern ships, especially its tankers, were extremely important to the Allies. Norwegian tankers carried nearly one-third of the oil transported to Britain during the war. Records show that 694 Norwegian ships were sunk during this period, representing 47% of the total fleet. At the end of the war in 1945, the Norwegian merchant fleet was estimated at 1,378\u00a0ships. More than 3,700 Norwegian merchant seamen died.\nAssessment.\nG. H. Persall maintains that \"the Germans were close\" to economically starving England, but they \"failed to capitalize\" on their early war successes. Others, including Blair and Alan Levine, disagree; Levine states this is \"a misperception\", and that \"it is doubtful they ever came close\" to achieving this.\nThe focus on U-boat successes, the \"aces\" and their scores, the convoys attacked, and the ships sunk, serves to camouflage the \"Kriegsmarine\"'s manifold failures. In particular, this was because most of the ships sunk by U-boats were not in convoys, but sailing alone, or having become separated from convoys.\nAt no time during the campaign were supply lines to Britain interrupted; even during the \"Bismarck\" crisis, convoys sailed as usual (although with heavier escorts). In all, during the Atlantic campaign only 10% of transatlantic convoys that sailed were attacked, and of those attacked only 10% on average of the ships were lost. Overall, more than 99% of all ships sailing to and from the British Isles during World War II did so successfully.\nDespite their efforts, the Axis powers were unable to prevent the build-up of Allied invasion forces for the liberation of Europe. In November 1942, at the height of the Atlantic campaign, the US Navy escorted the Operation Torch invasion fleet across the Atlantic without hindrance, or even being detected. In 1943 and 1944 the Allies transported 3 million American and Allied servicemen across the Atlantic without significant loss. By 1945 the USN was able to wipe out a wolf-pack suspected of carrying V-weapons in the mid-Atlantic, with little difficulty.\nThird, and unlike the Allies, the Germans were never able to mount a comprehensive blockade of Britain. Nor were they able to focus their effort by targeting the most valuable cargoes, the eastbound traffic carrying war materiel. Instead they were reduced to the slow attrition of a tonnage war. To win this, the U-boat arm had to sink 300,000\u00a0GRT per month in order to overwhelm Britain's shipbuilding capacity and reduce its merchant marine strength.\nIn only four out of the first 27 months of the war did Germany achieve this target, and after December 1941, when Britain was joined by the US merchant marine and ship yards the target effectively doubled. As a result, the Axis needed to sink 700,000\u00a0GRT per month; as the massive expansion of the US shipbuilding industry took effect this target increased still further. The 700,000 ton target was achieved in only one month, November 1942; after May 1943 average sinkings dropped to less than one tenth of that figure. In addition, reports do not consistently emphasize an important distinction between GRT (tonnage in units of 100 cubic feet), which is not a weight, and displacement, which is. Thus sinking a ship with a GRT of 1,000, destroyed 100,000 cubic feet of enclosed space, which bore no fixed relationship to the volume or tonnage of cargo it could carry.\nBy the end of the war the Allies had built over 38 million tons of new shipping.\nThe reason for the misperception that the German blockade came close to success may be found in post-war writings by both German and British authors. Blair attributes the distortion to \"propagandists\" who \"glorified and exaggerated the successes of German submariners\", while he believes Allied writers \"had their own reasons for exaggerating the peril\".\nDan van der Vat suggests that, unlike the US, or Canada and Britain's other dominions, which were protected by oceanic distances, Britain was at the end of the transatlantic supply route closest to German bases; for Britain it was a lifeline. It is this which led to Churchill's concerns. Coupled with a series of major convoy battles in the space of a month, it undermined confidence in the convoy system in March 1943, to the point Britain considered abandoning it, not realising the U-boat had already effectively been defeated. These were \"over-pessimistic threat assessments\", Blair concludes: \"At no time did the German U-boat force ever come close to winning the Battle of the Atlantic or bringing on the collapse of Great Britain\".\nShipping and U-boat sinkings each month.\nHistorians disagree about the relative importance of the anti-U-boat measures. Max Hastings states that \"In 1941 alone, Ultra [breaking the German code] saved between 1.5 and two million tons of Allied ships from destruction.\" This would be a 40 per cent to 53 per cent reduction. A history based on the German archives written for the British Admiralty after the war by a former U-boat commander and son-in-law of D\u00f6nitz reports that several detailed investigations to discover whether their operations were compromised by broken code were negative and that their defeat \".. was due firstly to outstanding developments in enemy radar\u00a0...\" The graphs of the data are colour coded to divide the battle into three epochs\u2014 before the breaking of the Enigma code, after it was broken, and after the introduction of centimetric radar, which could reveal submarine conning towers above the surface of the water and even detect periscopes. Obviously this subdivision of the data ignores many other defensive measures the Allies developed during the war, so interpretation must be constrained. Codebreaking by itself did not decrease the losses, which continued to rise ominously. More U-boats were sunk, but the number operational had more than tripled. After the improved radar came into action shipping losses plummeted, reaching a level significantly (p=0.99) below the early months of the war. The development of the improved radar by the Allies began in 1940, before the United States entered the war, when Henry Tizard and A. V. Hill won permission to share British secret research with the Americans, including bringing them a cavity magnetron, which generates the needed high-frequency radio waves. All sides will agree with Hastings that \"... mobilization of the best civilian brains, and their integration into the war effort at the highest levels, was an outstanding British success story.\"\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "57766", "revid": "24465790", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57766", "title": "Charlie and the Chocolate Factory", "text": "1964 children's novel by Roald Dahl\nCharlie and the Chocolate Factory is a 1964 children's novel by the British writer Roald Dahl. It features the adventures of young Charlie Bucket inside the chocolate factory of an eccentric chocolatier named Willy Wonka.\nThe story was originally inspired by Dahl's experience of chocolate companies during his schooldays at Repton School in Derbyshire. Cadbury would often send test packages to the schoolchildren in exchange for their opinions on the new products. At that time (around the 1920s), Cadbury and Rowntree's were England's two largest chocolate makers and they each often tried to steal trade secrets by sending spies, posing as employees, into the other's factory\u2014inspiring Dahl's idea for the recipe-thieving spies (such as Wonka's rival Slugworth) depicted in the book. Because of this, both companies became highly protective of their chocolate-making processes. It was a combination of this secrecy and the elaborate, often gigantic, machines in the factory that inspired Dahl to write the story.\n\"Charlie and the Chocolate Factory\" is frequently ranked among the most popular works in children's literature. In 2012 Charlie Bucket brandishing a Golden Ticket appeared in a Royal Mail first class stamp in the UK. The novel was first published in the US by Alfred A. Knopf, Inc. in 1964 and in the UK by George Allen &amp; Unwin 11 months later. The book's sequel, \"Charlie and the Great Glass Elevator\", was published in 1972. Dahl planned a third instalment in the series, but never finished it. \nThe book has been adapted into two major motion pictures: \"Willy Wonka &amp; the Chocolate Factory\" (1971) and \"Charlie and the Chocolate Factory\" (2005). A standalone film exploring Willy Wonka's origins, simply titled \"Wonka,\" was released in 2023. The book has spawned a media franchise with multiple video games, theatrical productions and merchandise.\nPlot.\nCharlie Bucket is a kind and loving boy who lives in poverty with his parents and grandparents in a town which is home to the world-famous Wonka's Chocolate Factory. One day, Charlie's bedridden Grandpa Joe tells him about Willy Wonka, the factory's eccentric owner, and all of his fantastical candies. Rival chocolatiers sent in spies to steal Wonka's recipes, forcing him to close the factory and disappear. Wonka reopened the factory years later, but the gates remain locked, and nobody knows who is providing the factory with its workforce because no people are seen going out or coming in.\nThe next day, the newspaper announces that Wonka has hidden five Golden Tickets in Wonka Bars; the finders of these tickets will be invited to a tour of the factory. The first four tickets are found by gluttonous Augustus Gloop, spoilt Veruca Salt, the compulsive gum-chewer Violet Beauregarde, and the television addict Mike Teavee. During the mad rush to find the Golden Tickets, Charlie's attempts to find a Golden Ticket fail: on the first try, on Charlie's birthday, his parents give him a Wonka bar (his usual birthday present) that turns out nothing; on the second try, with encouragement from Grandpa Joe, Charlie buys another Wonka bar using some of Grandpa Joe's secret savings, but that too yields no ticket. On another instance, several days after his father loses his job at a toothpaste factory that closes, Charlie buys two Wonka Bars with some money he found in the snow. When he opens the second bar, Charlie discovers that it contains the fifth and final ticket. Later, on hearing the news, Grandpa Joe suddenly regains his mobility and volunteers to accompany Charlie to the factory.\nOn the day of the tour, which is the very next day, Wonka welcomes the five children and the adults inside the factory, a wonderland of confectionery creations that defy logic. They also meet the Oompa-Loompas, a race of impish humanoids who help him operate the factory as thanks for him rescuing them from a land of dangerous monsters and with his promise to provide them with cocoa beans. During the tour, the four other children give in to their respective impulses and are ejected from the tour in darkly comical ways: Augustus falls into the Chocolate River and is sucked up a pipe, Violet turns blue while inflating into a giant human blueberry after chewing an experimental stick of three-course dinner gum ending with a blueberry pie flavour, Veruca and her parents fall down a rubbish chute after she tries to capture one of the nut-testing squirrels, and Mike is shrunk after misusing a machine that sends chocolate by television \u2014 all despite Wonka's warnings. The Oompa-Loompas sing about the children's misbehaviour each time disaster strikes.\nWith only Charlie remaining, Wonka congratulates him for \"winning\" the factory. Wonka explains that the whole tour was secretly designed to help him find a worthy heir to his business, and Charlie was the only child whose innocence and good nature passed the test. They ride the Great Glass Elevator and watch the other four children leave the factory by boarding trucks loaded to the brim with Wonka products (as promised in the Golden Tickets) before flying to Charlie's house, where Wonka invites the entire Bucket family to come and live with him inside his factory.\nPublication.\nRace, editing, and censorship.\nDahl's widow said that Charlie was originally written as \"a little black boy.\" Dahl's biographer said the change to a white character was driven by Dahl's agent, who thought a black Charlie would not appeal to readers.\nIn the first published edition, the Oompa-Loompas were described as African pygmies, and were drawn this way in the original printed edition. After the announcement of a film adaptation sparked a statement from the American group NAACP, which expressed concern that the transportation of Oompa-Loompas to Wonka's factory resembled slavery, Dahl found himself sympathising with their concerns and published a revised edition. In this edition, as well as the subsequent sequel, the Oompa-Loompas were drawn as being white and appearing similar to hippies, and the references to Africa were deleted.\nIn 2023 the publisher Puffin made more than eighty additional changes to the original text of the book, such as: removing every occurrence of the word \"fat\" (including referring to Augustus Gloop as \"enormous\" rather than \"enormously fat\" and greatly changing the words of his song); removing most references to the Oompa-Loompa's diminutive size and physical appearance and omitting descriptions of them living in trees and wearing deerskins and leaves; removing or changing the words \"mad\", \"crazy\" and \"queer\"; omitting many references to Mike Teavee's toy guns; and removing references to corporal punishment (such as changing \"She needs a really good spanking\" to \"She needs a really good talking to\" and \"She wants a good kick in the pants\" to \"She needs to learn some manners\").\nUnused chapters.\nVarious unused and draft material from Dahl's early versions of the novel have been found. In the initial, unpublished drafts of \"Charlie and the Chocolate Factory\", nine golden tickets were distributed to tour Willy Wonka's secret chocolate factory and the children faced more rooms and more temptations to test their self-control. Some of the names of the children cut from the final work include: \n\"Spotty Powder\".\n\"Spotty Powder\" was first published as a short story in 1973. In 1998, it was included in the children's horror anthology \"Scary! Stories That Will Make You Scream\" edited by Peter Haining. The brief note before the story described the story as having been left out of \"Charlie and the Chocolate Factory\" due to an already brimming number of misbehaving children characters in the tale. In 2005, \"The Times\" reprinted \"Spotty Powder\" as a \"lost\" chapter, saying that it had been found in Dahl's desk, written backwards in mirror writing (the same way that Leonardo da Vinci wrote in his journals). Spotty Powder looks and tastes like sugar, but causes bright red pox-like spots to appear on faces and necks five seconds after ingestion, so children who eat Spotty Powder do not have to go to school. The spots fade on their own a few hours later. After learning the purpose of Spotty Powder, the humourless, smug Miranda Piker and her equally humourless father (a schoolmaster) are enraged and disappear into the Spotty Powder room to sabotage the machine. Soon after entering, they are heard making what Mrs. Piker interprets as screams. Mr. Wonka assures her (after making a brief joke where he claims that headmasters are one of the occasional ingredients) that it is only laughter. Exactly what happens to them is not revealed in the extract.\nIn an early draft, sometime after being renamed from Miranda Grope to Miranda Piker, but before \"Spotty Powder\" was written, she falls down the chocolate waterfall and ends up in the Peanut-Brittle Mixer. This results in the \"rude and disobedient little kid\" becoming \"quite delicious.\" This early draft poem was slightly rewritten as an Oompa-Loompa song in the lost chapter, which now puts her in the \"Spotty-Powder mixer\" and instead of being \"crunchy and ... good [peanut brittle]\" she is now \"useful [for truancy] and ... good.\"\n\"The Vanilla Fudge Room\".\nIn 2014 \"The Guardian\" revealed that Dahl had removed another chapter (\"The Vanilla Fudge Room\") from an early draft of the book. \"The Guardian\" reported the now-eliminated passage was \"deemed too wild, subversive and insufficiently moral for the tender minds of British children almost 50 years ago.\" In what was originally chapter five in that version of the book, Charlie goes to the factory with his mother instead of Grandpa Joe as originally published. At this point, the chocolate factory tour is down to eight children, including Tommy Troutbeck and Wilbur Rice. After the entire group climbs to the top of the titular fudge mountain, eating vanilla fudge along the way, Troutbeck and Rice decide to take a ride on the wagons carrying away chunks of fudge. The wagons take them directly to the Pounding And Cutting Room, where the fudge is reformed and sliced into small squares for retail sale. Wonka states the machine is equipped with \"a large wire strainer ... which is used specially for catching children before they fall into the machine\" adding that \"It always catches them. At least it always has up to now.\"\nThe chapter dates back to an early draft with ten golden tickets, including one each for Miranda Grope and Augustus Pottle, who fell into the chocolate river prior to the events of \"Fudge Mountain\". Augustus Pottle was routed to the Chocolate Fudge Room, not the Vanilla Fudge Room explored in this chapter, and Miranda Grope ended up in the Fruit and Nuts Room.\n\"The Warming Candy Room\".\nAlso in 2014, \"Vanity Fair\" published a plot summary of \"The Warming Candy Room\", wherein three boys eat too many \"warming candies\" and end up \"bursting with heat.\"\nThe Warming Candy Room is dominated by a boiler, which heats a scarlet liquid. The liquid is dispensed one drop at a time, where it cools and forms a hard shell, storing the heat and \"by a magic process ... the hot heat changes into an amazing thing called 'cold heat.'\" After eating a single warming candy, one could stand naked in the snow comfortably. This meets predictable disbelief from Clarence Crump, Bertie Upside and Terence Roper, who proceed to eat at least 100 warming candies each, resulting in profuse perspiration. The three boys and their families discontinue the tour after they are taken to cool off \"in the large refrigerator for a few hours.\"\n\"The Children's-Delight Room\".\nDahl originally planned for a child called Marvin Prune to be included. He submitted the excised chapter regarding Prune to \"The Horn Book Review\" in the early 1970s. Rather than publish the chapter, \"Horn Book\" responded with a critical essay by the children's author Eleanor Cameron, who called \"Charlie and the Chocolate Factory\" \u201cone of the most tasteless books ever written for children\u201d.\nReception.\nIn a 2006 list for the Royal Society of Literature, the author J. K. Rowling named \"Charlie and the Chocolate Factory\" among her top ten books that every child should read. A fan of the book since childhood, the film director Tim Burton wrote: \"I responded to \"Charlie and the Chocolate Factory\" because it respected the fact that children can be adults.\"\nA 2004 study found that it was a common read-aloud book for fourth-grade pupils in schools in San Diego County, California, US. A 2012 survey by the University of Worcester determined that it was one of the most common books that UK adults had read as children, after \"Alice's Adventures in Wonderland\", \"The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe\" and \"The Wind in the Willows\".\nGroups who have praised the book include:\nIn the 2012 survey published by \"SLJ\", a monthly with primarily US audience, \"Charlie\" was the second of four books by Dahl among their Top 100 Chapter Books, one more than any other writer. \"Time\" magazine in the US included the novel in its list of the 100 Best Young-Adult Books of All Time; it was one of three Dahl novels on the list, more than any other author. In 2016 the novel topped the list of Amazon's best-selling children's books by Dahl in Print and on Kindle. In 2023 the novel was ranked by BBC at no. 18 in their poll of \"The 100 greatest children's books of all time\".\nAlthough the book has always been popular and considered a children's classic by many literary critics, a number of prominent individuals have spoken unfavourably of the novel over the years. The children's novelist and literary historian John Rowe Townsend has described the book as \"fantasy of an almost literally nauseating kind\" and accused it of \"astonishing insensitivity\" regarding the original portrayal of the Oompa-Loompas as African black pygmies, although Dahl did revise this in later editions. Another novelist, Eleanor Cameron, compared the book to the sweets that form its subject matter, commenting that it is \"delectable and soothing while we are undergoing the brief sensory pleasure it affords but leaves us poorly nourished with our taste dulled for better fare.\" Ursula K. Le Guin wrote in support of this assessment in a letter to \"The Horn Book Review\", saying that her own daughter would turn \"quite nasty\" upon finishing the book. Dahl responded to Cameron's criticisms by noting that the classics that she had cited would not be well received by contemporary children.\nAdaptations.\n\"Charlie and the Chocolate Factory\" has frequently been adapted for other media, including games, radio, the screen, and stage, most often as plays or musicals for children\u00a0\u2013 often titled \"Willy Wonka\" or \"Willy Wonka, Jr\" and almost always featuring musical numbers by all the main characters (Wonka, Charlie, Grandpa Joe, Violet, Veruca, etc.); many of the songs are revised versions from the 1971 film.\nFilm.\nThe book was first made into a feature film as a musical, titled \"Willy Wonka &amp; the Chocolate Factory\" (1971), directed by Mel Stuart, produced by David L. Wolper, and starring Gene Wilder as Willy Wonka, character actor Jack Albertson as Grandpa Joe and Peter Ostrum as Charlie Bucket, with music by Leslie Bricusse and Anthony Newley. Dahl was credited for writing the screenplay, but David Seltzer was brought in by Stuart and Wolper to make changes against Dahl's wishes, leaving his original adaptation, in one critic's opinion, \"scarcely detectable\". Amongst other things, Dahl was unhappy with the foregrounding of Wonka over Charlie, and disliked the musical score. Because of this, Dahl disowned the film. The film had an estimated budget of US$2.9\u00a0million but grossed only $4\u00a0million and was considered a box-office disappointment, though it received positive reviews from critics. Home video and DVD sales, as well as repeated television airings, resulted in the film subsequently becoming a cult classic. Concurrently with the 1971 film, the Quaker Oats Company introduced a line of sweets whose marketing uses the book's characters and imagery.\nWarner Bros. and the Dahl estate reached an agreement in 1998 to produce another film version of \"Charlie and the Chocolate Factory\", with the Dahl family receiving total artistic control. The project languished in development hell until Tim Burton signed on to direct in 2003. The film, titled \"Charlie and the Chocolate Factory\", stars Johnny Depp as Willy Wonka. It was released in 2005 to positive reviews and massive box office returns, becoming the eighth-highest-grossing film of the year.\nIn October 2016 \"Variety\" reported that Warner Bros. had acquired the rights to the Willy Wonka character from the Roald Dahl Estate and would be planning a new film centred on him with David Heyman producing. In February 2018 Paul King entered final negotiations to direct the film. In May 2021, it was reported that the film would be a musical titled \"Wonka\", with Timoth\u00e9e Chalamet playing a younger version of Wonka in an origin story. King was confirmed as director and co-writer along with the comedian Simon Farnaby; the film was released globally in December 2023.\nAnimated series.\nOn 27 November 2018 Netflix and The Roald Dahl Story Company jointly announced that Netflix would be producing an animated series based on Dahl's books, including \"Charlie and the Chocolate Factory\", \"Matilda\", \"The BFG\", \"The Twits\" and other titles. Production commenced on the first of the Netflix Dahl animated series in 2019. On 5 March 2020 \"Variety\" announced that Taika Waititi was partnering with Netflix on a pair of animated series \u2013 one based on the world of \"Charlie and the Chocolate Factory\" and another based on the Oompa-Loompa characters. \"The shows will retain the quintessential spirit and tone of the original story while building out the world and characters far beyond the pages of the Dahl book for the very first time,\" Netflix said. On 23 February 2022 Mikros Animation revealed that they would be producing a new collaboration with Netflix. The collaboration was announced as \"Charlie and the Chocolate Factory\". The long-format animated event series is based on the 1964 novel and is written, directed and executive produced by Waititi.\nAudiobook.\nThe book has been recorded a number of times:\nEditions.\n\"Charlie and the Chocolate Factory\" has undergone numerous editions and been illustrated by numerous artists.\n50th anniversary cover controversy.\nThe cover photo of the 50th anniversary edition, published by Penguin Modern Classics for sale in the UK and aimed at the adult market, received widespread commentary and criticism. The cover is a photo of a heavily made up young girl seated on her mother's knee and wearing a doll-like expression, taken by the photographers Sofia Sanchez and Mauro Mongiello as part of a photo shoot for a 2008 fashion article in a French magazine, for a fashion article titled \"Mommie Dearest.\" In addition to writing that \"the image seemingly has little to do with the beloved children's classic\", reviewers and commentators in social media (such as posters on the publisher's Facebook page) have said the art evokes \"Lolita\", \"Valley of the Dolls\", and JonBenet Ramsey; looks like a scene from \"Toddlers &amp; Tiaras\"; and is \"misleading,\" \"creepy,\" \"sexualised,\" \"grotesque,\" \"misjudged on every level,\" \"distasteful and disrespectful to a gifted author and his work,\" \"pretentious,\" \"trashy\", \"outright inappropriate,\" \"terrifying,\" \"really obnoxious,\" and \"weird &amp; kind of paedophilic.\"\nThe publisher explained its objective in a blog post accompanying the announcement about the jacket art: \"This new image .\u2009.\u2009. looks at the children at the center of the story, and highlights the way Roald Dahl's writing manages to embrace both the light and the dark aspects of life.\" Additionally, Penguin Press's Helen Conford told the Bookseller: \"We wanted something that spoke about the other qualities in the book. It's a children's story that also steps outside children's and people aren't used to seeing Dahl in that way.\" She continued: \"[There is] a lot of ill feeling about it, I think because it's such a treasured book and a book which isn't really a 'crossover book'\" As she acknowledged: \"People want it to remain as a children's book.\"\n\"The New Yorker\" describes what it calls this \"strangely but tellingly misbegotten\" cover design thusly: \"The image is a photograph, taken from a French fashion shoot, of a glassy-eyed, heavily made-up little girl. Behind her sits, a mother figure, stiff and coiffed, casting an ominous shadow. The girl, with her long, perfectly waved platinum-blond hair and her pink feather boa, looks like a pretty and inert doll\u2014\" The article continues: \"And if the Stepford daughter on the cover is meant to remind us of Veruca Salt or Violet Beauregarde, she doesn't: those badly behaved squirts are bubbling over with rude life.\" Moreover, writes Talbot, \"The Modern Classics cover has not a whiff of this validation of childish imagination; instead, it seems to imply a deviant adult audience.\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "57767", "revid": "15195259", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57767", "title": "Eastern Orthdox", "text": ""}
{"id": "57768", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57768", "title": "Women's Tennis Association", "text": "International organization for women's tennis\nThe Women's Tennis Association (WTA) is the principal organizing body of women's professional tennis. The association governs the WTA Tour, which is the worldwide professional tennis tour for women, and was founded to create a better future for women's tennis. The WTA's corporate headquarters are in St. Petersburg, Florida, with its European headquarters in London and its Asia-Pacific headquarters in Beijing.\nThe Women's Tennis Association was founded in June 1973 by Billie Jean King, and traces its origins to the inaugural Virginia Slims tournament, arranged by Gladys Heldman, sponsored by Joe Cullman, CEO of Philip Morris, and held on 23 September 1970 at the Houston Racquet Club in Houston, Texas. Rosie Casals won this first event.\nWhen the Women's Tennis Association was founded, Billie Jean King was one of nine players that comprised the WTA, also referred to as the Original 9, that included Julie Heldman, Valerie Ziegenfuss, Judy Dalton, Kristy Pigeon, Peaches Bartkowicz, Kerry Melville Reid, Nancy Richey, and Rosie Casals. Today, the WTA has more than 2,500 players from nearly 100 countries competing for $146\u00a0million in prize money.\nHistory.\nBackground.\nTennis's Open Era, in which professional players were allowed to compete alongside amateurs, began in 1968. The first Open Tournament was the British Hard Court Championships in Bournemouth. Later that year at the first Open Wimbledon, the prize fund difference was 2.5:1 in favor of men. Billie Jean King, a high ranking tennis player in the late 1960s who won several titles, won \u00a3750 for taking the title, whilst Rod Laver won \u00a32,000. The total prize pool of both competitions were \u00a314,800 and \u00a35,680 for men and women, respectively. The tournaments that did not want to provide prize money eventually faded out of the calendar, including the US Eastern Grass Court circuit with stops at Merion Cricket Club and Essex county club.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe women were being squeezed financially because we had no control in a male-dominated sport. Men owned, ran and promoted the tournaments, and because many of them were former players themselves, their sympathies lay with the male players, who argued vociferously that most of the money should be theirs.\n\u2014King and Starr on the gender pay gap within tennis, from their book \"We Have Come a Long Way\" (1988)\nThere were two professional tennis circuits in existence at the start of the Open Era: World Championship Tennis (WCT), which was for men only, and the National Tennis League (NTL). Ann Jones, Rosie Casals, Fran\u00e7oise D\u00fcrr, and Billie Jean King joined the NTL. King was paid $40,000 a year, Jones was paid $25,000, and Casals and Durr were paid $20,000 each. The group played established tournaments, such as the US Open and Wimbledon, and also organised their own tournaments, playing in the South of France for two months. The International Tennis Federation (ITF) then imposed several sanctions on the group. Women were not allowed to play in the Wightman Cup in 1968 and 1969 and the USLTA refused to include Casals and King in their rankings for those years. In 1969, ratios of 5:1 in terms of pay between men and women were common at smaller tournaments. By 1970, these figures had increased to up to 12:1. The International Lawn Tennis Federation (ILTF) had begun dropping several women's competitions from the tournaments it presided over, having sanctioned 15 men-only tournaments in 1970, all of which had previously been combined events.\nThe turning point for women's pay inequality came prior to the 1970 US Open. The Pacific Southwest Championships directed by Jack Kramer, had announced a 12:1 ratio in the prize money difference between what men and women would win. This tournament provoked the top 9 female tennis players\u2014Billie Jean King, Julie Heldman, Valerie Ziegenfuss, Judy Dalton, Kristy Pigeon, Peaches Bartkowicz, Kerry Melville Reid, Nancy Richey, and Rosie Casals, now known as the Original 9\u2014to take a stand for equality. They did not play in the Los Angeles tournament and instead wanted to create their own tennis tournament.\nSeveral female players contacted Gladys Heldman, publisher of \"World Tennis Magazine\", and stated that they wanted to boycott the event. Although Heldman advised against it, she did help them put together their own tournament in Houston which would not take place until after the US Open. The 1970 Houston Women's Invitation for nine women players was formed. Heldman was friends with Joseph Cullman, CEO and chairman of Phillip Morris, who secured the new tournament. The tournament was a success and later sponsored by Virginia Slims in 1971.\nWTA Tour.\nThe WTA was founded at a meeting organised by Billie Jean King, a week before the 1973 Wimbledon Championships, as a direct response to the formation of the Association of Tennis Professionals a year prior. This meeting was held at Gloucester Hotel in London and featured 70 other female players, where King was named the first president of the organisation. In 1975, the WTA increased its financial stature by signing a television broadcast contract with CBS, the first in the WTA's history.\nIn 1976, Colgate assumed sponsorship of the circuit from April to November, with Avon replacing Virginia Slims as the sponsor of the winter circuit the following year. The \"Colgate Series\"\u2014renamed the \"Toyota Series\" in 1981\u2014included tournaments in all parts of the world, whereas the Avon sponsored events took place solely in the US. The two circuits merged at the beginning of the 1983 season, when Virginia Slims returned to take full sponsorship rights of the WTA Tour. Every tournament under the administration of the WTA became part of the \"Virginia Slims World Championship Series\", before becoming the WTA World Tour in 1995 after the WTA Players Association merged with the Women's Tennis Council.\nIn 1977, women's tennis was the first professional sport opened to transgender women. The New York Supreme Court ruled in favour of Ren\u00e9e Richards, a player who underwent male-to-female sex reassignment surgery. Eligibility of transgender players is officially regulated under the current WTA official rulebook.\nWTA Tour tournaments.\nSince 2012 (number of events varies each year; in 2018 there were ten tournaments: four in United States, two in China and one each in Croatia, France, India and Taiwan), with prize money for the four events in United States at US$150,000 and at the other events at around US$125,000.\nRanking points are also available at tournaments on the ITF Women's Circuit organized by the International Tennis Federation, which comprises several hundred tournaments each year with prize funds ranging from US$15,000 to US$100,000.\nManagement.\nAmerican sports entrepreneur Jerry Diamond (1928\u20131996) served as executive director of the women's association from 1974 to 1985. He was instrumental in negotiating business deals with Avon, Colgate-Palmolive, and Toyota, and worked out the deal that made Virginia Slims the titular sponsor of the WTA tour.\nLarry Scott became chairman and CEO of the WTA on 16 April 2003. While at the WTA, Scott put together the largest sponsorship in the history of women's sports, a six-year, $88\u00a0million sponsorship deal with Sony Ericsson. On 24 March 2009, Scott announced that he was resigning as WTA chief to take up a new position as the commissioner of the Pac-10 Conference, on 1 July 2009.\nScott pointed to Korn Ferry to headhunt his replacement but \"with no decision made\" on 13 July 2009, WTA Tour announced the appointment of Stacey Allaster, the Tour's president since 2006, as the new chairman and CEO of the WTA. Allaster was named as one of the \"Most Powerful Women in Sports\" by Forbes Magazine and led the WTA through significant growth and under her leadership, she secured a media agreement that would maximise fan exposure to women's tennis globally. During her time with the WTA, she generated an estimated $1\u00a0billion in diversified contract revenues, built the brand globally, and was a strong advocate for gender equality. She announced her retirement as chief executive of the WTA on 22 September 2015 citing a personal change in priorities.\nOn 5 October 2015, Steve Simon, the Tournament Director of the BNP Paribas Open, was announced to succeed Stacey as the new WTA chairman and CEO.\nIn December 2021, following Peng Shuai's disappearance by the Chinese government, the WTA under Steve Simon suspended its operations in China and Hong Kong. The boycott was lifted in 2023 after 16 months, citing financial losses due to the suspension of operations in China as well as the COVID-19 pandemic.\nIn March 2022, medical technology firm Hologic reached an agreement to become title sponsor and \"official health partner\" of the WTA Tour, marking its first title sponsorship agreement since the expiration of the previous Sony Ericsson deal.\nOn 28 October 2025, it was announced that Valerie Camillo had been chosen to be the next chairperson, taking over from the retiring Steve Simon on 17 November of that year.\nPlayers' Council.\nThe Players' Council is a group or sub-committee under the WTA board of directors, consisting of eight selected players on the tour that advocate player interest, handles grievances, changes in the tennis schedule and other concerns.\n2024\u201325 Players' Council\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nGrowth milestones.\nPrize money.\nWhen Avon began sponsoring the winter circuit in 1976, the largest prize fund offered for a single tournament was $100,000\u2014for the Avon Championships.\nIn 1984, The Australian Open joined the US Open in offering women equal prize money, but temporarily did not between 1996 and 2000. After a 30-year campaign, 2007 marked the historic achievement of equal prize money at Roland Garros and Wimbledon. This meant all four major tournaments offered parity. In 1973, the US Open tennis tournament became the first Grand Slam tournament to award the same prize money for women as men. The Australian Open would become the second Grand Slam offering equal prize money following suit in 1985 although the tournament awarded men more money from 1996 to 2000 before equal prize money returned in 2001. The French Open offered equal prize money for champions in 2006. In 2007 both Wimbledon and the French Open both offered equal prize money.\nThe WTA circuit continued to expand during these years. In 1971, King became the first female athlete to surpass $100,000 in earnings for a single year. Chris Evert became the first female athlete to win over $1,000,000 in career earnings in 1976. By 1980, over 250 women were playing professionally, and the circuit consisted of 47 global events, offering a total of $7.2\u00a0million in prize money. These increased financial opportunities allowed for groundbreaking developments not only in tennis, but across women's sports.\nIn 1982, Martina Navratilova became the first to win over $1,000,000 in a single year. Navratilova's single year earnings exceeded $2\u00a0million in 1984. In 1997, Martina Hingis became the first to earn over $3\u00a0million during a single year. In 2003, Kim Clijsters surpassed $4\u00a0million in earnings for a single year. In 2006, Venus Williams and the WTA pushed for equal prize money at both the French Open and Wimbledon. Both of these Grand Slam events relented in 2007 and awarded equal money for the first time. This enabled Justine Henin, who won the French Open in 2007, to earn over $5\u00a0million that year, becoming the first woman in sports to do this. In 2009, Serena Williams went over the six million mark by earning over $6.5\u00a0million in a single year. Then in 2012 both Serena Williams and Victoria Azarenka became the first players to exceed $7\u00a0million in prize money in a single season. In 2013 Serena Williams went over the twelve million dollar mark, winning $12,385,572 in a single year.\nWTA rankings.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "57769", "revid": "8884025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57769", "title": "Clay County, Alabama", "text": "County in Alabama, United States\nClay County is a county in the east central part of the U.S. state of Alabama. As of the 2020 census the population was 14,236. Its county seat is Ashland. Its name is in honor of Henry Clay, famous American statesman, member of the United States Senate from Kentucky and United States Secretary of State in the 19th century. It was the last dry county in Alabama with no wet cities within its boundaries, until a vote on March 1, 2016, approved the sale of alcohol in Lineville and Ashland.\nHistory.\nClay County was established on December 7, 1866, from land taken from Randolph and Talladega counties. Named after the famous statesman Henry Clay, the county seat itself was named after his estate in Lexington, Kentucky called \"Ashland\". The county was covered with a heavy growth of trees, and a part of the territory was occupied by the Creek Indians. The early pioneers acquired the lands by government entry and the Indian lands by public auction. The families came wholly from Fayette County, Georgia. Clay County was formed for geographic reasons. The citizens of the area had a difficult time reaching the county seat of Wedowee in Randolph County because of the Tallapoosa River to the east. Talladega was difficult to reach because of the intervening mountains. Even today, Clay County is one of only three counties in Alabama to have no U.S. highways in its boundaries. Ashland was a mining center, particularly for graphite.\nDuring the Desert Shield/Storm conflict, Clay County had more soldiers serving per capita than any other county in the United States.&lt;ref name=\"Ashland/Clay County, Alabama\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;\nGeography.\nAccording to the United States Census Bureau, the county has a total area of , of which is land and (0.3%) is water.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\n2020 Census.\nAs of the 2020 United States census, there were 14,236 people, 5,198 households, and 3,704 families residing in the county.\n2010 census.\nAs of the census of 2010, there were 13,932 people, 5,670 households, and 3,978 families residing in the county. The population density was . There were 6,776 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the county was 81.7% White (non-Hispanic), 14.8% Black or African American, 0.4% Native American, 0.2% Asian, 0.0% Pacific Islander, 1.2% from other races, and 1.7% from two or more races. 2.9% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.\n2000 census.\nAs of the census of 2000, there were 14,254 people, 5,765 households, and 4,098 families residing in the county. The population density was . There were 6,612 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the county was 77.62% White (non-Hispanic), 19.70% Black or African American, 0.32% Native American, 0.10% Asian, 0.02% Pacific Islander, 0.46% from other races, and 0.79% from two or more races. 4.77% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.\nThere were 5,670 households, out of which 27.1% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 52.7% were married couples living together, 12.8% had a female householder with no husband present, and 29.8% were non-families. 27.2% of all households were made up of individuals, and 11.8% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.41 and the average family size was 2.92.\nIn the county, the population was spread out, with 22.6% under the age of 18, 7.8% from 18 to 24, 23.8% from 25 to 44, 28.3% from 45 to 64, and 17.6% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 42 years. For every 100 females, there were 96.3 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 96.4 males.\nThe median income for a household in the county was $35,595, and the median income for a family was $43,392. Males had a median income of $32,382 versus $30,000 for females. The per capita income for the county was $18,332. About 18.5% of families and 18.8% of the population were below the poverty line, including 21.1% of those under age 18 and 15.4% of those age 65 or over.\nEducation.\nClay County contains one public school district. There are approximately 1,800 students in public PK-12 schools in Clay County.\nDistricts.\nSchool districts include:\nGovernment.\nClay County is governed by a five-member Board of Commissioners: Commissioner Morrison, Commissioner Harris, Commissioner Denny, Commissioner Milstead and Commissioner Burney. \nWithin Clay County are two principal cities, Ashland and Lineville. The mayor of Ashland is Larry J. Fetner who works closely with five community members that run the city government, they are Billy Joe Smith for District 1, Bobbie Steed for District 2 he is also Mayor Pro Tem, Kim M. Cain for District 3, Annette F. Gaither for District 4, Tommy Cantrell for District 5.\nThe second and smaller of the two cities is Lineville. The mayor is Roy Adamson and is also run by a five-member board. City Council members being as follows: Carolyn Smith for District 1, David Proctor for District 2, Joseph Appleby for District 3, Robert Milstead for District 4 and Johnny Appleby for District 5.\nLegislators for the county are Rep. Richard Laird for State of Alabama House, District 37. Sen. Gerald Dial State of Alabama Senate, District 13. The U.S. Representatives are Rep. Mike Rogers (R-AL), 3rd District, Sen. Tommy Tuberville and Sen. Katie Britt.\nClay County is reliably Republican at the presidential level. The last Democrat to win the county in a presidential election is Jimmy Carter, who won it by a plurality in 1980, even as he narrowly lost the state of Alabama to Ronald Reagan.\nPlaces of interest.\nClay County is home to parts of Cheaha State Park in the Talladega National Forest and Lake Wedowee on the eastern boundary. Outdoor adventures abound in Clay County and the surrounding area. The Pinhoti Trail system weaves its way through the Talladega National Forest to Mt. Cheaha, the highest point in Alabama. Hikers along the trail may spy some of the local wildlife, including whitetail deer, wild turkey, and the rare bald eagle.\nHome of Doc Hilt Trails for Off-Highway Vehicles. On May 5, 2010, Doc Hilt Trails was awarded the distinction of being a \"National Recreation Trail\". One of only two private motorized parks in the nation to ever be awarded the NRT designation.\nClay County has two sites listed on the National Register of Historic Places, the Hugo Black House (destroyed, but still listed) and the Clay County Courthouse.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n "}
{"id": "57770", "revid": "13892963", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57770", "title": "Clay County, Florida", "text": "County in Florida, United States\nClay County is a county located in the northeastern part of the U.S. state of Florida along the west bank of the St. Johns River. As of 2020, the population was 218,245 and in 2023, that number increased to 232,439, making it the third largest county in the Jacksonville metropolitan area. While most of the county is unincorporated, there are 4 municipalities with Green Cove Springs being the county seat and the unincorporated Lakeside CDP being the largest place. It is named in honor of Henry Clay, a famous American statesman, member of the United States Senate from Kentucky, and United States Secretary of State in the 19th century.\nSince 1990, Clay County has transformed into a largely suburban county with the third highest household median income in Florida behind neighboring St. Johns County and Santa Rosa County. This transformation has come as workers from Jacksonville, and to a smaller extent other nearby cities such as St. Augustine and Gainesville, have moved into newly built residential subdivisions. Over half of workers living in Clay County work in another county, which is the highest rate of any county in Florida. As such, the county has the third highest average commute time in the state at almost 33 minutes. With the population expected to surpass 300,000 residents by 2040, projects such as the First Coast Expressway are being constructed to alleviate chronic congestion on major roadways in the county such as Blanding Blvd and U.S. 17.\nClay County is known for its rich military history with major current and former installations such as Branan Air Field, Naval Air Station Green Cove Springs, and Camp Blanding all being located in the county. The county also attracts many tourists due to its abundance of natural water features. Many notable lakes such as Kingsley Lake, Lake Asbury, Doctors Lake, Lake Geneva, and Lake Brooklyn are all located in the county. Black Creek begins at the St. Johns River just north of Green Cove Springs and runs through the central portion of the county.\nHistory.\nEarly history.\nThe surrounding region was part of St. Johns culture, an early archaeological culture that spanned from 500 BC until the 17th Century, with the arrival of European explorers. At the time of first contact by French Huguenot explorer Ren\u00e9 Goulaine de Laudonni\u00e8re, the region was inhabited by the Agua Dulce people under the Timucua chiefdom of Utina. With the arrival of the Spanish colonists to St. Augustine in the East, the wars and skirmishes with the rival tribes to the north and west, and the defeat of the Huguenots at Fort Caroline by the newly arrived Spanish, the Utina chiefdom collapsed and the surviving natives fled South, leaving the area virtually uninhabited until the late 18th Century with attempts to resettle the area by the Spanish in the newly reclaimed Spanish East Florida.\nIn 1803, Zephaniah Kingsley, purchased the site of Laurel Grove (later rebuilt into the Town of Orange Park) to establish a plantation for planting oranges, and coffee, and for trading slaves. In 1816, George J. F. Clarke purchased land to build a sawmill on the site that grew into the city of Green Cove Springs. During the Patriot War, Laurel Grove was seized by the insurgents, forcing Kingsley to flee, but not before razing the plantation in order to keep it out of rebel hands.\nAfter the war ended and the eventual annexation of Spanish East Florida to the United States, the area saw an influx of tourists and settlers.\nEstablishment of Clay County.\nClay County was created on December 31, 1858, from a section of Duval County. The area was once a popular destination for tourists because of its springs and mild climate. Steamboats brought them to various hotels in Green Cove Springs, such as the St. Elmo, Clarendon, and Oakland. President Grover Cleveland was the most prominent of such tourists and had spring water shipped to the White House. Clay County's popularity among tourists peaked during the last three decades of the 19th century. Tourism later waned because of Henry Flagler's extension of the Florida East Coast Railway to other destinations such as Palm Beach and Miami.\nThe military has also played an important role in Clay County history. In 1939, Camp Blanding opened on Kingsley Lake in southwest Clay County. The Florida National Guard developed this complex. During World War II, it trained over 90,000 troops and became the fourth-largest \"city\" in the state. In Green Cove Springs, Lee Field was a flight training center. After World War II, Lee Field became a base for the mothball fleet. Although Lee Field closed in the early 1960s, Camp Blanding continues to operate today as a base for military training. Clay County is also a popular choice of residence for military personnel stationed on bases in nearby Duval County (NAS Jacksonville, NS Mayport, and, before it closed, NAS Cecil Field).\nGeography.\nAccording to the U.S. Census Bureau, the county has a total area of , of which are land and (6.1%) are covered by water.\nThe average elevation in Clay County is 95 feet above sea level with the highest point, located on the western border in Camp Blanding, being 259 feet. The southwestern portion of the county features many lakes which contribute to the Floridan Aquifer and are an important source of water for the surrounding region. During the 2000s, high growth rates in Northeast Florida caused many of the lakes to dry up as demand for water increased. To combat this, a project began in August 2022 to construct a pipeline from Black Creek in the central part of the county to Alligator Creek in Keystone Heights. This pipeline is expected to restore the water levels in the lakes to their former high points.\nClay County is home to Goldhead Branch State Park, Belmore State Forest, and Jennings State Forest. These protected areas provide critical habitat to many native species of plants and animals, as well as provide a buffer around Camp Blanding from surrounding development.\nTransportation.\nMajor highways.\nBefore the opening of the first segment of the First Coast Expressway in 2019, Clay County was the largest county in Florida without a limited-access highway. Once complete, this project will connect Interstate 10 in Jacksonville with Interstate 95 in St. Johns County and will result in the replacement of the current Shands Bridge with a new, expanded bridge.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\n2022 Census Estimates.\nAccording to 2022 census estimates, Clay County's population increased to 226,589. This increase was fueled exclusively by in-migration to the county. In all, 9,101 people have moved to Clay County since 2020 with over 95% of that growth coming from domestic migration.\nSince 2020, the county has experienced 5,643 deaths compared to 4,846 births resulting in a natural change of -797. This has corresponded with an increase in the median age to 40.5 years.\n2020 Census.\nAs of the 2020 United States census, there were 218,245 people, 75,360 households, and 57,587 families residing in the county. Hispanic or Latino residents comprised 10.6% of the population or 23,134 individuals. Among those not Hispanic or Latino, 159,922 (73.3%) were White alone or in combination, 29,317 (13.4%) were Black alone or in combination, 9,510 (4.4%) were Asian alone or in combination, 4,855 (2.2%) were American Indian or Alaska Native alone or in combination, and 3,234 (1.5%) were some other race alone or in combination.\nThere were 85,049 housing units of which 78,939 (92.8%) were occupied.\n2021 American Community Survey.\nAccording to the 2021 ACS, the median age in Clay County was 40.9 years. 25.6% of residents were 0\u201319 years, 11.4% were 20\u201329, 13% were 30\u201339, 13.3% were 40\u201349, 14.1% were 50\u201359, and 22.6% were 60 years and over.\nThere were 80,459 households in the county, of which 31.9% had children under 18 living with them, 54.6% were married couples living together, and 38.3% were individual householders with no spouse or partner present. The average household size was 2.75 and the average family size was 3.15.\nThe median income for a household in the county was $76,679, and the median income for a family was $85,196. Males had a median income of $47,393 versus $35,103 for females. The per capita income was $33,364. About 7.1% of the population were below the poverty line including 13.5% of those under age 18 and 6% of those age 65 and over.\nThe ten largest reported ancestry groups in the county were Irish (11.7%), English (11.6%), German (10.7%), American (4.7%), Italian (3.5%), Scottish (3.1%), French (2.2%), Polish (1.9%), European (1.5%), and Scotch-Irish (1.1%).\n45% of residents were born in Florida and 46% were born in another state. The majority of in-migration comes from other Southern states and the Northeast. There is a growing community of Puerto Ricans in Clay County, with the number of residents born on the island numbering 3,590.\nClay County has the second highest percentage of Filipino immigrants in Florida, after neighboring Duval County, with 1.1% of residents hailing from the Philippines. In total, 6.1% of residents were foreign-born with over 68% being naturalized citizens and the majority entering the United States prior to 2010. \nGovernment.\nClay County's large population in unincorporated areas is served by the Clay County Sheriff's Office and Clay County Fire &amp; Rescue. The current Sheriff, Michelle Cook (R), was elected in 2020.\nBoard of County Commissioners.\nClay County's government is led by a five-member Board of County Commissioners, each elected from a single-member district. The county commission appoints a County Manager as chief administrative officer of the county. Howard Wannamaker currently serves as the County Manager. The current office holders are:\nAs of 2025, all elected County Commissioners are registered Republicans.\nFederal Representation.\nAll of Clay County is located in Florida's 4th Congressional District of the U.S. House of Representatives. The current representative is Aaron Bean (R).\nState Representation.\nClay County is located in Florida's 6th Senate District represented by Republican Jennifer Bradley. In the Florida House of Representatives, District 11 is located entirely within the northern portion of the county and is represented by Republican Sam Garrison. Florida House District 20 covers the central and southern parts of the county and is represented by Republican Bobby Payne.\nPolitics.\nVoter registration.\nAccording to the Florida Department of State, Republicans account for a majority of registered voters in Clay County.\nStatewide elections.\nPolitically, Clay County is one of the most reliably Republican counties in the state during presidential elections outside of the Panhandle. It last supported a Democrat for president in 1960, and Jimmy Carter is the last Democrat to manage even 40 percent of the county's vote. However, conservative Democrats continued to hold most state and local offices well into the 1980s.\nEducation.\nThe Clay County School District operates 42 public schools, with currently 28 elementary schools, five junior high schools, six high schools, and one junior/senior high school.\nAs of the 2021-22 school year, the school district received an \"A\" grade from the Florida Department of Education and was ranked the tenth top school district in the state. In 2023, U.S. News and World Report ranked Fleming Island High School the top high school in Clay County and 91st in Florida.\nLibraries.\nThe Clay County Public Library System consists of five branches:\nThe first public library in Clay County was made up of a small collection established by the Village Improvement Association within the county. Other small libraries were established by other organizations within Clay County. In 1961, representatives from different women's organizations in the county started a movement to establish a library system within the county, and resulted in the Clay County Board of County Commissioners beginning to set aside funds to create the county library system. Due to their efforts, the first public library in Clay County was opened in 1961 in Green Cove Springs. The Green Cove Springs Library purchased a bookmobile in 1962 and began to provide outreach services to different areas within Clay County that same year. In 1962 two more public libraries opened in Clay County, the Keystone Heights Library and the Orange Park Library. A fire destroyed the Keystone Heights Library in February 1962. The Keystone Heights Library was relocated to a new building in Theme Park in 1964. The Headquarters Library in Green Cove Springs became open to the public in 1970 after a population boom caused the need for a new library. In 1976, the Orange Park Library moved to a larger location within the town of Orange Park. The population growth experienced in the county during the late 1970s necessitated the development of the Middleburg-Clay Hill Library, which first opened in a storefront in the late 1970s. The permanent facility for this library was completed and opened to the public in 1986.\nCommunities.\nCensus-designated places.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nOther unincorporated communities.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "57771", "revid": "14596827", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57771", "title": "Clay County, Illinois", "text": "County in Illinois, United States\nClay County is a county in the southeastern portion of the U.S. state of Illinois. As of the 2020 United States census, the population was 13,288. Since 1842, its county seat has been Louisville, in the center of the county's area. In 1950, the U.S. Census Bureau placed the mean center of U.S. population in Clay County.\nHistory.\nThe future Clay County had been inhabited for thousands of years by the Illiniwek Indians (the remains of an Indian village's burial ground are still visible west of Ingraham). White explorers used or cleared a trail between the future settlements of Saint Louis in Missouri, to Vincennes in Indiana; this became a mail route in 1805. The first white settler (McCauley, from Kentucky) built a cabin in 1809 near this road at its intersection with a trail from Vandalia to Mt. Carmel. He was driven out by the Indians, but had returned by 1819, by which time other cabins had been constructed in the area, which was originally called Habbardsville. The Indians were removed from the area in 1828.\nClay County was authorized by act of the state legislature on December 23, 1824, by partitioning portions of Wayne, Crawford, and Fayette counties. It was named for American statesman Henry Clay, a member of the United States Senate from Kentucky and United States Secretary of State. Clay was a candidate for president in 1824.\nThe first appointed commissioners met on March 8, 1825, to organize the county government. Land for county building purposes was donated near Habbardsville. The commissioners accepted the offer, renamed it Maysville, and had a two-room courthouse erected on the property by the end of the year. The seat remained at that location (about a mile south of the present community of Clay City) through 1841, and in 1842 the county government began functioning in Louisville, being at the center of the county's area.\nThe first railroad line through Clay County was laid between 1850 and 1854, the Ohio and Mississippi Line. By 1855\u201356, the Illinois Central Railroad had also been constructed across the northwest corner of the county.\nGeography.\nThe low rolling hills of Clay County are devoted to agricultural production. The various drainage areas are still largely wooded. The Little Wabash River flows southeastward through the center of the county, while Muddy Creek drains the eastern portion (the meanders of Little Muddy delineate a portion of the county's east border with Richland County). Buck Creek, in the south part of the county, flows eastward and joins the Little Wabash above Clay City. Raccoon Creek flows southeastward from the lower part of the county into Wayne County. The highest point on the terrain ( ASL) is a small point along the western border with Marion County.\nThe county produced excellent timber during the nineteenth century, and some sandstone and limestone. The soil is light and not considered adapted to farming on a large scale.\nAccording to the U.S. Census Bureau, the county has a total area of , of which is land and (0.3%) is water.\nAdjacent counties.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nCommunities.\nVillages.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nUnincorporated communities.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nTownships.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nClimate and weather.\nIn recent years, average temperatures in the county seat of Louisville have ranged from a low of in January to a high of in July, although a record low of was recorded in January 1904 and a record high of was recorded in July 1936. Average monthly precipitation ranged from in February to in June.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Stack/styles.css\"/&gt;\n2010 census.\nAs of the 2010 United States census, there were 13,815 people, 5,697 households, and 3,790 families in the county. The population density was . There were 6,404 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the county was 97.7% white, 0.5% Asian, 0.3% black or African American, 0.2% American Indian, 0.5% from other races, and 0.8% from two or more races. Those of Hispanic or Latino origin made up 1.1% of the population. In terms of ancestry, 21.7% were German, 14.6% were American, 12.6% were Irish, and 8.6% were English.\nOf the 5,697 households, 29.5% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 52.1% were married couples living together, 9.4% had a female householder with no husband present, 33.5% were non-families, and 28.9% of all households were made up of individuals. The average household size was 2.37 and the average family size was 2.89. The median age was 42.2 years.\nThe median income for a household in the county was $38,016 and the median income for a family was $48,659. Males had a median income of $38,191 versus $27,347 for females. The per capita income for the county was $20,802. About 11.2% of families and 16.3% of the population were below the poverty line, including 21.4% of those under age 18 and 14.7% of those age 65 or over.\nEducation.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nPolitics.\nAs part of Upland Southern-settled Southern Illinois, Clay County is powerfully Republican. No Democratic presidential nominee has won a majority in Clay County since Lyndon Johnson\u2019s 1964 landslide, and typically for the region recent presidential elections have seen dramatic declines in Democratic support.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "57772", "revid": "49089944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57772", "title": "Clay County, Kansas", "text": "County in Kansas, United States\nClay County is a county located in the U.S. state of Kansas. Its county seat and most populous city is Clay Center. As of the 2020 United States census, the county population was 8,117. The county was named for Henry Clay, an influential U.S. Senator from Kentucky.\nHistory.\nEarly history.\nFor many millennia, the Great Plains of North America were inhabited by nomadic Native Americans. From the 16th century to 18th century, the Kingdom of France claimed ownership of large parts of North America. In 1762, after the French and Indian War, France secretly ceded New France to Spain, per the Treaty of Fontainebleau.\n19th century.\nIn 1802, Spain returned most of the land to France, but keeping title to about 7,500 square miles. In 1803, most of the land for modern day Kansas was acquired by the United States from France as part of the 828,000 square mile Louisiana Purchase for 2.83 cents per acre.\nIn 1854, the Kansas Territory was organized, then in 1861 Kansas became the 34th U.S. state. In 1857, Clay County was established.\nWhen the first counties were created by the Kansas legislature in 1855, the territory within the present limits of the county was attached to Riley County for all revenue and judicial purposes. Subsequently, Clay was attached to Geary County. In 1857, Clay was created and named in honor of the famous American statesman Henry Clay, a member of the United States Senate from Kentucky and United States Secretary of State in the 19th century.\nIn 1887, the Atchison, Topeka and Santa Fe Railway built a branch line from Neva (3 miles west of Strong City) to Superior, Nebraska. This branch line connected Strong City, Neva, Rockland, Diamond Springs, Burdick, Lost Springs, Jacobs, Hope, Navarre, Enterprise, Abilene, Talmage, Manchester, Longford, Oak Hill, Miltonvale, Aurora, Huscher, Concordia, Kackley, Courtland, Webber, Superior. At some point, the line from Neva to Lost Springs was pulled, but the right of way has not been abandoned. This branch line was originally called \"Strong City and Superior line\" but later the name was shortened to the \"Strong City line\". In 1996, the Atchison, Topeka and Santa Fe Railway merged with Burlington Northern Railroad and renamed to the current BNSF Railway. Most locals still refer to this railroad as the \"Santa Fe\".\n21st century.\nIn 2010, the Keystone-Cushing Pipeline (Phase II) was constructed north to south through Clay County, with much controversy over tax exemption and environmental concerns (if a leak ever occurs). A pumping station named Riley was built along the pipeline.\nGeography.\nAccording to the U.S. Census Bureau, the county has a total area of , of which is land and (1.6%) is water.\nMajor highways.\nSources: National Atlas, U.S. Census Bureau\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAs of the 2000 census, there were 8,822 people, 3,617 households, and 2,517 families residing in the county. The population density was . There were 4,084 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the county was 97.72% White, 0.57% Black or African American, 0.41% Native American, 0.15% Asian, 0.26% from other races, and 0.90% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino people of any race were 0.83% of the population.\nThere were 3,617 households, out of which 30.50% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 59.90% were married couples living together, 6.10% had a female householder with no husband present, and 30.40% were non-families. 27.70% of all households were made up of individuals, and 15.40% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.39 and the average family size was 2.91.\nIn the county, the population was spread out, with 24.90% under the age of 18, 6.70% from 18 to 24, 23.90% from 25 to 44, 23.70% from 45 to 64, and 20.80% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 41 years. For every 100 females there were 99.10 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 95.60 males.\nThe median income for a household in the county was $33,965, and the median income for a family was $41,103. Males had a median income of $28,817 versus $17,760 for females. The per capita income for the county was $17,939. About 6.80% of families and 10.10% of the population were below the poverty line, including 14.60% of those under age 18 and 8.60% of those age 65 or over.\nGovernment.\nPresidential elections.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Hidden begin/styles.css\"/&gt;Presidential election results\nLike all of Kansas outside the eastern cities, Clay County is overwhelmingly Republican. When Lyndon B. Johnson became in 1964 the last Democrat to carry the state's electoral votes, Clay County was his weakest in the state, giving over 62 percent of its votes to Barry Goldwater. The solitary Democrat to win a majority of Clay County's votes has been William Jennings Bryan in 1896, although Woodrow Wilson in a four-way race in 1912, and Franklin D. Roosevelt in 1932 both obtained slim pluralities. Roosevelt in 1936, when he lost to Kansan Alf Landon by eighty-four votes, remains the last Democrat to win forty percent of the county's vote, and Jimmy Carter in 1976 is the last to pass thirty percent.\nEducation.\nUnified school districts that serve portions of the county include:\nCommunities.\nList of townships / incorporated cities / unincorporated communities / extinct former communities within Clay County.\nCities.\n\u2021 means a community has portions in an adjacent county.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nUnincorporated communities.\n\u2020 means a community is designated a Census-Designated Place (CDP) by the United States Census Bureau.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nGhost towns.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nTownships.\nClay County is divided into eighteen townships. The city of Clay Center is considered \"governmentally independent\" and is excluded from the census figures for the townships. In the following table, the population center is the largest city (or cities) included in that township's population total, if it is of a significant size.\n\"See List of people from Clay County, Kansas\"\nNotable people.\nTwo former Kansas Governors resided in Clay County. George Docking was the 35th Governor, serving from January 14, 1957, until January 9, 1961. William H. Avery was the 37th Governor, from January 11, 1965, until January 9, 1967.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "57773", "revid": "20957809", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57773", "title": "Clay County, Indiana", "text": "County in Indiana, United States\nClay County is a county located in the U.S. state of Indiana. As of 2020, the population was 26,466. The county seat is Brazil. Clay County is included in the Terre Haute, Indiana, Metropolitan Statistical Area.\nHistory.\nThe Indiana Legislature mandated Clay County in 1825, with territory partitioned from Owen, Putnam, Sullivan, and Vigo counties. Its name honors Henry Clay, a famous antebellum American statesman.\nThe first Courthouse was built in the newly platted town of Bowling Green in 1828. It was a two-story structure of hand-hewn logs.\nBy the late 1830s Clay County had grown to the extent that the first Courthouse could no longer provide adequate facilities. Therefore, a second Courthouse was constructed near the first Courthouse. This two-story brick structure served until destroyed by fire on November 30, 1851.\nBy the 1860s the towns of Harmony, Knightsville, and Brazil were growing rapidly, due in part to their location along the National Road, and also because of the many coal companies in that area. An effort to move the county seat of government to a more central location, which had begun in the 1850s, grew stronger creating controversy among citizens. In the 1860s citizens in the northern section of Clay County became more organized in their efforts. In 1871 brothers Robert and John Stewart donated land along the National Road in Brazil for a new courthouse. $5,300 was also raised by citizens in the area to entice the commissioners to move the seat of government from Bowling Green to Brazil. This amount was reportedly the value of the existing courthouse and grounds, thus defusing opponents' argument that abandoning the present courthouse would be a waste of taxpayers money. The relocation efforts, which began in 1871, were challenged in the Supreme Court. The relocation was finally granted in 1876.\nIn 1912 John W. Gaddis, a prominent architect in Vincennes, Indiana, entered into a contract with the County Commissioners to design, plan, and oversee the construction of a new courthouse. The construction bid of W.H. Bailey and Charles A. Koemer of Louisville, Kentucky was accepted in 1912 with the cornerstone being laid in the fall of 1912. Gaddis had completed several others: in Fairfield and Robinson, Illinois: Perryville, Missouri and two in Indiana, the Putnam County Courthouse in Greencastle (1905) and the Huntington County Courthouse (1906) in Huntington, which are also in Classical Revival mode.\nThe Clay County Courthouse, built in 1913\u20131914, is one of the most historically and architecturally significant buildings in Brazil and Clay County, Indiana. Built in Classical Revival style of architecture, it is the only building in Clay County holding county government offices and records. It is also located alongside the famed National Road (Cumberland Trail). The present building is the fifth Clay County Courthouse.\nGeography.\nAccording to the 2010 census, the county has a total area of , of which (or 99.23%) is land and (or 0.77%) is water.\nCommunities.\nTowns.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nUnincorporated communities.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nTownships.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAdjacent counties.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nEducation.\nThe county has two high schools: Northview High School (grades 9\u201312) and Clay City High School (grades 7\u201312). There are 7 elementary schools: Van Buren Elementary, Jackson Township Elementary, Staunton Elementary, Meridian Street Elementary, Forest Park Elementary, East Side Elementary and Clay City Elementary. The Clay Community School Corporation is located in Brazil.\nTransportation.\nAirport.\nThe county contains one public-use airport: Brazil Clay County Airport (0I2), serving Brazil, Indiana.\nClimate and weather.\nIn recent years, average temperatures in Brazil have ranged from a low of in January to a high of in July, although a record low of was recorded in January 1994 and a record high of was recorded in July 1936. Average monthly precipitation ranged from in February to in July.\nGovernment.\nThe county government is a constitutional body, and is granted specific powers by the Constitution of Indiana, and by the Indiana Code.\nCounty Council: The county council is the legislative branch of the county government and controls all the spending and revenue collection in the county. Representatives are elected to four-year terms from county districts. They are responsible for setting salaries, the annual budget, and special spending. The council also has limited authority to impose local taxes, in the form of an income and property tax that is subject to state level approval, excise taxes, and service taxes.\nBoard of Commissioners: The Board of Commissioners serves as the county's executive body. The commissioners are elected county-wide to staggered four-year terms. The Board executes acts of the County Council, collects revenue, and runs the day-to-day functions of the county government.\nCourt: Clay County is served by two state-level trial courts: the Clay Circuit Court and the Clay Superior Court. Each court is overseen by an elected judge, whose term of office is six years. There are no term limits for Circuit or Superior Court judges in Indiana. The Clay Circuit Court has primary jurisdiction over juvenile and probate matters, and the Clay Superior Court has primary jurisdiction over misdemeanor and traffic offences. The courts share concurrent jurisdiction over felony criminal matters and civil cases. circuit court.\nCounty Officials: The county has several other elected offices, including sheriff, coroner, auditor, treasurer, recorder, surveyor, and circuit court clerk. Each of these elected officers serves a term of four years and oversees a different part of county government. Members elected to county government positions are required to declare a party affiliation and to be residents of the county.\nClay County is part of Indiana's 8th congressional district; Indiana Senate districts 38 and 39; and Indiana House of Representatives districts 42, 44 and 46.\nClay County tends to vote Republican. Since 1888, county voters have chosen the Republican Party nominee in 73% (24 of 34) of the elections through 2024.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAs of the 2010 United States census, there were 26,890 people, 10,447 households, and 7,454 families in the county. The population density was . There were 11,703 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the county was 97.8% white, 0.3% black or African American, 0.2% Asian, 0.2% American Indian, 0.5% from other races, and 0.9% from two or more races. Those of Hispanic or Latino origin made up 1.1% of the population. In terms of ancestry, 29.2% were German, 20.2% were American, 12.8% were Irish, and 11.0% were English.\nOf the 10,447\u00a0households, 33.4% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 55.9% were married couples living together, 10.7% had a female householder with no husband present, 28.6% were non-families, and 24.0% of all households were made up of individuals. The average household size was 2.54 and the average family size was 2.99. The median age was 39.9 years.\nThe median income for a household in the county was $47,697 and the median income for a family was $52,907. Males had a median income of $40,671 versus $31,331 for females. The per capita income for the county was $20,569. About 9.0% of families and 12.5% of the population were below the poverty line, including 21.9% of those under age 18 and 6.7% of those age 65 or over.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "57774", "revid": "49089944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57774", "title": "Clay County, Minnesota", "text": "County in Minnesota, United States\nClay County is a county in the U.S. state of Minnesota. As of the 2020 census, the population was 65,318, and was estimated to be 66,848 in 2024, Its county seat is Moorhead.\nClay County is part of the Fargo, ND-MN Metropolitan Statistical Area.\nHistory.\nBreckenridge County was created on March 18, 1858. Clay County was established on November 2, 1860 as Breckinridge County and named for John C. Breckinridge, vice president of the United States from 1857 to 1861. After the Civil War began, Breckinridge joined the Confederate Army and in March 1862 the state Legislature replaced the name of Breckinridge with that of Henry Clay (1777\u20131852), who like Breckinridge was from Lexington, Ky., and was known \"The Great Pacificator\" or \"The Great Compromiser\" who helped head off civil war at least twice. The county's government was not organized until 1872, after the Northern Pacific Railway reached the area and settlement accelerated.\nGeography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Stack/styles.css\"/&gt;\nClay County lies on the western side of Minnesota. Its western boundary line abuts the eastern boundary line of the state of North Dakota (across the Red River). The Red River flows northward along the western boundary line of the county, on its way to the Hudson Bay in Canada. The Buffalo River flows west-northwesterly through the center of the county, joined by the South Branch Buffalo River west of Glyndon, before discharging into the Red on the county's western border near Georgetown. The terrain consists of rolling hills, dotted with lakes and ponds in its eastern portion. The terrain slopes to the west and north, with its highest point near the southeastern corner, at ASL.\nAccording to the United States Census Bureau, the county has a total area of , of which is land and (0.71%) is water. It is the 19th largest county in Minnesota by total area.\nMajor highways.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAdjacent counties.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nProtected areas.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nClimate and weather.\nIn recent years, average temperatures in the county seat of Moorhead have ranged from a low of in January to a high of in July, although a record low of was recorded in January 1887 and a record high of was recorded in July 1936, the latter also the highest recorded temperature in the history of Minnesota. Average monthly precipitation ranged from in February to in June.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAs of the third quarter of 2024, the median home value in Clay County was $281,040.\nAs of the 2023 American Community Survey, there are 25,939 estimated households in Clay County with an average of 2.41 persons per household. The county has a median household income of $77,664. Approximately 13.1% of the county's population lives at or below the poverty line. Clay County has an estimated 70.5% employment rate, with 39.0% of the population holding a bachelor's degree or higher and 95.0% holding a high school diploma.\nThe median age in the county was 34.1 years.\nClay County, Minnesota \u2013 racial and ethnic composition&lt;br&gt;\n2023 estimate.\nAs of the 2023 estimate, there were 66,258 people and 25,939 households residing in the county. There were 27,851 housing units. The racial makeup of the county was 87.9% White \"(84.0% NH White)\", 5.7% African American, 2.0% Native American, 1.4% Asian, 0.1% Pacific Islander, _% from some other races and 2.9% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino people of any race were 5.1% of the population.\nIn the 2023 estimate, Clay County is the 68th wealthiest county in Minnesota. $53,925 for per capita income.\n2020 Census.\nAs of the 2020 census, there were 65,318 people, 24,931 households, and 15,694 families residing in the county. The population density was . There were 26,844 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the county was 84.89% White, 4.88% African American, 1.76% Native American, 1.20% Asian, 0.03% Pacific Islander, 1.33% from some other races and 5.91% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino people of any race were 4.61% of the population.\n2010 census.\nAs of the 2010 census, there were 58,999 people, 22,279 households, and _ families residing in the county. The population density was . There were 23,959 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the county was 92.69% White, 1.43% African American, 1.36% Native American, 1.43% Asian, 0.04% Pacific Islander, 0.89% from some other races and 2.16% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino people of any race were 3.48% of the population.\n2000 census.\nAs of the 2000 census, there were 51,229 people, 18,670 households, and 12,340 families residing in the county. The population density was . There were 19,746 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the county was 93.99% White, 0.52% African American, 1.44% Native American, 0.88% Asian, 0.03% Pacific Islander, 1.67% from some other races and 1.47% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino people of any race were 3.65% of the population.\nIn terms of ancestry, 40.4% were of Norwegian and 26.8% German.\nThere were 18,670 households, out of which 33.80% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 53.90% were married couples living together, 8.80% had a female householder with no husband present, and 33.90% were non-families. 26.10% of all households were made up of individuals, and 10.60% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.53 and the average family size was 3.07.\nThe county population contained 25.00% under the age of 18, 17.10% from 18 to 24, 25.70% from 25 to 44, 19.30% from 45 to 64, and 12.90% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 32 years. For every 100 females, there were 93.70 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 89.10 males.\nThe median income for a household in the county was $37,889, and the median income for a family was $49,192. Males had a median income of $34,176 versus $23,149 for females. The per capita income for the county was $17,557. About 7.40% of families and 13.20% of the population were below the poverty line, including 13.30% of those under age 18 and 7.50% of those age 65 or over.\nGovernment and politics.\nIn national elections, Clay County has been a Democrat-leaning swing county for several decades. From 1992 to 2020, it voted for the winner of the presidential election. Since 1928, the only years in which Clay did not go for the election winner were 1960, 1968, 1988 and 2024. The presence of college town Moorhead and proximity to Fargo, North Dakota makes the county more liberal than others in western Minnesota.\nCommunities.\nCities.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nUnincorporated communities.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nTownships.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "57775", "revid": "49089944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57775", "title": "Clay County, Mississippi", "text": "County in Mississippi, United States\nClay County is a county in the U.S. state of Mississippi. As of the 2020 United States census, the population was 18,636. Its county seat is West Point. Its name is in honor of American statesman Henry Clay, member of the United States Senate from Kentucky and United States Secretary of State in the 19th century. J. Wesley Caradine, an African American, was the first state representative for Clay County after it was established in 1871. The federal government formerly designated Clay County as the West Point Micropolitan Statistical Area, but the county lost that status in 2013. It is part of the Golden Triangle region of the state.\nGeography.\nAccording to the U.S. Census Bureau, the county has a total area of , of which is land and (1.4%) is water.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\n2020 census.\nAs of the 2020 United States census, there were 18,636 people, 7,618 households, and 4,841 families residing in the county.\n2010 census.\nAs of the 2010 United States census, there were 20,634 people living in the county. 58.2% were Black or African American, 40.5% White, 0.2% Asian, 0.1% Native American, 0.3% of some other race and 0.6% of two or more races. 1.0% were Hispanic or Latino (of any race).\n2000 census.\nAs of the census of 2000, there were 21,979 people, 8,152 households, and 5,885 families living in the county. The population density was . There were 8,810 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the county was 56.33% Black or African American, 42.82% White, 0.05% Native American, 0.16% Asian, 0.01% Pacific Islander, 0.21% from other races, and 0.42% from two or more races. 0.86% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.\nAccording to the census of 2000, the largest ancestry groups in Clay County were African 56.3%, English 35% and Scots-Irish 4.5%.\nThere were 8,152 households, out of which 35.70% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 45.80% were married couples living together, 22.40% had a female householder with no husband present, and 27.80% were non-families. 25.50% of all households were made up of individuals, and 11.00% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.64 and the average family size was 3.19.\nIn the county, the population was spread out, with 28.80% under the age of 18, 10.40% from 18 to 24, 26.50% from 25 to 44, 21.10% from 45 to 64, and 13.10% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 34 years. For every 100 females there were 89.10 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 83.60 males.\nThe median income for a household in the county was $27,372, and the median income for a family was $35,461. Males had a median income of $30,038 versus $19,473 for females. The per capita income for the county was $14,512. About 19.20% of families and 23.50% of the population were below the poverty line, including 34.20% of those under age 18 and 21.90% of those age 65 or over.\nLaw enforcement.\nClay County has a sheriff law enforcement system.\nEducation.\nClay County is within the service area of the East Mississippi Community College system.\nCommunities.\nUnincorporated communities.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nPolitics.\nClay County is a Democratic stronghold, owing to its high African-American population. It last supported a Republican candidate in 1984, when it was narrowly won by Ronald Reagan."}
{"id": "57776", "revid": "13892963", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57776", "title": "Clay County, Missouri", "text": "County in Missouri, United States\nClay County is located in the U.S. state of Missouri and is part of the Kansas City metropolitan area. As of the 2020 census, the county had a population of 253,335, making it the fifth-most populous county in Missouri. Its county seat is Liberty. The county was organized January 2, 1822, and named in honor of U.S. Representative Henry Clay from Kentucky, later a member of the United States Senate and United States Secretary of State. Clay County contains many of the area's northern suburbs, along with a portion of the city of Kansas City, Missouri. It also owns and operates the Midwest National Air Center in Excelsior Springs.\nHistory.\nClay County was settled primarily from migrants from the Upper Southern states of Kentucky, Tennessee, and Virginia. They brought slaves and slaveholding traditions with them, and quickly started cultivating crops similar to those in Middle Tennessee and Kentucky: hemp and tobacco. Clay was one of several counties settled mostly by Southerners to the north and south of the Missouri River. Given their culture and traditions, this area became known as Little Dixie. In 1860, enslaved persons made up 25% or more of the county's population.\nThe 1828 execution of Annice, a slave owned by Jeremiah Prior, was the first to occur in Clay County. She was also the first female slave executed in the state of Missouri.\nMany members of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints found refuge in Clay County in November 1833 after they were driven from Jackson County, Missouri. In 1836, mobs and the Missouri State militia viciously drove the members of the church from the county. Leaders of this church, most notably Joseph Smith, were imprisoned for some months in Clay County in the jail at Liberty. In May 2012, the LDS Church built the Kansas City Missouri Temple six miles southwest of the Liberty Jail site at 7001 Searcy Creek Parkway in Kansas City, Missouri.\nGeography.\nAccording to the U.S. Census Bureau, the county has a total area of , of which is land and (2.8%) is covered by water. It is the fourth-smallest county in Missouri by area.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAs of the census of 2010, 221,939 people, 72,558 households, and 50,137 families resided in the county. The population density was . The 93,918 housing units averaged . The racial makeup of the county was 87.46% White, 5.18% Black or African American, 0.53% Native American, 2.05% Asian, 0.26% Pacific Islander, 1.77% from other races, and 2.75% from two or more races. About 5.90% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race. As of the census of 2000, 23.3% were of German, 14.5% American, 11.0% English, 10.8% Irish, and 5.6% Italian ancestry.\nOf the 72,558 households, 33.80% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 55.40% were married couples living together, 10.20% had a female householder with no husband present, and 30.90% were not families. About 25.20% of all households were made up of individuals, and 7.40% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.50 and the average family size was 3.00.\nIn the county, the population was distributed as 25.80% under the age of 18, 8.70% from 18 to 24, 32.30% from 25 to 44, 22.30% from 45 to 64, and 10.80% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 35 years. For every 100 females, there were 94.60 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 91.80 males.\nIn 2015 the median income for a household in Clay County was $62,099. The income per capita in Clay county was $29,793.\nIn 2010 the median income for a household in the county was $48,347, and for a family was $56,772. Males had a median income of $40,148 versus $27,681 for females. The per capita income for the county was $23,144. About 3.80% of families and 5.50% of the population were below the poverty line, including 6.40% of those under age 18 and 5.50% of those age 65 or over.\nRegistered voters number 151,042.\nEducation.\nSchool districts include:\nK-12:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nElementary-only district:\nCommunities.\nCities and towns.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nUnincorporated communities.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nPolitics.\nClay County, like the rest of Missouri, has swung to the Republican Party in the 21st century, though the margins have been very close. In 2000, Al Gore famously won the county by one vote. The county, holding Kansas City, is mainly suburban in culture and remains competitive. In 2016, Donald Trump won the county while Hillary Clinton failed to improve on Barack Obama's percentages with only 41% of the vote. Joe Biden, however, did improve on those margins, winning nearly 47% of the vote in 2020; Trump still carried the county by 4%.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "57778", "revid": "24841344", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57778", "title": "Clay County, Nebraska", "text": "County in Nebraska, United States\nClay County is a county in the U.S. state of Nebraska. As of the 2020 United States census, the population was 6,104. Its county seat is Clay Center. The county was formed in 1855, and was organized in 1871. It was named for Henry Clay, a member of the United States Senate from Kentucky, who went on to become United States Secretary of State. In the Nebraska license plate system, Clay County is represented by the prefix 30 (it had the 30th-largest number of vehicles registered in the county when the license plate system was established in 1922).\nGeography.\nAccording to the US Census Bureau, the county has an area of , of which is land and (0.2%) is water.\nMajor highways.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAdjacent counties.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nProtected areas.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAs of the 2000 United States census, there were 7,039 people, 2,756 households, and 1,981 families in the county. The population density was . There were 3,066 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the county was 97.57% White, 0.17% Black or African American, 0.31% Native American, 0.30% Asian, 1.24% from other races, and 0.41% from two or more races. 3.48% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race. 49.4% were of German, 7.2% English, 7.2% American, 5.4% Swedish and 5.3% Irish ancestry.\nThere were 2,756 households, out of which 32.90% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 63.70% were married couples living together, 5.50% had a female householder with no husband present, and 28.10% were non-families. 25.70% of all households were made up of individuals, and 13.10% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.52 and the average family size was 3.03.\nThe county population contained 27.30% under the age of 18, 5.90% from 18 to 24, 25.30% from 25 to 44, 23.60% from 45 to 64, and 18.00% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 40 years. For every 100 females, there were 95.10 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 95.00 males.\nThe median income for a household in the county was $34,259, and the median income for a family was $39,541. Males had a median income of $28,321 versus $19,870 for females. The per capita income for the county was $16,870. About 8.50% of families and 10.40% of the population were below the poverty line, including 13.40% of those under age 18 and 6.60% of those age 65 or over.\nCommunities.\nCities.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nVillages.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nTownships.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nPolitics.\nClay County voters are reliably Republican. In only one national election since 1936 has the county selected the Democratic Party candidate.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "57779", "revid": "46166101", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57779", "title": "Clay County, South Dakota", "text": "County in South Dakota, United States\nClay County is a county in the U.S. state of South Dakota. As of the 2020 census, the population was 14,967, and was estimated to be 15,245 in 2024. The county seat is Vermillion, which is also home to the University of South Dakota. The county is named for Henry Clay, American statesman, US Senator from Kentucky, and United States Secretary of State in the 19th century. Clay County comprises the Vermillion, SD Micropolitan Statistical Area, which is also included in the Sioux City-Vermillion, Iowa-SD-Nebraska Combined Statistical Area.\nHistory.\nThe future Clay County area was opened for legal settlement in 1859. In Autumn 1859, Ahira A. Partridge (who would become the first elected sheriff of the county) crossed the Missouri river into the Dakota territory, and became the first white man to settle, on 160 acres of land that now underlies Vermillion. In 1862 the county was formally organized. The Clay County Courthouse was built in 1912.\nClay County is the name of 17 other counties in the United States, most of them named for Henry Clay.\nGeography.\nClay County lies on the south line of South Dakota. The south boundary line of Clay County abuts the north line of the state of Nebraska (across the Missouri River). The Missouri River flows southeast along the south boundary line of Clay County. A small drainage creek flows into the county from Turner County, draining the central and eastern portions of the county and discharging into the river. Smaller drainages move water from the western county areas into the river. In addition to sloping into the drainage through the center of the county, the terrain generally slopes to the south. The area is largely devoted to agriculture.\nAccording to the United States Census Bureau, the county has a total area of , of which is land and (1.3%) is water. It is the 66th largest county in South Dakota by total area. It is the smallest county by area in South Dakota.\nAdjacent counties.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAs of the third quarter of 2024, the median home value in Clay County was $230,280.\nAs of the 2023 American Community Survey, there are 5,561 estimated households in Clay County with an average of 2.28 persons per household. The county has a median household income of $58,794. Approximately 17.5% of the county's population lives at or below the poverty line. Clay County has an estimated 66.6% employment rate, with 46.0% of the population holding a bachelor's degree or higher and 93.9% holding a high school diploma.\nThe top five reported ancestries (people were allowed to report up to two ancestries, thus the figures will generally add to more than 100%) were English (94.4%), Spanish (1.5%), Indo-European (1.3%), Asian and Pacific Islander (1.7%), and Other (1.0%).\nThe median age in the county was 24.5 years.\n2020 census.\nAs of the 2020 census, there were 14,967 people, 5,564 households, and 2,795 families residing in the county. The population density was . There were 6,180 housing units.\n2010 census.\nAs of the 2010 census, there were 13,864 people, 5,110 households, and 2,628 families in the county. The population density was . There were 5,639 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the county was 91.1% White, 3.1% American Indian, 1.7% Asian, 1.3% black or African American, 0.5% from other races, and 2.3% from two or more races. Those of Hispanic or Latino origin made up 2.0% of the population. In terms of ancestry, 43.9% were German, 16.4% were Norwegian, 15.8% were Irish, 8.7% were English, 5.4% were Swedish, and 1.8% were American.\nOf the 5,110 households, 24.7% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 40.9% were married couples living together, 7.3% had a female householder with no husband present, 48.6% were non-families, and 32.4% of all households were made up of individuals. The average household size was 2.28 and the average family size was 2.91. The median age was 25.0 years.\nThe median income for a household in the county was $37,198 and the median income for a family was $61,159. Males had a median income of $37,059 versus $28,016 for females. The per capita income for the county was $19,518. About 8.0% of families and 24.0% of the population were below the poverty line, including 13.6% of those under age 18 and 6.7% of those age 65 or over.\nRacial/ethnic makeup.\nThe racial makeup of the county was 92.78% White, 1.00% Black or African American, 2.66% Native American, 1.95% Asian, 0.01% Pacific Islander, 0.29% from other races, and 1.31% from two or more races. 0.89% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race. 32.0% were of German, 15.6% Norwegian, 9.9% Irish and 5.4% English ancestry.\nReligion.\nFrom 2000 Census data, over 50% consider themselves \"unclaimed\".\nCommunities.\nUnincorporated communities.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nTownships.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nPolitics.\nLargely due to the presence of the University of South Dakota, Clay County has consistently voted for Democratic Party candidates for president from 1988 onward, frequently by double digit margins. In 2000, 2016, 2020, and 2024, it was the only county in the Dakotas without a Native American majority to vote Democratic for president.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "57780", "revid": "8657507", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57780", "title": "Clay County, North Carolina", "text": "County in North Carolina, United States\nClay County is a county located in the far western part of U.S. state North Carolina. As of the 2020 census, the county population was 11,089. The county seat is Hayesville.\nHistory.\nEarly inhabitants.\nThe area that became Clay County has long been occupied by indigenous people. An earthwork platform mound was built around 1000 CE in modern-day Hayesville, likely by people of the South Appalachian Mississippian culture as the center of their village. The Cherokee Native Americans later constructed a town known as \"Quanassee\" at the site. Quanassee had several hundred residents by 1550. In 1716, South Carolina officials met with Cherokee leaders at Quanassee to gain the Cherokee's alliance in the Yamassee War. The next year South Carolina built a trading site in Quanassee to provide English goods in exchange for Cherokee commodities like deerskins. A Coosa (Creek) war party \"cut off\" Quanassee in 1725, wrecking the village and enslaving or killing most of its residents.\u00a0The village was briefly reestablished before the American Revolution; Rutherford expedition forces camped there in 1776.\nThe Unicoi Turnpike, a 1,000-year-old Native American trading route, ran through the site of Quanassee and modern-day Brasstown. In 1813, the trail was developed into a toll road from Tennessee to Georgia, creating the first highway through the area. Today Brasstown is the oldest continuous settlement in the county, having hosted residents since the establishment of the toll road.\nThe land which would become Clay County was claimed by Buncombe County in 1791, Haywood County by 1810, and Macon County in 1828. In the 1820s, Baptist missionaries visited Quanassee to preach to families living there. The first white settlers moved into what would become Clay County in the early 1830s. Migrants into the area were primarily of Scots-Irish descent, who had moved into the backcountry of the Appalachians from eastern areas. They moved south from Pennsylvania and Virginia after the American Revolution. Most became yeomen farmers and few owned slaves in the antebellum years. The first school in the area began operation in 1834. It was a tuition-based academy started by Leonard Butterfield on a farm near Hyatt's Creek. From 1836\u20131838, the state of North Carolina surveyed and subdivided land in the area to be sold. The parcels were put on public sale in Franklin in fall 1838.\nIn October 1837, Tennessee militia established Fort Hembree at present-day Hayesville to prepare for deporting the Cherokee people. Approximately 1,000 Cherokee were held prisoner there and removed from the area. The U.S. Military abandoned Fort Hembree in June 1838. In 1839, most of the area became part of Cherokee County, which was formed from western Macon County. Clay County's oldest remaining church, Hayesville Presbyterian Church, was built in 1848.\nCounty formation.\nIn the fall of 1860, George Hayes, who was running for state representative from Cherokee County, promised his constituents to introduce legislation to organize a new county in the region. That would bring business associated with a new county seat, and make government accessible to more people. In February 1861 the legislation was introduced and passed by the North Carolina General Assembly. Clay County was formed primarily from Cherokee County, however a small area was taken from Macon County; it was named for statesman Henry Clay, former Secretary of State and member of the United States Senate from Kentucky. In honor of Mr. Hayes, the legislature designated the new county seat as Hayesville. The town was incorporated on March 12, 1913.\nIn 1860 Fort Hembree was reactivated to train soldiers for the Civil War. Early county trials and the first county commissioners\u2019 meetings were held at the fort. It also contained a general store. Given the interruption of the war, Clay County lacked an organized, formal government until 1868. Hicksville Academy, which became Hayesville High School (today the county's only public high school), was founded in 1870. In the 1890s it was bought by Duke University and offered college courses.\nAfter the initial wood-frame county courthouse was destroyed by arson in 1870, the brick courthouse was constructed in 1888. It has been listed on the National Register of Historic Places. In mid-2007, courthouse operations moved to a new complex built west of the town square.\nThe first post office to open in what became Clay County began service January 8, 1844, at Fort Hembree. At its peak, Clay County boasted 17 post offices. By 1976 there were only three remaining, in Hayesville, Warne, and Brasstown.\nClay County\u2019s borders have expanded twice since its formation. In 1872, the county annexed Buck Creek and Black Mountain from Macon County. In 1874, the county added a part of the Brasstown Creek area extending to the Georgia state line.\nIn the late 1870s and early 1880s the Tusquittee Turnpike toll road operated from Clay County to the Nantahala River in Macon County. Tiger\u2019s Store is thought to be the oldest continuously operating business in Clay County. It was established around 1899 in Shooting Creek and moved to Hayesville around 1908. A ruby from Clay County is part of the Crown Jewels of the United Kingdom.\n20th century to present.\nClay County\u2019s two-story brick jail was built in 1912 to replace a log building. In 1972, shop class students from Hayesville High School constructed a replacement prison in downtown Hayesville. That was in use until 2008 when a new $4.3 million detention center opened at the judicial complex site. Today the brick jail is home to the Clay County Historical &amp; Arts Museum.\nClay County's first official bank opened on May 18, 1910. A creamery opened in Brasstown in 1924. Mission Dam was constructed on the western end of the county in 1924. Gold mines operated in Tusquittee, Warne and Brasstown around the 1930s. In the 1940s and 50s, Clay County\u2019s largest employers were band saw lumber mills. One of the county\u2019s only manufacturing companies, Lidseen of North Carolina, Inc., has operated a metal fabrication plant in Warne since 1957. Another manufacturing plant, American Components Incorporated, made a metal film resistor for the Saturn V rocket that carried Neil Armstrong to the moon. Clay County has also manufactured ladies\u2019 dresses, items for combat soldiers, and kitchen and bathroom fixtures.\nThe county\u2019s first electric power came from a small dam across Shooting Creek near the Elf community in January 1920. The Blue Ridge Electric Association of Young Harris, Georgia, took over providing electricity for all of Clay County in 1939. By 1950, every community in the county had electricity.\nThe first automobile came to Clay County in 1914. From the early 1900s until the 1930s, every male citizen of Clay County between the ages of 18 and 45 was required to work five days per year without pay to help maintain public roads. Construction on US 64 between Hayesville, Warne, and Brasstown started in 1921. In 1959 a new highway was built from Hayesville through Sweetwater to Peachtree to provide Clay County residents with faster access to Andrews' new District Memorial Hospital. The US 64 moniker moved to this new route and the former route became Old Hwy. 64. US 64 connected Hayesville to Franklin in the early 1930s. NC 69 was built between Hayesville and Georgia in 1922. The entire road had to be relocated when Chatuge Lake was created twenty years later.\nIn October 1920, Clay County\u2019s first and only railroad line, the Peavine, was completed between Hayesville and Andrews, where it connected with the Southern Railway. Cherokee and Clay counties each contributed $75,000 toward its construction. The Peavine hauled mainly lumber, but also kaolin mined in Clay County. The line was dismantled in 1951.\nA silent film theater opened in the county in the 1920s. A movie theater later operated in Hayesville from the 1940s to the 1960s. The county has not had a movie theater since. Clay County's public library was established by the 1930s. It began in a two-story building on Hayesville's town square and at some point moved to a small room in the courthouse. In 1940 it became part of Nantahala Regional Library system. Its first librarian, Ellen Scroggs, was hired in 1943. A new $80,000 library building opened downtown on June 25, 1967. It was named in honor of local-born Dr. Fred A. Moss, who gave $10,000 towards its construction and donated books. Today Moss Memorial Library is the only public library in Clay County.\nChatuge Dam was constructed near Hayesville in the early 1940s by the Tennessee Valley Authority, creating Chatuge Lake. At the time, Chatuge Dam was the highest earthen dam in the world until the Aswan Dam was constructed in Egypt in 1964. The dam was listed on the National Register of Historic Places in 2017.\nIn the 1950s, Clay County's official song was written. Willie Forrest Standridge wrote \"Clay County Song\" to the tune of Onward Christian Soldiers. The county's oldest nonprofit, Hinton Rural Life Center, began in 1957. A mission retreat operated by the United Methodist Church, it serves churches across nine southeastern states and is named for benefactor Harold H. Hinton. The Clay County Rescue Squad was organized in 1964. The county's first golf course opened in 1970. The Clay County Historical &amp; Arts Council was founded February 6, 1974. The Peacock Performing Arts Center, the only community theatre in far-west North Carolina, opened in Hayesville in 1986. The Clay County Chamber of Commerce began in 1986. Clay County's building inspections department started in 1987. The famed New Year's Eve \"Possum Drop\" was held annually in Brasstown between 1990 and 2018. The Clay County Food Pantry was founded in 1992. The Clay County Recreation Center was built in Hayesville in 2007 and expanded in 2013. In 2025, Amazon built a distribution center and warehouse in the county.\nSince the nineteenth century, Clay County has remained largely agricultural. Given its relative isolation, in the 21st century, residents continue to be overwhelmingly of European-American ancestry.\nGeography.\nAccording to the U.S. Census Bureau, the county has a total area of , of which is land and (2.63%) is water. It is the third-smallest county in North Carolina by land area and smallest by total area.\nClay County is bordered to the south by the state of Georgia and the Chattahoochee National Forest. The Nantahala River forms part of its northeastern border. The county is drained by the Hiwassee River. In the southern part of Clay County is Chatuge Lake, on the North Carolina\u2013Georgia border. Much of Clay County exists within the Nantahala National Forest. Fires Creek Bear Reserve is north of the township of Tusquittee and offers multiple hiking trails. The Appalachian Trail winds through southeast Clay County.\nBefore 1941 the U.S. government purchased most of Clay County\u2019s forest land to preserve it as National Forest Service property. The Forest Service oversees approximately 60 percent of Clay County\u2019s land. Of Clay County's 136,096 acres, 110,096 are forested lands, including 65,934 in the eastern part of the county owned and maintained by the federal government as part of Nantahala National Forest. As of 2024, 14,515 acres are devoted to agriculture, with a total of 178 farms. Clay County has a total of 11 dams listed on the National Inventory of Dams; six are classified as high-hazard, meaning a dam failure may be deadly.\nClimate.\nClay County has a humid subtropical climate, (\"Cfa\") according to the K\u00f6ppen classification, with hot, humid summers and mild, but occasionally cold winters by the standards of the southern United States.\nLike the rest of the southeastern U.S., Clay County receives abundant rainfall, which is relatively evenly distributed throughout the year. Average annual rainfall is . Blizzards are rare but possible; one nicknamed the Storm of the Century hit the entire Eastern United States in March 1993.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAs of 2024, Clay County has the third-oldest population of any county in North Carolina. The county's median age is 51.5, just behind Brunswick County and Cherokee County. The county's homeless population was 52 as of 2025. The county's jobless rate was 3.5 percent as of 2025.\nClay County has the fifth lowest gross domestic product in the state as of 2024. As of 2025, the county's median household income is $62,461, the median net worth is $244,790, and the county has 499 businesses.\n2020 census.\nAs of the 2020 census, there were 11,089 people, 4,996 households, and 3,424 families residing in the county.\n2000 census.\nAt the 2000 census, there were 8,775 people, 3,847 households, and 2,727 families residing in the county. The population density was . There were 5,425 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the county was 98.01% White, 0.80% Black or African American, 0.33% Native American, 0.09% Asian, 0.07% Pacific Islander, 0.15% from other races, and 0.56% from two or more races. 0.83% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.\nThere were 3,847 households, out of which 23.50% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 59.80% were married couples living together, 7.50% had a female householder with no husband present, and 29.10% were non-families. 26.30% of all households were made up of individuals, and 14.40% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.25 and the average family size was 2.68.\nIn the county, the population was spread out, with 18.60% under the age of 18, 6.20% from 18 to 24, 22.80% from 25 to 44, 29.80% from 45 to 64, and 22.70% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 47 years. For every 100 females there were 94.90 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 91.40 males.\nThe median income for a household in the county was $31,397, and the median income for a family was $38,264. Males had a median income of $29,677 versus $19,529 for females. The per capita income for the county was $18,221. About 7.80% of families and 11.40% of the population were below the poverty line, including 14.60% of those under age 18 and 13.00% of those age 65 or over.\nLaw, government, and politics.\nGovernment.\nThe Clay County government is a constitutional body and is granted specific powers by the Constitution of North Carolina, most of which are determined by the state's General Assembly. The county is governed by an elected five member four-year term Board of Commissioners. Clay County is a member of the regional Southwestern Commission Council of Governments. The county's annual operating budget is $27.6 million as of 2025.\nPolitics.\nIn the North Carolina Senate, Clay County is part of the 50th Senate district and is represented by Republican Jim Davis. In the North Carolina House of Representatives, Clay County is part of the 120th district, represented by Republican Kevin Corbin.\nNo Democratic presidential candidate has won Clay County since Jimmy Carter in 1976. Bill Clinton in 1996 was the last Democratic candidate to reach forty percent of the county's vote. Before the Progressive Era, Clay County was uniformly Democratic, but since Charles Evans Hughes became the first Republican to carry the county in 1916, it has voted for the GOP in all but five elections.\nLaw and public safety.\nThe Clay County sheriff's office is the sole policing agency for the county. The sheriff protects the court and county owned facilities, manages the jail, and provides patrol and detective services. The Clay County sheriff\u2019s office employed 22 officers and 15 detention officers as of 2025. The department\u2019s 2024-2025 budget is $3.77 million. The office fielded more than 8,000 service calls in 2024, including 212 motor vehicle accidents, 12 sexual assaults, and 59 calls for breaking and entering. The department conducted 728 vehicle stops that year. Clay County\u2019s detention center had 339 bookings in 2024.\nEducation.\nClay County Schools serves all of the county with about 1,200 students attending a total of 4 separate schools, located on a central campus in Hayesville. After county government, Clay County Schools is the largest employer in the county with a staff of 205 people. Hayesville High School serves grades 9\u201312. Around seven percent, or $2.1 million of Clay County's annual budget, goes to the Clay County Board of Education as of 2025.\nHigher education is offered nearby at Tri-County Community College, Young Harris College, and Western Carolina University.\nThe largest and oldest folk school in the United States, the John C. Campbell Folk School, is located in Brasstown, an unincorporated community that exists partly in Cherokee County and partly in Clay County. The school focuses on creative folk arts for all ages and offers community dance and concert entertainment.\nMedia.\nThe \"Clay County Progress\" is published weekly in Hayesville. It is the only newspaper in the county. Between 1902 and at least 1909 the community was served by the \"Clay County Courier\" newspaper. Between 1926 and 1943 the area was served by the \"Clay County News\". The \"Progress\" was founded in 1951 and faced competition from weekly newspaper \"The Smoky Mountain Sentinel\" between 1987 and 2012.\nCommunities.\nTownships.\nThe county is divided into six townships:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "57781", "revid": "46166101", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57781", "title": "Clay County, Texas", "text": "County in Texas, United States\nClay County is a county located in the U.S. state of Texas. As of the 2020 census, its population was 10,218. The county seat is Henrietta. The county was founded in 1857 and later organized in 1860. It is named in honor of Henry Clay, famous American statesman, Kentucky Senator and United States Secretary of State. Clay County is part of the Wichita Falls, Metropolitan Statistical Area in North Texas.\nThe Wichita Falls rancher, oilman, and philanthropist Joseph Sterling Bridwell owned a ranch in Clay County, among his multiple holdings.\nGeography.\nAccording to the U.S. Census Bureau, the county has a total area of , of which is land and (2.5%) is water.\nLake Arrowhead State Park, a development on Lake Arrowhead in Clay County, encompasses acres. The lakeshore extends 106 miles; the park offers bicycling, birding, boating, camping, canoeing, fishing, hiking, horseback riding, nature study, picnicking, swimming, and wildlife observation.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAs of the census of 2000, there were 11,006 people, 4,323 households, and 3,181 families residing in the county. The population density was . There were 4,992 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the county was 95.35% White, 0.42% Black or African American, 1.03% Native American, 0.10% Asian, 0.01% Pacific Islander, 1.68% from other races, and 1.42% from two or more races. 3.67% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race. At 89.4% of the county's population, Clay County has the highest percentage of Non-Hispanic Whites in the state of Texas.\nThere were 4,323 households, out of which 30.70% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 63.20% were married couples living together, 7.30% had a female householder with no husband present, and 26.40% were non-families. 23.50% of all households were made up of individuals, and 11.80% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.52 and the average family size was 2.98.\nIn the county, the population was spread out, with 24.90% under the age of 18, 6.80% from 18 to 24, 26.40% from 25 to 44, 25.90% from 45 to 64, and 16.10% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 40 years. For every 100 females, there were 94.00 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 93.10 males.\nThe median income for a household in the county was $35,738, and the median income for a family was $41,514. Males had a median income of $28,914 versus $20,975 for females. The per capita income for the county was $16,361. About 8.10% of families and 10.30% of the population were below the poverty line, including 11.70% of those under age 18 and 11.00% of those age 65 or over.\nCommunities.\nUnincorporated communities.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nPolitics.\nClay County is represented in the Texas House of Representatives by Republican James Frank, a businessman from Wichita Falls.\nPrior to 1996, Clay County was strongly Democratic in presidential elections. The only Republican Party candidates who managed to win the county from 1912 to 1992 were Herbert Hoover thanks to anti-Catholic sentiment towards Al Smith as well as Richard Nixon and Ronald Reagan in their 49-state landslides of 1972 &amp; 1984, respectively. Since 1996, the county has swung hard to supporting the Republican Party similar to almost all white-majority rural counties in the Solid South.\n!scope=\"col\" rowspan=\"2\"|Year\n!scope=\"col\" colspan=\"2\"|Republican\n!scope=\"col\" colspan=\"2\"|Democratic\n!scope=\"col\" colspan=\"2\"|Third party(ies)\n!!scope=\"col\"|No.\u202f !!scope=\"col\"|% !!scope=\"col\"|No.\u202f !!scope=\"col\"|% !!scope=\"col\"|No.\u202f !!scope=\"col\"|%\nEducation.\nSchool districts serving sections of the county include:\nThe county is in the service area of Vernon College.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "57783", "revid": "49089944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57783", "title": "Clay County, Tennessee", "text": "County in Tennessee, United States\nClay County is a county in the U.S. state of Tennessee. As of the 2020 United States census, the population was 7,581. Its county seat and only incorporated city is Celina. Clay County is named in honor of American statesman Henry Clay, member of the United States Senate from Kentucky and United States Secretary of State in the 19th century.\nHistory.\nClay County was formed in 1870 by combining pieces from surrounding Jackson and Overton counties. Secretary of State Cordell Hull's first law office (now a museum) was located in Clay County.\nClay County's early inhabitants farmed and worked the Cumberland River, which was the major method of transportation in the Cumberland area. There were many docks and ferry crossings throughout Clay County to transport local crops and livestock to major markets. The timber industry was a major employer throughout the 1800s and 1900s and provides many jobs today. Tobacco farming became important in the local area throughout the 1900s and many old tobacco barns are still standing. With the end of government subsidies and with foreign competition, tobacco farming is minimal. Cattle, poultry, and corn are the major agricultural influences today. Clay County is one of the top poultry-producing counties in Tennessee.\nDuring the Civil War, many skirmishes took place up and down the Cumberland River to control the movement of barges laden with supplies. Local communities were split in their loyalties, with many families at odds with each other. Some of these animosities remain today between family groups.\nThe city of Celina is at the junction of the Obey and Cumberland rivers, and it was a major port during the steamboat years between Nashville and Burnside, Kentucky. Although the Celina ferry landing no longer exists, Celina still connects the north and south by highway. Butler's Landing was used as a storage depot with large warehouses owned and operated by the Butler family. The first Clay County Court meeting was held in a store near the river at Butler's Landing on March 6, 1871. Butler's Landing nearly became the county seat, but Celina won the vote by a narrow margin.\nClay County's rural location has restricted development and attraction of business and industry. This has resulted in the county having one of the highest unemployment rates annually in the state of Tennessee. The lack of jobs often results in the loss of educated young people who have limited opportunities locally. SR 52 has been upgraded to a 4-lane divided highway as part of the Corridor J project, which connects to I-40 in Cookeville, and work continues on developing a new industrial park within the Celina city limits. It is hoped this industrial park will help attract more jobs to the county.\nGeography.\nAccording to the U.S. Census Bureau, the county has a total area of , of which is land and (8.8%) is water. The Cumberland River flows through the center of the county from north to south, fed by the Obey River which flows through the city of Celina from its impoundment at Dale Hollow Lake, inundates much of the eastern part of the county.\nUnlike most of Tennessee, a sizable part of northern Clay County is outside of the Sun Belt due to a past error surveying the northern border of Middle and East Tennessee. Celina in particular is north of the Sun Belt. The Sun Belt is defined by the Kinder Institute as being south of 36\u00b030'N latitude, which was intended to be the northern border of Tennessee and is the actual northern border of West Tennessee.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Stack/styles.css\"/&gt;\n2020 census.\nAs of the 2020 United States census, there were 7,581 people, 3,039 households, and 2,002 families residing in the county.\n2000 census.\nAs of the census of 2000, there were 7,976 people, 3,379 households, and 2,331 families residing in the county. The 2005 Census Estimate placed the population at 7,992. The population density was . There were 3,959 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the county was 92.75% White, 1.44% Black or African American, 0.33% Native American, 0.14% Asian, 0.11% Pacific Islander, 0.24% from other races, and 4.99% from two or more races. 1.35% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.\nThere were 3,379 households, out of which 27.70% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 54.70% were married couples living together, 9.70% had a female householder with no husband present, and 31.00% were non-families. 27.60% of all households were made up of individuals, and 12.00% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.33 and the average family size was 2.80.\nIn the county, the population was spread out, with 21.50% under the age of 18, 7.90% from 18 to 24, 27.40% from 25 to 44, 27.60% from 45 to 64, and 15.70% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 40 years. For every 100 females there were 94.60 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 95.00 males.\nThe median income for a household in the county was $23,958, and the median income for a family was $29,784. Males had a median income of $23,513 versus $16,219 for females. The per capita income for the county was $13,320. About 14.30% of families and 19.10% of the population were below the poverty line, including 23.40% of those under age 18 and 27.60% of those age 65 or over.\nCommunities.\nUnincorporated communities.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nPolitics.\nThough a traditionally Democratic county like most of Middle Tennessee, Clay County has historically been more competitive compared to other counties in the region such as Stewart County, with pockets of Southern Unionist sympathy having existed on the Highland Rim west of the Cumberland River even as the river valley and eastern part of the county supported the Confederacy enough to vote for secession by a wider margin than similarly-divided DeKalb County (where secession passed by the narrowest margin of any county that didn't vote to remain). The county voted for GOP candidates in 1920, 1960, 1968, 1972, 1984 and 1988, and Herbert Hoover in 1928, Ronald Reagan in 1980, and George W. Bush in 2004 all came within less than 2 percentage points of winning Clay County. Like almost all of Tennessee, however, the county has turned solidly Republican in the 2010s. The last time Democrats even came close to winning any part of Clay County in any statewide election(s) was 2018, when both Phil Bredesen and Karl Dean came within five percentage points of winning the Celina town limits (losing by 1.6% and 2.9% margins respectively) despite losing badly statewide. Even so, Celina itself has since been swept up in Clay County's hard rightward swing too, with Bill Lee doing better in Celina than statewide when he won re-election in 2022, a stark contrast from his anemic performance in 2018. In 2024, Donald Trump and Marsha Blackburn both got over 80% of the vote in Clay County overall, vastly outperforming even their previous margins; Clay County had one of the four biggest rightward swings/trends of any Tennessee county from the 2020 presidential election to 2024, being the only county in the state other than nearby Trousdale and rural Black Belt Lauderdale and Haywood Counties to trend more than 2.5% rightwards relative to the national popular vote between those two elections. Clay County native Trae Crowder attributed its powerful rightward swing every time Trump was on the ballot to Trump's economic populist messaging in 2016 and the county's lingering economic distress after abruptly losing many manufacturing jobs in the 1990s, with Crowder noting that Clay County voters were told what they wanted to hear in 2016 then became more \"dug in\" as reliably Republican voters in 2020 and 2024.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "57785", "revid": "422817", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57785", "title": "Clay County, West Virginia", "text": "County in West Virginia, United States\nClay County is a county in the U.S. state of West Virginia. As of the 2020 census, the population was 8,051. Its county seat is Clay. The county was founded in 1858 and named in honor of Henry Clay, famous American statesman, member of the United States Senate from Kentucky and United States Secretary of State in the 19th century. Clay County is part of the Charleston, WV Metropolitan Statistical Area.\nGeography.\nAccording to the United States Census Bureau, the county has a total area of , of which is land and (0.6%) is water.\nIn 1863, West Virginia's counties were divided into civil townships, with the intention of encouraging local government. This proved impractical in the heavily rural state, and in 1872 the townships were converted into magisterial districts. Clay County was divided into four districts: Buffalo, Henry, Pleasant, and Union. A fifth district, Otter, was created from part of Henry in 1876. Between 1990 and 2000, these districts were consolidated into Districts A, B, and C. The county has access to Interstate 79 at the Big Otter and Wallback exits. In 2025, the Mountain Transit Authority began providing public transportation services to Clay County.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\n2000 census.\nAs of the census of 2000, there were 10,330 people, 4,020 households, and 2,942 families living in the county. The population density was . There were 4,836 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the county was 98.22% White, 0.08% Black or African American, 0.71% Native American, 0.02% Asian, 0.09% from other races, and 0.89% from two or more races. 0.41% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.\nThere were 4,020 households, out of which 33.50% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 58.20% were married couples living together, 10.40% had a female householder with no husband present, and 26.80% were non-families. 24.30% of all households were made up of individuals, and 11.40% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.55 and the average family size was 3.01.\nIn the county, the population was spread out, with 25.60% under the age of 18, 9.00% from 18 to 24, 27.50% from 25 to 44, 24.20% from 45 to 64, and 13.70% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 37 years. For every 100 females, there were 97.90 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 97.30 males.\nThe median income for a household in the county was $22,120, and the median income for a family was $27,137. Males had a median income of $30,161 versus $16,642 for females. The per capita income for the county was $12,021. About 24.40% of families and 27.50% of the population were below the poverty line, including 37.00% of those under age 18 and 15.00% of those age 65 or over.\n2010 census.\nAs of the 2010 United States census, there were 9,386 people, 3,728 households, and 2,566 families living in the county. The population density was . There were 4,572 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the county was 98.8% white, 0.2% American Indian, 0.1% black or African American, 0.1% Asian, 0.1% from other races, and 0.8% from two or more races. Those of Hispanic or Latino origin made up 0.4% of the population. In terms of ancestry, 17.6% were Irish, 14.7% were English, 13.2% were German, 11.0% were American, and 5.0% were Dutch.\nOf the 3,728 households, 31.3% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 53.6% were married couples living together, 9.7% had a female householder with no husband present, 31.2% were non-families, and 26.2% of all households were made up of individuals. The average household size was 2.50 and the average family size was 3.00. The median age was 41.5 years.\nThe median income for a household in the county was $30,789 and the median income for a family was $40,634. Males had a median income of $42,269 versus $24,402 for females. The per capita income for the county was $16,205. About 22.4% of families and 23.7% of the population were below the poverty line, including 29.3% of those under age 18 and 21.1% of those age 65 or over.\nCommunities.\nUnincorporated communities.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nPolitics.\nLike most of West Virginia, Clay County was reliably Democratic throughout the 20th century, but it has shifted to being sharply Republican in recent years.\nIn popular culture.\nClay County is also the birthplace of the \"Golden Delicious\" Apple. The original tree was found on the Mullins' family farm in Clay County, West Virginia, United States and was locally known as Mullin's Yellow Seedling and Annit apple.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "57786", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57786", "title": "Stevedore's knot", "text": ""}
{"id": "57787", "revid": "1318464445", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57787", "title": "Clay County, Arkansas", "text": "County in Arkansas, United States\nClay County is a county located in the U.S. state of Arkansas. Originally incorporated as Clayton County, as of the 2020 United States census, its population was 14,552. The county has two county seats, Corning and Piggott. It is a dry county, in which the sale of alcoholic beverages is restricted or prohibited.\nHistory.\nWhen Clay County was created as Arkansas's 67th county on 24 March 1873 (along with Baxter County), it was named Clayton County after John M. Clayton, then a member of the Arkansas Senate and a brother of then-U.S. Senator Powell Clayton, though some sources suggest it may have been named for Powell Clayton instead.\nTwo years later on 6 December 1875, the county's name was shortened to \"Clay\" by the Arkansas General Assembly. Some claim it was renamed for the statesman Henry Clay, while others say John M. Clayton remained its official namesake. The name change apparently was inspired by lingering distrust of Powell Clayton, as he had declared martial law and suspended elections in the county in 1868 when he was Governor of Arkansas and it was still part of Greene County.\nThe first county seat was Corning, established in 1873, with the arrival of the St. Louis, Iron Mountain and Southern Railway, as the first incorporated town in the county. The county seat was moved to Boydsville in 1877, in what was known as \"Old Bradshaw Field\", because people living east of the Black and Cache Rivers had difficulty getting to Corning during the flood season. However, this caused problems for those living west of the rivers, and in 1881 Corning was re-established as the seat of the Western District, with Boydsville remaining the seat for the Eastern District. With the arrival of the St. Louis, Arkansas and Texas Railroad in 1882, other towns such as Greenway, Rector and Piggott experienced growth. In 1887, the Eastern District seat was moved to Piggott, and the dual county seat system remains in place today. Important county functions (such as the Quorum Court) alternate between Piggott and Corning as their venues.\nIn the early 20th century, Clay, Greene, and Craighead counties had sundown town policies forbidding African Americans from living in the area.\nOn 6 April 1972, Sheriff http:// and deputies https:// and http:// were shot and killed while trying to respond to a domestic disturbance call on Bert Grissom. Grissom opened fire as soon as the men stepped out of their car. He later surrendered without resistance to another deputy, and was tried, convicted, and sentenced to life in prison. http:// became sheriff, but he died in an automobile accident on 8 June 1973. Four of the five police officers who have lost their lives serving the Clay County Sheriff's Office died in these two incidents.\nGeography.\nAccording to the U.S. Census Bureau, the county has a total area of , of which is land and (0.3%) is water.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\n2020 census.\nAs of the 2020 United States census, there were 14,552 people, 6,444 households, and 4,140 families residing in the county.\n2000 census.\nAs of the 2000 census, there were 17,609 people, 7,417 households, and 5,073 families residing in the county. The population density was . There were 8,498 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the county was 98.1% White, 0.2% Black or African American, 0.7% Native American, 0.1% Asian, 0.2% from other races, and 0.1% from two or more races. 0.8% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.\nThere were 7,417 households, out of which 28.3% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 56.6% were married couples living together, 8.6% had a female householder with no husband present, and 31.6% were non-families. 28.4% of all households were made up of individuals, and 16.7% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.35 and the average family size was 2.87.\nIn the county, the population was spread out, with 23.1% under the age of 18, 7.7% from 18 to 24, 25.3% from 25 to 44, 24.6% from 45 to 64, and 19.4% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 40 years. For every 100 females there were 93.5 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 88.3 males.\nThe median income for a household in the county was $25,345, and the median income for a family was $32,558. Males had a median income of $24,375 versus $17,146 for females. The per capita income for the county was $14,512. About 13.4% of families and 17.5% of the population were below the poverty line, including 21.2% of those under age 18 and 22.7% of those age 65 or over.\nGovernment.\nCounty Government.\nThe county government is a constitutional body granted specific powers by the Constitution of Arkansas and the Arkansas Code. The quorum court is the legislative branch of the county government and controls all spending and revenue collection. Representatives are called justices of the peace and are elected from county districts every even-numbered year. The number of districts in a county vary from nine to fifteen, and district boundaries are drawn by the county election commission. The Clay County Quorum Court has nine members. Presiding over quorum court meetings is the county judge, who serves as the chief executive officer of the county. The county judge is elected at-large and does not vote in quorum court business, although capable of vetoing quorum court decisions.\nDistrict Judge: David Copelin\nThe composition of the Quorum Court after the 2024 elections is 7 Republicans and 2 Democrats. Justices of the Peace (members) of the Quorum Court following the elections are:\nAdditionally, the townships of Clay County are entitled to elect their own respective constables, as set forth by the Constitution of Arkansas. Constables are largely of historical significance as they were used to keep the peace in rural areas when travel was more difficult. The township constables as of the 2024 elections are:\nPolitics.\nWhile Clay County was once a Democratic stronghold, in recent decades it has swung hard towards the Republicans. The county voted Democratic in every presidential election from Reconstruction until 1960 with comfortable margins. It shifted back and forth during the latter part of the 20th century, with four Republican wins in 1960, 1968, 1972, and 1984. Since 1992, however, the county has shifted to the right in every presidential election. Flipping red in 2004, each successive Republican has garnered a greater share of the vote, culminating in Donald Trump's nearly 80% win in 2024, the highest share ever for a Republican candidate.\nEconomy.\nAgriculture is the cornerstone of Clay County's economy. Farmers throughout the county grow a wide variety of crops. Rice is the dominant crop, but significant amounts of cotton, soybeans, corn, hay, and milo are also grown. Industry is limited to a handful of factories located in the cities of Piggott, Corning, and Rector.\nEducation.\nPublic education of elementary and secondary school students is provided by:\nCommunities.\nCities.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nTownships.\nTownships in Arkansas are the divisions of a county. Each township includes unincorporated areas; some may have incorporated cities or towns within part of their boundaries. Arkansas townships have limited purposes in modern times. However, the United States census does list Arkansas population based on townships (sometimes referred to as \"county subdivisions\" or \"minor civil divisions\"). Townships are also of value for historical purposes in terms of genealogical research. Each town or city is within one or more townships in an Arkansas county based on census maps and publications. The townships of Clay County are listed below; listed in parentheses are the cities, towns, and/or census-designated places that are fully or partially inside the township.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "57788", "revid": "49089944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57788", "title": "Clay County, Iowa", "text": "County in Iowa, United States\nClay County is a county located in the U.S. state of Iowa. As of the 2020 United States census, the population was 16,384. Its county seat is Spencer. Its name is in honor of Henry Clay Jr., a colonel who died in action in the Mexican\u2013American War, and son of Henry Clay, famous American statesman from Kentucky. Clay County comprises the Spencer, IA Micropolitan Statistical Area. Clay County holds the annual Clay County Fair. The first newspaper in Clay County was the \"Peterson Patriot\" which started publication in 1880.\nGeography.\nAccording to the U.S. Census Bureau, the county has a total area of , of which is land and (0.9%) is water. Clay County is home to the large Barringer Slough wetland.\nAirport.\nThe Spencer Municipal Airport is located northwest of the business district of Spencer. It provides service to the county and surrounding communities.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\n2020 census.\nThe 2020 census recorded a population of 16,384 in the county, with a population density of . 96.20% of the population reported being of one race. There were 8,109 housing units of which 7,222 were occupied.\n2010 census.\nThe 2010 census recorded a population of 16,667 in the county, with a population density of . There were 8,062 housing units, of which 7,282 were occupied.\n2000 census.\nAs of the census of 2000, there were 17,372 people, 7,259 households, and 4,776 families residing in the county. The population density was . There were 7,828 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the county was 98.08% White, 0.17% Black or African American, 0.10% Native American, 0.82% Asian, 0.03% Pacific Islander, 0.25% from other races, and 0.55% from two or more races. 1.13% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.\nThere were 7,259 households, out of which 30.70% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 55.60% were married couples living together, 6.80% had a female householder with no husband present, and 34.20% were non-families. 29.80% of all households were made up of individuals, and 13.70% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.35 and the average family size was 2.92.\nIn the county, the population was spread out, with 24.70% under the age of 18, 8.00% from 18 to 24, 26.90% from 25 to 44, 22.50% from 45 to 64, and 18.00% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 39 years. For every 100 females, there were 93.30 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 90.90 males.\nThe median income for a household in the county was $35,799, and the median income for a family was $42,769. Males had a median income of $30,163 versus $21,068 for females. The per capita income for the county was $19,451. About 6.30% of families and 8.20% of the population were below the poverty line, including 11.10% of those under age 18 and 8.10% of those age 65 or over.\nEconomy.\nThe county has been based on farming. The 1980s farm crisis caused some families to have to give up their farms, and farms have been merged to industrial scale. The population has declined since 1980. \nAt one point Great Lakes Airlines was headquartered in Summit Township, Clay County.\nCommunities.\nCities.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nTownships.\nClay County is divided into these townships:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nPopulation ranking.\nThe population ranking of the following table is based on the 2020 United States census of Clay County.\n\u2020 \"county seat\"\nPolitics.\nFor most of its history, Clay County has primarily voted for Republican party candidates in presidential elections. Exceptions to this include Bull Moose candidate &amp; former president Theodore Roosevelt winning a majority in 1912, the longest Democratic streak in its history when Franklin D. Roosevelt &amp; Harry S. Truman were on the ballot from 1932 to 1948, Lyndon B. Johnson winning in a landslide statewide &amp; nationally in 1964, Michael Dukakis getting a huge boost statewide thanks to the Midwest farm crisis in 1988, &amp; Bill Clinton benefiting from Ross Perot gaining significant minorities of the county's vote in 1992 &amp; 1996. The level of Republican support has increased significantly in recent years, with Hillary Clinton posting the worst performance since 1952 when Adlai Stevenson won an identical percentage of the county's votes at 26.1%.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "57789", "revid": "46166101", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57789", "title": "Clay County, Kentucky", "text": "County in Kentucky, United States\nClay County is a county located in the U.S. state of Kentucky. As of the 2020 census, the county population was 20,345. Clay County is included in the Corbin, Kentucky micropolitan area.\n. Its county seat is Manchester. The county was formed in 1807 and named in honor of Green Clay (1757\u20131826). Clay was a member of the Virginia and Kentucky State legislatures, first cousin once removed of Henry Clay, U.S. Senator from Kentucky and Secretary of State in the 19th century.\nHistory.\nClay County was established in 1807 from land given by Floyd, Knox and Madison counties. The courthouse burned in January 1936.\nGeography.\nAccording to the United States Census Bureau, the county has a total area of , of which is land and (0.4%) is water.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAs of the census of 2010, there were 21,730 people, 8,556 households, and 6,442 families residing in the county. The population density was . There were 9,439 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the county was 93.9% White, 4.8% Black or African American, 0.2% Native American, 0.1% Asian, &lt;0.1% Pacific Islander, 0.2% from other races, and 0.7% from two or more races. 1.4% of the population were Hispanics or Latinos of any race.\nThere were 8,556 households, out of which 36.9% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 58.6% were married couples living together, 12.4% had a female householder with no husband present, and 24.7% were non-families. 22.5% of all households were made up of individuals, and 9.0% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.62 and the average family size was 3.06.\nThe age distribution was 25.4% under the age of 18, 9.2% from 18 to 24, 32.6% from 25 to 44, 22.5% from 45 to 64, and 10.3% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 35 years. For every 100 females, there were 111.7 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 112.6 males.\nThe median income for a household in the county was $16,271, and the median income for a family was $18,925. Males had a median income of $24,164 versus $17,816 for females. The per capita income for the county was $9,716. About 35.4% of families and 39.7% of the population were below the poverty line, including 47.6% of those under the age of 18 and 31.3% of those age 65 or over.\nThe county's per-capita income and median household income make it one of the poorest counties in the United States. Among counties whose population contains a non-Hispanic white majority, Clay County was once the poorest by per-capita income and second to another county in the same Kentucky region, Owsley County, by median household income. However, in recent years the economic status of Clay County, Kentucky has improved relative to other lower income counties.\nCommunities.\nUnincorporated towns and villages.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nPost offices.\nMany former post offices were, and some current ones are, located along the waterways, which are paralleled by modern roads.\nArrows denote renamings.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nOther places.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThere are also places named in early censuses, some still identifiable today: Ammie, Ashers Fork, Creekville, Deer Lick, Felty, Gardner, Jacks Creek, McWhorter, Portersburg, Queendale, Shepherdtown, Sidell, Spring Creek, Teges, and Trixie.\nPolitics.\nClay County has been rock-ribbed Republican since the Civil War, having last voted for a Democratic nominee for president in 1860 when it supported Kentucky native and Southern Democrat John C. Breckinridge. In the last one hundred years the only Republicans to receive less than sixty percent were Bob Dole, who still won the county by nearly 25 percent, and Barry Goldwater, who held the county by seventy-five votes amidst a Democratic landslide in 1964. In 2008 John McCain received 77.5% of the vote, and in 2024 three time GOP nominee Donald Trump received nearly 90% of Clay's vote, which was the highest total in the county's history.\nHealth.\nIn July 2010, \"The Washington Post\" named Clay County the unhealthiest county in Kentucky, and one of the unhealthiest in the nation. Clay County also featured prominently in a June 2014 article in \"The New York Times\" about the difficulty of living in poverty in eastern Kentucky, ranking last in overall ratings for counties in the United States. The factors which accounted for Clay county's low ranking were unemployment, prevalence of disabilities, obesity, income, and education. The \"Times\" declared Clay County the \"hardest place to live in the U.S.\"\nLife expectancy.\nOf 3,142 counties in the United States in 2014, Clay County ranked 3,137 in the longevity of female residents and 3,109 in the longevity of male residents. Males in Clay County lived an average of 68.6 years and females lived an average of 73.6 years compared to the national average for longevity of 76.5 for males and 81.2 for females. Moreover, the average longevity in Clay County declined by 0.4 years for males and 3.4 years for females between 1985 and 2014 compared to a national average for the same period of an increased life span of 5.5 years for men and 3.1 years for women. High rates of smoking and obesity and a low level of physical activity appear to be contributing factors to the lowered longevity for both sexes.\nEducation.\nThere is one school district in the county, Clay County School District.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "57790", "revid": "46166101", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57790", "title": "Clay County, Georgia", "text": "County in Georgia, United States\nClay County is a county located in the southwestern part of the U.S. state of Georgia. As of the 2020 United States census, the population was 2,848, making it the third-least populous county in Georgia. The county seat is Fort Gaines.\nHistory.\nThis area was historically occupied by the Creek Indians until Indian Removal in the 1830s. European Americans pushed them out and developed the land for cotton, bringing in thousands of African slaves to work the land.\nThe county is named in honor of Henry Clay, famous American statesman, member of the United States Senate from Kentucky and United States Secretary of State in the 19th century. Part of the Black Belt geological formation of Georgia, prior to the American Civil War the county's chief commodity crop was cotton, cultivated and processed by farmers and African-American slaves. After the war, the economy continued to be agricultural, but timber was also harvested.\nClay was created by a February 16, 1854, act of the Georgia General Assembly, and organized from portions of Early and Randolph counties.\nClay County's population is one-third of what it was in 1910.\nGeography.\nAccording to the U.S. Census Bureau, the county has a total area of , of which is land and (10.1%) is water.\nThe central and southwestern portions of Clay County, from west of Bluffton to northwest of Coleman, are located in the Lower Chattahoochee River sub-basin of the ACF River Basin (Apalachicola-Chattahoochee-Flint River Basin). The county's northwestern corner, which is bisected by State Route 39 running north from Fort Gaines, is located in the Middle Chattahoochee River-Walter F. George Lake sub-basin of the same ACF River Basin. Just the very southeastern corner of Clay County is located in the Spring Creek sub-basin of the same larger ACF River Basin.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAs of the 2020 United States census, there were 2,848 people, 1,242 households, and 708 families residing in the county.\n2010 census.\nAs of the 2010 United States census, there were 3,183\u00a0people, 1,331\u00a0households, and 869\u00a0families living in the county. The population density was . There were 2,102 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the county was 60.4% black or African American, 37.6% white, 0.3% Asian, 0.3% American Indian, 0.1% from other races, and 1.2% from two or more races. Those of Hispanic or Latino origin made up 0.8% of the population. In terms of ancestry, and 3.3% were American.\nOf the 1,331\u00a0households, 27.3% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 37.5% were married couples living together, 22.8% had a female householder with no husband present, 34.7% were non-families, and 31.6% of all households were made up of individuals. The average household size was 2.35 and the average family size was 2.93. The median age was 45.8 years.\nThe median income for a household in the county was $26,250 and the median income for a family was $31,354. Males had a median income of $29,440 versus $23,816 for females. The per capita income for the county was $13,353. About 25.5% of families and 34.2% of the population were below the poverty line, including 56.7% of those under age 18 and 16.0% of those age 65 or over.\n2000 census.\nAs of the census of 2000, there were 3,357 people, 1,347 households, and 928 families living in the county. The population density was . There were 1,925 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the county was 60.47% Black or African American, 38.43% White, 0.12% Native American, 0.27% Asian, 0.06% Pacific Islander, and 0.66% from two or more races. 0.95% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.\nThere were 1,347 households, out of which 25.70% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 40.70% were married couples living together, 23.40% had a female householder with no husband present, and 31.10% were non-families. 27.80% of all households were made up of individuals, and 13.20% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.45 and the average family size was 2.99.\nIn the county, the population was spread out, with 25.70% under the age of 18, 8.00% from 18 to 24, 21.00% from 25 to 44, 25.70% from 45 to 64, and 19.50% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 42 years. For every 100 females there were 83.30 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 78.50 males.\nThe median income for a household in the county was $21,448, and the median income for a family was $27,837. Males had a median income of $26,557 versus $17,083 for females. The per capita income for the county was $16,819. About 28.10% of families and 31.30% of the population were below the poverty line, including 43.40% of those under age 18 and 23.90% of those age 65 or over.\nPolitics.\nClay County was one of the most consistently voting Democratic counties in the country. It voted for the Democratic nominee in every election from 1868 until 1960, and then again since 1976. In the 2022 Georgia state elections, however, Clay County voted for every Republican candidate except Herschel Walker. This has resulted in the county becoming a swing county. In 2024, Donald Trump lost the county by less than 8 points, the closest a Republican presidential candidate has come to carrying the county since Richard Nixon won it in his 1972 landslide.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "57794", "revid": "3125232", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57794", "title": "Fractal antenna", "text": "Antenna with a fractal shape\nA fractal antenna is an antenna that uses a fractal, self-similar design to maximize the effective length, or increase the perimeter (on inside sections or the outer structure), of material that can receive or transmit electromagnetic radiation within a given total surface area or volume.\nSuch fractal antennas are also referred to as multilevel and space filling curves, but the key aspect lies in their repetition of a motif over two or more scale sizes, or \"iterations\". For this reason, fractal antennas are very compact, multiband or wideband, and have useful applications in cellular telephone and microwave communications.\nA fractal antenna's response differs markedly from traditional antenna designs, in that it is capable of operating with good-to-excellent performance at many different frequencies simultaneously. Normally, standard antennas have to be \"cut\" for the frequency for which they are to be used\u2014and thus the standard antennas only work well at that frequency.\nIn addition, the fractal nature of the antenna shrinks its size, without the use of any extra components such as inductors or capacitors.\nLog-periodic antennas.\nLog-periodic antennas are arrays invented in 1952 and commonly seen as TV antennas. This was long before Mandelbrot coined the word \"fractal\" in 1975. Some authors (for instance Cohen) consider log-periodic antennas to be an early form of fractal antenna due to their infinite self similarity at all scales. However, they have a finite length even in the theoretical limit with an infinite number of elements and therefore do not have a fractal dimension that exceeds their topological dimension \u2013 which is one way of defining fractals. More typically, (for instance Pandey) authors treat them as a separate but related class of antenna.\nPerformance.\nAntenna elements (as opposed to antenna arrays, which are usually not included as fractal antennas) made from self-similar shapes were first created by Nathan Cohen then a professor at Boston University, starting in 1988. Cohen's efforts with a variety of fractal antenna designs were first published in 1995, which marked the inaugural scientific publication on fractal antennas.\nMany fractal element antennas use the fractal structure as a virtual combination of capacitors and inductors. This makes the antenna so that it has many different resonances, which can be chosen and adjusted by choosing the proper fractal design. This complexity arises because the current on the structure has a complex arrangement caused by the inductance and self capacitance. In general, although their effective electrical length is longer, the fractal element antennas are themselves physically smaller, again due to this reactive loading.\nThus, fractal element antennas are shrunken compared to conventional designs and do not need additional components, assuming the structure happens to have the desired resonant input impedance. In general, the fractal dimension of a fractal antenna is a poor predictor of its performance and application. Not all fractal antennas work well for a given application or set of applications. Computer search methods and antenna simulations are commonly used to identify which fractal antenna designs best meet the needs of the application.\nStudies during the 2000s showed advantages of the fractal element technology in real-life applications, such as RFID\nand cell phones.\nFractals have been used commercially in antennas since the 2010s.\nTheir advantages are good multiband performance, wide bandwidth, and small area.\nThe gain with small size results from constructive interference with multiple current maxima, afforded by the electrically long structure in a small area.\nSome researchers have disputed that fractal antennas have superior performance. S.R. Best (2003) observed \"that antenna geometry alone, fractal or otherwise, does not uniquely determine the electromagnetic properties of the small antenna\".\nHansen &amp; Collin (2011) reviewed many papers on fractal antennas and concluded that they offer no advantage over fat dipoles, loaded dipoles, or simple loops, and that non-fractals are always better.\nBalanis (2011) reported on several fractal antennas and found them equivalent in performance to the electrically small antennas they were compared to.\nLog periodics, a form of fractal antenna, have their electromagnetic characteristics uniquely determined by geometry, via an opening angle.\nFrequency invariance and Maxwell's equations.\nOne different and useful attribute of some fractal element antennas is their self-scaling aspect. In 1957, V.H. Rumsey presented results that angle-defined scaling was one of the underlying requirements to make antennas invariant (have same radiation properties) at a number, or range, of frequencies. Work by Y. Mushiake in Japan starting in 1948 demonstrated a similar result of self-complementary antennas being frequency independent.\nIt was believed that antennas had to be defined by angles for this to be true, but in 1999 it was discovered that self-similarity was the requirement to make antennas frequency and bandwidth invariant. Angle-defined antennas are self-similar, but other self-similar antennas are frequency independent although not angle-defined.\nThis analysis, based on Maxwell's equations, showed fractal antennas offer a closed-form and unique insight into the invariance properties of Maxwell's equations \u2013 a key aspect of electromagnetic phenomena \u2013 now known as the Hohlfeld-Cohen-Rumsey (HCR) principle. Mushiake's earlier work on self complementarity was shown to be limited to impedance smoothness, as expected from Babinet's principle, but not frequency invariance.\nOther uses.\nIn addition to their use as antennas, fractals have also found application in other antenna system components, including loads, counterpoises, and ground planes.\nFractal inductors and fractal tuned circuits (fractal resonators) were also discovered and invented simultaneously with fractal element antennas. An emerging example of such is in metamaterials. A recent invention demonstrates using close-packed fractal resonators to make the first wideband metamaterial 'invisibility cloak' at microwave frequencies.\nFractal filters (a type of tuned circuit) are another example where the superiority of the fractal approach for smaller size and better rejection has been proven.\nAs fractals can be used as counterpoises, loads, ground planes, and filters, all parts that can be integrated with antennas, they are considered parts of some antenna \"systems\" and thus are discussed in the context of fractal antennas.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "57795", "revid": "12277875", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57795", "title": "Georgetown, Ascension Island", "text": "Capital of Ascension Island, United Kingdom\nGeorgetown is the capital and chief settlement of Ascension Island, in the British Overseas Territory of Saint Helena, Ascension and Tristan da Cunha, situated on the west coast of the island.\nThe town is centred on St Mary's Church, part of the Anglican Diocese of St Helena and the former Exiles Club, built as a Royal Marines barracks at the time of Napoleon's exile to Saint Helena in the early 19th century.\nIt is named after King George III, who reigned at the time the island was claimed for Britain and garrisoned by the Admiralty in 1815.\nIn addition to the church, there is a pier, an athletics track, a small supermarket, Royal Mail post office (and probably Internet connections), snack bar, hotel, police station, Georgetown Hospital, dental surgery, and a library. There is no school, however, and pupils travel to Two Boats village, 3 miles inland, in the center of the island.\nNaval history.\nA naval base was established at Georgetown in 1816 due to British concerns that the French might make use of the island to attempt a rescue of their exiled former Emperor.\nFollowing Napoleon's death in 1821 (and George III's the year before), the settlement found a new role as a supply, maintenance and victualling base for the West Africa Squadron. Local tufa was used for building, but everything else had to be imported (including seeds, vegetables and fruit trees, all of which were cultivated on Green Mountain to supplement the locally available diet of turtle meat).\nBy 1829, a small jetty had been constructed, as well as several buildings on what is now the Regent Square area, close to the sea (including a hospital \u2013 the West Africa Squadron was notoriously prone to sickness).\nIn June 1829, a Lieutenant of the Royal Engineers, Henry Brandreth, arrived on Ascension with a remit to survey the facilities there and make recommendations for their improvement. He condemned what he found as, for the most part, 'miserable tenements ... inhabited by vermin'. Together, with the local commandant, he recommended re-establishing the settlement a little way back from the sea, on the elevated \"plateau\" which Georgetown occupies today. Having returned to England to oversee the supply and manufacture of certain items for the island, he returned in 1830 to begin work on this project. A key innovation was the construction of St George's Water Tank, which can still be seen today: water was channelled to it from the mountain top, as well as from every roof in Georgetown, and from here it was fed by a windpump into a header tank for distribution to local buildings (and, via a pipeline, to the pierhead for transfer to ships). The Marine Barracks building also dates from this period, as do several other buildings including Georgetown's hospital, which continues to fulfil the purpose for which it was built.\nThe site of the old settlement, closer to the sea, was then used for storage and maintenance (the surviving Main Storehouse of 1848 was once claimed to be the largest building in the southern hemisphere). Before long, to meet the demands of an increasingly steam-powered navy, coaling facilities were built, and in 1862 a 'steam factory' housing metalworkers, a machine shop and smelting works, was established.\nGeorgetown continued to serve as a strategic base for the Navy through the 20th century, though after 1899 the site was increasingly administered by the Eastern Telegraph Company. When in 1922 the Board of the Admiralty ceded Ascension Island to the Colonial Office, an exchange of correspondence indicates that one thing its officials wished to preserve was their annual gift of turtle soup from Georgetown (an annual perquisite apparently enjoyed since 1816).\nForts.\nOn 22 October 1815, HMS \"Peruvian\" and HMS \"Zenobia\" anchored in the roadstead off Georgetown to claim the island for the British Crown. Once ashore, one of the first tasks undertaken by the sailors was to set up a pair of cannons on the promontory in the harbour to provide some defence. This battery became known as Fort Cockburn (renamed in the middle of the century Fort Thornton).\nA second fort was established on a site called Goat Hill further to the west in around 1860 (Fort Hayes) and a third, Fort Bedford, on the hill overlooking the town called Cross Hill. Fort Bedford, which dates from 1903, still has some Victorian cannons, as well as a pair of BL 5.5 inch Mark I naval guns that were originally fitted to . These guns were used to repel a German attack by \"U-124\" on 9 December 1941 during World War II with surprisingly great success as the Germans did not approach the island again. Fort Hayes until recently housed the museum of the Ascension Island Heritage Society.\nPresent-day Georgetown.\nThe town is a centre of culture on Ascension. It usually hosts local athletics events as well as being the start of the annual dew pond race from sea level to the highest point on the island on Green Mountain. Ascension Day activities (to celebrate the discovery of Ascension) are either hosted here or in nearby Two Boats village. As of 2008[ [update]] the population was about 450. Nearby Long Beach is an important nesting ground for the giant green turtle.\nGeorgetown Cemetery.\nA cemetery was begun some time in the early 19th century. It was used both for deaths on the island and for burial of persons dying on ships within one day's sail of the island. Graves of note include Captain William Bafe and his crew, and Commodore Reginald Thomas John Levinge of the Levinge baronets.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "57799", "revid": "12517593", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57799", "title": "Stephen Crane", "text": "American novelist, short story writer, poet, and journalist\nStephen Crane (November 1, 1871 \u2013 June 5, 1900) was an American poet, novelist, and short story writer. Prolific throughout his short life, he wrote notable works in the Realist tradition as well as early examples of American Naturalism and Impressionism. He is recognized by modern critics as one of the most innovative writers of his generation.\nThe ninth surviving child of Methodist parents, Crane began writing at the age of four and had several articles published by 16. Having little interest in university studies though he was active in a fraternity, he left Syracuse University in 1891 to work as a reporter and writer. Crane's first novel was the 1893 Bowery tale \"\", generally considered by critics to be the first work of American literary Naturalism. He won international acclaim for his Civil War novel \"The Red Badge of Courage\" (1895), considered a masterpiece by critics and writers.\nIn 1896, Crane endured a highly publicized scandal after appearing as a witness in the trial of a suspected prostitute, an acquaintance named Dora Clark. Late that year, he accepted an offer to travel to Cuba as a war correspondent. As he waited in Jacksonville, Florida, for passage, he met Cora Taylor, with whom he began a lasting relationship. En route to Cuba, Crane's vessel, the SS \"Commodore\", sank off the coast of Florida, leaving him adrift for 30 hours in a dinghy. Crane described the ordeal in \"The Open Boat\". During the final years of his life, he covered conflicts in Greece (accompanied by Cora, recognized as the first woman war correspondent) and later lived in England with her. He was befriended by writers such as Joseph Conrad and H. G. Wells. Plagued by financial difficulties and ill health, Crane died of tuberculosis in a Black Forest sanatorium in Germany at the age of 28.\nAt the time of his death, Crane was considered an important figure in American literature. After he was nearly forgotten for two decades, critics revived interest in his life and work. Crane's writing is characterized by vivid intensity, distinctive dialects, and irony. Common themes involve fear, spiritual crises and social isolation. Although recognized primarily for \"The Red Badge of Courage\", which has become an American classic, Crane is also known for his poetry, journalism, and short stories such as \"The Open Boat\", \"The Blue Hotel\", \"The Bride Comes to Yellow Sky\", and \"The Monster\". His writing made a deep impression on 20th-century writers, most prominent among them Ernest Hemingway, and is thought to have inspired the Modernists and the Imagists.\nBiography.\nEarly years.\nStephen Crane was born on November 1, 1871, in Newark, New Jersey, to Jonathan Townley Crane, a minister in the Methodist Episcopal church, and Mary Helen Peck Crane, daughter of a clergyman, George Peck. He was the fourteenth and last child born to the couple. At 45, Helen Crane had suffered the deaths of her previous four children in infancy. Nicknamed \"Stevie\" by the family, he joined eight surviving brothers and sisters\u2014Mary Helen, George Peck, Jonathan Townley, William Howe, Agnes Elizabeth, Edmund Byran, Wilbur Fiske, and Luther.\nThe Cranes were descended from Jaspar Crane, a founder of New Haven Colony, who had migrated there from England in 1639. Stephen was named for a putative founder of Elizabethtown, New Jersey, who had, according to family tradition, come from England or Wales in 1665, as well as his great-great-grandfather Stephen Crane, a Revolutionary War patriot who served as New Jersey delegate to the First Continental Congress in Philadelphia. Crane later wrote that his father \"was a great, fine, simple mind\", who had written numerous tracts on theology. Although his mother was a popular spokeswoman for the Woman's Christian Temperance Union and a highly religious woman, Crane wrote that he did not believe \"she was as narrow as most of her friends or family.\" The young Stephen was raised primarily by his sister Agnes, 15\u00a0years his senior. The family moved to Port Jervis, New York, in 1876, where Dr. Crane became the pastor of Drew Methodist Church, a position that he retained until his death.\nAs a child, Crane was often sickly and afflicted by constant colds. When the boy was almost two, his father wrote in his diary that his youngest son became \"so sick that we are anxious about him.\" Despite his fragile nature, Crane was an intelligent child who taught himself to read before the age of four. At the age of three, while imitating his brother Townley's writing, he asked his mother, \"how do you spell \"O\"?\" In December 1879, Crane wrote a poem about wanting a dog for Christmas. Entitled \"I'd Rather Have \u2013\", it is his first surviving poem. Stephen was not regularly enrolled in school until January 1880, but he had no difficulty in completing two grades in six weeks. Recalling this feat, he wrote that it \"sounds like the lie of a fond mother at a teaparty, but I do remember that I got ahead very fast and that father was very pleased with me.\"\nDr. Crane died on February 16, 1880, at the age of 60; Stephen was eight years old. Some 1,400\u00a0people attended his funeral, more than double the size of his congregation. After her husband's death, Mrs. Crane moved to Roseville, near Newark, leaving Stephen in the care of his older brother Edmund, with whom the young boy lived with cousins in Sussex County. He next lived with his brother William, a lawyer, in Port Jervis for several years.\nHis older sister Helen took him to Asbury Park to be with their brother Townley and his wife, Fannie. Townley was a professional journalist; he headed the Long Branch department of both the \"New-York Tribune\" and the Associated Press, and also served as editor of the \"Asbury Park Shore Press\". Agnes, another Crane sister, joined the siblings in New Jersey. She took a position at Asbury Park's intermediate school and moved in with Helen to care for the young Stephen.\nWithin a couple of years, the Crane family suffered more losses. First, Townley and his wife lost their two young children. His wife Fannie died of Bright's disease in November 1883. Agnes Crane became ill and died on June 10, 1884, of meningitis at the age of 28.\nSchooling.\nCrane wrote his first known story, \"Uncle Jake and the Bell Handle\", when he was 14. In late 1885, he enrolled at Pennington Seminary, a ministry-focused coeducational boarding school north of Trenton. His father had been principal there from 1849 to 1858. Soon after her youngest son left for school, Mrs. Crane began suffering what the \"Asbury Park Shore Press\" reported as \"a temporary aberration of the mind.\" She had apparently recovered by early 1886, but later that year, her son, 23-year-old Luther Crane, died after falling in front of an oncoming train while working as a railroad flagman. It was the fourth death in six years among Stephen's immediate family.\nAfter two years, Crane left Pennington for Claverack College, a quasi-military school. He later looked back on his time at Claverack as \"the happiest period of my life although I was not aware of it.\" A classmate remembered him as a highly literate but erratic student, lucky to pass examinations in math and science, and yet \"far in advance of his fellow students in his knowledge of History and Literature\", his favorite subjects. While he held an impressive record on the drill field and baseball diamond, Crane generally did not excel in the classroom. Not having a middle name, as was customary among other students, he took to signing his name \"Stephen T. Crane\" in order \"to win recognition as a regular fellow\". Crane was seen as friendly, but also moody and rebellious. He sometimes skipped class to play baseball, a game in which he starred as catcher. He was also greatly interested in the school's military training. He rose rapidly in the ranks of the student battalion. One classmate described him as \"indeed physically attractive without being handsome\", but he was aloof, reserved and not generally popular. Although academically weak, Crane gained experience at Claverack that provided background (and likely some anecdotes from the Civil War veterans on the staff) for \"The Red Badge of Courage\".\nIn mid-1888, Crane became his brother Townley's assistant at a New Jersey shore news bureau, working there every summer until 1892. Crane's first publication under his byline was an article on the explorer Henry M. Stanley's quest to find the Scottish missionary David Livingstone in Africa. It appeared in the February 1890 Claverack College \"Vidette\". Within a few months, Crane was persuaded by his family to forgo a military career and transfer to Lafayette College in Easton, Pennsylvania, to pursue a mining engineering degree. He registered at Lafayette on September 12; he promptly took up baseball again and joined the largest fraternity, Delta Upsilon. He also joined both rival literary societies, named for (George) Washington and (Benjamin) Franklin. Crane infrequently attended classes and ended the semester with grades for four of his seven courses.\nAfter one semester, Crane transferred to Syracuse University, where he enrolled as a non-degree candidate in the College of Liberal Arts. He roomed in the Delta Upsilon fraternity house and joined the baseball team. Attending just one class (English Literature) during the middle trimester, he remained in residence while taking no courses in the third.\nConcentrating on his writing, Crane began to experiment with tone and style while trying out different subjects. He published his fictional story, \"Great Bugs of Onondaga,\" simultaneously in the \"Syracuse Daily Standard\" and the \"New York Tribune\". Declaring college \"a waste of time\", Crane decided to become a full-time writer and reporter. He attended a Delta Upsilon chapter meeting on June 12, 1891, but shortly afterward left college for good.\nFull-time writer.\nIn the summer of 1891, Crane often camped with friends in the nearby area of Sullivan County, New York, where his brother Edmund occupied a house obtained as part of their brother William's Hartwood Club (Association) land dealings. He used this area as the geographic setting for several short stories, which were posthumously published in a collection under the title \"Stephen Crane: Sullivan County Tales and Sketches\". Crane showed two of these works to \"New York Tribune\" editor Willis Fletcher Johnson, a family friend, who accepted them for publication. \"Hunting Wild Dogs\" and \"The Last of the Mohicans\" were the first of fourteen unsigned Sullivan County sketches and tales published in the \"Tribune\" between February and July 1892. Crane also showed Johnson an early draft of his first novel, \"\".\nLater that summer, Crane met and befriended author Hamlin Garland, who had been lecturing locally on American literature and arts. On August 17, Garland gave a talk on novelist William Dean Howells, which Crane wrote up for the \"Tribune\". Garland became a mentor for and champion of the young writer, whose intellectual honesty impressed him. Their relationship suffered in later years, however, because Garland disapproved of Crane's alleged immorality, related to his living with a woman married to another man.\nStephen moved into his brother Edmund's house in Lakeview, a suburb of Paterson, New Jersey, in the fall of 1891. From there he made frequent trips into New York City, writing and reporting, particularly on its impoverished tenement districts. Crane focused particularly on The Bowery, a small and once prosperous neighborhood in southern Manhattan. After the Civil War, Bowery shops and mansions had given way to saloons, dance halls, brothels and flophouses, all of which Crane frequented. He later said he did so for research. He was attracted to the human nature found in the slums, considering it \"open and plain, with nothing hidden.\" Believing nothing honest and unsentimental had been written about the Bowery, Crane became determined to do so himself; this was the setting of his first novel. On December 7, 1891, Crane's mother died at the age of 64, and the 20-year-old appointed Edmund as his guardian.\nIn the spring of 1892, Crane began a romance with Lily Brandon Munroe, a married woman who was estranged from her husband. He did so despite being frail, undernourished, and suffering from a hacking cough \u2013 none of which prevented him from smoking cigarettes. Although Munroe later said Crane \"was not a handsome man,\" she admired his \"remarkable almond-shaped gray eyes.\" He begged her to elope with him, but her family opposed the match because Crane lacked money and prospects, and she declined. Their last meeting likely occurred in April 1898.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSuch an assemblage of the spraddle-legged men of the middle class, whose hands were bent and shoulders stooped from delving and constructing, had never appeared to an Asbury Park summer crowd, and the latter was vaguely amused.\n\u2014 Stephen Crane, account of the JOUAM parade as it appeared in the \"Tribune\"\nBetween July 2 and September 11, 1892, Crane published more than ten news reports on Asbury Park affairs. Although a \"Tribune\" colleague stated that Crane \"was not highly distinguished above any other boy of twenty who had gained a reputation for saying and writing bright things,\" that summer his reporting took on a more skeptical, hypocrisy-deflating tone. A storm of controversy erupted over a report he wrote on the Junior Order of United American Mechanics' American Day Parade, titled \"Parades and Entertainments.\" Published on August 21, the report juxtaposes the \"bronzed, slope-shouldered, uncouth\" marching men \"begrimed with dust\" and the spectators dressed in \"summer gowns, lace parasols, tennis trousers, straw hats and indifferent smiles.\" Believing they were being ridiculed, some JOUAM marchers were outraged and wrote to the editor. The owner of the \"Tribune\", Whitelaw Reid, was that year's Republican vice-presidential candidate, and this likely increased the sensitivity of the paper's management to the issue. Although Townley wrote a piece for the \"Asbury Park Daily Press\" in his brother's defense, the \"Tribune\" quickly apologized to its readers, calling Stephen Crane's piece \"a bit of random correspondence, passed inadvertently by the copy editor.\" Hamlin Garland and biographer John Barry attested that Crane told them he had been dismissed by the \"Tribune\". Although Willis Fletcher Johnson later denied this, the paper did not publish any of Crane's work after 1892.\nLife in New York.\nCrane struggled to make a living as a freelance writer, contributing sketches and feature articles to various New York newspapers. In October 1892, he moved into a rooming house in Manhattan whose boarders were a group of medical students. During this time, he expanded or entirely reworked \"Maggie: A Girl of the Streets\". In the winter of 1893, Crane took the manuscript of \"Maggie\" to Richard Watson Gilder, who rejected it for publication in \"The Century Magazine\".\nCrane decided to publish it privately, with money he had inherited from his mother. The novella was published in late February or early March 1893 by a small printing shop that usually printed medical books and religious tracts. The typewritten title page for the Library of Congress copyright application read simply: \"A Girl of the Streets, / A Story of New York. / \u2014By\u2014/Stephen Crane.\" The name \"Maggie\" was added to the title later. Crane used the pseudonym \"Johnston Smith\" for the novella's initial publication, later telling friend and artist Corwin Knapp Linson that the \"nom de plume\" was the \"commonest name I could think of. I had an editor friend named Johnson, and put in the 't', and no one could find me in the mob of Smiths\". Hamlin Garland reviewed the work in the June 1893 issue of \"The Arena\", calling it \"the most truthful and unhackneyed study of the slums I have yet read, fragment though it is\". Despite this early praise, Crane became depressed and destitute from having spent $869 for 1,100\u00a0copies of a novel that did not sell; he ended up giving a hundred copies away. He would later remember \"how I looked forward to publication and pictured the sensation I thought it would make. It fell flat. Nobody seemed to notice it or care for it... Poor Maggie! She was one of my first loves.\"\nIn March 1893, Crane spent hours in Linson's studio having his portrait painted. He became fascinated with issues of the \"Century\" that were largely devoted to famous battles and military leaders from the Civil War. Frustrated with the dryly written stories, Crane stated, \"I wonder that some of those fellows don't tell how they \"felt\" in those scraps. They spout enough of what they \"did\", but they're as emotionless as rocks.\" Crane returned to these magazines during subsequent visits to Linson's studio, and eventually the idea of writing a war novel overtook him. He would later state that he \"had been unconsciously working the detail of the story out through most of his boyhood\" and had imagined \"war stories ever since he was out of knickerbockers\". This novel would ultimately become \"The Red Badge of Courage\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nA river, amber-tinted in the shadow of its banks, purled at the army's feet; and at night, when the stream had become of a sorrowful blackness, one could see across it the red, eyelike gleam of hostile camp-fires set in the low brows of distant hills.\n\u2014 Stephen Crane, \"The Red Badge of Courage\"\nCrane wished to show how it felt to be in a war by writing \"a psychological portrayal of fear\". Conceiving his story from the point of view of a young private who is at first filled with boyish dreams of the glory of war and then quickly becomes disillusioned, Crane borrowed the private's surname, \"Fleming\", from his sister-in-law's maiden name. He later said that the first paragraphs came to him with \"every word in place, every comma, every period fixed\". He wrote from around midnight until four or five in the morning. Because he could not afford a typewriter, he wrote carefully in ink on legal-sized paper, seldom crossing through or interlining a word. If he did change something, he would rewrite the whole page.\nWhile working on his second novel, Crane remained prolific, concentrating on publishing stories to stave off poverty; \"An Experiment in Misery\", based on Crane's experiences in the Bowery, was printed by the \"New York Press\". He also wrote five or six poems a day. In early 1894, he showed some of his poems to Hamlin Garland, who said he read \"some thirty in all\" with \"growing wonder\". Although Garland and William Dean Howells encouraged him to submit his poetry for publication, Crane's free verse was too unconventional for most. After brief wrangling between poet and publisher, Copeland &amp; Day accepted Crane's first book of poems, \"The Black Riders and Other Lines\", although it would not be published until after \"The Red Badge of Courage\". He received a 10\u00a0percent royalty and the publisher assured him that the book would be in a form \"more severely classic than any book ever yet issued in America\".\nIn the spring of 1894, Crane offered the finished manuscript of \"The Red Badge of Courage\" to \"McClure's Magazine\", which had become the foremost magazine for Civil War literature. While \"McClure's\" delayed giving him an answer on his novel, they offered him an assignment writing about the Pennsylvania coal mines. \"In the Depths of a Coal Mine\", a story with pictures by Linson, was syndicated by \"McClure's\" in a number of newspapers, heavily edited. Crane was reportedly disgusted by the cuts, asking Linson, \"Why the hell did they send me up there then? Do they want the public to think the coal mines gilded ball-rooms with the miners eating ice-cream in boiled shirt-fronts?\"\nDuring the early part of his career, Crane was promoted by Elbert Hubbard, who commented on his works and featured them in his popular small magazine, \"The Philistine\". Crane was the guest of honor at the first annual meeting of the Society of Philistines in 1895 when he was relatively unknown. Although Crane was severely teased during the meeting, they remained friendly and their association proved mutually beneficial. Seven of Crane\u2019s poems and a short story were published in the first issue of \"The Roycroft Quarterly\" (another of Hubbard\u2019s magazines) which commemorated the event. In a concluding note, Hubbard commented, \"to the mass, he is known, if at all, only as the author of \"The Black Riders\" in verse, and of the \"Red Badge of Courage\" in prose; efforts, both, that challenge study and baffle understanding rather than soothe superficiality or pander to the wishes of mental indolence.\"\nSources report that following an encounter with a male prostitute that spring, Crane began a novel on the subject entitled \"Flowers of Asphalt,\" which he later abandoned. The manuscript has never been recovered.\nAfter discovering that \"McClure's\" could not afford to pay him, Crane took his war novel to Irving Bacheller of the Bacheller-Johnson Newspaper Syndicate, which agreed to publish \"The Red Badge of Courage\" in serial form. From December 3 to 9, \"The Red Badge of Courage\" was published in some half-dozen newspapers in the United States. Although it was greatly cut for syndication, Bacheller attested to its causing a stir, saying \"its quality [was] immediately felt and recognized.\" The lead editorial in the \"Philadelphia Press\" of December 7 said that Crane \"is a new name now and unknown, but everybody will be talking about him if he goes on as he has begun\".\nTravels and fame.\nAt the end of January 1895, Crane left on what he called \"a very long and circuitous newspaper trip\" to the west. While writing feature articles for the Bacheller syndicate, he traveled to Saint Louis, Missouri, Nebraska, New Orleans, Galveston, Texas, and Mexico City. Irving Bacheller would later state that he \"sent Crane to Mexico for new color\", which the author found in the form of Mexican slum life. Whereas he found the lower class in New York pitiful, he was impressed by the \"superiority\" of the Mexican peasants' contentment and \"even refuse[d] to pity them\".\nReturning to New York five months later, Crane joined the Lantern (alternately spelled \"Lanthom\" or \"Lanthorne\") Club organized by a group of young writers and journalists. The club, located on the roof of an old house on William Street near the Brooklyn Bridge, served as a drinking establishment and was decorated to look like a ship's cabin. There Crane ate one good meal a day, although friends were troubled by his \"constant smoking, too much coffee, lack of food and poor teeth\", as Nelson Greene put it. Living in near-poverty and greatly anticipating the publication of his books, Crane began work on two more novels: \"The Third Violet\" and \"George's Mother\".\n\"The Black Riders\" was published by Copeland &amp; Day shortly before his return to New York in May, but it received mostly negative criticism for the poems' unconventional style and use of free verse. A piece in the \"Bookman\" called Crane \"the Aubrey Beardsley of poetry\" and a commentator from the \"Chicago Daily Inter-Ocean\" stated that \"there is not a line of poetry from the opening to the closing page. Whitman's \"Leaves of Grass\" were luminous in comparison. Poetic lunacy would be a better name for the book.\" In June, the \"New York Tribune\" dismissed the book as \"so much trash\". Crane was pleased that the book was \"making some stir\".\nIn contrast to the reception for Crane's poetry, \"The Red Badge of Courage\" was welcomed with acclaim after its publication by Appleton in September 1895. For the next four months, the book was in the top six on bestseller lists around the country. It arrived on the literary scene \"like a flash of lightning out of a clear winter sky\", according to H. L. Mencken, who was about 15 at the time. The novel also became popular in Britain; Joseph Conrad, a future friend of Crane, wrote that the novel \"detonated... with the impact and force of a twelve-inch shell charged with a very high explosive\". Appleton published two, possibly three, printings in 1895 and as many as eleven more in 1896. Although some critics considered the work overly graphic and profane, it was widely heralded for its realistic portrayal of war and unique writing style. The \"Detroit Free Press\" declared that \"The Red Badge\" would give readers \"so vivid a picture of the emotions and the horrors of the battlefield that you will pray your eyes may never look upon the reality.\"\nWanting to capitalize on the success of \"The Red Badge\", McClure Syndicate offered Crane a contract to write a series on Civil War battlefields. Because it was a wish of his to \"visit the battlefield\u2014which I was to describe\u2014at the time of year when it was fought\", Crane agreed. Visiting battlefields in Northern Virginia, including Fredericksburg, he would later produce five more Civil War tales: \"Three Miraculous Soldiers\", \"The Veteran\", \"An Indiana Campaign\", \"An Episode of War\" and \"The Little Regiment\".\nScandal.\nAt the age of 24, Crane, who was reveling in his success, became involved in a highly publicized case involving a suspected prostitute named Dora Clark. At 2 a.m. on September 16, 1896, he escorted two chorus girls and Clark from New York City's Broadway Garden, a popular \"resort\" where he had interviewed the women for a series he was writing. As Crane saw one woman safely to a streetcar, a plainclothes policeman named Charles Becker arrested the other two for solicitation; Crane was threatened with arrest when he tried to interfere. One of the women was released after Crane confirmed her erroneous claim that she was his wife, but Clark was charged and taken to the precinct. Against the advice of the arresting sergeant, Crane made a statement confirming Dora Clark's innocence, stating that \"I only know that while with me she acted respectably, and that the policeman's charge was false.\" On the basis of Crane's testimony, Clark was discharged. The media seized upon the story; news spread to Philadelphia, Boston and beyond, with papers focusing on Crane's courage. The \"Stephen Crane story\", as it became known, soon became a source for ridicule; the \"Chicago Dispatch\" quipped that \"Stephen Crane is respectfully informed that association with women in scarlet is not necessarily a 'Red Badge of Courage.'\"\nA couple of weeks after her trial, Clark pressed charges of false arrest against the officer who had arrested her. The next day, the officer physically attacked Clark in the presence of witnesses. Crane, who initially went briefly to Philadelphia to escape the pressure of publicity, returned to New York to give testimony at Becker's trial despite advice given to him from Theodore Roosevelt, who was Police Commissioner and a new acquaintance of Crane. The defense targeted Crane: police raided his apartment and interviewed people who knew him, trying to find incriminating evidence to lessen the effect of his testimony. A vigorous cross-examination sought to portray Crane as a man of dubious morals; while the prosecution proved that he frequented brothels, Crane claimed this was merely for research purposes. After the trial ended on October 16, the arresting officer was exonerated, and Crane's reputation was ruined.\nCora Taylor and the \"Commodore\" shipwreck.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nNone of them knew the color of the sky. Their eyes glanced level and were fastened upon the waves that swept toward them. These waves were of the hue of slate, save for the tops, which were of foaming white, and all of the men knew the colors of the sea.\n\u2014 Stephen Crane, \"The Open Boat\"\nGiven $700 in Spanish gold by the Bacheller-Johnson syndicate to work as a war correspondent in Cuba as the Spanish\u2013American War was pending, the 25-year-old Crane left New York on November 27, 1896, on a train bound for Jacksonville, Florida. Upon arrival in Jacksonville, he registered at the St. James Hotel under the alias of Samuel Carleton to maintain anonymity while seeking passage to Cuba. He toured the city and visited the local brothels. Within days he met 31-year-old Cora Taylor, proprietor of the downtown bawdy house Hotel de Dream. Born into a respectable Boston family, Taylor (whose legal name was Cora Ethel Stewart) had already had two brief marriages; her first husband, Vinton Murphy, divorced her on grounds of adultery. In 1889, she had married British Captain Donald William Stewart. She left him in 1892 for another man, but was still legally married. By the time Crane arrived, Taylor had been in Jacksonville for two years. She lived a bohemian lifestyle, owned a hotel of assignation, and was a respected local figure. The two spent much time together while Crane awaited his departure. He was finally cleared to leave for the Cuban port of Cienfuegos on New Year's Eve aboard the SS \"Commodore\".\nThe ship sailed from Jacksonville with 27 or 28\u00a0men and supplies and ammunition for the Cuban rebels. On the St. Johns River and less than from Jacksonville, \"Commodore\" struck a sandbar in a dense fog and damaged its hull. Although towed off the sandbar the following day, it was beached again in Mayport and again damaged. A leak began in the boiler room that evening and, as a result of malfunctioning water pumps, the ship came to a standstill about from Mosquito Inlet. As the ship took on more water, Crane described the engine room as resembling \"a scene at this time taken from the middle kitchen of hades.\" The \"Commodore\"'s lifeboats were lowered early on January 2, 1897, and the ship ultimately sank at 7\u00a0a.m. Crane was one of the last to leave in a dinghy. In an ordeal that he recounted in the short story \"The Open Boat\", Crane and three other men (including the captain) foundered off the coast of Florida for a day and a half before trying to land the dinghy at Daytona Beach. The small boat overturned in the surf, forcing the exhausted men to swim to shore; one died. Having lost the gold given to him for his journey, Crane wired Cora Taylor for help. She traveled to Daytona and returned to Jacksonville with Crane the next day, only four days after he had left on the \"Commodore\".\nThe disaster was reported on the front pages of newspapers across the country. Rumors that the ship had been sabotaged were widely circulated but never substantiated. Portrayed favorably and heroically by the press, Crane emerged from the ordeal with his reputation enhanced, if not restored. Meanwhile, Crane's affair with Taylor blossomed.\nArchaeological investigations were conducted in 2002\u20132004 to examine and document the exposed remains of a wreck near Ponce Inlet, Florida, conjectured to be that of the SS \"Commodore\". The collected data, and other accumulated evidence, finally substantiated the identification of the \"Commodore\".\nGreco-Turkish War.\nDespite contentment in Jacksonville and the need for rest after his ordeal, Crane became restless. He left Jacksonville on January 11 for New York City, where he applied for a passport to Cuba, Mexico and the West Indies. Spending three weeks in New York, he completed \"The Open Boat\" and periodically visited Port Jervis to see family. By this time, however, blockades had formed along the Florida coast as tensions rose with Spain, and Crane concluded that he would never be able to travel to Cuba. He sold \"The Open Boat\" to Scribner's for $300 in early March. Determined to work as a war correspondent, Crane signed on with William Randolph Hearst's \"New York Journal\" to cover the impending Greco-Turkish conflict. He brought along Taylor, who sold the Hotel de Dream.\nOn March 20, they sailed first to England, where Crane was warmly received. They arrived in Athens in early April; between April 17 (when Turkey declared war on Greece) and April 22, Crane wrote his first published report of the war, \"An Impression of the 'Concert'\". When he left for Epirus in the northwest, Taylor remained in Athens, where she became the war's first woman war correspondent. She wrote under the pseudonym \"Imogene Carter\" for the \"New York Journal\", a job that Crane had secured for her. They wrote frequently, traveling throughout the country separately and together. The first large battle that Crane witnessed was the Turks' assault on General Constantine Smolenski's Greek forces at Velestino. Crane wrote: \"It is a great thing to survey the army of the enemy. Just where and how it takes hold upon the heart is difficult of description.\" During this battle, Crane encountered \"a fat waddling puppy\" that he immediately claimed, dubbing it \"Velestino, the Journal dog\". Greece and Turkey signed an armistice on May 20; Crane and Taylor left Greece for England, taking with them Velestino and two Greek brothers as servants.\nSpanish\u2013American War.\nAfter staying in Limpsfield, Surrey, for a few days, Crane and Taylor settled in Ravensbrook, a plain brick villa in Oxted. Referring to themselves as Mr. and Mrs. Crane, the couple lived openly in England, but Crane concealed the relationship from friends and family in the United States. Admired in England, Crane thought himself attacked back home: \"There seem so many of them in America who want to kill, bury and forget me purely out of unkindness and envy and\u2014my unworthiness, if you choose\", he wrote. Velestino the dog sickened and died soon after their arrival in England, on August 1. Crane, who had a great love for dogs, wrote an emotional letter to a friend an hour after the dog's death, stating that \"for eleven days we fought death for him, thinking nothing of anything but his life.\" The Limpsfield-Oxted area was home to members of the socialist Fabian Society and a magnet for writers such as Edmund Gosse, Ford Madox Ford and Edward Garnett. Crane also met the Polish-born novelist Joseph Conrad in October 1897, with whom he would have what Crane called a \"warm and endless friendship\".\nAlthough Crane was confident among peers, strong negative reviews of the recently published \"The Third Violet\" were causing his literary reputation to dwindle. Reviewers were also highly critical of Crane's war letters, deeming them self-centered. Although \"The Red Badge of Courage\" had by this time gone through fourteen printings in the United States and six in England, Crane was running out of money. To survive financially, he wrote prolifically for both the English and the American markets. He wrote in quick succession stories such as \"The Monster\", \"The Bride Comes to Yellow Sky\", \"Death and the Child\" and \"The Blue Hotel\". Crane began to attach price tags to his new works of fiction, hoping that \"The Bride\", for example, would fetch $175.\nAs 1897 ended, Crane's money crisis worsened. Amy Leslie, a reporter from Chicago and a former lover, sued him for $550. The \"New York Times\" reported that Leslie gave him $800 in November 1896 but that he had repaid only a quarter. In February, he was summoned to answer Leslie's claim. The claim was apparently settled out of court, because no record of adjudication exists. Meanwhile, Crane felt \"heavy with troubles\" and \"chased to the wall\" by expenses. He confided to his agent that he was $2,000 in debt but that he would \"beat it\" with more literary output.\nSoon after the exploded in Havana Harbor on February 15, 1898, under suspicious circumstances, Crane was offered a \u00a360 advance by \"Blackwood's Magazine\" for articles \"from the seat of war in the event of a war breaking out\" between the United States and Spain. His health was failing, and it is believed that signs of his pulmonary tuberculosis, which he may have contracted in childhood, became apparent. With almost no money coming in from his finished stories, Crane accepted the assignment and left Oxted for New York. Taylor and the rest of the household stayed behind to fend off local creditors. Crane applied for a passport and left New York for Key West two days before Congress declared war. While the war idled, he interviewed people and produced occasional copy.\nIn early June, he observed the establishment of an American base in Cuba when Marines seized Guant\u00e1namo Bay. He went ashore with the Marines, planning \"to gather impressions and write them as the spirit moved.\" Although he wrote honestly about his fear in battle, others observed his calmness and composure. He would later recall \"this prolonged tragedy of the night\" in the war tale \"Marines Signaling Under Fire at Guantanamo\". After showing a willingness to serve during fighting at Cuzco, Cuba, by carrying messages to company commanders, Crane was officially cited for his \"material aid during the action\".\nHe continued to report upon various battles and the worsening military conditions and praised Theodore Roosevelt's Rough Riders, despite past tensions with the Commissioner. In early July, Crane was sent to the United States for medical treatment for a high fever. He was diagnosed with yellow fever, then malaria. Upon arrival in Old Point Comfort, Virginia, he spent a few weeks resting in a hotel. Although Crane had filed more than 20 dispatches in the three months he had covered the war, the \"World\"'s business manager believed that the paper had not received its money's worth and fired him. In retaliation, Crane signed with Hearst's \"New York Journal\" with the wish to return to Cuba. He traveled first to Puerto Rico and then to Havana. In September, rumors began to spread that Crane, who was working anonymously, had either been killed or disappeared. He sporadically sent out dispatches and stories about the mood and conditions in Havana, but he was soon desperate for money again. Taylor, left alone in England, was also penniless. She became frantic with worry over her lover's whereabouts; they were not in direct communication until the end of the year. Crane left Havana and arrived in England on January 11, 1899.\nDeath.\nRent on Ravensbrook had not been paid for a year. Crane secured a solicitor to act as guarantor for their debts, after which Crane and Taylor relocated to Brede Place. This manor in Sussex, which dated to the 14th\u00a0century and had neither electricity nor indoor plumbing, was offered to them by friends at a modest rent. The relocation appeared to give Crane hope, but his money problems continued. Deciding that he could no longer afford to write for American publications, he concentrated on publishing in English magazines.\nCrane pushed himself to write feverishly during the first months at Brede; he told his publisher that he was \"doing more work now than I have at any other period in my life\". His health worsened, and by late 1899 he was asking friends about health resorts. \"The Monster and Other Stories\" was in production and \"War Is Kind\", his second collection of poems, was published in the United States in May. None of his books after \"The Red Badge of Courage\" had sold well, and he bought a typewriter to spur output. \"Active Service\", a novella based on Crane's correspondence experience, was published in October. The \"New York Times\" reviewer questioned \"whether the author of \"Active Service\" himself really sees anything remarkable in his newspapery hero.\"\nIn December, the couple held an elaborate Christmas party at Brede, attended by Conrad, Henry James, H. G. Wells, and other friends; it lasted several days. On December 29 Crane suffered a severe pulmonary hemorrhage. In January 1900, he had recovered sufficiently to work on a new novel, \"The O'Ruddy\", completing 25 of the 33\u00a0chapters. Plans were made for him to travel as a correspondent to Gibraltar to write sketches from Saint Helena, the site of a Boer prison, but in late March and early April, he suffered two more hemorrhages. Taylor took over most of Crane's correspondence while he was ill, writing to friends for monetary aid. The couple planned to travel on the continent but Conrad, upon visiting Crane for the last time, remarked that his friend's \"wasted face was enough to tell me that it was the most forlorn of all hopes.\"\nOn May 28, the couple arrived at Badenweiler, Germany, a health spa on the edge of the Black Forest. Despite his weakened condition, Crane continued to dictate fragmentary episodes for the completion of \"The O'Ruddy\". He died on June 5, 1900, at the age of 28. In his will he left everything to Taylor, who took his body to New Jersey for burial. Crane was interred in Evergreen Cemetery in Hillside, New Jersey.\nFiction and poetry.\nStyle and technique.\nStephen Crane's fiction is typically categorized as representative of Naturalism, American realism, Impressionism or a mixture of the three. Critic Sergio Perosa, for example, wrote that the work presents a \"symbiosis\" of Naturalistic ideals and Impressionistic methods. When asked whether he would write an autobiography in 1896, Crane responded that he \"dare not say that I am honest. I merely say that I am as nearly honest as a weak mental machinery will allow.\" Similarities between the stylistic techniques in Crane's writing and Impressionist painting\u2014including the use of color and chiaroscuro\u2014are often cited to support the theory that Crane was not only an Impressionist but also influenced by the movement. H. G. Wells remarked upon \"the great influence of the studio\" on Crane's work, quoting a passage from \"The Red Badge of Courage\" as an example: \"Camp fires, like red, peculiar blossoms, dotted the night... From this little distance the many fires, with the black forms of men passing to and fro before the crimson rays, made weird and satanic effects.\" Although no direct evidence exists that Crane formulated a precise theory of his craft, he vehemently rejected sentimentality, asserting that \"a story should be logical in its action and faithful to character. Truth to life itself was the only test, the greatest artists were the simplest, and simple because they were true.\"\nPoet and biographer John Berryman suggested that there were three basic variations, or \"norms\", of Crane's narrative style. The first, \"flexible, swift, abrupt and nervous\", is best exemplified in \"The Red Badge of Courage\", while the second (\"supple majesty\") is believed to relate to \"The Open Boat\", and the third (\"much more closed, circumstantial and 'normal' in feeling and syntax\") to later works such as \"The Monster\". Crane's work, however, cannot be determined by style solely on chronology. Not only does his fiction not take place in any particular region with similar characters, but it varies from serious in tone to reportorial writing and light fiction. Crane's writing, both fiction and nonfiction, is consistently driven by immediacy and is at once concentrated, vivid and intense. The novels and short stories contain poetic characteristics such as shorthand prose, suggestibility, shifts in perspective and ellipses between and within sentences. Similarly, omission plays a large part in Crane's work; the names of his protagonists are not commonly used and sometimes they are not named at all.\nCrane was often criticized by early reviewers for his frequent incorporation of everyday speech into dialogue, mimicking the regional accents of his characters with colloquial stylization. This is apparent in his first novel, in which Crane ignored the romantic, sentimental approach of slum fiction; he instead concentrated on the cruelty and sordid aspects of poverty, expressed using the Bowery's crude dialect and profanity. The distinct dialect of his Bowery characters is apparent at the beginning of the text; the title character admonishes her brother saying: \"Yeh knows it puts mudder out when yes comes home half dead, an' it's like we'll all get a poundin'.\"\nMajor themes.\nCrane's work is often thematically driven by Naturalistic and Realistic concerns, including ideals versus realities, spiritual crises and fear. These themes are particularly evident in Crane's first three novels, \"Maggie: A Girl of the Streets\", \"The Red Badge of Courage\" and \"George's Mother\". The three main characters search for a way to make their dreams come true, but ultimately suffer from crises of identity. Crane was fascinated by war and death, as well as fire, disfigurement, fear and courage, all of which inspired many works. In \"The Red Badge of Courage\", the main character longs for the heroics of battle but ultimately fears it, demonstrating the dichotomy of courage and cowardice. He experiences the threat of death, misery and a loss of self.\nExtreme isolation from society and community is also apparent in Crane's work. During the most intense battle scenes in \"The Red Badge of Courage\", for example, the story's focus is mainly \"on the inner responses of a self unaware of others\". In \"The Open Boat\", \"An Experiment in Misery\" and other stories, Crane uses light, motion and color to express epistemological uncertainty. Similar to other Naturalistic writers, Crane scrutinizes the position of man, who has been isolated not only from society, but also from God and nature. \"The Open Boat\", for example, distances itself from Romantic optimism and affirmation of man's place in the world by concentrating on the characters' isolation.\nWhile he lived, Stephen Crane was denominated by critical readers a realist, a naturalist, an impressionist, symbolist, \"Symboliste\", expressionist and ironist; his posthumous life was enriched by critics who read him as nihilistic, existentialist, a neo-Romantic, a sentimentalist, protomodernist, pointilliste, visionist, imagist and, by his most recent biographer, a \"bleak naturalist.\" At midcentury he was a \"predisciple of the New Criticism\"; by its end he was \"a proto-deconstructionist anti-artist hero\" who had \"leapfrogged modernism, landing on postmodernist ground.\" As Sergio Perosa wrote in 1964, \"The critic wanders in a labyrinth of possibilities, which every new turn taken by Crane's fiction seems to explode or deny.\"\nAs Anthony Splendora noted in 2015, Death haunts Crane's work; it overshadows his best efforts, each of which features the signal demise of a main character. Allegorically, \"The Blue Hotel,\" at the pinnacle of the short story form, may even be an \"autothanatography\", the author's intentional exteriorization or objectification, in this case for the purpose of purgation, of his own impending death. Crane's \"Swede\" in that story can be taken, following current psychoanalytical theory, as a surrogative, sacrificial victim.\nTranscending this \"dark circumstance of composition,\" Crane had a particular telos and impetus for his creation: beyond the tautologies that all art is alterity and to some formal extent mimesis, Crane sought and obviously found \"a form of catharsis\" in writing. This view accounts for his uniqueness, especially as operative through his notorious \"disgust\" with his family's religion, their \"vacuous, futile psalm-singing\". His favorite book was Mark Twain's \"Life on the Mississippi\", in which God is mentioned only twice\u2014once as irony and once as \"a swindle.\" Not only did Crane call out God specifically with the lines \"Well then I hate thee / righteous image\" in \"The Black Riders\" (1895), but even his most hopeful tropes, such as the \"comradeship\" of his \"Open Boat\" survivors, make no mention of deity, specifying only \"indifferent nature.\" His antitheism is most evident in his characterization of the human race as \"lice clinging to a space-lost bulb,\" a climax-nearing speech in \"The Blue Hotel\". It is possible that Crane utilized religion's formal psychic space, now suddenly available resulting from the recent \"Death of God\", as a milieu for his compensative art.\nNovels.\nBeginning with the publication of \"\" in 1893, Crane was recognized by critics mainly as a novelist. \"Maggie\" was initially rejected by publishers because of its atypical and true-to-life depictions of class warfare, which clashed with sentimental tales of that time. Rather than focusing on the rich or middle class, the novel's characters are lower-class denizens of New York's Bowery. The main character, Maggie, descends into prostitution after being led astray by her lover. Although the novel's plot is simple, its dramatic mood, quick pace and portrayal of Bowery life have made it memorable. \"Maggie\" is not merely an account of slum life, but also represents eternal symbols. In his first draft, Crane did not give his characters proper names. Instead, they were identified by epithets: Maggie, for example, was the girl who \"blossomed in a mud-puddle\" and Pete, her seducer, was a \"knight\". The novel is dominated by irony, anger, and destructive morality. Critics would later call the novel \"the first dark flower of American Naturalism\" for its distinctive elements of naturalistic fiction.\nWritten thirty years after the end of the Civil War and before Crane had any experience of battle, \"The Red Badge of Courage\" was innovative stylistically as well as psychologically. Often described as a war novel, it focuses less on battle and more on the main character's psyche and his reactions in war. It is believed that Crane based the fictional battle in the novel on that of Chancellorsville; he may also have interviewed veterans of the 124th New York Volunteer Infantry Regiment, commonly known as the Orange Blossoms, in Port Jervis, New York. Told in a third-person limited point of view, it reflects the private experience of Henry Fleming, a young soldier who flees from combat. \"The Red Badge of Courage\" is notable in its vivid descriptions and well-cadenced prose, both of which create suspense within the story. Similarly, by substituting epithets for characters' names (\"the youth\", \"the tattered soldier\"), Crane injects an allegorical quality, making his characters point to a specific characteristic of man. Like Crane's first novel, \"The Red Badge of Courage\" has a deeply ironic tone which increases in severity as the novel progresses. The title of the work is ironic; Henry wishes \"that he, too, had a wound, a red badge of courage\". The wound he does receive (from the rifle butt of a fleeing Union soldier) is instead a badge of shame.\nThe novel expresses a strong connection between humankind and nature, a frequent and prominent concern in Crane's fiction and poetry. Whereas contemporary writers (Ralph Waldo Emerson, Nathaniel Hawthorne, Henry David Thoreau) focused on a sympathetic bond on the two elements, Crane wrote from the perspective that human consciousness distanced humans from nature. In \"The Red Badge of Courage\", this distance is paired with references to animals, and men with animalistic characteristics: people \"howl\", \"squawk\", \"growl\", or \"snarl\".\nSince the resurgence of Crane's popularity in the 1920s, \"The Red Badge of Courage\" has been deemed a major American text. The novel has been anthologized numerous times, including in the 1942 collection \"\", edited by Ernest Hemingway. In the introduction, Hemingway wrote that the novel \"is one of the finest books of our literature, and I include it entire because it is all as much of a piece as a great poem is.\"\nCrane's later novels have not received as much critical praise. After the success of \"The Red Badge of Courage\", Crane wrote another tale set in the Bowery. \"George's Mother\" is less allegorical and more personal than his two previous novels, and it focuses on the conflict between a church-going, temperance-adhering woman (thought to be based on Crane's mother) and her single remaining offspring, who is a naive dreamer. Critical response to the novel was mixed. \"The Third Violet\", a romance that he wrote quickly after publishing \"The Red Badge of Courage\", is typically considered as Crane's attempt to appeal to popular audiences. Crane considered it a \"quiet little story.\" Although it contained autobiographical details, the characters have been deemed inauthentic and stereotypical. Crane's second to last novel, \"Active Service\", revolves around the Greco-Turkish War of 1897, with which the author was familiar. Although noted for its satirical take on the melodramatic and highly passionate works that were popular of the nineteenth century, the novel was not successful. It is generally accepted by critics that Crane's work suffered at this point due to the speed at which he wrote. His last novel, a suspenseful and picaresque work entitled \"The O'Ruddy\", was finished posthumously by Robert Barr and published in 1903.\nShort fiction.\nCrane wrote many different types of fictional pieces while indiscriminately applying to them terms such as \"story\", \"tale\" and \"sketch\". For this reason, critics have found clear-cut classification of Crane's work problematic. While \"The Open Boat\" and \"The Bride Comes to Yellow Sky\" are often considered short stories, others are variously identified.\nIn an 1896 interview with Herbert P. Williams, a reporter for the \"Boston Herald\", Crane said that he did \"not find that short stories are utterly different in character from other fiction. It seems to me that short stories are the easiest things we write.\" During his brief literary career, he wrote more than a hundred short stories and fictional sketches. Crane's early fiction was based in camping expeditions in his teens; these stories eventually became known as \"The Sullivan County Tales and Sketches\". He considered these \"sketches\", which are mostly humorous and not of the same caliber of work as his later fiction, to be \"articles of many kinds,\" in that they are part fiction and part journalism.\nThe subject matter for his stories varied extensively. His early New York City sketches and Bowery tales accurately described the results of industrialization, immigration and the growth of cities and their slums. His collection of six short stories \"The Little Regiment\" covered the American Civil War, a subject for which he became famous with \"The Red Badge of Courage\". Although similar to Crane's novel, \"The Little Regiment\" was believed to lack vigor and originality. Realizing the limitations of these tales, Crane wrote: \"I have invented the sum of my invention with regard to war and this story keeps me in internal despair.\"\n\"The Open Boat and Other Stories\" (1898) contains seventeen short stories that deal with three periods in Crane's life: his Asbury Park boyhood, his trip to the West and Mexico in 1895, and his Cuban adventure in 1897. This collection was well received and included several of his most critically successful works. His 1899 collection \"The Monster and Other Stories\" was similarly well received.\nTwo posthumously published collections were not as successful. In August 1900 \"The Whilomville Stories\" were published, a collection of thirteen stories that Crane wrote during the last year of his life. The work deals almost exclusively with boyhood, and the stories are drawn from events occurring in Port Jervis, where Crane lived from the age of six to eleven. Focusing on small-town America, the stories tend toward sentimentality, but remain perceptive of the lives of children. \"Wounds in the Rain\", published in September 1900, contains fictional tales based on Crane's reports for the \"World\" and the \"Journal\" during the Spanish\u2013American War. These stories, which Crane wrote while desperately ill, include \"The Price of the Harness\" and \"The Lone Charge of William B. Perkins\" and are dramatic, ironic and sometimes humorous.\nDespite Crane's prolific output, only four stories\u2014\"The Open Boat\", \"The Blue Hotel\", \"The Bride Comes to Yellow Sky\", and \"The Monster\"\u2014have received extensive attention from scholars. H. G. Wells considered \"The Open Boat\" to be \"beyond all question, the crown of all his work\", and it is one of the most frequently discussed of Crane's works.\nPoetry.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;poem&gt;\nMany red devils ran from my heart\nAnd out upon the page.\nThey were so tiny\nThe pen could mash them.\nAnd many struggled in the ink.\nIt was strange\nTo write in this red muck\nOf things from my heart.\n&lt;/poem&gt;\n\u2014 Stephen Crane\nCrane's poems, which he preferred to call \"lines\", are typically not given as much scholarly attention as his fiction; no anthology contained Crane's verse until 1926. Although it is not certain when Crane began to write poetry seriously, he once said that his overall poetic aim was \"to give my ideas of life as a whole, so far as I know it\". The poetic style used in both of his books of poetry, \"The Black Riders and Other Lines\" and \"War is Kind\", was unconventional for the time in that it was written in free verse without rhyme, meter, or even titles for individual works. They are typically short in length; although several poems, such as \"Do not weep, maiden, for war is kind\", use stanzas and refrains, most do not. Crane also differed from his peers and later poets in that his work contains allegory, dialectic and narrative situations.\nCritic Ruth Miller claimed that Crane wrote \"an intellectual poetry rather than a poetry that evokes feeling, a poetry that stimulates the mind rather than arouses the heart\". In the most complexly organized poems, the significance of the states of mind or feelings is ambiguous, but Crane's poems tend to affirm certain elemental attitudes, beliefs, opinions and stances toward God, man and the universe. \"The Black Riders\" in particular is essentially a dramatic concept and the poems provide continuity within the dramatic structure. There is also a dramatic interplay in which there is frequently a major voice reporting an incident seen or experienced. The second voice or additional voices represent a point of view which is revealed to be inferior; when these clash, a dominant attitude emerges.\nLegacy.\nIn four years, Crane published five novels, two volumes of poetry, three short story collections, two books of war stories, and numerous works of short fiction and reporting. Today he is mainly remembered for \"The Red Badge of Courage\". The novel has been adapted several times for the screen, including John Huston's 1951 version. By the time of his death, Crane had become one of the best known writers of his generation. His eccentric lifestyle, frequent newspaper reporting, association with other famous authors, and expatriate status made him somewhat of an international celebrity. Although most stories about his life tended toward the romantic, rumors about his alleged drug use and alcoholism persisted long after his death.\nBy the early 1920s, Crane and his work were nearly forgotten. It was not until Thomas Beer published his biography in 1923, which was followed by editor Wilson Follett's \"The Work of Stephen Crane\" (1925\u20131927), that Crane's writing came to the attention of a scholarly audience. Crane's reputation was then enhanced by writer friends such as Joseph Conrad, H. G. Wells and Ford Madox Ford, all of whom either published recollections or commented upon their time with Crane. John Berryman's 1950 biography of Crane further established him as an important American author. Since 1951 there has been a steady outpouring of articles, monographs, and reprints in Crane scholarship.\nToday, Crane is considered one of the most innovative writers of the 1890s. His peers, including Conrad and James, as well as later writers such as Robert Frost, Ezra Pound, and Willa Cather, hailed Crane as one of the finest creative spirits of his time. His work was described by Wells as \"the first expression of the opening mind of a new period, or, at least, the early emphatic phase of a new initiative.\" Wells said that \"beyond dispute\", Crane was \"the best writer of our generation, and his untimely death was an irreparable loss to our literature.\" Conrad wrote that Crane was an \"artist\" and \"a seer with a gift for rendering the significant on the surface of things and with an incomparable insight into primitive emotions\". Crane's work has proved inspirational for future writers; not only have scholars drawn similarities between Hemingway's \"A Farewell to Arms\" and \"The Red Badge of Courage\", but Crane's fiction is thought to have been an important inspiration for Hemingway and his fellow Modernists. In 1936, Hemingway wrote in \"Green Hills of Africa\" that \"The good writers are Henry James, Stephen Crane, and Mark Twain.\" Crane's poetry is thought to have been a precursor to the Imagist movement, and his short fiction has also influenced American literature. \"The Open Boat\", \"The Blue Hotel\", \"The Monster\" and \"The Bride Comes to Yellow Sky\" are generally considered by critics to be examples of Crane's best work.\nBadenweiler and the house where he died became a tourist attraction; Alexander Woollcott attested to the fact that, long after Crane's death, tourists would be directed to the room where he died. Columbia University Rare Book and Manuscript Library has a collection of Crane and Taylor's personal correspondence dating from 1895 to 1908. Near his brother Edmund's Sullivan County home in New York, where Crane stayed for a short time, a pond is named after him. The Stephen Crane House in Asbury Park, New Jersey, where the author lived with his siblings for nine years, is operated as a museum dedicated to his life and work. Syracuse University has an annual Stephen Crane Lecture Series.\nColumbia University purchased much of the Stephen Crane materials held by Cora Crane at her death. The Crane Collection is one of the largest in the nation of his materials. Columbia University had an exhibit: \"'The Tall Swift Shadow of a Ship at Night': Stephen and Cora Crane\", November 2, 1995 through February 16, 1996, about the lives of the couple, featuring letters and other documents and memorabilia.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\nPrimary sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nv.1: Bowery Tales. .\nv.2: The Red Badge of Courage. .\nv.3: The Third Violet. Active Service. .\nv.4: The O'Ruddy. .\nv.5: Tales of Adventure. .\nv.6: Tales of War. .\nv.7: Tales of Whilomville. .\nv.8: Tales, Sketches, and Reports. .\nv.9: Reports of War. .\nv.10: Poems and Literary Remains. .\nSecondary sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
