{"id": "59364", "revid": "49402000", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59364", "title": "Methionine", "text": "Sulfur-containing amino acid\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chembox/styles.css\"/&gt;\nChemical compound\nMethionine (symbol Met or M) () is an essential amino acid in humans. Compared to other amino acids, methionine has particularly decisive biosynthetic roles. It is the precursor to the amino acid cysteine and the pervasive methylation agent rSAM. Methionine is required for protein synthesis, which is initiated by N-formylmethionine-sRNA.\nMethionine was first isolated in 1921 by John Howard Mueller. It is encoded by the codon AUG. It was named by Satoru Odake in 1925, as an abbreviation of its structural description 2-amino-4-(methylthio)butanoic acid.\nBiochemical details.\nMethionine (abbreviated as Met or M; encoded by the codon AUG) is an \u03b1-amino acid that is used in the biosynthesis of proteins. It contains a carboxyl group (which is in the deprotonated \u2212COO\u2212 form under biological pH conditions), an amino group (which is in the protonated \u2212NH3+ form under biological pH conditions) located in \u03b1-position with respect to the carboxyl group, and an \"S\"-methyl thioether side chain, classifying it as a nonpolar, aliphatic amino acid.\nIn nuclear genes of eukaryotes and in Archaea, methionine is coded for by the start codon, meaning it indicates the start of the coding region and is the first amino acid produced in a nascent polypeptide during mRNA translation.\nA proteinogenic amino acid.\nCysteine and methionine are the two sulfur-containing proteinogenic amino acids. Excluding the few exceptions where methionine may act as a redox sensor (e.g.,methionine sulfoxide), methionine residues do not have a catalytic role. This is in contrast to cysteine residues, where the thiol group has a catalytic role in many proteins. The thioether within methionine does however have a minor structural role due to the stability effect of S/\u03c0 interactions between the side chain sulfur atom and aromatic amino acids in one-third of all known protein structures. This lack of a strong role is reflected in experiments where little effect is seen in proteins where methionine is replaced by norleucine, a straight hydrocarbon sidechain amino acid which lacks the thioether.\nIt has been conjectured that norleucine was present in early versions of the genetic code, but methionine intruded into the final version of the genetic code due to its role in the cofactor \"S\"-adenosylmethionine (rSAM). This situation is not unique and may have occurred with ornithine and arginine.\nEncoding.\nMethionine is one of only two amino acids encoded by a single codon (AUG) in the standard genetic code (tryptophan, encoded by UGG, is the other). In reflection to the evolutionary origin of its codon, the other AUN codons encode isoleucine, which is also a hydrophobic amino acid. In the mitochondrial genome of several organisms, including metazoa and yeast, the codon AUA also encodes for methionine. In the standard genetic code AUA codes for isoleucine and the respective tRNA (\"ileX\" in \"Escherichia coli\") uses the unusual base lysidine (bacteria) or agmatidine (archaea) to discriminate against AUG.\nThe methionine codon AUG is also the most common start codon. A \"Start\" codon is message for a ribosome that signals the initiation of protein translation from mRNA when the AUG codon is in a Kozak consensus sequence. As a consequence, methionine is often incorporated into the \"N\"-terminal position of proteins in eukaryotes and archaea during translation, although it can be removed by post-translational modification. In bacteria, the derivative \"N\"-formylmethionine is used as the initial amino acid.\nDerivatives.\n\"S\"-Adenosylmethionine.\nThe methionine-derivative \"S\"-adenosylmethionine (rSAM) is a cofactor that serves mainly as a methyl donor. rSAM is composed of an adenosyl molecule (via 5\u2032 carbon) attached to the sulfur of methionine. It is a sulfonium cation that releases a methyl radical upon reduction.\nBiosynthesis.\nAs an essential amino acid, methionine is not synthesized \"de novo\" in humans and other animals, which must ingest methionine or methionine-containing proteins. In plants and microorganisms, methionine biosynthesis belongs to the aspartate family, along with threonine and lysine (via diaminopimelate, but not via \u03b1-aminoadipate). The main backbone is derived from aspartic acid, while the sulfur may come from cysteine, methanethiol, or hydrogen sulfide.\nThe pathway using cysteine is called the \"transsulfuration pathway\", while the pathway using hydrogen sulfide (or methanethiol) is called \"direct-sulfurylation pathway\".\nCysteine is similarly produced, namely it can be made from an activated serine and either from homocysteine (\"reverse transsulfurylation route\") or from hydrogen sulfide (\"direct sulfurylation route\"); the activated serine is generally \"O\"-acetylserine (via CysK or CysM in \"E. coli\"), but in \"Aeropyrum pernix\" and some other archaea \"O\"-phosphoserine is used. CysK and CysM are homologues, but belong to the PLP fold type III clade.\nTranssulfurylation pathway.\nEnzymes involved in the \"E. coli\" transsulfurylation route of methionine biosynthesis:\nOther biochemical pathways.\nAlthough mammals cannot synthesize methionine, they can still use it in a variety of biochemical pathways:\nCatabolism.\nMethionine is converted to \"S\"-adenosylmethionine (rSAM) by (1) methionine adenosyltransferase.\nrSAM serves as a methyl donor in many (2) methyltransferase reactions, and is converted to \"S\"-adenosylhomocysteine (SAH).\n(3) Adenosylhomocysteinase\ncysteine.\nRegeneration.\nMethionine can be regenerated from homocysteine via (4) methionine synthase in a reaction that requires vitamin B12 as a cofactor.\nHomocysteine can also be remethylated using glycine betaine (\"N\",\"N\",\"N\"-trimethylglycine, TMG) to methionine via the enzyme betaine-homocysteine methyltransferase (E.C.2.1.1.5, BHMT). BHMT makes up to 1.5% of all the soluble protein of the liver, and recent evidence suggests that it may have a greater influence on methionine and homocysteine homeostasis than methionine synthase.\nReverse-transulfurylation pathway: conversion to cysteine.\nHomocysteine can be converted to cysteine.\nMetabolic diseases.\nThe degradation of methionine is impaired in the following metabolic diseases:\nChemical synthesis.\nThe industrial synthesis combines acrolein, methanethiol, and cyanide, which affords the hydantoin. Racemic methionine can also be synthesized from diethyl sodium phthalimidomalonate by alkylation with chloroethylmethylsulfide (ClCH2CH2SCH3) followed by hydrolysis and decarboxylation. Also see Methanol.\nHuman nutrition.\nThere is inconclusive clinical evidence on methionine supplementation. Dietary restriction of methionine can lead to bone-related disorders.\nOverconsumption of methionine, the methyl group donor in DNA methylation, is related to cancer growth in a number of studies.\nRequirements.\nThe Food and Nutrition Board of the U.S. Institute of Medicine set Recommended Dietary Allowances (RDAs) for essential amino acids in 2002. For methionine combined with cysteine, for adults 19 years and older, 19\u00a0mg/kg body weight/day.\nThis translates to about 1.33 grams per day for a 70 kilogram individual.\nDietary sources.\nHigh levels of methionine can be found in eggs, meat, and fish; sesame seeds, Brazil nuts, and some other plant seeds; and cereal grains. Most fruits and vegetables contain very little. Most legumes, though protein dense, are low in methionine. Proteins without adequate methionine are not considered to be complete proteins. For that reason, racemic methionine is sometimes added as an ingredient to pet foods.\nHealth.\nLoss of methionine has been linked to senile greying of hair. Its lack leads to a buildup of hydrogen peroxide in hair follicles, a reduction in tyrosinase effectiveness, and a gradual loss of hair color. Methionine raises the intracellular concentration of glutathione, thereby promoting antioxidant-mediated cell defense and redox regulation. It also protects cells against dopamine induced nigral cell loss by binding oxidative metabolites.\nMethionine is an intermediate in the biosynthesis of cysteine, carnitine, taurine, lecithin, phosphatidylcholine, and other phospholipids. Improper conversion of methionine can lead to atherosclerosis due to accumulation of homocysteine.\nOther uses.\n-Methionine is sometimes given as a supplement to dogs; It helps reduce the chances of kidney stones in dogs. Methionine is also known to increase the urinary excretion of quinidine by acidifying the urine. Aminoglycoside antibiotics used to treat urinary tract infections work best in alkaline conditions, and urinary acidification from using methionine can reduce its effectiveness. If a dog is on a diet that acidifies the urine, methionine should not be used.\nMethionine is allowed as a supplement to organic poultry feed under the US certified organic program.\nMethionine can be used as a nontoxic pesticide option against giant swallowtail caterpillars, which are a serious pest to orange crops.\nRestricting methionine intake.\nMore and more studies show that restricting methionine intake can increase the lifespan of some animals.\nIn 2005, a study showed that restricting methionine intake without energy restriction in rodents increases their lifespan.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59366", "revid": "44992897", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59366", "title": "Large intestine", "text": "Last part of the digestive system in vertebrates\nThe large intestine, also known as the large bowel, is the last part of the gastrointestinal tract and of the digestive system in tetrapods. Water is absorbed here and the remaining waste material is stored in the rectum as feces before being removed by defecation. The colon (progressing from the ascending colon to the transverse, the descending and finally the sigmoid colon) is the longest portion of the large intestine, and the terms \"large intestine\" and \"colon\" are often used interchangeably, but most sources define the large intestine as the combination of the cecum, colon, rectum, and anal canal. Some other sources exclude the anal canal.\nIn humans, the large intestine begins in the right iliac region of the pelvis, just at or below the waist, where it is joined to the end of the small intestine at the cecum, via the ileocecal valve. It then continues as the colon ascending the abdomen, across the width of the abdominal cavity as the transverse colon, and then descending to the rectum and its endpoint at the anal canal. Overall, in humans, the large intestine is about long, which is about one-fifth of the whole length of the human gastrointestinal tract.\nStructure.\nThe colon of the large intestine is the last part of the digestive system. It has a segmented appearance due to a series of saccules called haustra. It extracts water and salt from solid wastes before they are eliminated from the body and is the site in which the fermentation of unabsorbed material by the gut microbiota occurs. Unlike the small intestine, the colon does not play a major role in absorption of foods and nutrients. About 1.5 litres or 45 ounces of water arrives in the colon each day.\nThe colon is the longest part of the large intestine and its average length in the adult human is 65 inches or 166\u00a0cm (range of 80 to 313\u00a0cm) for males, and 61 inches or 155\u00a0cm (range of 80 to 214\u00a0cm) for females.\nSections.\nIn mammals, the large intestine consists of the cecum (including the appendix), colon (the longest part), rectum, and anal canal.\nThe four sections of the colon are: the ascending colon, transverse colon, descending colon, and sigmoid colon. These sections turn at the colic flexures.\nThe parts of the colon are either intraperitoneal or behind it in the retroperitoneum. Retroperitoneal organs, in general, do not have a complete covering of peritoneum, so they are fixed in location. Intraperitoneal organs are completely surrounded by peritoneum and are therefore mobile. Of the colon, the ascending colon, descending colon and rectum are retroperitoneal, while the cecum, appendix, transverse colon and sigmoid colon are intraperitoneal. This is important as it affects which organs can be easily accessed during surgery, such as a laparotomy.\nIn terms of diameter, the cecum is the widest, averaging slightly less than 9\u00a0cm in healthy individuals, and the transverse colon averages less than 6\u00a0cm in diameter. The descending and sigmoid colon are slightly smaller, with the sigmoid colon averaging in diameter. Diameters larger than certain thresholds for each colonic section can be diagnostic for megacolon.\nCecum and appendix.\nThe cecum is the first section of the large intestine and is involved in digestion, while the appendix which develops embryologically from it, is not involved in digestion and is considered to be part of the gut-associated lymphoid tissue. The function of the appendix is uncertain, but some sources believe that it has a role in housing a sample of the gut microbiota, and is able to help to repopulate the colon with microbiota if depleted during the course of an immune reaction. The appendix has also been shown to have a high concentration of lymphatic cells.\nAscending colon.\nThe ascending colon is the first of four main sections of the large intestine. It is connected to the small intestine by a section of bowel called the cecum. The ascending colon runs upwards through the abdominal cavity toward the transverse colon for approximately eight inches (20\u00a0cm).\nOne of the main functions of the colon is to remove the water and other key nutrients from waste material and recycle it. As the waste material exits the small intestine through the ileocecal valve, it will move into the cecum and then to the ascending colon where this process of extraction starts. The waste material is pumped upwards toward the transverse colon by peristalsis. The ascending colon is sometimes attached to the appendix via Gerlach's valve. In ruminants, the ascending colon is known as the \"spiral colon\".\nTransverse colon.\nThe transverse colon is the part of the colon from the hepatic flexure, also known as the right colic, (the turn of the colon by the liver) to the splenic flexure also known as the left colic, (the turn of the colon by the spleen). The transverse colon hangs off the stomach, attached to it by a large fold of peritoneum called the greater omentum. On the posterior side, the transverse colon is connected to the posterior abdominal wall by a mesentery known as the transverse mesocolon.\nThe transverse colon is encased in peritoneum, and is therefore mobile (unlike the parts of the colon immediately before and after it).\nThe proximal two-thirds of the transverse colon is perfused by the middle colic artery, a branch of the superior mesenteric artery (SMA), while the latter third is supplied by branches of the inferior mesenteric artery (IMA). The \"watershed\" area between these two blood supplies, which represents the embryologic division between the midgut and hindgut, is an area sensitive to ischemia.\nDescending colon.\nThe descending colon is the part of the colon from the splenic flexure to the beginning of the sigmoid colon. One function of the descending colon in the digestive system is to store feces that will be emptied into the rectum. It is retroperitoneal in two-thirds of humans. In the other third, it has a (usually short) mesentery. The arterial supply comes via the left colic artery. The descending colon is also called the \"distal gut\", as it is further along the gastrointestinal tract than the proximal gut. Gut flora are very dense in this region.\nSigmoid colon.\nThe sigmoid colon is the part of the large intestine after the descending colon and before the rectum. The name \"sigmoid\" means S-shaped (see sigmoid; cf. sigmoid sinus). The walls of the sigmoid colon are muscular and contract to increase the pressure inside the colon, causing the stool to move into the rectum.\nThe sigmoid colon is supplied with blood from several branches (usually between 2 and 6) of the sigmoid arteries, a branch of the IMA. The IMA terminates as the superior rectal artery.\nSigmoidoscopy is a common diagnostic technique used to examine the sigmoid colon.\nRectum.\nThe rectum is the last section of the large intestine. It holds the formed feces awaiting elimination via defecation.\nIt is about 12\u00a0cm long.\nAppearance.\nThe cecum \u2013 the first part of the large intestine\nThe taenia coli run the length of the large intestine. Because the taenia coli are shorter than the large bowel itself, the colon becomes \"sacculated\", forming the haustra of the colon which are the shelf-like intraluminal projections.\nBlood supply.\nArterial supply to the colon comes from branches of the superior mesenteric artery (SMA) and inferior mesenteric artery (IMA). Flow between these two systems communicates via the marginal artery of the colon that runs parallel to the colon for its entire length. Historically, a structure variously identified as the arc of Riolan or meandering mesenteric artery (of Moskowitz) was thought to connect the proximal SMA to the proximal IMA. This variably present structure would be important if either vessel were occluded. However, at least one review of the literature questions the existence of this vessel, with some experts calling for the abolition of these terms from future medical literature.\nVenous drainage usually mirrors colonic arterial supply, with the inferior mesenteric vein draining into the splenic vein, and the superior mesenteric vein joining the splenic vein to form the hepatic portal vein that then enters the liver. Middle rectal veins are an exception, delivering blood to inferior vena cava and bypassing the liver.\nLymphatic drainage.\nLymphatic drainage from the ascending colon and proximal two-thirds of the transverse colon is to the ileocolic lymph nodes and the superior mesenteric lymph nodes, which drain into the cisterna chyli. The lymph from the distal one-third of the transverse colon, the descending colon, the sigmoid colon, and the upper rectum drain into the inferior mesenteric and colic lymph nodes. The lower rectum to the anal canal above the pectinate line drain to the internal ileocolic nodes. The anal canal below the pectinate line drains into the superficial inguinal nodes. The pectinate line only roughly marks this transition.\nNerve supply.\nSympathetic supply: superior &amp; inferior mesenteric ganglia;\nparasympathetic supply: vagus &amp; sacral plexus (S2-S4)\nDevelopment.\nThe endoderm, mesoderm and ectoderm are germ layers that develop in a process called gastrulation. Gastrulation occurs early in human development. The gastrointestinal tract is derived from these layers.\nVariation.\nOne variation on the normal anatomy of the colon occurs when extra loops form, resulting in a colon that is up to five metres longer than normal. This condition, referred to as redundant colon, typically has no direct major health consequences, though rarely volvulus occurs, resulting in obstruction and requiring immediate medical attention. A significant indirect health consequence is that use of a standard adult colonoscope is difficult and in some cases impossible when a redundant colon is present, though specialized variants on the instrument (including the pediatric variant) are useful in overcoming this problem.\nMicroanatomy.\nColonic crypts.\nThe wall of the large intestine is lined with simple columnar epithelium with invaginations. The invaginations are called the intestinal glands or colonic crypts.\nThe colon crypts are shaped like microscopic thick walled test tubes with a central hole down the length of the tube (the crypt lumen). Four tissue sections are shown here, two cut across the long axes of the crypts and two cut parallel to the long axes. In these images the cells have been stained by immunohistochemistry to show a brown-orange color if the cells produce a mitochondrial protein called cytochrome c oxidase subunit I (CCOI). The nuclei of the cells (located at the outer edges of the cells lining the walls of the crypts) are stained blue-gray with haematoxylin. As seen in panels C and D, crypts are about 75 to about 110 cells long. Baker et al. found that the average crypt circumference is 23 cells. Thus, by the images shown here, there are an average of about 1,725 to 2,530 cells per colonic crypt. Nooteboom et al. measuring the number of cells in a small number of crypts reported a range of 1,500 to 4,900 cells per colonic crypt. Cells are produced at the crypt base and migrate upward along the crypt axis before being shed into the colonic lumen days later. There are 5 to 6 stem cells at the bases of the crypts.\nAs estimated from the image in panel A, there are about 100 colonic crypts per square millimeter of the colonic epithelium. Since the average length of the human colon is 160.5\u00a0cm and the average inner circumference of the colon is 6.2\u00a0cm, the inner surface epithelial area of the human colon has an average area of about 995\u00a0cm2, which includes 9,950,000 (close to 10 million) crypts.\nIn the four tissue sections shown here, many of the intestinal glands have cells with a mitochondrial DNA mutation in the \"CCOI\" gene and appear mostly white, with their main color being the blue-gray staining of the nuclei. As seen in panel B, a portion of the stem cells of three crypts appear to have a mutation in \"CCOI\", so that 40% to 50% of the cells arising from those stem cells form a white segment in the cross cut area.\nOverall, the percent of crypts deficient for CCOI is less than 1% before age 40, but then increases linearly with age. Colonic crypts deficient for CCOI in women reaches, on average, 18% in women and 23% in men by 80\u201384 years of age.\nCrypts of the colon can reproduce by fission, as seen in panel C, where a crypt is fissioning to form two crypts, and in panel B where at least one crypt appears to be fissioning. Most crypts deficient in CCOI are in clusters of crypts (clones of crypts) with two or more CCOI-deficient crypts adjacent to each other (see panel D).\nMucosa.\nAbout 150 of the many thousands of protein coding genes expressed in the large intestine, some are specific to the mucous membrane in different regions and include CEACAM7.\nFunction.\nThe large intestine absorbs water and any remaining absorbable nutrients from the food before sending the indigestible matter to the rectum. The colon absorbs vitamins that are created by the colonic bacteria, such as thiamine, riboflavin, and vitamin K. It also compacts feces, and stores fecal matter in the rectum until it can be discharged via the anus in defecation.\nThe large intestine also secretes potassium and chloride. Recycling of various nutrients takes place in the colon. Examples include fermentation of carbohydrates, short chain fatty acids, and urea cycling.\nThe appendix contains a small amount of mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue which gives the appendix an undetermined role in immunity. However, the appendix is known to be important in fetal life as it contains endocrine cells that release biogenic amines and peptide hormones important for homeostasis during early growth and development.\nBy the time chyme enters the large intestine, the small intestine has absorbed nearly all digestible nutrients and approximately 90% of the ingested water, based on volume measurements showing that only about 1\u20132 litres of fluid pass into the colon from a daily intestinal load of roughly 9\u201310 litres. Indeed, as demonstrated by the commonality of ileostomy procedures, it is possible for many people to live without large portions of their large intestine, or even without it completely. At this point only some electrolytes like sodium, magnesium, and chloride are left as well as indigestible parts of ingested food (e.g., a large part of ingested amylose, starch which has been shielded from digestion heretofore, and dietary fiber, which is largely indigestible carbohydrate in either soluble or insoluble form). As the chyme moves through the large intestine, most of the remaining water is removed, while the chyme is mixed with mucus and bacteria (known as gut flora), and becomes feces. The ascending colon receives fecal material as a liquid. The muscles of the colon then move the watery waste material forward and slowly absorb all the excess water, causing the stools to gradually solidify as they move along into the descending colon.\nThe bacteria break down some of the fiber for their own nourishment and create acetate, propionate, and butyrate as waste products, which in turn are used by the cell lining of the colon for nourishment. No protein is made available. In humans, perhaps 10% of the undigested carbohydrate thus becomes available, though this may vary with diet; in other animals, including other apes and primates, who have proportionally larger colons, more is made available, thus permitting a higher portion of plant material in the diet. The large intestine produces no digestive enzymes \u2014 chemical digestion is completed in the small intestine before the chyme reaches the large intestine. The pH in the colon varies between 5.5 and 7 (slightly acidic to neutral).\nStanding gradient osmosis.\nWater absorption at the colon typically proceeds against a transmucosal osmotic pressure gradient. The \"standing gradient osmosis\" is the reabsorption of water against the osmotic gradient in the intestines. Cells occupying the intestinal lining pump sodium ions into the intercellular space, raising the osmolarity of the intercellular fluid. This hypertonic fluid creates an osmotic pressure that drives water into the lateral intercellular spaces by osmosis via tight junctions and adjacent cells, which then in turn moves across the basement membrane and into the capillaries, while more sodium ions are pumped again into the intercellular fluid. Although water travels down an osmotic gradient in each individual step, overall, water usually travels against the osmotic gradient due to the pumping of sodium ions into the intercellular fluid. This allows the large intestine to absorb water despite the blood in capillaries being hypotonic compared to the fluid within the intestinal lumen.\nGut flora.\nThe large intestine houses over 700 species of bacteria that perform a variety of functions, as well as fungi, protozoa, and archaea. Species diversity varies by geography and diet. The microbes in a human distal gut often number in the vicinity of 100 trillion, and can weigh around 200 grams (0.44 pounds). This mass of mostly symbiotic microbes has recently been called the latest human organ to be \"discovered\" or in other words, the \"forgotten organ\".\nThe large intestine absorbs some of the products formed by the bacteria inhabiting this region. Undigested polysaccharides (fiber) are metabolized to short-chain fatty acids by bacteria in the large intestine and absorbed by passive diffusion. The bicarbonate that the large intestine secretes helps to neutralize the increased acidity resulting from the formation of these fatty acids.\nThese bacteria also produce large amounts of vitamins, especially vitamin K and biotin (a B vitamin), for absorption into the blood. Although this source of vitamins, in general, provides only a small part of the daily requirement, it makes a significant contribution when dietary vitamin intake is low. An individual who depends on absorption of vitamins formed by bacteria in the large intestine may become vitamin-deficient if treated with antibiotics that inhibit the vitamin producing species of bacteria as well as the intended disease-causing bacteria.\nOther bacterial products include gas (flatus), which is a mixture of nitrogen and carbon dioxide, with small amounts of the gases hydrogen, methane, and hydrogen sulfide. Bacterial fermentation of undigested polysaccharides produces these. Some of the fecal odor is due to indoles, metabolized from the amino acid tryptophan. The normal flora is also essential in the development of certain tissues, including the cecum and lymphatics.\nThey are also involved in the production of cross-reactive antibodies. These are antibodies produced by the immune system against the normal flora, that are also effective against related pathogens, thereby preventing infection or invasion.\nThe two most prevalent phyla of the colon are Bacillota and Bacteroidota. The ratio between the two seems to vary widely as reported by the Human Microbiome Project. Bacteroides are implicated in the initiation of colitis and colon cancer. Bifidobacteria are also abundant, and are often described as 'friendly bacteria'.\nA mucus layer protects the large intestine from attacks from colonic commensal bacteria.\nClinical significance.\nDisease.\nFollowing are the most common diseases or disorders of the colon:\nColonoscopy.\nColonoscopy is the endoscopic examination of the large intestine and the distal part of the small bowel with a CCD camera or a fiber optic camera on a flexible tube passed through the anus. It can provide a visual diagnosis (e.g. ulceration, polyps) and grants the opportunity for biopsy or removal of suspected colorectal cancer lesions. Colonoscopy can remove polyps as small as one millimetre or less. Once polyps are removed, they can be studied with the aid of a microscope to determine if they are precancerous or not. It takes 15 years or fewer for a polyp to turn cancerous.\nColonoscopy is similar to sigmoidoscopy\u2014the difference being related to which parts of the colon each can examine. A colonoscopy allows an examination of the entire colon (1200\u20131500\u00a0mm in length). A sigmoidoscopy allows an examination of the distal portion (about 600\u00a0mm) of the colon, which may be sufficient because benefits to cancer survival of colonoscopy have been limited to the detection of lesions in the distal portion of the colon.\nA sigmoidoscopy is often used as a screening procedure for a full colonoscopy, often done in conjunction with a stool-based test such as a fecal occult blood test (FOBT), fecal immunochemical test (FIT), or multi-target stool DNA test (Cologuard) or blood-based test, SEPT9 DNA methylation test (Epi proColon). About 5% of these screened patients are referred to colonoscopy.\nVirtual colonoscopy, which uses 2D and 3D imagery reconstructed from computed tomography (CT) scans or from nuclear magnetic resonance (MR) scans, is also possible, as a totally non-invasive medical test, although it is not standard and still under investigation regarding its diagnostic abilities. Furthermore, virtual colonoscopy does not allow for therapeutic maneuvers such as polyp/tumour removal or biopsy nor visualization of lesions smaller than 5 millimeters. If a growth or polyp is detected using CT colonography, a standard colonoscopy would still need to be performed. Additionally, surgeons have lately been using the term pouchoscopy to refer to a colonoscopy of the ileo-anal pouch.\nOther animals.\nThe large intestine is truly distinct only in tetrapods, in which it is almost always separated from the small intestine by an ileocaecal valve. In most vertebrates, however, it is a relatively short structure running directly to the anus, although noticeably wider than the small intestine. Although the caecum is present in most amniotes, only in mammals does the remainder of the large intestine develop into a true colon.\nIn some small mammals, the colon is straight, as it is in other tetrapods, but, in the majority of mammalian species, it is divided into ascending and descending portions; a distinct transverse colon is typically present only in primates. However, the taeniae coli and accompanying haustra are not found in either carnivorans or ruminants. The rectum of mammals (other than monotremes) is derived from the cloaca of other vertebrates, and is, therefore, not truly homologous with the \"rectum\" found in these species.\nIn some fish, there is no true large intestine, but simply a short rectum connecting the end of the digestive part of the gut to the cloaca. In sharks, this includes a \"rectal gland\" that secretes salt to help the animal maintain osmotic balance with the seawater. The gland somewhat resembles a caecum in structure but is not a homologous structure.\nReferences.\n \"This article incorporates text in the public domain from the 20th edition of\" Gray's Anatomy \"(1918)\"\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59367", "revid": "4207251", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59367", "title": "John Murray, 4th Earl of Dunmore", "text": "British Army officer and colonial administrator (1730\u20131809)\nJohn Murray, 4th Earl of Dunmore (1730 \u2013 25 February 1809) was a British Army officer and colonial administrator who served as the governor of Virginia from 1771 to 1775. Dunmore was named governor of New York in 1770. He succeeded to the same position in the colony of Virginia the following year after the death of Norborne Berkeley, 4th Baron Botetourt. As Virginia's governor, Dunmore directed a series of campaigns against the trans-Appalachian Indians, known as Lord Dunmore's War. He is noted for issuing a 1775 document, Dunmore's Proclamation, offering freedom to slaves who fought for the British Crown against Patriot rebels in Virginia. Dunmore fled to New York after the burning of Norfolk in 1776 and later returned to Britain. He was Governor of the Bahamas from 1787 to 1796.\nEarly life.\nMurray was born in Taymouth, Scotland, the eldest son of William Murray, 3rd Earl of Dunmore, by his marriage to Catherine Nairne; he was a nephew of John Murray, 2nd Earl of Dunmore. In 1745, both Murray, then only 15, and his father joined the ill-fated Rising of \"Bonnie Prince Charlie\" (Charles Edward Stuart). The young Murray was appointed as a page to Prince Charles. The second Earl, his uncle, remained loyal to the Hanoverians.\nAfter the Jacobite Army was defeated at the Battle of Culloden in 1746, William Murray was imprisoned in the Tower of London, and his family was put under house arrest. By 1750, William Murray had received a conditional pardon. John Murray was now aged twenty and joined the British Army. He served as a captain in the Seven Years' War, leading raids on the coast of France until resigning his commission around 1760.\nIn 1756, after the deaths of his uncle and father, he became the fourth Earl of Dunmore. In 1759, Dunmore married Lady Charlotte Stewart (1740 \u2013 11 November 1818), a daughter of Alexander Stewart, 6th Earl of Galloway. They had five sons and three daughters:\nColonial governor of New York.\nDunmore was named the British governor of the Province of New York in 1770, but soon after his appointment, Virginia's governor, Norborne Berkeley, 4th Baron Botetourt (Lord Botetourt), died, and Dunmore was eventually named to replace him. William Tryon, the current governor of the Province of North Carolina, was correspondingly transferred to replace Dunmore in New York. Dunmore, who had already well-established himself in New York and owned over 50,000 acres of land in the colony, was unhappy to lose the lucrative post, complaining \"I asked for New York\u2014New York I took, and they have robbed me of it without my Consent.\" Two places in present-day Vermont, which was delineated from the New York and New Hampshire grants, took his name, and one retains it: Waterford was formed from \"Dunmore\" (which also included parts of today's St. Johnsbury and Concord) in Caledonia County, and there is still Lake Dunmore in Addison County.\nColonial governor of Virginia.\nLord Dunmore's War.\nDunmore arrived in Williamsburg to take up the post of royal governor of the Colony of Virginia on 25 September 1771. Despite growing issues with Great Britain, his predecessor, Lord Botetourt, had been a popular governor, even though he served only two years. Like many in the ruling class of Virginia, Dunmore acquired ownership over several slaves. As Virginia's colonial governor, Dunmore directed a series of campaigns against the Indians known as Lord Dunmore's War. The Shawnee were the main target of these attacks. He aimed to strengthen Virginia's claims in the west, particularly in the Ohio Country. However, as a byproduct, it was known he would increase his power base. Some even accused Dunmore of colluding with the Shawnees and arranging the war to deplete the Virginia militia and help safeguard the Loyalist cause, should there be a colonial rebellion. Dunmore, in his history of the Indian Wars, denied these accusations.\nBattle for control.\nLacking diplomatic skills, Dunmore tried to govern without consulting the House of Burgesses of the Colonial Assembly for more than a year, which exacerbated an already tense situation. Richard Henry Lee would later write of the deeply unpopular governor that, if British administrators had \"searched through the world for a person the best fitted to ruin their cause and procure union and success for these Colonies, they could not have found a more complete Agent than Lord Dunmore.\"\nWhen Dunmore finally convened the Colonial Assembly in March 1773, which was the only way he could deal with fiscal issues to finance his war through additional taxation, the burgesses instead first resolved to form a committee of correspondence to communicate their continued concerns about the Townshend Acts and Gaspee Affair to Great Britain. Dunmore immediately postponed the Assembly. Many burgesses gathered a short distance away at the Raleigh Tavern and continued discussing their problems with the new taxes, perceived corruption, and lack of representation in England. When Dunmore reconvened the Assembly in 1774, the burgesses passed a resolution declaring 1 June 1774 a day of fasting and prayer in Virginia. In response, Dunmore dissolved the House.\nThe burgesses again reconvened as the Second Virginia Convention and elected delegates to the Continental Congress. Dunmore issued a proclamation against electing delegates to the Congress but failed to take serious action. In March 1775, Patrick Henry's \"Give me Liberty or give me Death!\" speech delivered at St. John's Episcopal Church in Richmond helped convince delegates to approve a resolution calling for armed resistance.\nIn the face of rising unrest in the colony, Dunmore sought to deprive Virginia's militia of military supplies. Dunmore gave the key to the Williamsburg magazine to Lieutenant Henry Colins, commander of HMS \"Magdalen\", and ordered him to remove the powder, provoking what became known as the Gunpowder Incident. On the night of 20 April 1775, royal marines loaded fifteen half-barrels of powder into the governor's wagon, intent on transporting it down the Quarterpath Road to the James River and the British warship. Local militia rallied, and word of the incident spread across the colony.\nConfrontation with the Hanover militia.\nThe Hanover militia, led by Patrick Henry, arrived outside Williamsburg on 3 May. That same day, Dunmore evacuated his family from the Governor's Palace to his hunting lodge, Porto Bello, in nearby York County. On 6 May, Dunmore issued a proclamation against \"a \"certain\" Patrick Henry ... and a Number of deluded Followers\" who had organised \"an Independent Company ... and put themselves in a Posture of War.\"\nDunmore threatened to impose martial law and eventually retreated to Porto Bello to join his family. Dislodged by the Virginia rebels and wounded in the leg, on 8 June, Dunmore took refuge on the British warship in the York River. Over the following months, Dunmore sent many raiding parties to plunder plantations along the James, York, and Potomac rivers, particularly those owned by rebels. The British raiding parties exacerbated tensions by plundering Patriot supplies and encouraging their slaves to rebel. In December, George Washington, who had been installed only months before as commander in chief of the Continental Army, commented, \"I do not think that forcing his lordship on shipboard is sufficient. Nothing less than depriving him of life or liberty will secure peace to Virginia, as motives of resentment actuate his conduct to a degree equal to the total destruction of that colony.\"\nDunmore's Proclamation.\nDunmore is noted for Dunmore's Proclamation, also known as Lord Dunmore's Offer of Emancipation. Dated 7 November 1775 but proclaimed a week later, Dunmore thereby formally offered freedom to slaves who abandoned their Patriot masters to join the British. The proclamation appeared to respond to the legislature's proclamation that Dunmore had resigned his position by boarding a Royal Navy warship off Yorktown nearly six months earlier. However, by the end of the war, an estimated 800 to 2000 formerly enslaved people sought refuge with the British; some served in a military role, though the majority served in noncombatant roles.\nDunmore organized these Black Loyalists into the Ethiopian Regiment. However, despite winning the Battle of Kemp's Landing on 17 November 1775, Dunmore lost decisively at the Battle of Great Bridge on 9 December 1775. Following that defeat, Dunmore loaded his troops and many Virginia Loyalists onto Royal Navy ships waiting offshore. Smallpox spread in the confined quarters, and some 500 of the 800 members of the Ethiopian Regiment died.\nFinal skirmishes and return to Britain.\nOn New Year's Day in 1776, Dunmore gave orders to burn waterfront buildings in Norfolk from which patriot troops were firing on his ships. However, the fire spread. The city burned, and with it, any hope that Dunmore's loyalists could return to Virginia. Dunmore retreated to New York. Some ships of his refugee fleet were sent south, mainly to Florida. Esek Hopkins, the new commander of the American navy, was given orders in early January 1776 to pursue Dunmore, who the Virginians viewed as a pirate, but Hopkins selected the Bahamas as a better target. When Dunmore realized he could not regain control in Virginia, he returned to Britain in July 1776. Dunmore continued to draw his pay as the colony's governor until 1783, when Britain recognized American independence.\nColonial governor of the Bahamas.\nFrom 1787 to 1796, Dunmore served as governor of the Bahamas. During his tenure as governor, the British issued land grants to American Loyalists who went into exile. The sparse population of the Bahamas tripled within a few years. The Loyalists developed cotton as a commodity crop, but it dwindled from insect damage and soil exhaustion. In addition to the slaves they brought with them, the Loyalist planters' descendants imported more enslaved people from Africa for labour.\nPeerage.\nDunmore sat as a Scottish representative peer in the House of Lords from 1761 to 1774 and from 1776 to 1790.\nDeath.\nDunmore died on 25 February 1809 in Ramsgate in Kent. He was succeeded in the earldom by his eldest son, George. The Countess of Dunmore died in 1819.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59369", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59369", "title": "First Digit Law", "text": ""}
{"id": "59370", "revid": "40890970", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59370", "title": "Bartholomew Badlesmere, 1st Baron Badlesmere", "text": "Member of the Parliament of England\nBartholomew de Badlesmere, 1st Baron Badlesmere (18 August 1275\u00a0\u2013 14 April 1322) was an English soldier, diplomat, member of parliament, landowner and nobleman. He was the son and heir of Sir Gunselm de Badlesmere (died ca. 1301) and Joan FitzBernard. He fought in the English army both in France and Scotland during the later years of the reign of Edward I of England and the earlier part of the reign of Edward II of England. He was executed after participating in an unsuccessful rebellion led by Thomas, 2nd Earl of Lancaster.\nCareer.\nThe earliest records of Bartholomew's life relate to his service in royal armies, which included campaigns in Gascony (1294), Flanders (about 1297) and Scotland (1298, 1300, 1301\u201304, 1306\u201308, 1310\u201311, 1314\u201319). However, even at a relatively young age his activities were not limited to soldiering. \nIn October 1300, he was one of the household of Henry de Lacy, Earl of Lincoln who were permitted by the King to accompany the Earl when he set out for Rome during the following month in order to complain to Pope Boniface VIII of injury done by the Scots.\nA writ issued on 13 April 1301, presumably soon after the death of Jocelin, Sir Gunselm de Badlesmere, initiated inquests into the identity of the next heir of lands that he held direct from the King. This led to a hearing on 30 April of that year in relation to property in Kent at Badlesmere and Donewelleshethe, where it was confirmed that the heir was his son Bartholomew, then aged 26.\nBartholomew de Badlesmere and Fulk Payfrer were the knights who represented the county of Kent at the Parliament that sat at Carlisle from January 1306/7 until 27 March 1307. Also in 1307 Bartholomew was appointed governor of Bristol Castle. In that role he took charge of the subjugation of the city when it defied royal authority in 1316.\nIn 1310, Bartholomew acted as deputy Constable of England on behalf of the Earl of Hereford. Bartholomew served as his lieutenant when Hereford refused to perform his duties in the Scottish campaign of 1310\u201311. He was one of the retinue of the Earl of Gloucester at the Battle of Bannockburn on 24 June 1314, Bartholomew's own sub-retinue consisting of at least 50 men. He was criticised for not coming to his aid when Gloucester lost his life in an impetuous attack on the Scottish schiltron on that occasion.\nIn the following January, Bartholomew was one of the many notables who attended the funeral of Piers Gaveston.\nOn 28 April 1316, Bartholomew was one of four men who were authorised to grant safe conducts in the King's name to Robert Bruce and other Scots so that they could come to England to negotiate a truce. In December of that year, he was commissioned, along with the Bishop of Ely and the Bishop of Norwich to go on an embassy to Pope John XXII at Avignon to seek his help against the Scots and request a Bull to release the King from his oath to the Ordinances. In June of the same year, Bartholomew's daughter Elizabeth married Edward, the son and heir of Roger Mortimer. Bartholomew was sufficiently wealthy to pay \u00a32,000 for the marriage, in exchange for which extensive property was settled on the bride.\nOn 1 November 1317, the King appointed Bartholomew as custodian of Leeds Castle in Kent This was followed by a transaction on 20 March 1318 by which the King granted the castle and manor of Leeds along with the advowson of the priory of Leeds to Bartholomew and his heirs in exchange for the manor and advowson of Adderley, Shropshire, which Bartholomew surrendered to the King \nBy late November 1317, Bartholomew made a compact with a number of noblemen and prelates, including Aymer de Valence, 2nd Earl of Pembroke, Humphrey de Bohun, 4th Earl of Hereford and the Archbishop of Canterbury with the aim of reducing the influence on the King of advisors of whom they disapproved. Bartholomew and his associates formed a loose grouping which has been referred to by modern historians as the \"Middle Party\", who detested alike Edward's minions, such as the Hugh le Despenser, 1st Earl of Winchester, and his violent enemies such as Lancaster. Although he was hostile to Thomas, 2nd Earl of Lancaster, Bartholomew helped to make peace between the king and Lancaster in 1318.\nOn 1 October 1318, Bartholomew was with the King at York, setting out to repel an invasion by the Scots. Nineteen days later, he was appointed as the King's household steward in place of William Montagu. This position was of major importance, as it provided continual access to the King's presence and considerable influence over who could obtain access to the king. Bartholomew was still holding this appointment in June 1321. Financial grants that he received during this period included \u00a3500 on appointment as steward and over \u00a31,300 in October 1319.\nIn 1319, Bartholomew obtained the king's licence to found a priory on his manor of Badlesmere, but the proposed priory was never established. In June of the following year, he hosted a splendid reception at Chilham Castle for Edward II and his entourage when they were travelling to Dover en route for France. Also in 1320, he was granted control of Dover Castle and Wardenship of the Cinque Ports and in 1321 was appointed governor of Tunbridge Castle.\nDuring the earlier part of 1321, Bartholomew, along with the Bishop of Worcester and the Bishop of Carlisle and others represented the King in unsuccessful negotiations with the Scots for either a permanent peace or an extended truce.\nRebellion.\nBy the summer of 1321, Bartholomew defied the King by associating with their mutual enemy the Earl of Lancaster and his allies in their active opposition to Edward's \"evil councillors\" such as the Despensers. The Lancastrian forces moved from the North to London, reaching the capital by the end of July.\nIn the autumn, the King started to apply pressure targeted on Bartholomew, probably partly because many of his manors were closer to London than those of magnates such as Lancaster and partly because of anger at the disloyalty of his own household steward. Edward took control of Dover Castle and forbade Bartholomew entrance to the county of Kent, an injunction that he promptly breached. Bartholomew then returned to Witney, Oxfordshire, where a tournament attended by many of his new allies was being held. When returning to London from a pilgrimage to Canterbury, the Queen did not take the most direct route but detoured to Leeds Castle, where she and her armed retinue demanded access, precipitating the siege and its aftermath that is described in detail in the article about Bartholomew's wife Margaret de Clare, Baroness Badlesmere.\nAlthough Bartholomew assembled an armed force and marched from Witney towards Kent, by the time he reached Kingston upon Thames it was clear that he would not receive help from Lancaster and his followers and so he was not able to take effective action to relieve the siege. During the following months, civil war broke out.\nOn 26 December 1321, the King ordered the Sheriff of Gloucester to arrest Bartholomew. Shortly afterwards, the King offered safe conducts to the rebels who would come over to him, with the specific exception of Bartholomew de Badlesmere.\nDetails contained in arrest warrants signpost the progress of Bartholomew and his companions across England. By 15 January 1321/2, they had occupied and burned the town of Bridgnorth and sacked the castles at Elmley and Hanley. By 23 February, the rebels had been sighted in Northamptonshire. On 1 March, Bartholomew was reported as one of a number of prominent rebels who had reached Pontefract.\nOn 11 March the sheriff of Nottingham and Derby was ordered to arrest the same group, who had taken Burton upon Trent but they departed from that town when the royal army approached. On 16 March 1321/22, the Earl of Lancaster and his allies were defeated at the Battle of Boroughbridge.\nDeath.\nBartholomew fled south from Boroughbridge and, according to the \"Livere de Reis\", was captured in a small wood near Brickden and taken by the Earl of Mar to Canterbury. Alternative details appear in John Leland's \"Collectanea\", which states that \"Syr Barptolemew Badelesmere was taken at Stow Parke yn the Manoyr of the Bishop of Lincoln that was his nephew.\" Stow Park is about 10 miles north-west of the centre of Lincoln, where the bishop was Henry Burghersh. Stow Park was one of the principal residences of the Bishop in that era but none of the medieval buildings still survive above ground. The identity of \"Brickden\" is uncertain but may well refer to Buckden, Huntingdonshire, another place where the Bishop of Lincoln had a manor house (Buckden Towers). If so, that may be the reason for the differing accounts of the place that Bartholomew had reached when he was arrested, as they both featured residences of his nephew.\nBartholomew was tried at Canterbury on 14 April 1322 and sentenced to death. On the same day he was drawn for three miles behind a horse to Blean, where he held property. There he was hanged and beheaded. His head was displayed on the Burgh Gate at Canterbury and the rest of his body left hanging at Blean. There it probably remained for quite some time, as it was not until the Lent Parliament of 1324 that the prelates successfully petitioned for the bodies of the nobles still hanging on the gallows to be given ecclesiastical burial. In a book that was first published in 1631, the antiquary John Weever stated that Bartholomew was buried at White Friars, Canterbury; this was a community of the Order of St Augustine.\nProperty.\nBy the latter part of his life, Bartholomew possessed a vast portfolio of properties, either in his own right or jointly with his wife Margaret. These assets were forfeited because of Bartholomew's rebellion. During the first four years of reign of Edward III, a series of inquisitions post mortem established the properties to which Margaret was entitled and also those of which her son Giles would be the right heir. Much of the property was restored to Bartholomew's widow or assigned to Giles, who at that juncture was still a minor in the King's wardship.\nSome of the properties that Bartholomew held are listed below; the list is not exhaustive and he did not necessarily hold all of them at the same time.\nThe relevant inquisitions post mortem also contain details of numerous advowsons and other property rights that Bartholomew owned.\nFamily.\nBartholomew married Margaret de Clare, childless widow of Gilbert Umfraville, son of Gilbert Umfraville, 2nd Earl of Angus. The marriage had taken place by 30 June 1308, when the couple were jointly granted the manor of Bourne, Sussex. Margaret was a daughter of Thomas de Clare and his wife Juliana FitzGerald. A comprehensive overview of their children can be seen in the records of numerous inquisitions post mortem that were held after the death of their son Giles on 7 June 1338. The evidence given at each hearing rested on local knowledge and there were some inconsistencies about the names of Giles' sisters and their precise ages. However, taken as a whole, it is clear from the inquisition records that the names of Bartholomew's children were as follows, listed in descending order of age: \nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59371", "revid": "15590", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59371", "title": "Deuterocanonical", "text": ""}
{"id": "59373", "revid": "40043980", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59373", "title": "Q code", "text": "Type of Morse code operating signal\nThe Q-code is a standardised collection of three-letter codes that each start with the letter \"Q\". It is an operating signal initially developed for commercial radiotelegraph communication (used e.\u00a0g. by the Maritime Mobile Service or Amateur Radio Service), later also for TeleTYpe\" (TTY. e.\u00a0g. for AFTN, the Aeronautical Fixed Telecommunications Network\") and \"RadioTeleTYpe\" (RTTY e.g. used by the Maritime Mobile Service or Amateur Radio Service) and in voice communications (e.g. Aeronautical mobile service). Most Q-codes defined in 1947 are still in use today, date back to the International Telecommunication Convention in Atlantic City, 1947 and are standardized in the ITU International Radio Regulations from 1947 (ITU-RR).\nEarly development.\nThe original Q-codes were created, \"circa\" 1909, by the British government as a \"List of abbreviations ... prepared for the use of British ships and coast stations licensed by the Postmaster General\". The Q-codes facilitated communication between maritime radio operators speaking different languages, so they were soon adopted internationally. A total of forty-five Q-codes appeared in the \"List of Abbreviations to be used in Radio Communications\", which was included in the Service Regulations affixed to the Second International Radiotelegraph Convention in London (The convention was signed on July 5, 1912, and became effective July 1, 1913.)\nThe following table reviews a sample of the all-services Q-codes adopted by the 1912 convention:\nLater use.\nOver the years the original Q-codes were modified to reflect changes in radio practice. For example, QSW / QSX originally stood for, \"Shall I increase / decrease my spark frequency?\", but in the 1920s spark-gap transmitters were gradually being banned from land stations, making that meaning obsolete. By the 1970s, the \"Post Office Handbook for Radio Operators\" listed over a hundred Q-codes, covering a wide range of subjects including radio procedures, meteorology, radio direction finding, and search and rescue.\nSome Q-codes are also used in aviation, in particular QNE, QNH and QFE, referring to certain altimeter settings. These codes are used in radiotelephone conversations with air traffic control as unambiguous shorthand, where safety and efficiency are of vital importance. A subset of Q-codes is used by the Miami-Dade County, Florida local government for law enforcement and fire rescue communications, one of the few instances where Q-codes are used in ground voice communication.\nThe QAA\u2013QNZ code range includes phrases applicable primarily to the aeronautical service, as defined by the International Civil Aviation Organization. The QOA\u2013QQZ code range is reserved for the maritime service. The QRA\u2013QUZ code range includes phrases applicable to all services and is allocated to the International Telecommunication Union. QVA\u2013QZZ are not allocated. Many codes have no immediate applicability outside one individual service, such as maritime operation (many QO or QU series codes) or radioteletype operation (the QJ series).\nMany military and other organisations that use Morse code have adopted additional codes, including the Z code used by most European and NATO countries. The Z code adds commands and questions adapted for military radio transmissions, for example, \"ZBW 2\", which means \"change to backup frequency number 2\", and \"ZNB abc\", which means \"my checksum is abc, what is yours?\"\nUsed in their formal question / answer sense, the meaning of a Q-code varies depending on whether the individual Q-code is sent as a question or an answer. For example, the message \"QRP?\" means \"Shall I decrease transmitter power?\", and a reply of \"QRP\" means \"Yes, decrease your transmitter power\", whereas an unprompted statement \"QRP\" means \"Please decrease your transmitter power\". This structured use of Q-codes is fairly rare and now mainly limited to amateur radio and military Morse code (CW) traffic networks.\nUnder U.S. F.C.C. Regulations, CFR 47 97.113(a)(4), Amateurs are not permitted to 'transmit codes or ciphers' (historical description), allowing only that 'plain- language communications' may be transmitted. The term 'Q-Signal' has been historically used in that context, not 'Q-Code,' - the use of 'Code' is technically a violation of F.C.C. Regulations. This essentially examples, in the U.S. the historic separation between Amateur and Commercial/Military radio services\nUse since the International Telecommunication Convention in Atlantic City, 1947.\nThe Q-code was first specified in ITU International Radio Regulations from 1947, Appendix 9, Section 1\"\" which defines:\nWhile some ranges of the Q-codes are for the use of all services, some bands of Q-codes were assigned specifically for the Aeronautical Mobile and the Maritime Mobile Service, which are: \n\"\"1. The series of groups QRA to QUZ listed in this Appendix, is for use by all services.\"\" \n\"2. The QAA to QNZ series are reserved for the aeronautical service and the QOA to QQZ series are reserved for the maritime services. These series are not listed in these regulations.\"\"\" \nICAO (\"International Civil Aviation Organization\") specified the Q-codes for aeronautical purposes initially in COM/504/1 - Doc 6100. Amendment \"Communication Codes and Abbreviations. Q Code\" published 1952.April.01 While not all Q-codes published in 1952 in Doc-6100 are still in use today, the Q-codes used today are documente in ICAO DOC-8400, \"ICAO Abbreviations and Codes\"\nThe Q-codes for the Maritime Mobile Service used today are documented in ITU Recommendation ITU-R M.1172, \"Miscellaneous Abbreviations and Signals to be used for Radiocommunications in the Maritime Mobile Service\", 1995.\n\"\"5. Abbreviations are given the form of a question when followed by a question mark. When an abbreviation is used as a question and is followed by additional or complementary information, the question mark should follow this information.\"\" \n\"3. Certain abbreviations may be given an affirmative or negative sense by sending \u201cC\u201d or \u201cN\u201d respectively, immediately following the \u201cQ\u201d code abbreviation.\" To distinguish the use of a Q-code transmitted in radiotelegraphy communication as a question from the same Q-code transmitted as a statement, operators either prefixed it with the military network question marker \"INT\" (&lt;templatestyles src=\"Morse/styles.css\"/&gt;\u00a0\u2584\u00a0\u2584\u00a0\u2584\u2584\u2584\u00a0\u2584\u00a0\u2584\u2584\u2584\u00a0) or suffixed it with the standard Morse question mark UD (&lt;templatestyles src=\"Morse/styles.css\"/&gt;\u00a0\u2584\u00a0\u2584\u00a0\u2584\u2584\u2584\u00a0\u2584\u2584\u2584\u00a0\u2584\u00a0\u2584\u00a0). \n\"\"4. The meanings assigned to \u201cQ\u201d code abbreviations may be amplified or completed by the addition of appropriate other groups, call signs, place names, figures, numbers, etc. It is optional to fill in the blanks shown in parentheses. Any data which is filled in where blanks appear should be sent in the same order as shown in the significations.\"\" For the Aeronautic Radio Service QNH 1015 identifies \"\u2021 \"Altimeter Sub-Scale Setting to obtain Elevation when on the Ground\" 1015 hPa.\n\"\"\u2021\" \"\"When radiotelephony is used, the abbreviations and terms are transmitted using the individual letters in non-phonetic form\".\"\n\"\"7. All time should be given in Greenwich mean time (G.M.T.) unless otherwise indicated in the question or reply.\"\" GMT was replaced in 1972 by UTC (Universal Coordinated Time).\nAlthough Q-codes were created when radio used Morse code exclusively, they continued to be employed after the introduction of voice transmissions. To avoid confusion, transmitter call signs are restricted; countries can be issued unused Q-Codes as their ITU prefix e.g. Qatar is QAT.\n\"Q\" has no official meaning, but it is sometimes assigned a word with mnemonic value, such as \"question\" or \"query\", for example in QFE: \"query field elevation\".\nListing according to service.\nAeronautical Code signals (QAA\u2013QNZ; ICAO).\nFirst defined in ICAO publication \"Doc 6100-COM/504/1\" and in \"ICAO Procedures for Air Navigation Services, Abbreviations and Codes (PANS-ABC)\" [Doc8400-4] (4th edition 1989), the majority of the Q-codes have fallen out of common use; for example today reports such as QAU (\"I am about to jettison fuel\") and QAZ (\"I am flying in a storm\") would be voice or computerised transmissions. But several remain part of the standard ICAO radiotelephony phraseology in aviation. These are also part of ACP131, which lists all ITU-R Q-codes, without grouping them by aeronautical/marine/general use. The currently applicable version of ICAO Doc-8400 has the title \"Procedures for Air Navigation Services, ICAO Abbreviations\"\nand Codes, edition 8, 2010.November.18\nMaritime Mobile Service (QOA\u2013QQZ).\nThis assignment is specified in \"RECOMMENDATION ITU-R M.1172\".\nQ signals are not substantially used in the maritime service. Morse code is now very rarely used for maritime communications, but in isolated maritime regions like Antarctica and the South Pacific the use of Q-codes continues. Q-codes still work when HF voice circuits are not possible due to atmospherics and the nearest vessel is one ionospheric hop away.\nAll services (QRA\u2013QUZ).\nFirst defined by the Washington 1927 ITU Radio Regulations. Later defined by ITU-R in Appendix 9 to the Radio Regulations Annex to the \"International Telecommunications Convention\" (Atlantic City, 1947). The current callsign table is found in ITU-R Appendix 42. Current interpretation of the Q-code can be found in ITU-R Appendices 14 and 15.\nITU Radio Regulations 1990, Appendix 13: Miscellaneous Abbreviations and Signals to be Used in Radiotelegraphy Communications Except in the Maritime Mobile Service:\nAmateur radio.\nAmateur radio has adapted two different sets of Q-codes for use in amateur communications. The first set comes from the ITU civil series QRA through QUZ. Most of the meanings are identical to the ITU definitions, however, they must be looked at in the context of amateur communications. For example, QSJ? asks what the charges are for sending the telegraph. Since by regulation amateur communications are without charge, this Q-code couldn't make sense.\nThe second set is the set of QN Signals, used only in ARRL NTS nets. These operating signals generally have no equivalent in the ACP 131 publication or ITU publications, and are specifically defined only for use in ARRL NTS nets. They are not used in casual amateur radio communications.\nSelected Q-codes were soon adopted by amateur radio operators. In December 1915, the American Radio Relay League began publication of a magazine titled \"QST\", named after the Q-code for \"General call to all stations\". In amateur radio, the Q-codes were originally used in Morse code transmissions to shorten lengthy phrases and were followed by a Morse code question mark (&lt;templatestyles src=\"Morse/styles.css\"/&gt;\u00a0\u2584\u00a0\u2584\u00a0\u2584\u2584\u2584\u00a0\u2584\u2584\u2584\u00a0\u2584\u00a0\u2584\u00a0) if the phrase was a question.\nQ-codes are commonly used in voice communications as shorthand nouns, verbs, and adjectives making up phrases. For example, an amateur radio operator will complain about QRM (man-made interference), or tell another operator that there is \"QSB on the signal\" (fading); \"to QSY\" is to change your operating frequency, or to break in on a conversation QSK is often used even on VHF and UHF frequencies. (See also Informal usage, below.)\nNotes for response to radiotelegraph Q-codes.\nResponses to a radiotelegraph Q-code query or a Q-code assertion may vary depending upon the code. For Q-code assertions or queries which only need to be acknowledged as received, the usual practice is to respond with the letter \"R\" for \"Roger\" which means \"Received correctly\". Sending an \"R\" merely means the code has been correctly received and does not necessarily mean that the receiving operator has taken any other action.\nFor Q-code queries that need to be answered in the affirmative, the usual practice is to respond with the letter \"C\" (Sounds like the Spanish word \"Si\"). For Q-code queries that need to be answered in the negative, the usual practice it to respond with the letter \"N\" for \"no\". For those Q-code assertions that merely need to be acknowledged as understood, the usual practice is to respond with the prosign SN (or VE) which means \"understood\". On telegraph cable networks \"KK\" was often used at the end of a reply to a Q-code to mean \"OK\" or \"Acknowledged\". This practice predates amateur radio as telegraph operators in the late 19th century are known to have used it.\nInformal usage.\nQAC - Taken from the Articles of Association of the South Hampshire International Telegraphy Society, para 9: \"...and amongst themselves they shall promote the Use of the Code QAC, which shall be taken as implying \"All Compliments\" and shall include:- VY 73 73 OM CUL BCNU &amp; mni tnx fer nice/FB/rotten QSO GL GB hpe cuagn wid gud/btr/wrse condx mri Xms Hpi Nw Yr mni hpi rtrns gtgs fer Rosh Hoshanah/Id el Fitr/May Day/Tksgvg 88 to XYL/YL/Widow Ciao Cheerio &amp; gud/FB/best DX or any Part or Parts thereof in any Permutation or Combination.\nQLF \u2013 \"Are you sending with your left foot? Try sending with your left foot!\" A humorously derogatory comment about the quality of a person's sending.\nQNB \u2013 QNB? \u201cHow many buttons on your radio?\u201d \u201cQNB 100/5\u201d Means there are 100 and I know what 5 of them do.\nQSK \u2013 \"I can hear you during my transmission\" \u2013 refers to a particular mode of Morse code operating often called QSK operation (full break-in) in which the receiver is quickly enabled during the spaces between the dits and dahs, which allows another operator to interrupt transmissions. Many modern transceivers incorporate this function, sometimes referred to as \"full break-in\" as against \"semi-break-in\" in which there is a short delay before the transceiver goes to receive.\nQSY \u2013 \"Change to transmission on another frequency\"; colloquially, \"move [=change address]\". E.g., \"When did http:// QSY from Northolt to Portishead?\"\nQTH \u2013 \"My location is\u00a0____\"; colloquially in voice or writing, \"location\". E.g., \"The OCF \"[antenna type]\" is an interesting build but at my QTH a disappointing performer.\"\nQTHR \u2013 \"At the registered location\u00a0____\"; chiefly British use. Historically, the location in the printed Callbook; modernly, \"as given in online government records for my callsign\". E.g., \"You can contact me QTHR\".\nQBL \u2013 \u201cQuit Being a Lid\u201d. QBL is used among amateur radio operators to indicate humor in their CW transmission. While QBL is generally used by a small subsection of operators who can properly decode, it is available to anyone. \"Lid\" is said to be short for \"Literal Idiot\". The QBL moniker has been adopted by some radio operators as a term of endearment, like the https://.\nGerman use during World War II.\nDuring World War II, according to Bletchley Park\u2019s \"General Report on Tunny,\" German radio teleprinter networks used Q-codes to establish and maintain circuit connections.\nIn particular: QEP was to indicate the Lorenz cipher machine setting for each message and, QZZ to indicate that the daily key change was about to take place at the sender's station.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59374", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59374", "title": "Ethnic origin", "text": ""}
{"id": "59375", "revid": "31192532", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59375", "title": "Titus Andronicus", "text": "Play by Shakespeare\nThe Lamentable Tragedy of Titus Andronicus, often shortened to Titus Andronicus, is a tragedy by William Shakespeare, believed to have been written between 1588 and 1593. It is thought to be Shakespeare's first tragedy and is often seen as his attempt to emulate the violent and bloody revenge plays of his contemporaries, which were extremely popular with audiences throughout the 16th century. \nTitus, a general in the Roman army, presents Tamora, Queen of the Goths, as a slave to the new Roman emperor, Saturninus. Saturninus takes her as his wife. From this position, Tamora vows revenge against Titus for killing her son. Titus and his family retaliate, leading to a cycle of violence.\n\"Titus Andronicus\" was initially very popular, but by the later 17th century it was not well esteemed. The Victorian era disapproved of it, largely because of its graphic violence. Its reputation began to improve around the middle of the 20th century, but it is still one of Shakespeare's least respected plays.\nCharacters.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSynopsis.\nShortly after the death of the Roman emperor, his two sons, Saturninus and Bassianus, quarrel over who will succeed him. Their conflict seems set to boil over into violence until a tribune, Marcus Andronicus, announces that the people's choice for the new emperor is his brother, Titus, who will shortly return to Rome from a victorious ten-year campaign against the Goths. Titus arrives to much fanfare, bearing with him as prisoners Tamora, Queen of the Goths; her three sons Alarbus, Chiron, and Demetrius; and her secret lover, Aaron the Moor. Despite Tamora's desperate pleas, Titus sacrifices her eldest son, Alarbus, to avenge the deaths of twenty-one of his own sons during the war. Distraught, Tamora and her two surviving sons vow to obtain revenge on Titus and his family.\nMeanwhile, Titus refuses the offer of the throne, arguing that he is not fit to rule and instead supporting the claim of Saturninus, who then is duly elected. Saturninus tells Titus that for his first act as emperor, he will marry Titus's daughter Lavinia. Titus agrees, although Lavinia is already betrothed to Saturninus's brother, Bassianus, who refuses to give her up. Titus's sons tell Titus that Bassianus is in the right under Roman law, but Titus refuses to listen, accusing them all of treason. A scuffle breaks out, during which Titus kills his own son, Mutius. Saturninus then denounces the Andronici family for their effrontery and shocks Titus by marrying Tamora. Putting into motion her plan for revenge, Tamora advises Saturninus to pardon Bassianus and the Andronici family, which he reluctantly does.\nDuring a royal hunt the following day, Aaron persuades Demetrius and Chiron to kill Bassianus so that they may rape Lavinia. They do so, throwing Bassianus's body into a pit and dragging Lavinia deep into the forest before violently raping her. To keep her from revealing what has happened, they cut out her tongue and cut off her hands. Meanwhile, Aaron writes a forged letter, which frames Titus's sons Martius and Quintus for the murder of Bassianus. Horrified at the death of his brother, Saturninus arrests Martius and Quintus and sentences them to death.\nSome time later, Marcus discovers the mutilated Lavinia and takes her to her father, who is still shocked at the accusations levelled at his sons, and upon seeing Lavinia, he is overcome with grief. Aaron then visits Titus and falsely tells him that Saturninus will spare Martius and Quintus if either Titus, Marcus, or Titus's remaining son, Lucius, cuts off one of their hands and sends it to him. Though Marcus and Lucius are willing, Titus has his own left hand cut off by Aaron and sends it to the emperor. However, a messenger brings back Martius's and Quintus's severed heads, along with Titus's own severed hand. Desperate for revenge, Titus orders Lucius to flee Rome and raise an army among their conquered enemy, the Goths.\nLater, Lavinia writes the names of her attackers in the dirt, using a stick held with her mouth and between her arms. Meanwhile, Aaron is informed that Tamora has secretly given birth to a mixed-race baby, fathered by Aaron, which will draw Saturninus's wrath. Though Tamora wants the baby killed, Aaron kills the nurse to keep the child's race a secret and flees to raise his son among the Goths. Thereafter, Lucius, marching on Rome with an army, captures Aaron and threatens to hang the infant. In order to save the baby, Aaron reveals the entire revenge plot to Lucius.\nBack in Rome, Titus's behaviour suggests he might be deranged. Convinced of Titus's madness, Tamora, Demetrius, and Chiron (dressed as the spirits of \"Revenge\", \"Murder\", and \"Rape\", respectively) approach Titus in order to persuade him to have Lucius remove his troops from Rome. Tamora (as \"Revenge\") tells Titus that she will grant him revenge on all of his enemies if he convinces Lucius to postpone the imminent attack on Rome. Titus agrees and sends Marcus to invite Lucius to a reconciliatory feast. Revenge then offers to invite the Emperor and Tamora as well, and is about to leave when Titus insists that Rape and Murder stay with him. When Tamora is gone, Titus has Chiron and Demetrius restrained, cuts their throats, and drains their blood into a basin held by Lavinia. Titus tells Lavinia that he will \"play the cook\", grind the bones of Demetrius and Chiron into powder, and bake their heads into two pies, which he will serve to their mother.\nThe next day, during the feast at his house, Titus asks Saturninus if a father should kill his daughter when she has been raped. When Saturninus answers that he should, Titus kills Lavinia and tells Saturninus of the rape. When the Emperor calls for Chiron and Demetrius, Titus reveals that they were baked in the pies Tamora has already been eating. Titus then kills Tamora and is immediately killed by Saturninus, who is subsequently killed by Lucius to avenge his father's death. Lucius is then proclaimed Emperor. He orders that Titus and Lavinia be laid in their family tomb, that Saturninus be given a state burial, that Tamora's body be thrown to the wild beasts outside the city, and that Aaron be hanged. Aaron, however, is unrepentant to the end, regretting only that he did not do more evil in his life. Lucius decides Aaron deserves to be buried chest-deep as punishment and left to die of thirst and starvation, and Aaron is taken away to be punished thus.\nSetting and sources.\nSetting.\nThe story of \"Titus Andronicus\" is fictional, not historical, unlike Shakespeare's other Roman plays, \"Julius Caesar\", \"Antony and Cleopatra\", and \"Coriolanus\", all of which are based on real historical events and people (or, in the case of \"Coriolanus\", believed to be historical by late Romans, as well as in Shakespeare's time). Even the time in which \"Titus\" is set may not be based on a real historical period. According to the prose version of the play (see below), the events are \"set in the time of Theodosius\", who ruled from 379 to 395. On the other hand, the general setting appears to be what Clifford Huffman describes as \"late-Imperial Christian Rome\", possibly during the reign of Justinian I (527\u2013565). Also favouring a later date, Grace Starry West argues,\n \"the Rome of \"Titus Andronicus\" is Rome after Brutus, after Caesar, and after Ovid. We know it is a later Rome because the emperor is routinely called Caesar; because the characters are constantly alluding to Tarquin, Lucretia, and Brutus, suggesting that they learned about Brutus's new founding of Rome from the same literary sources we do, Livy and Plutarch.\"\nOthers are less certain of a specific setting, however. For example, Jonathan Bate has pointed out that the play begins with Titus returning from a successful ten-year campaign against the Goths, as if at the height of the Roman Empire, but ends with Goths invading Rome, as if at its death. Similarly, T.J.B.\u00a0Spencer argues that\n \"the play does not assume a political situation known to Roman history; it is, rather a summary of Roman politics. It is not so much that any particular set of political institutions is assumed in \"Titus\", but rather that it includes \"all\" the political institutions that Rome ever had.\"\nSources.\nIn his efforts to fashion general history into a specific fictional story, Shakespeare may have consulted the \"Gesta Romanorum\", a well known thirteenth-century collection of tales, legends, myths, and anecdotes written in Latin, which took figures and events from history and spun fictional tales around them. In Shakespeare's lifetime, a writer known for doing likewise was Matteo Bandello, who based his work on that of writers such as Giovanni Boccaccio and Geoffrey Chaucer, and who could have served as an indirect source for Shakespeare. So, too, could the first major English author to write in this style, William Painter, who borrowed from, amongst others, Herodotus, Plutarch, Aulus Gellius, Claudius Aelianus, Livy, Tacitus, Giovanni Battista Giraldi, and Bandello himself. However, it is also possible to determine more specific sources for the play. The primary source for the rape and mutilation of Lavinia, as well as Titus's subsequent revenge, is Ovid's \"Metamorphoses\" (c.\u2009AD 8), which is featured in the play itself when Lavinia uses it to help explain to Titus and Marcus what happened to her. \nIn the sixth book of \"Metamorphoses\", Ovid tells the story of the rape of Philomela, daughter of Pandion I, King of Athens. Despite ill omens, Philomela's sister, Procne, marries Tereus of Thrace and has a son for him, Itys. After five years in Thrace, Procne yearns to see her sister again, so she persuades Tereus to travel to Athens and accompany Philomela back to Thrace. Tereus does so, but he soon begins to lust after Philomela. When she refuses his advances, he drags her into a forest and rapes her. He then cuts out her tongue to prevent her from telling anyone of the incident and returns to Procne, telling her that Philomela is dead. However, Philomela weaves a tapestry, in which she names Tereus as her assailant, and has it sent to Procne. The sisters meet in the forest and together plot their revenge. They kill Itys and cook his body in a pie, which Procne then serves to Tereus. During the meal, Philomela reveals herself, showing Itys' head to Tereus and telling him what they have done. For the scene where Lavinia reveals her rapists by writing in the sand, Shakespeare may have used a story from the first book of \"Metamorphoses\"; the tale of the rape of Io by Zeus, where, to prevent her from divulging the story, he turns her into a cow. Upon encountering her father, she attempts to tell him who she is but is unable to do so until she thinks to scratch her name in the dirt using her hoof.\nTitus's revenge may also have been influenced by Seneca's play \"Thyestes\", written in the first century AD. In the myth of Thyestes, which is the basis for Seneca's play, Thyestes, son of Pelops, King of Pisa, who, along with his brother Atreus, was exiled by Pelops for the murder of their half-brother, Chrysippus. They take up refuge in Mycenae and soon ascend to co-inhabit the throne. However, each becomes jealous of the other, and Thyestes tricks Atreus into electing him as the sole king. Determined to re-attain the throne, Atreus enlists the aid of Zeus and Hermes, and has Thyestes banished from Mycenae. Atreus subsequently discovers that his wife, Aerope, had been having an affair with Thyestes, and he vows revenge. He asks Thyestes to return to Mycenae with his family, telling him that all past animosities are forgotten. However, when Thyestes returns, Atreus secretly kills Thyestes's sons. He cuts off their hands and heads, and cooks the rest of their bodies in a pie. At a reconciliatory feast, Atreus serves Thyestes the pie in which his sons have been baked. As Thyestes finishes his meal, Atreus produces the hands and heads, revealing to the horrified Thyestes what he has done.\nAnother specific source for the final scene is discernible when Titus asks Saturninus if a father should kill his daughter when she has been raped. This is a reference to the story of Verginia from Livy's \"Ab urbe condita\" (c.\u200926 BC). Around 451 BC, a decemvir of the Roman Republic, Appius Claudius Crassus, begins to lust after Verginia, a plebeian girl betrothed to a former tribune, Lucius Icilius. She rejects Claudius's advances, enraging him, and he has her abducted. However, both Icilius and Verginia's father, famed centurion Lucius Verginius, are respected figures and Claudius is forced to legally defend his right to hold Verginia. At the Forum, Claudius threatens the assembly with violence, and Verginius's supporters flee. Seeing that defeat is imminent, Verginius asks Claudius if he may speak to his daughter alone, to which Claudius agrees. However, Verginius stabs Verginia, determining that her death is the only way he can secure her freedom.\nFor the scene where Aaron tricks Titus into cutting off one of his hands, the primary source was probably an unnamed popular tale about a Moor's vengeance, published in various languages throughout the sixteenth century (an English version entered into the Stationers' Register in 1569 has not survived). In the story, a married nobleman with two children chastises his Moorish servant, who vows revenge. The servant goes to the moated tower where the man's wife and children live, and rapes the wife. Her screams bring her husband, but the Moor pulls up the drawbridge before the nobleman can gain entry. The Moor then kills both children on the battlements in full view of the man. The nobleman pleads with the Moor that he will do anything to save his wife, and the Moor demands he cut off his nose. The man does so, but the Moor kills the wife anyway, and the nobleman dies of shock. The Moor then flings himself from the battlements to avoid punishment.\nShakespeare also drew on various sources for the names of many of his characters. For example, Titus could have been named after the Emperor Titus Flavius Vespasianus, who ruled Rome from 79 to 81. Jonathan Bate, Geoffrey Bullough and some other scholars have speculated that the name 'Andronicus' could have come from Andronicus Comnenus, Byzantine emperor from 1183 to 1185. Like Titus Andronicus, Andronicus Comnenus was a violent ruler who was ultimately overthrown and brutally killed by his own people. Andronicus Comnenus was also known to shoot arrows with messages attached, another trait that is shared with Titus Andronicus. In addition, both Andronicus Comnenus and Titus Andronicus lost their right hand shortly before their death. Others have speculated that Shakespeare took the name from the story \"Andronicus and the lion\" in Antonio de Guevara's \"Epistolas familiares\". That story involves a sadistic emperor named Titus who amused himself by throwing slaves to wild animals and watching them be slaughtered. However, when a slave called Andronicus is thrown to a lion, the lion lies down and embraces the man. The emperor demands to know what has happened, and Andronicus explains that he had once helped the lion by removing a thorn from its foot. Bate speculates that this story, with one character called Titus and another called Andronicus, could be why several contemporary references to the play are in the form \"Titus &amp; Ondronicus\".\nGeoffrey Bullough argues that Lucius's character arc (estrangement from his father, followed by banishment, followed by a glorious return to avenge his family honour) was probably based on Plutarch's \"Life of Coriolanus\". As for Lucius's name, Frances Yates speculates that he may be named after Saint Lucius, who introduced Christianity into Britain. On the other hand, Jonathan Bate hypothesises that Lucius could be named after Lucius Junius Brutus, founder of the Roman Republic, arguing that \"the man who led the people in their uprising was Lucius Junius Brutus. This is the role that Lucius fulfills in the play.\"\nThe name of Lavinia was probably taken from the mythological figure of Lavinia, daughter of Latinus, King of Latium, who, in Virgil's \"Aeneid\", courts Aeneas as he attempts to settle his people in Latium. A. C. Hamilton speculates that the name of Tamora could have been based upon the historical figure of Tomyris, a violent and uncompromising queen of the ancient Massagetae. Eugene M. Waith suggests that the name of Tamora's son, Alarbus, could have come from George Puttenham's \"The Arte of English Poesie\" (1589), which contains the line \"the Roman prince did daunt/Wild Africans and the lawless Alarbes.\" G. K. Hunter has suggested Shakespeare may have taken Saturninus's name from Herodian's \"History of the Empire from the Death of Marcus\", which features a jealous and violent tribune named Saturninus. On the other hand, Waith speculates that Shakespeare may have been thinking of an astrological theory which he could have seen in Guy Marchant's \"The Kalendayr of the shyppars\" (1503), which states that Saturnine men (i.e. men born under the influence of Saturn) are \"false, envious and malicious.\"\nShakespeare most likely took the names of Caius, Demetrius, Marcus, Martius, Quintus, \u00c6milius, and Sempronius from Plutarch's \"Life of Scipio Africanus\". Bassianus's name probably came from Lucius Septimius Bassianus, better known as Caracalla, who, like Bassianus in the play, fights with his brother over succession, one appealing to primogeniture and the other to popularity.\nBallad, prose history, and source debate.\nAny discussion of the sources of \"Titus Andronicus\" is complicated by the existence of two other versions of the story; a prose history and a ballad; both are anonymous and undated.\nUltimately, there is no clear critical consensus on the issue of the order in which the \"play\", \"prose\", and \"ballad\" were written, with the only tentative agreement being that at the latest, all three were probably in existence by 1594.\nThe first definite reference to the ballad \"Titus Andronicus' Complaint\" is an entry in the Stationers' Register by the printer John Danter on 6\u00a0February 1594, where the entry \"A booke intitled a Noble Roman Historye of Tytus Andronicus\" is immediately followed by \"Entred also vnto[\"sic\"] him, the ballad thereof\". The earliest surviving copy of the ballad is in Richard Johnson's \"The Golden Garland of Princely Pleasures and Delicate Delights\" (1620), but the date of its composition is unknown.\nThe prose was first published in chapbook form some time between 1736\u20131764 by Cluer Dicey under the title \"The History of Titus Andronicus, the Renowned Roman General\" (the ballad was also included in the chapbook), however it is believed to be much older than that. The copyright records from the Stationers' Register in Shakespeare's own lifetime provide some tenuous evidence regarding the dating of the prose. On 19 April 1602, the publisher Thomas Millington sold his share in the copyright of \"A booke intitled a Noble Roman Historye of Tytus Andronicus\" (which Danter had initially entered into the Register in 1594) to Thomas Pavier. The orthodox belief is that this entry refers to the play.\nThe next version of the play to be published was for Edward White, in 1611, printed by Edward Allde, thus prompting the question of why Pavier never published the play, despite having owned the copyright for nine years. J.Q. Adams believes that the original Danter entry in 1594 is not a reference to the play but instead to the prose version, and that the subsequent transferrals of copyright relate to the prose, not the play, explaining why the play was never published by Pavier. Similarly, Greg believes that all copyright to the play lapsed upon Danter's death in 1600, hence the 1602 transferral from Millington to Pavier was illegitimate unless it refers to something other than the play; i.e. the prose. Both scholars conclude that the evidence seems to imply the prose existed by early 1594 at the latest.\nHowever, even if the prose version existed in 1594, there is no solid evidence to suggest the order in which the play, ballad, and prose were written, and which served as source for which. Traditionally, the prose has been seen as the original, with the play derived from it, and the ballad derived from both play and prose. Adams, for example, firmly believed in this order (\"prose-play-ballad\") as did John Dover Wilson and Geoffrey Bullough. This theory is by no means universally accepted however. For example, R.M.\u00a0Sargent agrees with Adams and Bullough that the prose was the source of the play, but he argues that the poem was also a source of the play (\"prose-ballad-play\").\nMarco Mincoff rejects both theories, arguing instead that the play came first, and served as a source for both the ballad and the prose (\"play-ballad-prose\"). G.H.\u00a0Metz felt that Mincoff was incorrect and reasserted the primacy of the prose-play-ballad sequence. G.K.\u00a0Hunter however, believes that Adams, Dover Wilson, Bullough, Sargent, Mincoff, and Metz were \"all\" wrong, and the play was the source for the prose, with both serving as sources for the ballad (\"play-prose-ballad\"). In his 1984 edition of the play for \"The Oxford Shakespeare\", E.M.\u00a0Waith rejects Hunter's theory and supports the original prose-play-ballad sequence.\nOn the other hand, Jonathan Bate favours Mincoff's theory of \"play-ballad-prose\", in his 1995 edition for the \"Arden Shakespeare\" (3rd\u00a0series). In the introduction to the 2001\u00a0edition of the play for the \"Penguin Shakespeare\" (edited by Sonia Massai), Jacques Berthoud agrees with Waith and settles on the initial \"prose-play-ballad\" sequence. In his 2006\u00a0revised edition for the \"New Cambridge Shakespeare\", Alan Hughes also argues for the original \"prose-play-ballad\" hypothesis, but proposes that the source for the ballad was exclusively the prose, not the play.\nDate and text.\nDate.\nThe earliest known record of \"Titus Andronicus\" is found in Philip Henslowe's diary on 24 January 1594, where Henslowe recorded a performance by Sussex's Men of \"Titus &amp; ondronicus\", probably at The Rose. Henslowe marked the play as \"ne\", which most critics take to mean \"new\". There were subsequent performances on 29 January and 6 February. Also on 6 February, the printer John Danter entered into the \"Stationers' Register\" \"A booke intitled a Noble Roman Historye of Tytus Andronicus\". Later in 1594, Danter published the play in quarto under the title The Most Lamentable Romaine Tragedie of Titus Andronicus (referred to by scholars as Q1) for the booksellers Edward White and Thomas Millington, making it the first of Shakespeare's plays to be printed. This evidence establishes that the latest possible date of composition is late 1593.\nOne of the two known copies of the second edition of Titus Andronicus is a part of The University of Edinburgh Heritage Collection. This was donated by William Hog in 1700. In the 1860s this copy was lent to Shakespeare scholar and collector James Orchard Halliwell-Phillips so he could make a facsimile. This arrangement, brokered by David Laing, eventually led to Halliwell-Phillips donating a vast collection of books and manuscripts to Edinburgh University Library. \nThere is evidence, however, that the play may have been written some years earlier than this. In 1614, Ben Jonson wrote in a preface to \"\" that \"He that will swear, \"Jeronimo\" or \"Andronicus\" are the best plays, yet shall pass unexcepted at, here, as a man whose judgement shows it is constant, and hath stood still these five and twenty, or thirty years.\" The success and popularity of Thomas Kyd's \"The Spanish Tragedy\", to which Jonson alludes, is attested by many contemporary documents, so by placing \"Titus\" alongside it, Jonson is saying that \"Titus\" too must have been extremely popular in its day, but by 1614, both plays had come to be seen as old fashioned. If Jonson is taken literally, for the play to have been between 25 and 30 years old in 1614, it must have been written between 1584 and 1589, a theory which not all scholars reject out of hand. For example, in his 1953 edition of the play for the \"Arden Shakespeare\" 2nd Series, J.C. Maxwell argues for a date of late 1589. Similarly, E.A.J. Honigmann, in his 'early start' theory of 1982, suggests that Shakespeare wrote the play several years before coming to London c.\u20091590, and that \"Titus\" was actually his first play, written c.\u20091586. In his \"Cambridge Shakespeare\" edition of 1994 and again in 2006, Alan Hughes makes a similar argument, believing the play was written very early in Shakespeare's career, before he came to London, possibly c.\u20091588.\nHowever, the majority of scholars tend to favour a post-1590 date, and one of the primary arguments for this is that the title page of Q1 assigns the play to three different playing companies; Derby's Men, Pembroke's Men and Sussex's Men (\"As it was Plaide by the Right Honourable the Earle of Darbie, Earle of Pembrooke, and Earle of Su\u017f\u017fex their Seruants\"). This is highly unusual in copies of Elizabethan plays, which usually refer to one company only, if any. If the order of the listing is chronological, as Eugene M. Waith and Jacques Berthoud, for example, believe it is, it means that Sussex's Men were the last to perform the play, suggesting it had been on stage quite some time prior to 24 January 1594. Waith hypothesises that the play originally belonged to Derby's Men, but after the closure of the London theatres on 23 June 1592 due to an outbreak of plague, Derby's Men sold the play to Pembroke's Men, who were going on a regional tour to Bath and Ludlow. The tour was a financial failure, and the company returned to London on 28 September, financially ruined. At that point, they sold the play to Sussex's Men, who would go on to perform it on 24 January 1594 at The Rose. If one accepts this theory, it suggests a date of composition as some time in early to mid-1592. However, Jonathan Bate and Alan Hughes have argued that there is no evidence that the listing is chronological, and no precedent on other title pages for making that assumption. Additionally, a later edition of the play gives a different order of acting companies \u2013 Pembroke's Men, Derby's Men, Sussex' Men and Lord Chamberlain's Men, suggesting the order is random and cannot be used to help date the play.\nAs such, even amongst scholars who favour a post-1590 date, 1592 is by no means universally accepted. Jacques Berthoud, for example, argues that Shakespeare had close associations with Derby's Men and \"it would seem that \"Titus Andronicus\" must already have entered the repertoire of Derby's Men by the end of 1591 or the start of 1592 at the latest.\" Berthoud believes this places the date of composition some time in 1591. Another theory is provided by Jonathan Bate, who finds it significant that Q1 lacks the \"sundry times\" comment found on virtually every sixteenth-century play; the claim on a title page that a play had been performed \"sundry times\" was an attempt by publishers to emphasise its popularity, and its absence on Q1 indicates that the play was so new, it hadn't been performed anywhere. Bate also finds significance in the fact that prior to the rape of Lavinia, Chiron and Demetrius vow to use Bassianus's body as a pillow. Bate believes this connects the play to Thomas Nashe's \"The Unfortunate Traveller\", which was completed on 27 June 1593. Verbal similarities between \"Titus\" and George Peele's poem \"The Honour of the Garter\" are also important for Bate. The poem was written to celebrate the installation of Henry Percy, 9th Earl of Northumberland as a Knight of the Garter on 26 June 1593. Bate takes these three pieces of evidence to suggest a timeline which sees Shakespeare complete his \"Henry VI\" trilogy prior to the closing of the theatres in June 1592. At this time, he turns to classical antiquity to aid him in his poems \"Venus and Adonis\" and \"The Rape of Lucrece\". Then, towards the end of 1593, with the prospect of the theatres being reopened, and with the classical material still fresh in his mind, he wrote \"Titus\" as his first tragedy, shortly after reading Nashe's novel and Peele's poem, all of which suggests a date of composition of late 1593.\nOther critics have attempted to use more scientific methods to determine the date of the play. For example, Gary Taylor has employed stylometry, particularly the study of contractions, colloquialisms, rare words and function words. Taylor concludes that the entire play except Act 3, Scene 2 was written just after \"Henry VI, Part 2\" and \"Henry VI, Part 3\", which he assigns to late 1591 or early 1592. As such, Taylor settles on a date of mid-1592 for \"Titus\". He also argues that 3.2, which is only found in the 1623 Folio text, was written contemporaneously with \"Romeo and Juliet\", in late 1593.\nHowever, if the play was written and performed by 1588 (Hughes), 1589 (Maxwell), 1591 (Berthoud), 1592 (Waith and Taylor), or 1593 (Bate), why did Henslowe refer to it as \"ne\" in 1594? R.A. Foakes and R.T. Rickert, modern editors of \"Henslowe's Diary\", argue that \"ne\" could refer to a newly licensed play, which would make sense if one accepts Waith's argument that Pembroke's Men had sold the rights to Sussex's Men upon returning from their failed tour of the provinces. Foakes and Rickert also point out that \"ne\" could refer to a newly revised play, suggesting editing on Shakespeare's part some time in late 1593. Waith sees this suggestion as especially important insofar as John Dover Wilson and Gary Taylor have shown that the text as it exists in Q1 \"does\" seem to indicate editing. However, that \"ne\" does actually stand for \"new\" is not fully accepted; in 1991, Winifred Frazer argued that \"ne\" is actually an abbreviation for \"Newington Butts\". Brian Vickers, amongst others, finds Frazer's arguments convincing, which renders interpretation of Henslow's entry even more complex.\nText.\nThe 1594 quarto text of the play, with the same title, was reprinted by James Roberts for Edward White in 1600 (Q2). On 19 April 1602, Millington sold his share in the copyright to Thomas Pavier. However, the next version of the play was published again for White, in 1611, under the slightly altered title \"The Most Lamentable Tragedie of Titus Andronicus\", printed by Edward Allde (Q3).\nQ1 is considered a 'good text' (i.e. not a bad quarto or a reported text), and it forms the basis for most modern editions of the play. Q2 appears to be based on a damaged copy of Q1, as it is missing a number of lines which are replaced by what appear to be guess work on the part of the compositor. This is especially noticeable at the end of the play where four lines of dialogue have been added to Lucius's closing speech; \"See justice done on Aaron, that damned Moor,/By whom our heavy haps had their beginning;/Then afterwards to order well the state,/That like events may ne'er it ruinate.\" Scholars tend to assume that when the compositor got to the last page and saw the damage, he presumed some lines were missing, when in fact none were. Q2 was considered the control text until 1904, when the copy of Q1 now at the Folger Shakespeare Library was discovered in Sweden. Together with a 1594 printing of \"Henry VI, Part II\", the Folger's Q1 \"Titus\" is the earliest extant printed Shakespearean play. Q2 also corrects a number of minor errors in Q1. Q3 is a further degradation of Q2, and includes a number of corrections to the Q2 text, but introduces many more errors.\nThe \"First Folio\" text of 1623 (F1), under the title \"The Lamentable Tragedy of Titus Andronicus\", is based primarily on the Q3 text (which is why modern editors use Q1 as the control rather than the usual practice in Shakespeare of using the \"Folio\" text). However, the \"Folio\" text includes material found in none of the quarto editions, primarily Act 3, Scene 2 (also called the 'fly-killing scene'). It is believed that while Q3 was probably the main source for the \"Folio\", an annotated prompter's copy was also used, particularly in relation to stage directions, which differ significantly from all of the quarto texts.\nAs such, the text of the play that is today known as \"Titus Andronicus\" involves a combination of material from Q1 and F1, the vast majority of which is taken from Q1.\nThe Peacham drawing.\nAn important piece of evidence relating to both the dating and text of \"Titus\" is the so-called 'Peacham drawing' or 'Longleat manuscript'; the only surviving contemporary Shakespearean illustration, now residing in the library of the Marquess of Bath at Longleat. The drawing appears to depict a performance of \"Titus\", under which is quoted some dialogue. Eugene M. Waith argues of the illustration that \"the gestures and costumes give us a more vivid impression of the visual impact of Elizabethan acting than we get from any other source.\"\nFar from being an acknowledged source of evidence however, the document has provoked varying interpretations, with its date in particular often called into question. The fact that the text reproduced in the drawing seems to borrow from Q1, Q2, Q3 \"and\" F1, while also inventing some of its own readings, further complicates matters. Additionally, a possible association with Shakespearean forger John Payne Collier has served to undermine its authenticity, while some scholars believe it depicts a play other than \"Titus Andronicus\", and is therefore of limited use to Shakespeareans.\nAnalysis and criticism.\nCritical history.\nAlthough \"Titus\" was extremely popular in its day, over the course of the 17th, 18th and 19th centuries it became perhaps Shakespeare's most maligned play, and it was only in the latter half of the 20th century that this pattern of denigration showed any signs of subsiding.\nOne of the earliest critical disparagements of the play occurred in 1687, in the introduction to Edward Ravenscroft's theatrical adaptation, \"Titus Andronicus, or the Rape of Lavinia. A Tragedy, Alter'd from Mr. Shakespeare's Works\". Speaking of the original play, Ravenscroft wrote, \"\u2009'tis the most incorrect and indigested piece in all his works. It seems rather a heap of rubbish than a structure.\" In 1765, Samuel Johnson questioned the possibility of even staging the play, pointing out that \"the barbarity of the spectacles, and the general massacre which are here exhibited, can scarcely be conceived tolerable to any audience.\" In 1811, August Wilhelm Schlegel wrote that the play was \"framed according to a false idea of the tragic, which by an accumulation of cruelties and enormities, degenerated into the horrible and yet leaves no deep impression behind.\"\nIn 1927, T. S. Eliot argued that it was \"one of the stupidest and most uninspired plays ever written, a play in which it is incredible that Shakespeare had any hand at all, a play in which the best passages would be too highly honoured by the signature of Peele.\" In 1948, John Dover Wilson wrote that the play \"seems to jolt and bump along like some broken-down cart, laden with bleeding corpses from an Elizabethan scaffold, and driven by an executioner from Bedlam dressed in cap and bells.\" He goes on to say that if the play had been by anyone other than Shakespeare, it would have been lost and forgotten; it is only because tradition holds that Shakespeare wrote it (which Dover Wilson highly suspects) that it is remembered, not for any intrinsic qualities of its own.\nHowever, although the play continued to have its detractors, it began to acquire its champions as well. In his 1998 book, \"\", Harold Bloom defended \"Titus\" from various critical attacks it has had over the years, insisting the play is meant to be a \"parody\" and it is only bad \"if you take it straight\". He claims the uneven reactions audiences have had are a result of directors misunderstanding Shakespeare's intent, which was \"mocking and exploiting Marlowe\", and its only suitable director would be Mel Brooks.\nAnother champion came in 2001, when Jacques Berthoud pointed out that until shortly after World War II, \"\"Titus Andronicus\" was taken seriously only by a handful of textual and bibliographic scholars. Readers, when they could be found, mostly regarded it as a contemptible farrago of violence and bombast, while theatrical managers treated it as either a script in need of radical rewriting, or as a show-biz opportunity for a star actor.\" By 2001 however, this was no longer the case, as many prominent scholars had come out in defence of the play. One such scholar was Jan Kott. Speaking of its apparent gratuitous violence, Kott argued that\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"Titus Andronicus\" is by no means the most brutal of Shakespeare's plays. More people die in \"Richard III\". \"King Lear\" is a much more cruel play. In the whole Shakespearean repertory I can find no scene so revolting as Cordelia's death. In reading, the cruelties of \"Titus\" can seem ridiculous. But I have seen it on the stage and found it a moving experience. Why? In watching \"Titus Andronicus\" we come to understand \u2013 perhaps more than by looking at any other Shakespeare play \u2013 the nature of his genius: he gave an inner awareness to passions; cruelty ceased to be merely physical. Shakespeare discovered the moral hell. He discovered heaven as well. But he remained on earth.\nIn his 1987 edition of the play for the \"Contemporary Shakespeare\" series, A. L. Rowse speculates as to why the fortunes of the play have begun to change during the 20th century:\n \"in the civilised Victorian age the play could not be performed because it could not be believed. Such is the horror of our own age, with the appalling barbarities of prison camps and resistance movements paralleling the torture and mutilation and feeding on human flesh of the play, that it has ceased to be improbable.\"\nDirector Julie Taymor, who staged a production Off-Broadway in 1994 and directed a film version in 1999, says she was drawn to the play because she found it to be the \"[most] relevant of Shakespeare's plays for the modern era\". As she believes we live in the most violent period in history, Taymor feels that the play has acquired more relevance for us than it had for the Victorians; \"it seems like a play written for today, it reeks of now\". Jonathan Forman, when he reviewed Taymor's film for the \"New York Post\", agreed and stated \"It is the Shakespeare play for our time, a work of art that speaks directly to the age of Rwanda and Bosnia.\"\nAuthorship.\nPerhaps the most frequently discussed topic in the play's critical history is that of authorship. None of the three quarto editions of \"Titus\" name the author, which was normal for Elizabethan plays. However, Francis Meres does list the play as one of Shakespeare's tragedies in \"Palladis Tamia\" in 1598. Additionally, John Heminges and Henry Condell felt sure enough of Shakespeare's authorship to include it in the \"First Folio\" in 1623. As such, with what little available solid evidence suggesting that Shakespeare did indeed write the play, questions of authorship tend to focus on the perceived lack of quality in the writing, and often the play's resemblance to the work of contemporaneous dramatists.\nThe first to question Shakespeare's authorship is thought to have been Edward Ravenscroft in 1678, and over the course of the eighteenth century, numerous renowned Shakespeareans followed suit; Nicholas Rowe, Alexander Pope, Lewis Theobald, Samuel Johnson, George Steevens, Edmond Malone, William Guthrie, John Upton, Benjamin Heath, Richard Farmer, John Pinkerton, and John Monck Mason, and in the nineteenth century, William Hazlitt and Samuel Taylor Coleridge. All doubted Shakespeare's authorship. So strong had the anti-Shakespearean movement become during the eighteenth century that in 1794, Thomas Percy wrote in the introduction to \"Reliques of Ancient English Poetry\", \"Shakespeare's memory has been fully vindicated from the charge of writing the play by the best critics.\" Similarly, in 1832, the \"Globe Illustrated Shakespeare\" claimed there was universal agreement on the matter due to the un-Shakespearean \"barbarity\" of the play.\nHowever, despite the fact that so many Shakespearean scholars believed the play to have been written by someone other than Shakespeare, there were those throughout the eighteenth and nineteenth century who argued against this theory. One such scholar was Edward Capell, who, in 1768, said that the play was badly written but asserted that Shakespeare did write it. Another major scholar to support Shakespeare's authorship was Charles Knight in 1843. Several years later, a number of prominent German Shakespeareans also voiced their belief that Shakespeare wrote the play, including August Wilhelm Schlegel and Hermann Ulrici.\nTwentieth century criticism moved away from trying to prove or disprove that Shakespeare wrote the play, and instead came to focus on the issue of co-authorship. Ravenscroft had hinted at this in 1678, but the first modern scholar to look at the theory was John Mackinnon Robertson in 1905, who concluded that \"much of the play is written by George Peele, and it is hardly less certain that much of the rest was written by Robert Greene or Kyd, with some by Marlow\". In 1919, T. M. Parrott reached the conclusion that Peele wrote Act 1, 2.1 and 4.1, and in 1931, Philip Timberlake corroborated Parrott's findings.\nThe first major critic to challenge Robertson, Parrott and Timberlake was E. K. Chambers, who successfully exposed inherent flaws in Robertson's methodology. In 1933, Arthur M. Sampley employed the techniques of Parrott to argue \"against\" Peele as co-author, and in 1943, Hereward Thimbleby Price also argued that Shakespeare wrote alone.\nBeginning in 1948, with John Dover Wilson, many scholars have tended to favour the theory that Shakespeare and Peele collaborated in some way. Dover Wilson, for his part, believed that Shakespeare edited a play originally written by Peele. In 1957, R. F. Hill approached the issue by analysing the distribution of rhetorical devices in the play. Like Parrott in 1919 and Timberlake in 1931, he ultimately concluded that Peele wrote Act 1, 2.1 and 4.1, while Shakespeare wrote everything else. In 1979, Macdonald Jackson employed a rare word test, and ultimately came to an identical conclusion as Parrott, Timberlake and Hill. In 1987, Marina Tarlinskaja used a quantitative analysis of the occurrence of stresses in the iambic pentameter line, and she too concluded that Peele wrote Act 1, 2.1 and 4.1. In 1996, Macdonald Jackson returned to the authorship question with a new metrical analysis of the function words \"and\" and \"with\". His findings also suggested that Peele wrote Act 1, 2.1 and 4.1.\nHowever, there have always been scholars who believe that Shakespeare worked on the play alone. Many of the editors of the various twentieth century scholarly editions of the play for example, have argued against the co-authorship theory; Eugene M. Waith in his \"Oxford Shakespeare\" edition of 1985, Alan Hughes in his \"Cambridge Shakespeare\" edition of 1994 and again in 2006, and Jonathan Bate in his \"Arden Shakespeare\" edition of 1995. In the case of Bate however, in 2002, he came out in support of Brian Vickers' book \"Shakespeare, Co-Author\" which restates the case for Peele as the author of Act 1, 2.1 and 4.1.\nAs well as analysing the distribution of a large number of rhetorical devices throughout the play, Vickers also devised three new authorship tests; an analysis of polysyllabic words, an analysis of the distribution of alliteration and an analysis of vocatives. His findings led him to assert that Peele wrote Act 1, 2.1 and 4.1. Vickers' findings have not been universally accepted. Subsequent investigation by the \"New Oxford Shakespeare\" published in the edition's \"Authorship Companion\" found that scene 4.1 is in fact by Shakespeare not Peele and that the Fly Scene (3.2), present only in 1623 Folio edition, is a late addition to the play, probably made by Thomas Middleton after Shakespeare died in 1616. These findings are disputed by Darren Freebury-Jones in \"Shakespeare's Borrowed Feathers\", who provides fresh evidence for Peele's authorship of 4.1 and argues that the Fly Scene, though absent from earlier editions, probably formed part of the original play but was omitted when Shakespeare and Peele's scenes were merged.\nThomas North's 1557 translation of \"Dial of Princes\" has led to North being recognized as the author of the lost \"Titus and Vespasian\", written in 1562, and that \"Titus Andronicus\" should be added to Shakespeare's list of 'borrowed' Roman plays.\nLanguage.\nThe language of \"Titus\" has always had a central role in criticism of the play insofar as those who doubt Shakespeare's authorship have often pointed to the apparent deficiencies in the language as evidence of that claim. However, the quality of the language has had its defenders over the years, critics who argue that the play is more linguistically complex than is often thought, and features a more accomplished use of certain linguistic motifs than has hitherto been allowed for.\nOne of the most basic such motifs is repetition. Several words and topics occur time and again, serving to connect and contrast characters and scenes, and to foreground certain themes. Perhaps the most obvious recurring motifs are those of honour, virtue and nobility, all of which are mentioned multiple times throughout the play, especially during the first act; the play's opening line is Saturninus's address to \"Noble patricians, patrons of my right\" (l.1). In the second speech of the play, Bassianus states \"And suffer not dishonour to approach/The imperial seat, to virtue consecrate,/To justice, continence and nobility;/But let desert in pure election shine\" (ll.13\u201316). From this point onwards, the concept of nobility is at the heart of everything that happens. H. B. Charlton argues of this opening Act that \"the standard of moral currency most in use is honour\".\nWhen Marcus announces Titus's imminent arrival, he emphasises Titus's renowned honour and integrity: \"And now at last, laden with honour's spoils,/Returns the good Andronicus to Rome,/Renowned Titus, flourishing in arms./Let us entreat by honour of his name/Whom worthily you would have now succeed\" (ll.36\u201340). Marcus's reference to Titus's name is even itself an allusion to his nobility insofar as Titus's full title (Titus Pius) is an honorary epitaph which \"refers to his devotion to patriotic duty\".\nBassianus then cites his own admiration for all of the Andronici: \"Marcus Andronicus, so I do affy/In thy uprightness and integrity,/And so I love and honour thee and thine,/Thy noble brother Titus, and his sons\" (ll.47\u201350). Upon Titus's arrival, an announcement is made: \"Patron of virtue, Rome's best champion,/Successful in the battles that he fights,/With honour and with fortune is returned\" (ll.65\u201368). Once Titus has arrived on stage, it is not long before he too is speaking of honour, virtue and integrity, referring to the family tomb as a \"sweet cell of virtue and nobility\" (l.93). After Titus chooses Saturninus as Emperor, they praise one another's honour, with Saturninus referring to Titus's \"honourable family\" (ll.239) and Titus claiming \"I hold me highly honoured of your grace\" (ll.245). Titus then says to Tamora, \"Now, madam, are you prisoner to an Emperor \u2013/To him that for your honour and your state/Will use you nobly and your followers\" (ll.258\u2013260).\nEven when things begin to go awry for the Andronici, each one maintains a firm grasp of his own interpretation of honour. The death of Mutius comes about because Titus and his sons have different concepts of honour; Titus feels the Emperor's desires should have precedence, his sons that Roman law should govern all, including the Emperor. As such, when Lucius reprimands Titus for slaying one of his own sons, Titus responds \"Nor thou, nor he, are any sons of mine;/My sons would never so dishonour me\" (l.296). Moments later, Saturninus declares to Titus \"I'll trust by leisure him that mocks me once,/Thee never, nor thy traitorous haughty sons,/Confederates all to dishonour me\" (ll.301\u2013303). Subsequently, Titus cannot quite believe that Saturninus has chosen Tamora as his empress and again sees himself dishonoured; \"Titus, when wert thou wont to walk alone,/Dishonoured thus and challeng'd of wrongs\" (ll.340\u2013341). When Marcus is pleading with Titus that Mutius should be allowed to be buried in the family tomb, he implores, \"Suffer thy brother Marcus to inter/His noble nephew here in virtue's nest,/That died in honour and Lavinia's cause\" (ll.375\u2013377). Having reluctantly agreed to allow Mutius a royal burial, Titus then returns to the issue of how he feels his sons have turned on him and dishonoured him: \"The dismall'st day is this that e'er I saw,/To be dishonoured by my sons in Rome\" (ll.384\u2013385). At this point, Marcus, Martius, Quintus and Lucius declare of the slain Mutius, \"He lives in fame, that died in virtue's cause\" (ll.390).\nOther characters also become involved in the affray resulting from the disagreement among the Andronici, and they too are equally concerned with honour. After Saturninus has condemned Titus, Bassianus appeals to him, \"This noble gentleman, Lord Titus here,/Is in opinion and in honour wronged\" (ll.415\u2013416). Then, in a surprising move, Tamora suggests to Saturninus that he should forgive Titus and his family. Saturninus is at first aghast, believing that Tamora is now dishonouring him as well; \"What madam, be dishonoured openly,/And basely put it up without revenge?\" (ll.442\u2013443), to which Tamora replies,\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\u2014\u200a\nThe irony here, of course, is that her false appeal to honour is what begins the bloody cycle of revenge which dominates the rest of the play.\nAlthough not all subsequent scenes are as heavily saturated with references to honour, nobility and virtue as is the opening, they are continually alluded to throughout the play. Other notable examples include Aaron's description of Tamora; \"Upon her wit doth earthly honour wait,/And virtue stoops and trembles at her frown\" (2.1.10\u201311). An ironic and sarcastic reference to honour occurs when Bassianus and Lavinia encounter Aaron and Tamora in the forest and Bassianus tells Tamora \"your swarthy Cimmerian/Doth make your honour of his body's hue,/Spotted, detested, and abominable\" (2.3.72\u201374). Later, after the Clown has delivered Titus's letter to Saturninus, Saturninus declares \"Go, drag the villain hither by the hair./Nor age nor honour shall shape privilege\" (4.4.55\u201356). Another example is seen outside Rome, when a Goth refers to Lucius \"Whose high exploits and honourable deeds/Ingrateful Rome requites with foul contempt\" (5.1.11\u201312).\nA further significant motif is metaphor related to violence: \"the world of \"Titus\" is not simply one of meaningless acts of random violence but rather one in which language engenders violence and violence is done to language through the distance between word and thing, between metaphor and what it represents.\" For example, in 3.1 when Titus asks Aaron to cut off his hand because he believes it will save his sons' lives he says, \"Lend me thy hand, and I will give thee mine.\" Therefore, in the language of \"Titus\", \"to lend one's hand is to risk dismemberment.\"\nNo discussion of the language of \"Titus\" is complete without reference to Marcus's speech upon finding Lavinia after her rape:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\u2014\u200a\nIn this much discussed speech, the discrepancy between the beautiful imagery and the horrific sight before us has been noted by many critics as jarring, and the speech is often severely edited or completely removed for performance; in the 1955 RSC production, for example, director Peter Brook cut the speech entirely. There is also a great deal of disagreement amongst critics as to the essential meaning of the speech. John Dover Wilson, for example, sees it as nothing more than a parody, Shakespeare mocking the work of his contemporaries by writing something so bad. He finds no other tonally analogous speech in all of Shakespeare, concluding it is \"a bundle of ill-matched conceits held together by sticky sentimentalism\". Similarly, Eugene M. Waith determines that the speech is an aesthetic failure that may have looked good on the page but which is incongruous in performance.\nHowever, defenders of the play have posited several theories which seek to illustrate the thematic relevance of the speech. For example, Nicholas Brooke argues that it \"stands in the place of a choric commentary on the crime, establishing its significance to the play by making an emblem of the mutilated woman\". Actress Eve Myles, who played Lavinia in the 2003 RSC production, suggests that Marcus \"tries to bandage her wounds with language\", thus the speech has a calming effect and is Marcus's attempt to soothe Lavinia.\nAnother theory is suggested by Anthony Brian Taylor, who argues simply that Marcus is babbling; \"beginning with references to 'dream' and 'slumber' and ending with one to sleep, the speech is an old man's reverie; shaken by the horrible and totally unexpected spectacle before him, he has succumbed to the senile tendency to drift away and become absorbed in his own thoughts rather than confront the harshness of reality.\" Jonathan Bate however, sees the speech as more complex, arguing that it attempts to give voice to the indescribable. Bate thus sees it as an illustration of language's ability to \"bring back that which has been lost\", i.e. Lavinia's beauty and innocence is figuratively returned in the beauty of the language. Similarly, for Brian Vickers, \"these sensual pictorial images are appropriate to Lavinia's beauty now forever destroyed. That is, they serve one of the constant functions of tragedy, to document the \"metabol\u00e9\", that tragic contrast between what people once were and what they have become.\" Jacques Berthoud provides another theory, arguing that the speech \"exhibits two qualities seldom found together: an unevasive emotional recognition of the horrors of her injuries, and the knowledge that, despite her transformation into a living grave of herself, she remains the person he knows and loves.\" Thus, the speech evokes Marcus's \"protective identification\" with her. D. J. Palmer feels that the speech is an attempt to rationalise in Marcus's own mind the sheer horror of what he is seeing;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Marcus' lament is an effort to realise a sight that taxes to the utmost the powers of understanding and utterance. The vivid conceits in which he pictures his hapless niece do not transform or depersonalise her: she is already transformed and depersonalised ... Far from being a retreat from the awful reality into some aesthetic distance, then, Marcus' conceits dwell upon this figure that is to him both familiar and strange, fair and hideous, living body and object: this is, and is not, Lavinia. Lavinia's plight is literally unutterable ... Marcus' formal lament articulates unspeakable woes. Here and throughout the play the response to the intolerable is ritualised, in language and action, because ritual is the ultimate means by which man seeks to order and control his precarious and unstable world.\nIn contradistinction to Dover Wilson and Waith, several scholars have argued that while the speech may not work on the page, it can work in performance. Discussing the Deborah Warner RSC production at The Swan in 1987, which used an unedited text, Stanley Wells argues that Donald Sumpter's delivery of the speech \"became a deeply moving attempt to master the facts and thus to overcome the emotional shock of a previously unimagined horror. We had the sense of a suspension of time, as if the speech represented an articulation, necessarily extended in expression, of a sequence of thoughts and emotions, that might have taken no more than a second or two to flash through the character's mind, like a bad dream.\" Also speaking of the Warner production and Sumpter's performance, Alan C. Dessen writes \"we observe Marcus, step-by-step, use his logic and Lavinia's reactions to work out what has happened, so that the spectators both see Lavinia directly \"and\" see through his eyes and images. In the process the horror of the situation is filtered through a human consciousness in a way difficult to describe but powerful to experience.\"\nLooking at the language of the play in a more general sense has also produced a range of critical theories. For example, Jacques Berthoud argues that the rhetoric of the play is explicitly bound up with its theme; \"the entire dramatic script, soliloquies included, functions as a network of responses and reactions. [The language's] primary and consistent function is interlocutory.\" An entirely different interpretation is that of Jack Reese, who argues that Shakespeare's use of language functions to remove the audience from the effects and implications of violence; it has an almost Brechtian . Using the example of Marcus's speech, Reese argues that the audience is disconnected from the violence through the seemingly incongruent descriptions of that violence. Such language serves to \"further emphasise the artificiality of the play; in a sense, they suggest to the audience that it is hearing a poem read rather than seeing the events of that poem put into dramatic form.\" Gillian Kendall, however, reaches the opposite conclusion, arguing that rhetorical devices such as metaphor augment the violent imagery, not diminish it, because the figurative use of certain words complements their literal counterparts. This, however, \"disrupts the way the audience perceives imagery.\" An example of this is seen in the body politic/dead body imagery early in the play, as the two images soon become interchangeable. Another theory is provided by Peter M. Sacks, who argues that the language of the play is marked by \"an artificial and heavily emblematic style, and above all a revoltingly grotesque series of horrors which seem to have little function but to ironise man's inadequate expressions of pain and loss\".\nPerformance.\nThe earliest definite recorded performance of \"Titus\" was on 24 January 1594, when Philip Henslowe noted a performance by Sussex's Men of \"Titus &amp; ondronicus\". Although Henslowe does not specify a theatre, it was most likely The Rose. Repeated performances were staged on 28 January and 6 February. On 5 and 12 June, Henslowe recorded two further performances of the play, at the Newington Butts Theatre by the combined Admiral's Men and Lord Chamberlain's Men. The 24 January show earned three pounds eight shillings, and the performances on 29 January and 6 February earned two pounds each, making it the most profitable play of the season. The next recorded performance was on 1 January 1596, when a troupe of London actors, possibly Chamberlain's Men, performed the play during the Christmas festivities at Burley-on-the-Hill in the manor of Sir John Harington, Baron of Exton.\nSome scholars, however, have suggested that the January 1594 performance may not be the first recorded performance of the play. On 11 April 1592, Henslowe recorded ten performances by Derby's Men of a play called \"Titus and Vespasian\", which some, such as E. K. Chambers, have identified with Shakespeare's play. Most scholars, however, believe that \"Titus and Vespasian\" is more likely a different play about the two real life Roman Emperors, Vespasian, who ruled from 69 to 79, and his son Titus, who ruled from 79 to 81. The two were subjects of many narratives at the time, and a play about them would not have been unusual. Dover Wilson further argues that the theory that \"Titus and Vespasian\" is \"Titus Andronicus\" probably originated in an 1865 English translation of a 1620 German translation of \"Titus\", in which Lucius had been renamed Vespasian.\nAlthough it is known that the play was definitely popular in its day, there is no other recorded performance for many years. In January 1668, it was listed by the Lord Chamberlain as one of twenty-one plays owned by the King's Company which had, at some stage previously, been acted at Blackfriars Theatre; \"A Catalogue of part of his Mates Servants Playes as they were formally acted at the Blackfryers &amp; now allowed of to his Mates Servants at ye New Theatre.\" However, no other information is provided. During the late seventeenth, eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, adaptations of the play came to dominate the stage, and after the Burley performance in 1596 and the possible Blackfriars performance some time prior to 1667, there is no definite recorded performance of the Shakespearean text in England until the early twentieth century.\nAfter over 300 years absence from the English stage, the play returned on 8 October 1923, in a production directed by Robert Atkins at The Old Vic, as part of the Vic's presentation of the complete dramatic works over a seven-year period. The production featured Wilfred Walter as Titus, Florence Saunders as Tamora, George Hayes as Aaron and Jane Bacon as Lavinia. Reviews at the time praised Hayes' performance but criticised Walter's as monotonous. Atkins staged the play with a strong sense of Elizabethan theatrical authenticity, with a plain black backdrop, and a minimum of props. Critically, the production met with mixed reviews, some welcoming the return of the original play to the stage, some questioning why Atkins had bothered when various adaptations were much better and still extant. Nevertheless, the play was a huge box office success, one of the most successful in the Complete Works presentation.\nThe earliest known performance of the Shakespearean text in the United States was in April 1924 when the Alpha Delta Phi fraternity of Yale University staged the play under the direction of John M. Berdan and E. M. Woolley as part of a double bill with Robert Greene's \"Friar Bacon and Friar Bungay\". While some material was removed from 3.2, 3.3 and 3.4, the rest of the play was left intact, with much attention devoted to the violence and gore. The cast list for this production has been lost.\nThe best known and most successful production of the play in England was directed by Peter Brook for the RSC at the Royal Shakespeare Theatre in 1955, starring Laurence Olivier as Titus, Maxine Audley as Tamora, Anthony Quayle as Aaron and Vivien Leigh as Lavinia. Brook had been offered the chance to direct \"Macbeth\" but had controversially turned it down, and instead decided to stage \"Titus\". The media predicted that the production would be a massive failure, and possibly spell the end of Brook's career, but on the contrary, it was a huge commercial and critical success, with many of the reviews arguing that Brook's alterations improved Shakespeare's script (Marcus's lengthy speech upon discovering Lavinia was removed and some of the scenes in Act 4 were reorganised). Olivier in particular was singled out for his performance and for making Titus a truly sympathetic character. J. C. Trewin for example, wrote \"the actor had thought himself into the hell of Titus; we forgot the inadequacy of the words in the spell of the projection.\" The production is also noted for muting the violence: Chiron and Demetrius were killed off stage; the heads of Quintus and Martius were never seen; the nurse is strangled, not stabbed; Titus's hand was never seen; blood and wounds were symbolised by red ribbons. Edward Trostle Jones summed up the style of the production as employing \"stylised distancing effects\". The scene where Lavinia first appears after the rape was singled out by critics as being especially horrific, with her wounds portrayed by red streamers hanging from her wrists and mouth. Some reviewers however, found the production too beautified, making it unrealistic, with several commenting on the cleanness of Lavinia's face after her tongue has supposedly been cut out. After its hugely successful Royal Shakespeare Theatre run, the play went on tour around Europe in 1957. No video recordings of the production are known, although there are many photographs available.\nThe success of the Brook production seems to have provided an impetus for directors to tackle the play, and ever since 1955, there has been a steady stream of performances on the English and American stages. After Brook, the next major production came in 1967, when Douglas Seale directed an extremely graphic and realistic presentation at the Centre Stage in Baltimore with costumes that recalled the various combatants in World War II. Seale's production employed a strong sense of theatrical realism to make parallels between the contemporary period and that of \"Titus\", and thus comment on the universality of violence and revenge. Seale set the play in the 1940s and made pointed parallels with concentration camps, the massacre at Katyn, the Nuremberg Rallies and the Hiroshima and Nagasaki bombings. Saturninus was based on Benito Mussolini and all his followers dressed entirely in black; Titus was modelled after a Prussian Army officer; the Andronici wore Nazi insignia and the Goths at the end of the play were dressed in Allied Forces uniforms; the murders in the last scene are all carried out by gunfire, and at the end of the play swastikas rained down onto the stage. The play received mixed reviews with many critics wondering why Seale had chosen to associate the Andronici with Nazism, arguing that it created a mixed metaphor.\nLater in 1967, as a direct reaction to Seale's realistic production, Gerald Freedman directed a performance for Joseph Papp's Shakespeare Festival at the Delacorte Theater in Central Park, Manhattan, starring Jack Hollander as Titus, Olympia Dukakis as Tamora, Moses Gunn as Aaron and Erin Martin as Lavinia. Freedman had seen Seale's production and felt it failed because it worked by \"bringing into play our sense of reality in terms of detail and literal time structure\". He argued that when presented realistically, the play simply does not work, as it raises too many practical questions, such as why does Lavinia not bleed to death, why does Marcus not take her to the hospital immediately, why does Tamora not notice that the pie tastes unusual, exactly how do both Martius and Quintus manage to fall into a hole? Freedman argued that \"if one wants to create a fresh emotional response to the violence, blood and multiple mutilations of \"Titus Andronicus\", one must shock the imagination and subconscious with visual images that recall the richness and depth of primitive rituals.\" As such, the costumes were purposely designed to represent no particular time or place but were instead based on those of the Byzantine Empire and feudal Japan. Additionally, the violence was stylised; instead of swords and daggers, wands were used and no contact was ever made. The colour scheme was hallucinatory, changing mid-scene. Characters wore classic masks of comedy and tragedy. The slaughter in the final scene was accomplished symbolically by having each character wrapped in a red robe as they died. A narrator (Charles Dance) was also used, who, prior to each act, would announce what was going to happen in the upcoming act, thus undercutting any sense of realism. The production received generally positive reviews, with Mildred Kuner arguing \"Symbolism rather than gory realism was what made this production so stunning.\"\nIn 1972, Trevor Nunn directed an RSC production at the Royal Shakespeare Theatre, as part of a presentation of the four Roman plays, starring Colin Blakely as Titus, Margaret Tyzack as Tamora, Calvin Lockhart as Aaron and Janet Suzman as Lavinia. Colin Blakely and John Wood as a vicious and maniacal Saturninus received particularly positive reviews. This production took the realistic approach and did not shirk from the more specific aspects of the violence; for example, Lavinia has trouble walking after the rape, which, it is implied, was anal rape. Nunn believed the play asked profound questions about the sustainability of Elizabethan society, and as such, he linked the play to the contemporary period to ask the same questions of late twentieth-century England; he was \"less concerned with the condition of ancient Rome than with the morality of contemporary life\". In his program notes, Nunn wrote \"Shakespeare's Elizabethan nightmare has become ours.\" He was especially interested in the theory that decadence had led to the collapse of Rome. At the end of 4.2, for example, there was an on-stage orgy, and throughout the play, supporting actors appeared in the backgrounds dancing, eating, drinking and behaving outrageously. Also in this vein, the play opened with a group of people paying homage to a waxwork of an obese emperor reclining on a couch and clutching a bunch of grapes.\nThe play was performed for the first time at the Stratford Shakespeare Festival in Ontario, Canada in 1978, when it was directed by Brian Bedford, starring William Hutt as Titus, Jennifer Phipps as Tamora, Alan Scarfe as Aaron and Domini Blithe as Lavinia. Bedford went with neither stylisation nor realism; instead the violence simply tended to happen off-stage, but everything else was realistically presented. The play received mixed reviews with some praising its restraint and others arguing that the suppression of the violence went too far. Many cited the final scene, where despite three onstage stabbings, not one drop of blood was visible, and the reveal of Lavinia, where she was totally bloodless despite her mutilation. This production cut Lucius's final speech and instead ended with Aaron alone on the stage as Sibyl predicts the fall of Rome in lines written by Bedford himself. As such, \"for affirmation and healing under Lucius the production substituted a sceptical modern theme of evil triumphant and Rome's decadence.\"\nA celebrated, and unedited production, (according to Jonathan Bate, not a single line from Q1 was cut) was directed by Deborah Warner in 1987 at The Swan and remounted at Barbican's Pit in 1988 for the RSC, starring Brian Cox as Titus, Estelle Kohler as Tamora, Peter Polycarpou as Aaron and Sonia Ritter as Lavinia. Met with almost universally positive reviews, Jonathan Bate regards it as the finest production of any Shakespearean play of the entire 1980s. Using a small cast, Warner had her actors address the audience from time to time throughout the play and often had actors leave the stage and wander out into the auditorium. Opting for a realist presentation, the play had a warning posted in the pit \"This play contains scenes which some people may find disturbing\", and numerous critics noted how, after the interval at many shows, empty seats had appeared in the audience. Warner's production was considered so successful, both critically and commercially, that the RSC did not stage the play again until 2003.\nIn 1988, Mark Rucker directed a realistic production at Shakespeare Santa Cruz, starring J. Kenneth Campbell as Titus, Molly Maycock as Tamora, Elizabeth Atkeson as Lavinia, and an especially well-received performance by Bruce A. Young as Aaron. Campbell presented Titus in a much more sympathetic light than usual; for example, he kills Mutius by accident, pushing him so that he falls against a tree, and his refusal to allow Mutius to be buried was performed as if in a dream state. Prior to the production, Rucker had Young work out and get in shape so that by the time of the performance, he weighed 240\u00a0lbs. Standing at six-foot four, his Aaron was purposely designed to be the most physically imposing character on the stage. Additionally, he was often positioned as standing on hills and tables, with the rest of the cast below him. When he appears with the Goths, he is not their prisoner, but willingly enters their camp in pursuit of his baby, the implication being that without this one weakness, he would have been invincible.\nIn 1994, Julie Taymor directed the play at the Theater for the New City. The production featured a prologue and epilogue set in the modern era, foregrounded the character of Young Lucius, who acts as a kind of choric observer of events, and starred Robert Stattel as Titus, Melinda Mullins as Tamora, Harry Lennix as Aaron and Miriam Healy-Louie as Lavinia. Heavily inspired in her design by Joel-Peter Witkin, Taymor used stone columns to represent the people of Rome, who she saw as silent and incapable of expressing any individuality or subjectivity. Controversially, the play ended with the implication that Lucius had killed Aaron's baby, despite his vow not to.\nIn 1995, Gregory Doran directed a production at the Royal National Theatre, which also played at the Market Theatre in Johannesburg, South Africa, starring Antony Sher as Titus, Dorothy Ann Gould as Tamora, Sello Maake as Aaron and Jennifer Woodbine as Lavinia. Although Doran explicitly denied any political overtones, the play was set in a modern African context and made explicit parallels to South African politics. In his production notes, which Doran co-wrote with Sher, he stated, \"Surely, to be relevant, theatre must have an umbilical connection to the lives of the people watching it.\" One particularly controversial decision was to have the play spoken in indigenous accents rather than Received Pronunciation, which allegedly resulted in many white South Africans refusing to see the play. Writing in \"Plays International\" in August 1995, Robert Lloyd Parry argued \"the questions raised by \"Titus\" went far beyond the play itself [to] many of the tensions that exist in the new South Africa; the gulf of mistrust that still exists between blacks and whites ... \"Titus Andronicus\" has proved itself to be political theatre in the truest sense.\"\nFor the first time since 1987, the RSC staged the play in 2003, under the direction of Bill Alexander and starring David Bradley as Titus, Maureen Beattie as Tamora, Joe Dixon as Aron and Eve Myles as Lavinia. Convinced that Act 1 was by George Peele, Alexander felt he was not undermining the integrity of Shakespeare by drastically altering it; for example, Saturninus and Tamora are present throughout, they never leave the stage; there is no division between the upper and lower levels; all mention of Mutius is absent; and over 100 lines were removed.\nIn 2006, two major productions were staged within a few weeks of one another. The first opened on 29 May at Shakespeare's Globe, directed by Lucy Bailey and starring Douglas Hodge as Titus, Geraldine Alexander as Tamora, Shaun Parkes as Aaron and Laura Rees as Lavinia. Bailey focused on a realistic presentation throughout the production; for example, after her mutilation, Lavinia is covered from head to toe in blood, with her stumps crudely bandaged, and raw flesh visible beneath. So graphic was Bailey's use of realism that at several productions, audience members fainted upon Lavinia's appearance. The production was also controversial insofar as the Globe had a roof installed for the first time in its history. The decision was taken by designer William Dudley, who took as his inspiration a feature of the Colosseum known as a velarium \u2013 a cooling system which consisted of a canvas-covered, net-like structure made of ropes, with a hole in the centre. Dudley made it as a PVC awning which was intended to darken the auditorium.\nThe second 2006 production opened at the Royal Shakespeare Theatre on 9 June as part of the \"Complete Works Festival\". Directed by Yukio Ninagawa, it starred Kotaro Yoshida as Titus, Rei Asami as Tamora, Shun Oguri as Aaron and Hitomi Manaka as Lavinia. Performed in Japanese, the original English text was projected as surtitles onto the back of the stage. In stark contrast to Bailey's production, theatricality was emphasised; the play begins with the company still rehearsing and getting into costume and the stage hands still putting the sets together. The production followed the 1955 Brook production in its depiction of violence; actress Hitomi Manaka appeared after the rape scene with stylised red ribbons coming from her mouth and arms, substituting for blood. Throughout the play, at the back of the stage, a huge marble wolf can be seen from which feed Romulus and Remus, with the implication being that Rome is a society based on animalistic origins. The play ends with Young Lucius holding Aaron's baby out to the audience and crying out \"The horror! The horror!\"\nSeveral reviews of the time made much of the manner in which each production approached the appearance of Lavinia after the rape: \"At Shakespeare's Globe, the groundlings are fainting at the mutilations in Lucy Bailey's coarse but convincing production. To Stratford-upon-Avon, Yukio Ninagawa brings a Japanese staging so stylised that it keeps turning the horror into visual poetry.\" Speaking of Bailey's production, Eleanor Collins of , said of the scene, \"audience members turned their heads away in real distress\". Charles Spencer of \"The Daily Telegraph\" called Lavinia \"almost too ghastly to behold\". Michael Billington of \"The Guardian\" said her slow shuffle onto the stage \"chills the blood\". Sam Marlowe of \"The Times\" saw Bailey's use of realism as extremely important for the moral of the production as a whole: \"violated, her hands and her tongue cruelly cut away, she stumbles into view drenched in blood, flesh dangling from her hacked wrists, moaning and keening, almost animalistic. It's the production's most powerful symbolic image, redolent of the dehumanising effects of war.\" Of Ninagawa's production, some critics felt the use of stylisation damaged the impact of the scene. Benedict Nightingale of \"The Times\", for example, asked \"is it enough to suggest bloodletting by having red ribbons flow from wrists and throats?\" Similarly, \"The Guardian\"'s Michael Billington, who had praised Bailey's use of realistic effects, wrote \"At times I felt that Ninagawa, through stylised images and Handelian music, unduly aestheticised violence.\" Some critics, however, felt the stylisation was more powerful than Bailey's realism; Neil Allan and Scott Revers of , for example, wrote \"Blood itself was denoted by spools of red thread spilling from garments, limbs and Lavinia's mouth. Cruelty was stylised; the visceral became the aesthetic.\" Similarly, Paul Taylor, writing for \"The Independent\", wrote \"Gore is represented by swatches of red cords that tumble and trail from wounded wrists and mouths. You might think that this method had a cushioning effect. In fact it concentrates and heightens the horror.\" Ninagawa himself said \"The violence is all there. I am just trying to express these things in a different way from any previous production.\" In her 2013 essay, \"Mythological Reconfigurations on the Contemporary Stage: Giving a New Voice to Philomela in \"Titus Andronicus\"\", which directly compares the depictions of the two Lavinias, Agn\u00e8s Lafont writes of Ninagawa's production that Lavinia's appearance functions as a \"visual emblem\": \"Bloodshed and beauty create a stark dissonance ... Distancing itself from the violence it stages thanks to 'dissonance', the production presents Lavinia onstage as if she were a painting ... Ninagawa's work distances itself from cruelty, as the spectacle of suffering is stylised. Ribbons that represent blood ... are symbolic means of filtering the aching spectacle of an abused daughter, and yet the spectacle retains its shocking potential and its power of empathy all the while intellectualizing it.\"\nIn 2007, Gale Edwards directed a production for the Shakespeare Theatre Company at the Harman Center for the Arts, starring Sam Tsoutsouvas as Titus, Valerie Leonard as Tamora, Colleen Delany as Lavinia, and Peter Macon as Aaron. Set in an unspecific modern milieu, props were kept to a minimum, with lighting and general staging kept simple, as Edwards wanted the audience to concentrate on the story, not the staging. The production received generally very favourable reviews.\nIn 2011, Michael Sexton directed a modern military dress production at The Public Theater on a minimalistic set made of plywood boards. The production had a low budget and much of it was spent on huge volumes of blood that literally drenched the actors in the final scene, as Sexton said he was determined to outdo his contemporaries in terms of the amount of on-stage blood in the play. The production starred Jay O. Sanders (who was nominated for a Lucille Lortel) as Titus, Stephanie Roth Haberle as Tamora, Ron Cephas Jones as Aaron and Jennifer Ikeda as Lavinia.\nIn 2013, Michael Fentiman directed the play for the Royal Shakespeare Company, with Stephen Boxer as Titus, Katy Stephens as Tamora, Kevin Harvey as Aaron, and Rose Reynolds as Lavinia. Emphasising the gore and violence, the production carried a trailer with warnings of \"graphic imagery and scenes of butchery\". It played at The Swan until October 2013. Also in 2013, the Hudson Shakespeare Company staged a production directed by Jon Ciccarelli as part of a special Halloween festival for the Historic Jersey City and Harsimus Cemetery. The production contrasted a military and modern Goth culture, but quickly disintegrated into an anarchic state, stressing the black comedy of the play.\nOutside Britain and the United States, other significant productions include Qiping Xu's 1986 production in China, which drew political parallels to Mao Zedong's Cultural Revolution and the Red Guards; Peter Stein's 1989 production in Italy which evoked images of twentieth century Fascism; Daniel Mesguich's 1989 production in Paris, which set the entire play in a crumbling library, acting as a symbol for Roman civilisation; Nenni Delmestre's 1992 production in Zagreb which acted as a metaphor for the struggles of the Croatian people; and Silviu Purc\u0103rete's 1992 Romanian production, which explicitly avoided using the play as a metaphor for the fall of Nicolae Ceau\u0219escu (this production is one of the most successful plays ever staged in Romania, and it was revived every year up to 1997).\nAdaptations.\nPlays.\nThe first known adaptation of the play originated in the later years of the sixteenth century. In 1620, a German publication entitled contained a play called (\"A most lamentable tragedy of Titus Andronicus and the haughty empress, wherein are found memorable events\"). Transcribed by Frederick Menius, the play was a version of \"Titus\" performed by Robert Browne and John Greene's group of travelling players. The overriding plot of \"Tito Andronico\" is identical to \"Titus\", but all the character names are different, with the exception of Titus himself. Written in prose, the play does not feature the fly killing scene (3.2), Bassianus does not oppose Saturninus for the throne, Alarbus is absent, Quintus and Mutius are only seen after their death, many of the classical and mythological allusions have been removed; stage directions are much more elaborate, for example, in the banquet scene, Titus is described as wearing blood-soaked rags and carrying a butcher's knife dripping with blood.\nAnother European adaptation came in 1637, when Dutch dramatist Jan Vos wrote a version of the play entitled \"Aran en Titus\", which was published in 1641, and republished in 1642, 1644, 1648 and 1649, illustrating its popularity. The play may have been based on a 1621 work, now lost, by Adriaen Van den Bergh, which may itself have been a composite of the English \"Titus\" and the German \"Tito Andronico\". Vos' play focuses on Aaron, who, in the final scene, is burned alive on stage, beginning a tradition amongst adaptations of foregrounding the Moor and ending the play with his death.\nThe earliest English language adaptation was in 1678 at Drury Lane, by Edward Ravenscroft: \"Titus Andronicus, or the Rape of Lavinia. A Tragedy, Alter'd from Mr. Shakespeares Works\", probably with Thomas Betterton as Titus and Samuel Sandford as Aaron. In his preface, Ravenscroft wrote \"Compare the Old Play with this you'l finde that none in all that Authors Works ever receiv'd greater Alterations or Additions, the language not only Refin'd, but many Scenes entirely New: Besides most of the principal Characters heighten'd and the Plot much incresas'd.\" The play was a huge success and was revived in 1686, and published the following year. It was revived again in 1704 and 1717. The 1717 revival was especially successful, starring John Mills as Titus, Mrs. Giffard as Tamora, James Quin as Aaron, and John Thurmond as Saturninus. The play was revived again in 1718 and 1719 (with John Bickerstaff as Aaron) and 1721 (with Thomas Walker in the role). Quin had left Drury Lane in 1718 and gone to Lincoln's Inn Fields, which was owned by John Rich. Rich's actors had little Shakespearean experience, and Quin was soon advertised as the main attraction. In 1718, the adaptation was presented twice at Lincoln, both times with Quin as Aaron. In the 1720\u20131721 season, the play earned \u00a381 with three performances. Quin became synonymous with the role of Aaron, and in 1724 he chose the adaptation as the play to be performed at his benefit.\nRavenscroft made drastic alterations to the play. He removed all of 2.2 (preparing for the hunt), 3.2 (the fly killing scene), 4.3 (firing the arrows and sending the clown to Saturninus) and 4.4 (the execution of the clown). Much of the violence was toned down; for example both the murder of Chiron and Demetrius and Titus's amputation take place off stage. A significant change in the first scene, and one with major implications for the rest of the play, is that prior to the sacrifice of Alarbus, it is revealed that several years previously, Tamora had one of Titus's sons in captivity and refused to show him clemency despite Titus's pleas. Aaron has a much larger role in Ravenscroft than in Shakespeare, especially in Act 1, where lines originally assigned to Demetrius and Tamora are given to him. Tamora does not give birth during the action, but earlier, with the baby secretly kept by a nurse. To maintain the secret, Aaron kills the nurse, and it is the nurse's husband, not Lucius, who captures Aaron as he leaves Rome with the child. Additionally, Lucius's army is not composed of Goths, but of Roman centurions loyal to the Andronici. The last act is also considerably longer; Tamora and Saturninus both have lengthy speeches after their fatal stabbings. Tamora asks for her child to be brought to her, but she stabs it immediately upon receiving it. Aaron laments that Tamora has now outdone him in evil; \"She has out-done me in my own Art \u2013/Out-done me in Murder \u2013 Kille'd her own Child./Give it me \u2013 I'le eat it.\" He is burned alive as the climax of the play.\nIn January and February 1839 an adaptation written and directed by and also starring Nathaniel Bannister was performed for four nights at the Walnut Street Theatre in Philadelphia. The playbill had a note reading \"The manager, in announcing this play, adapted by N. H. Bannister from the language of Shakespeare alone, assures the public that every expression calculated to offend the ear, has been studiously avoided, and the play is presented for their decision with full confidence that it will merit approbation.\" In his \"History of the Philadelphia Stage\", Volume IV (1878), Charles Durang wrote, \"Bannister ably preserved the beauties of its poetry, the intensity of its incidents, and excluded the horrors with infinite skill, yet preserved all the interest of the drama.\" Nothing else is known about this production.\nThe most successful adaptation of the play in Britain premiered in 1850, written by Ira Aldridge and C. A. Somerset. Aaron was rewritten to make him the hero of the piece (played by Aldridge), the rape and mutilation of Lavinia were removed, Tamora (Queen of Scythia) became chaste and honourable, with Aaron as her friend only, and Chiron and Demetrius act only out of love for their mother. Only Saturninus is a truly evil character. Towards the end of the play, Saturninus has Aaron chained to a tree, and his baby flung into the Tiber. Aaron frees himself however and leaps into the river after the child. At the end, Saturninus poisons Aaron, but as Aaron dies, Lavinia promises to look after his child for him, due to his saving her from rape earlier in the piece. An entire scene from \"Zaraffa, the Slave King\", a play written specifically for Aldridge in Dublin in 1847, was included in this adaptation. After the initial performances, Aldridge kept the play in the repertoire, and it was extremely successful at the box office and continued to be staged in England, Ireland, Scotland and Wales until at least 1857, when it received a glowing review from \"The Sunday Times\" on 26 April. It was generally agreed amongst reviewers of the period that the Aldridge/Somerset rewrite was considerably superior to Shakespeare's original. For example, \"The Era\" reviewer wrote,\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The deflowerment of Lavinia, cutting out her tongue, chopping off her hands, and the numerous decapitations which occur in the original, are wholly omitted, and a play not only presentable but actually attractive is the result. Aaron is elevated into a noble and lofty character; Tamora, the queen of Scythia, is a chaste though decidedly strong-minded female, and her connection with the Moor appears to be of legitimate description; her sons Chiron and Demetrius are dutiful children, obeying the behests of their mother. Thus altered, Mr. Aldridge's conception of the part of Aaron is excellent \u2013 gentle and impassioned by turns; now burning with jealousy as he doubts the honour of the Queen; anon, fierce with rage, as he reflects upon the wrongs which have been done him \u2013 the murder of Alarbus and the abduction of his son; and then all tenderness and emotion in the gentler passages with his infant.\nThe next adaptation was in 1951, when Kenneth Tynan and Peter Myers staged a thirty-five-minute version entitled \"Andronicus\" as part of a Grand Guignol presentation at the Irving Theatre. Produced in the tradition of Theatre of Cruelty, the production edited together all of the violent scenes, emphasised the gore, and removed Aaron entirely. In a review in the \"Sunday Times\" on 11 November, Harold Hobson wrote the stage was full of \"practically the whole company waving gory stumps and eating cannibal pies\".\nIn 1957 the Old Vic staged a heavily edited ninety-minute performance as part of a double bill with an edited version of \"The Comedy of Errors\". Directed by Walter Hudd, both plays were performed by the same company of actors, with Derek Godfrey as Titus, Barbara Jefford as Tamora, Margaret Whiting as Lavinia and Robert Helpmann as Saturninus. Performed in the manner of a traditional Elizabethan production, the play received mixed reviews. \"The Times\", for example, felt that the juxtaposition of the blood tragedy and the frothy comedy was \"ill-conceived\".\nIn 1970, Swiss dramatist Friedrich D\u00fcrrenmatt adapted the play into a German language comedy entitled (\"Titus Andronicus: Comedy After Shakespeare\"). Of the adaptation he wrote \"it represents an attempt to render Shakespeare's early chaotic work fit for the German stage without having the Shakespearean atrocities and grotesqueries passed over in silence.\" Working from a translation of the \"First Folio\" text by Wolf Graf von Baudissin, D\u00fcrrenmatt altered much of the dialogue and changed elements of the plot; the fly killing scene (3.2) and the interrogation of Aaron (5.1) were removed; Titus has Aaron cut off his hand, and after he realises he has been tricked, Marcus brings Lavinia to him rather than the other way around as in the original play. Another major change is that after Aaron is presented with his love child, he flees Rome immediately, and successfully, and is never heard from again. D\u00fcrrenmatt also added a new scene, where Lucius arrives at the Goth camp and persuades their leader, Alarich, to help him. At the end of the play, after Lucius has stabbed Saturninus, but before he has given his final speech, Alarich betrays him, kills him, and orders his army to destroy Rome and kill everyone in it.\nIn 1981, John Barton followed the 1957 Old Vic model and directed a heavily edited version of the play as a double bill with \"The Two Gentlemen of Verona\" for the RSC, starring Patrick Stewart as Titus, Sheila Hancock as Tamora, Hugh Quarshie as Aaron and Leonie Mellinger as Lavinia. Theatricality and falseness were emphasised, and when actors were off stage, they could be seen at the sides of the stage watching the performance. The production received lukewarm reviews, and had an average box office.\nIn 1984, German playwright Heiner M\u00fcller adapted the play into (\"Anatomy Titus: Fall of Rome. A Shakespearean Commentary\"). Interspersing the dialogue with a chorus like commentary, the adaptation was heavily political and made reference to numerous twentieth century events, such as the rise of the Third Reich, Stalinism, the erection of the Berlin Wall and the attendant emigration and defection issues, and the 1973 Chilean coup d'\u00e9tat. M\u00fcller removed the entire first act, replacing it was a narrated introduction, and completely rewrote the final act. He described the work as \"terrorist in nature\", and foregrounded the violence; for example Lavinia is brutally raped on stage and Aaron takes several hacks at Titus's hand before amputating it. First performed at the Schauspielhaus Bochum, it was directed by Manfred Karge and Matthias Langhoff, and is still regularly revived in Germany.\nIn 1989, Jeanette Lambermont directed a heavily edited kabuki version of the play at the Stratford Shakespeare Festival, in a double bill with \"The Comedy of Errors\", starring Nicholas Pennell as Titus, Goldie Semple as Tamora, Hubert Baron Kelly as Aaron and Lucy Peacock as Lavinia.\nIn 2005, German playwright Botho Strau\u00df adapted the play into (\"Rape: After Titus Andronicus by Shakespeare\"), also commonly known by its French name, . Set in both a contemporary and an ancient world predating the Roman Empire, the adaptation begins with a group of salesmen trying to sell real estate; gated communities which they proclaim as , where women and children are secure from \"theft, rape and kidnapping\". Mythology is important in the adaptation; Venus is represented as governing nature, but is losing her power to the melancholic and uninterested Saturn, leading to a society rampant with (lack of meaning, insignificance). Written in prose rather than blank verse, changes to the text include the rape of Lavinia being Tamora's idea instead of Aaron's; the removal of Marcus; Titus does not kill his son; he does not have his hand amputated; Chiron is much more subservient to Demetrius; Aaron is more philosophical, trying to find meaning in his acts of evil rather than simply revelling in them; Titus does not die at the end, nor does Tamora, although the play ends with Titus ordering the deaths of Tamora and Aaron.\nIn 2008, M\u00fcller's \"Anatomie Titus\" was translated into English by Julian Hammond and performed at the Cremorne Theatre in Brisbane, the Canberra Theatre, the Playhouse in the Sydney Opera House and the Malthouse Theatre, Melbourne by the Bell Shakespeare Company and the Queensland Theatre Company. Directed by Michael Gow and with an all-male cast, it starred John Bell as Titus, Peter Cook as Tamora, Timothy Walter as Aaron and Thomas Campbell as Lavinia. Racism was a major theme in this production, with Aaron initially wearing a gorilla mask, and then poorly applied blackface, and his baby 'played' by a golliwogg.\nIn 2012, as part of the Globe to Globe Festival at Shakespeare's Globe, the play was performed under the title \"Titus 2.0\". Directed by Tang Shu-wing, it starred Andy Ng Wai-shek as Titus, Ivy Pang Ngan-ling as Tamora, Chu Pak-hong as Aaron and Lai Yuk-ching as Lavinia. Performed entirely in Cantonese, from an original script by Cancer Chong, the play had originally been staged in Hong Kong in 2009. The production took a minimalist approach and featured very little blood (after Lavinia has her hands cut off, for example, she simply wears red gloves for the rest of the play). The production features a narrator throughout, who speaks both in first person and third person, sometimes directly to the audience, sometimes to other characters on the stage. The role of the narrator alternates throughout the play, but is always performed by a member of the main cast. The production received excellent reviews, both in its original Hong Kong incarnation, and when restaged at the Globe.\nIn 2014, Noelle Fair and Lisa LaGrande adapted the play into \"Interpreting her Martyr'd Signs\", the title of which is taken from Titus's claim to be able to understand the mute Lavinia. Focusing on the backstories of Tamora and Lavinia, the play is set in Purgatory shortly after their deaths, where they find themselves in a waiting area with Aaron as their salvation or damnation is decided upon. As they try to come to terms with their unresolved conflict, Aaron serves as a master of ceremonies, initiating a dialogue between them, leading to a series of flashbacks to their lives prior to the beginning of the play.\n\"\", an absurdist comic play by Taylor Mac and directed by George C. Wolfe, began previews at the Booth Theatre on Broadway on 11 March 2019 with an opening of 21 April 2019. The cast included Nathan Lane, Kristine Nielsen, and Julie White and involved servants tasked with cleaning up the carnage from the original play.\nMusicals.\n\"Titus Andronicus: The Musical!\", written by Brian Colonna, Erik Edborg, Hannah Duggan, Erin Rollman, Evan Weissman, Matt Petraglia, and Samantha Schmitz, was staged by the Buntport Theater Company in Denver, Colorado four times between 2002 and 2007. Staged as a band of travelling thespian players who are attempting to put on a serious production of \"Titus\", and starring Brian Colonna as Titus, Erin Rollman as Tamora (and Marcus), Hannah Duggan as both Aaron and Lavinia (when playing Aaron she wore a fake moustache), Erik Edborg as Lucius and Saturninus, and Evan Weissman as Someone Who Will Probably Die (he is killed over thirty times during the play). The piece was very much a farce, and included such moments as Lavinia singing an aria to the tune of \"Oops!...I Did It Again\" by Britney Spears, after her tongue has been cut out; Saturninus and Lucius engaged in a sword fight, but both being played by the same actor; Chiron and Demetrius 'played' by a gas can and a car radio respectively; the love child being born with a black moustache. A number of critics felt that the play improved on Shakespeare's original, and several wondered what Harold Bloom would have made of it.\n\"Tragedy! A Musical Comedy\", written by Michael Johnson and Mary Davenport was performed at the 2007 New York International Fringe Festival in the Lucille Lortel Theatre. Directed by Johnson, the piece starred Francis Van Wetering as Titus, Alexandra Cirves as Tamora, Roger Casey as Aaron (aka The Evil Black Guy) and Lauren Huyett as Lavinia. Staged as a farce, the production included moments such as Lavinia singing a song entitled \"At least I can still sing\" after having her hands cut off, but as she reaches the finale, Chiron and Demetrius return and cut out her tongue; Lucius is portrayed as a homosexual in love with Saturninus, and everyone knows except Titus; Titus kills Mutius not because he defies him, but because he discovers that Mutius wants to be a tap dancer instead of a soldier; Bassianus is a transvestite; Saturninus is addicted to prescription medication; and Tamora is a nymphomaniac.\nFilm.\nIn 1969, Robert Hartford-Davis planned to make a feature film starring Christopher Lee as Titus and Lesley-Anne Down as Lavinia, but the project never materialised.\nThe 1973 horror comedy film \"Theatre of Blood\", directed by Douglas Hickox featured a very loose adaptation of the play. Vincent Price stars in the film as Edward Lionheart, who regards himself as the finest Shakespearean actor of all time. When he fails to be awarded the prestigious Critic's Circle Award for Best Actor, he sets about exacting bloody revenge on the critics who gave him poor reviews, with each act inspired by a death in a Shakespeare play. One such act of revenge involves the critic Meredith Merridew (played by Robert Morley). Lionheart abducts Merridew's prized poodles, and bakes them in a pie, which he then feeds to Merridew, before revealing all and force-feeding the critic until he chokes to death.\nA 1997 straight-to-video adaptation, which cuts back on the violence, titled \"Titus Andronicus: The Movie\", was directed by Lorn Richey and starred Ross Dippel as Titus, Aldrich Allen as Aaron, and Maureen Moran as Lavinia. Another straight-to-video- adaptation was made in 1998, directed by Christopher Dunne, and starring Robert Reese as Titus, Candy K. Sweet as Tamora, Lexton Raleigh as Aaron, Tom Dennis as Demitrius, with Levi David Tinker as Chiron and Amanda Gezik as Lavinia. This version enhanced the violence and increased the gore. For example, in the opening scene, Alarbus has his face skinned alive, and is then disembowelled and set on fire.\nIn 1999, Julie Taymor directed an adaptation entitled \"Titus\", starring Anthony Hopkins as Titus, Jessica Lange as Tamora, Harry Lennix as Aaron (reprising his role from Taymor's 1994 theatrical production) and Laura Fraser as Lavinia. As with Taymor's stage production, the film begins with a young boy playing with toy soldiers in his home and being whisked away to a world resembling Ancient Rome, where he assumes the character of young Lucius. A major component of the film is the mixing of the old and modern; Chiron and Demetrius dress like modern rock stars, but the Andronici dress like Roman soldiers; some characters use chariots, some use cars and motorcycles; crossbows and swords are used alongside rifles and pistols; tanks are seen driven by soldiers in ancient Roman garb; bottled beer is seen alongside ancient amphorae of wine; microphones are used to address characters in ancient clothing. According to Taymor, this anachronistic structure was created to emphasise the timelessness of the violence in the film, to suggest that violence is universal to all humanity, at all times: \"Costume, paraphernalia, horses or chariots or cars; these represent the essence of a character, as opposed to placing it in a specific time. This is a film that takes place from the year 1 to the year 2000.\" At the end of the film, young Lucius takes the baby and walks out of Rome back to his era as he reverts to the boy; an image of hope for the future, symbolized by the rising sun in the background. Originally, the film was to end as Taymor's 1994 production had, with the implication that Lucius is going to kill Aaron's baby, but during production of the film, actor Angus Macfadyen, who played Lucius, convinced Taymor that Lucius was an honorable man and wouldn't go back on his word. Lisa S. Starks reads the film as a revisionist horror film and feels that Taymor is herself part of the process of twentieth century re-evaluation of the play: \"In adapting a play that has traditionally evoked critical condemnation, Taymor calls into question that judgement, thereby opening up the possibility for new readings and considerations of the play within the Shakespeare canon.\"\n\"William Shakespeare's Titus Andronicus\", directed by Richard Griffin and starring Nigel Gore as Titus, Zoya Pierson as Tamora, Kevin Butler as Aaron and Molly Lloyd as Lavinia, was released direct to video in 2000. Shot on DV in and around Providence, Rhode Island with a budget of $12,000, the film is set in a modern business milieu. Saturninus is a corporate head who has inherited a company from his father, and the Goths feature as contemporary goths.\nIn 2017, \"Titus Andronicus\" was adapted as \"The Hungry\" by director Bornilla Chatterjee set in contemporary New Delhi, India. It stars Naseeruddin Shah as Tathagat Ahuja (representing Titus), Tisca Chopra as Tulsi Joshi (representing Tamora), Neeraj Kabi as Arun Kumar (Aaron) and Sayani Gupta as Loveleen Ahuja (Lavinia).\nTelevision.\nIn 1970, Finnish TV channel Yle TV1 screened an adaptation of the play written and directed by Jukka Sipil\u00e4, starring Leo Lastum\u00e4ki as Titus, Iris-Lilja Lassila as Tamora, Eugene Holman as Aaron and Maija Leino as Lavinia.\nIn 1985, the BBC produced a version of the play for their \"BBC Television Shakespeare\" series. Directed by Jane Howell, the play was the thirty-seventh and final episode of the series and starred Trevor Peacock as Titus, Eileen Atkins as Tamora, Hugh Quarshie as Aaron and Anna Calder-Marshall as Lavinia. Because \"Titus\" was broadcast several months after the rest of the seventh season, it was rumoured that the BBC were worried about the violence in the play and that disagreements had arisen about censorship. This was inaccurate however, as the delay was actually caused by a BBC strike in 1984. The episode had been booked into the studio in February and March 1984, but the strike meant it could not shoot. When the strike ended, the studio could not be used as it was being used by another production, and then when the studio became available, the RSC was using Trevor Peacock, and filming did not take place until February 1985, a year later than planned. Initially, director Jane Howell wanted to set the play in present-day Northern Ireland, but she ultimately settled on a more conventional approach. All the body parts seen throughout were based upon real autopsy photographs, and were authenticated by the Royal College of Surgeons. The costumes of the Goths were based on punk outfits, with Chiron and Demetrius specifically based on the band KISS. For the scene when Chiron and Demetrius are killed, a large carcass is seen hanging nearby; this was a genuine lamb carcass purchased from a kosher butcher and smeared with Vaseline to make it gleam under the studio lighting. In an unusual design choice, Howell had the Roman populace all wear identical generic masks without mouths, so as to convey the idea that the Roman people were faceless and voiceless, as she felt the play depicted a society which \"seemed like a society where everyone was faceless except for those in power\". The production was one of the most lauded plays of the series and garnered almost universally positive reviews.\nFor the most part, the adaptation followed Q1 exactly (and F1 for 3.2) with some minor alterations. For example, a few lines were cut from various scenes, such as Lavinia's \"Ay, for these slips have made him noted long\" (2.3.87), thus removing the continuity error regarding the duration of the Goths' residence in Rome. Other examples include Titus's \"Ah, wherefore dost thou urge the name of hands,/To bid Aeneas tell the tale twice o'er,/How Troy was burnt and he made miserable?\" (3.2.26\u201328), Marcus's \"What, what! The lustful sons of Tamora/Performers of this heinous, bloody deed\" (4.1.78\u201379), and Titus and Marcus's brief conversation about Taurus and Aries (4.3.68\u201375). The adaptation also includes some lines from Q1 which were removed in subsequent editions; at 1.1.35 Titus's \"bearing his valiant sons/in coffins from the field\" continues with \"and at this day,/To the Monument of that Andronicy/Done sacrifice of expiation,/And slaine the Noblest prisoner of the Gothes.\" These lines are usually omitted because they create a continuity problem regarding the sacrifice of Alarbus, which has not happened yet in the text. However, Howell got around this problem by beginning the play at 1.1.64 \u2013 the entrance of Titus. Then, at 1.1.168, after the sacrifice of Alarbus, lines 1.1.1 to 1.1.63 (the introductions of Bassianus and Saturninus) take place, thus Titus's reference to Alarbus's sacrifice makes chronological sense.\nAnother notable stylistic technique used in the adaptation is multiple addresses direct to camera. For example, Saturninus's \"How well the tribune speaks to calm my thoughts\" (1.1.46); Tamora's vow to slaughter the Andronici at 1.1.450\u2013455 (thus absolving Saturninus from any involvement); Aaron's soliloquy in 2.1; Aaron's \"Ay, and as good as Saturninus may\" (2.1.91); Aaron's soliloquy in 2.3; Tamora's \"Now will I hence to seek my lovely Moor,/And let my spleenful sons this trull deflower\" (2.3.190\u2013191); Aaron's two asides in 3.1 (ll.187\u2013190 and 201\u2013202); Lucius's \"Now will I to the Goths and raise a power,/To be revenged on Rome and Saturnine\" (3.1.298\u2013299); Marcus's \"O, heavens, can you hear a good man groan\" speech (4.1.122\u2013129); Young Lucius's asides in 4.2 (ll.6 and 8\u20139); Aaron's \"Now to the Goths, as swift as swallow flies,/There to dispose this treasure in mine arms,/And secretly to greet the Empress' friends\" (4.2.172\u2013174); and Tamora's \"Now will I to that old Andronicus,/And temper him with all the art I have,/To pluck proud Lucius from the warlike Goths\" (4.4.107\u2013109).\nThe most significant difference from the original play concerned the character of Young Lucius, who is a much more important figure in the adaptation; he is present throughout Act 1, and retrieves the murder weapon after the death of Mutius; it is his knife which Titus uses to kill the fly; he aids in the capture of Chiron and Demetrius; he is present throughout the final scene. Much as Julie Taymor would do in her 1999 filmic adaptation, Howell set Young Lucius as the centre of the production to prompt the question \"What are we doing to the children?\" At the end of the play, as Lucius delivers his final speech, the camera stays on Young Lucius rather than his father, who is in the far background and out of focus, as he stares in horror at the coffin of Aaron's child (which has been killed off-screen). Thus the production became \"in part about a boy's reaction to murder and mutilation. We see him losing his innocence and being drawn into this adventure of revenge; yet, at the end we perceive that he retains the capacity for compassion and sympathy.\"\nIn 2001, the animated sitcom \"South Park\" based an episode on the play. In \"Scott Tenorman Must Die\", Eric Cartman is swindled by Scott Tenorman. Cartman tries various methods to get his money back, but Scott remains always one step ahead. He then decides to exact revenge on Scott. After numerous failed attempts, he hatches a plan which culminates in him having Scott's parents killed, the bodies of whom he then cooks in chili, which he feeds to Scott. He then gleefully reveals his deception as Scott finds his mother's finger in the chilli.\nThe Netflix TV series \"Unbreakable Kimmy Schmidt\" features a character originally named Ronald Wilkerson that changed his name to Titus Andromedon, possibly derived from this play.\nRadio.\nThe play has very rarely been staged for radio. In 1923, extracts were broadcast on BBC radio, performed by the Cardiff Station Repertory Company as the second episode of a series of programs showcasing Shakespeare's plays, entitled \"Shakespeare Night\". In 1953, BBC Third Programme aired a 130-minute version of the play, adapted for radio by J. C. Trewin and starring Baliol Holloway as Titus, Sonia Dresdal as Tamora, George Hayes as Aaron and Janette Tregarthen as Lavinia. In 1973, BBC Radio 3 aired an adaptation directed by Martin Jenkins, starring Michael Aldridge as Titus, Barbara Jefford as Tamora, Julian Glover as Aaron and Frances Jeater as Lavinia. In 1986, Austrian radio channel \u00d6sterreich 1 staged an adaptation by Kurt Klinger, starring Romuald Pekny as Titus, Marion Degler as Tamora, Wolfgang B\u00f6ck as Aaron and Elisabeth Augustin as Lavinia.\nReferences.\nCitations.\nAll references to \"Titus Andronicus\", unless otherwise specified, are taken from the \"Oxford Shakespeare\" (Waith), based on the Q1 text of 1594 (except 3.2, which is based on the folio text of 1623). Under its referencing system, 4.3.15 means act 4, scene 3, line 15.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSecondary sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59376", "revid": "140154", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59376", "title": "Thaana", "text": "Writing system of the Maldivian language\nThaana, T\u00e3na, Taana or T\u0101na (\u2009 ) is the present writing system of the Maldivian language spoken in the Maldives. Thaana has characteristics of both an abugida (diacritics, vowel-killer strokes) and a true alphabet (all vowels are written), with consonants derived from indigenous and Arabic numerals, and vowels derived from the vowel diacritics of the Arabic abjad. Maldivian orthography in Thaana is largely phonemic.\nName.\nH. C. P. Bell, the first serious researcher of Maldivian documents, used the spelling \"T\u0101na,\" as the initial consonant is unaspirated. The spelling \"Thaana\" was adopted in the mid-1970s, when the government of the Maldives embarked on a short period of Romanization; /t/ was transcribed \u27e8th\u27e9, as \u27e8t\u27e9 was used for the voiceless retroflex plosive .565\nHistory.\nThe Thaana script first appeared in a Maldivian inscription towards the beginning of the 17th century in a crude initial form known as Gabulhi ('incomplete') Thaana which was written \"scripta continua\". This early script slowly developed, its characters becoming more graceful and oblique, and adding spaces between words. As time went by it gradually replaced the older Dhives Akuru alphabet. The oldest written sample of the Thaana script is found in the island of Kanditheemu in \"Northern Miladhunmadulu Atoll\". It is inscribed on the door posts of the main \"Hukuru Miskiy\" (Friday mosque) of the island and dates back to 1008 AH (AD 1599) and 1020 AH (AD 1611) when the roof of the building was built and then renewed during the reigns of Ibrahim Kalaafaan (Sultan Ibrahim III) and Hussain Faamuladeyri Kilege (Sultan Hussain II) respectively.\nThe origins of Thaana are unique among the world's writing systems: The first nine letters (\"h \u1e63 n r b \u1e37 k \u0294 v\") are derived from the Arabic numerals, whereas the next nine (\"m f d t l g \u1e47 s \u1e0d\") were the local Indic numerals. (See Hindu\u2013Arabic numerals.) The remaining letters for loanwords (\"z \u1e6d y p j c \u00f1\") and Arabic transliteration (\"h\u0324 \u1e35 \u017e \u0295 \u0121 w \u1e95 t\u0324 \u1e93 s\u0331 q s\u0324 \u017c \u015b\") are derived from phonetically similar native consonants by means of diacritics (like nuqta), with the exception of \"yaa\", which is of unknown origin. This means that Thaana is one of the few writing systems not derived graphically from the original Semitic alphabet\u2014unless the Indic numerals were (see Brahmi numerals). (The Ogham script used in 1st millennium AD Ireland is another example, which also has some relation to numbers, since most of its letters are differentiated from others in a way similar to tally marks.)\nThe order of the Thaana alphabet (\"ha, shaviyani, noonu, raa, baa, etc.\") does not follow the order of other Indic scripts or of the Arabic script. There is no apparent logic to the order; this has been interpreted as suggesting that the script was scrambled to keep it secret from average islanders. The script was originally used primarily to write magical (\"fan\u1e0dita\") incantations. These included Arabic quotations, written from right to left. Maldivian learned men, who were all well versed in sorcery, saw the advantages of writing in this simplified hidden script, and Thaana was gradually adopted for everyday use.\nThaana nearly disappeared for a brief period in recent history. Towards the mid-1970s, during President Ibrahim Nasir's reign, Telex machines were introduced by the Maldivian government in the local administration. The new telex equipment was viewed as a great progress, but Thaana was deemed to be an obstacle because messages on the telex machines could only be written in the Latin script. Following this, a rough Latin transliteration for Maldivian was officially approved by the Maldivian government in 1976 and was quickly implemented by the administration. Booklets were printed and dispatched to all Atoll and Island Offices, as well as schools and merchant liners.\nThe Thaana script was reinstated by President Maumoon Abdul Gayoom shortly after he took power in 1978, although the Latin transcription of 1976 continues to be widely used.\nCharacteristics.\nThaana, like Arabic, is written right to left. It indicates vowels with diacritic marks derived from Arabic. Each letter must carry either a vowel or a \"sukun\" (which indicates \"no vowel\"). The only exception to this rule is \"n\u016bnu\" which, when written without a diacritic, indicates prenasalization of a following stop.\nFor a sample text, see the article on Qaumee salaam, the Maldives' national anthem.\nEven though it is not part of the alphabet, Arabic ligature Allah \ufdf2 is used for writing names in Thaana, for example (Abdullah). \"Allah\" is never written in thaana, with the ligature \ufdf2 used.\nConsonants.\nThe letter \"alifu\" (\u0787) is used for three different purposes other than acting as a normal consonant: it can act as a carrier for a vowel in the second part of a diphthong (if there is a preceding consonant with a vowel); when it carries a \"sukun\", it indicates gemination (lengthening) of the following consonant (even if the consonant is at the beginning of another word); and if \"alifu\"+\"sukun\" occurs at the end of a word, it indicates that the word ends in a glottal stop. Gemination of nasal consonants, however, is indicated by \"n\u016bnu\"+\"sukun\" preceding the nasal to be geminated. Originally, each letter had the name \"consonant+\"a\"+\"viyani\"\". The suffix -\"viyani\" originated from the word \"viyana\" which came from Sanskrit \u0935\u094d\u092f\u091e\u094d\u091c\u0928 \"vy\u00e1\u00f1jana\". For example, \"haa\" was originally called \"haviyani\". The names of consonants which had equivalent sounds in Arabic were changed to the Arabic names for the sounds (excepting \"gaafu\", which is a Persian name).\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"Naviyani\".\nNaviyani (\u07b1) represents the voiced retroflex nasal \"\u1e47\" () common to many Indic languages. This letter was abolished from Maldivian official documents around 1953.\nThe letter's former position in the Maldivian alphabet was the sixteenth, between Gaafu and Seenu, instead of Gnaviyani (\u078f). The former position of Gnaviyani (\u078f) was 22nd. It is still seen in reprints of old books like the \"Bodu Tarutheebu,\" and it is used by the people of Addu Atoll and Fuvahmulah when writing songs or poetry in their dialects as the sound is still present in their spoken dialects.\nAdditional letters.\nThese additional letters () were added to the Thaana alphabet by adding a (dot) to existing letters, to allow for transliteration of Arabic loanwords (except for \u079c \u017ee), as previously Arabic loanwords were written using the Arabic script. Their usage is inconsistent, and becoming less frequent as the spelling changes to reflect pronunciation by Maldivians, rather than the original Arabic pronunciation, as the words get absorbed into the Maldivian language.\nVowels.\nThere are five vowel strokes or diacritical signs () for short vowels (a, i, u, e, o). The first three are derived from the Arabic vowel signs, \"fat\u1e25ah, kasrah\" and \"\u1e0dammah\". The \"ebefili\" looks similar to and is most likely modelled on the Urdu ba\u1e5b\u012b ye. Long vowels (aa, ee, oo, ey and oa) are denoted by double \"fili\", with the exception of oa, which is a modification of the short \"obofili\".\nUnicode.\nThaana was added to the Unicode Standard in September 1999 with the release of version 3.0.\nThe Unicode block for Thaana is U+0780\u2013U+07BF:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59377", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59377", "title": "Zbigniew Boniek", "text": "Polish footballer and manager (born 1956)\nZbigniew Kazimierz Boniek (; born 3 March 1956) is a Polish former footballer and was most recently a UEFA vice-president. A former midfielder, who was also capable of playing mostly as a right winger and second striker, he is considered one of the greatest Polish players of all time, and was selected by Pel\u00e9 as one of the 100 best living footballers in 2004.\nIn an 80-cap international career, Boniek scored 24 goals and played at three consecutive World Cups, helping Poland to 3rd place in 1982 and making the Team of the Tournament. His greatest achievements in club football were at Juventus in Italy, winning the Serie A, Coppa Italia, European Cup, European Cup Winners' Cup, and European Super Cup between 1983 and 1985, being the first Polish footballer to win a confederation title and one of the first Central and Eastern European players to do so with a non-conational club. In 1978 and 1982, he won the Polish Footballer of the Year Award presented by the \"\" football weekly.\nIn the early 1990s, Boniek managed several Italian clubs, and also the Poland national team in 2002. In 2019, he was inducted in the Italian Football Hall of Fame.\nClub career.\nBoniek was born in Bydgoszcz. He first played for Polish clubs Zawisza Bydgoszcz and later at Widzew \u0141\u00f3d\u017a.\nBoniek transferred to Italian football giants Juventus in 1982. With Juventus he won the Coppa Italia in his first season, also managing a second-place finish in the league and reaching the 1983 European Cup Final in the same season. The following season, his performances proved decisive, as Juventus won both the Serie A title and the Cup Winners' Cup in 1984, with Boniek scoring the matching-winning goal in the 2\u20131 victory over Porto in the final of the latter tournament in Basel; he followed up these victories by claiming the European Super Cup later that year, scoring twice in the 2\u20130 win against Liverpool. He also won the European Cup in 1985, against Liverpool once again, winning the penalty that Michel Platini subsequently converted to win the title for Juventus, although the team's victory was overshadowed by the Heysel Disaster.\nThe following season, Boniek joined Roma, where he won a second Coppa Italia in 1986, and eventually ended his professional career with the club in 1988.\nInternational career.\nBoniek represented the Poland national team in 80 international matches between 1976 and 1988, and scored 24 goals. He took part at the 1978, 1982, and 1986 FIFA World Cups with Poland.\nAlthough he initially only appeared as a substitute in Poland's two opening group matches at the 1978 FIFA World Cup, he drew attention to himself when he scored two goals in a 3\u20131 victory over Mexico in Poland's final match of the group stage, helping his nation top their group; in the second round, however, Poland finished third in their group and were eliminated from the tournament.\nBoniek later starred in the Polish team that won a bronze medal at the 1982 FIFA World Cup in Spain: he helped his team reach the semi-finals of the tournament, scoring four goals in the process. In the first round, he scored in a 5\u20131 win over Peru on 22 June, to help Poland top their group; in the second round, he scored a hat-trick in his nation's 3\u20130 second round victory over Belgium, in Barcelona, on 28 June, but was forced to miss the semi-final defeat to eventual champions Italy due to a suspension after being booked in the 88th minute of a 0\u20130 draw against the Soviet Union.\nHe returned to the starting line-up for the victorious third-place match against France and was named to the team of the tournament for his performances throughout the competition. The 1986 FIFA World Cup was less successful, as Poland only qualified for the second round as the second best third-placed team, and were subsequently eliminated in the second round following a 4\u20130 defeat to Brazil.\nStyle of play.\nAlthough Boniek was usually deployed as a midfielder, he was also able to play as a forward. He preferred to operate between the lines in a free role, although he was a versatile player, capable of playing in several offensive and midfield positions on either flank or through the centre, and throughout his career he was deployed as an attacking midfielder, as a right winger, in a playmaking role as a central midfielder, as a centre-forward, or as a second striker; his Juventus manager, Giovanni Trapattoni, however, often struggled to find the most suitable position for him.\nBoniek was known for his extroverted personality and his trademark moustache, which made him a highly recognisable player. A tall, brave and hard-working footballer with a large, powerful, and slender physique, he was known for his blistering pace, acceleration, and quick reactions. In particular, Boniek was highly regarded for his ability to make sudden attacking runs to beat the defensive line and get on the end of his teammates' long passes, especially those of Michel Platini, with whom he formed a close friendship and formidable partnership at the Turin club, which made him lethal on counterattacks; this prompted Diego Maradona to describe Boniek as \u201cone of the finest players of their generation.\u201d\nA highly talented, creative, intelligent, and skilful footballer, he was one of the best dribblers of his time and also displayed superb technique, flair, and class. Although he was not a particularly prolific player, he was known for his eye for goal, and as his clinical finishing with either foot, as well as his head, which enabled him to maintain a consistent goalscoring rate throughout his career; he also earned a reputation for having the tendency to score decisive goals for his team in key matches.\nDespite his ability, at times he was also criticised, however, for being tactically undisciplined, inconsistent, too static in his movements off the ball, and for not being involved enough in his team's play during matches, which led him to struggle against opponents who did not give him a lot of space.\nThe Juventus president at the time of Boniek's tenure with the club, Gianni Agnelli, nicknamed him \"Bello di notte\" (\"Beauty at night\", which is a play on the title of the Bu\u00f1uel movie \"Belle de Jour\") because of his excellent performances in European club tournament matches, which were played in the evening; indeed, during continental tournaments, his opponents usually allowed him more space and time on the ball than in Serie A, which allowed him to get forward, undertake individual dribbling runs and score goals himself, or drop deep, link up with midfielders and create chances or provide assists for his teammates, courtesy of his passing, vision, and clever movement. He was also nicknamed Zib\u00ec by the Italian press.\nTowards the end of his career, as he lost his pace, he often functioned in a defensive role as a sweeper.\nManagerial career.\nFollowing his retirement, Boniek pursued a coaching career, but with less success; he also coached in Italy, with stints at Lecce in 1990\u201391, Bari in 1991\u201392, Sambenedettese in 1992\u201393, and Avellino in 1994\u201396.\nBoniek has served as vice-president of the Polish Football Association, and in July 2002 he became the manager of Poland. He resigned in December 2002, after just five matches (2 wins, 1 draw, 2 defeats, including a 1\u20130 home loss against Latvia in a European Championship qualifier).\nLater career.\nFollowing his retirement, Boniek had a successful business career. He later also worked as a pundit and football commentator. According to Polish sources, Boniek had been favoured to become the new Minister of Sport for his country, but he denied the claims and stated that he had no intention of taking the job.\nIn 2004, Boniek was named by Pel\u00e9 as one of the 125 Greatest Living Footballers, as part of FIFA's centenary celebrations. On 12 October 2009, he received the Golden Foot 'Legend' career award.\nOn 26 October 2012, he became the chairman of the Polish Football Association. He is popular for speaking in favour of decriminalising football fans by legalising pyrotechnics inside stadiums, a common practice among ultras. His term of office ended on 18 August 2021, and he was succeeded by Cezary Kulesza.\nPersonal life.\nBoniek has a university diploma in education. His father, J\u00f3zef Boniek, was also a professional football player and later a manager. In 1976, he married his wife Wies\u0142awa, a specialist in Romance studies, with whom he has three children: two daughters Karolina and Kamila and son Tomasz.\nLegacy.\nHonduran international footballer \u00d3scar Boniek Garc\u00eda was given the middle name \"Boniek\" in honour of Zbigniew Boniek. Garc\u00eda chose to have the name \"Boniek\" written across the back of his jersey while playing for Houston.\nBoniek Forbes (born 30 September 1983) is a Guinea-Bissau footballer who plays as a winger for Cheshunt. He played for Leyton Orient in the Football League.\nIn 2018, Boniek became an honorary citizen of \u0141\u00f3d\u017a. In 2019, he was named the most influential person in Polish sport by the Forbes Polska magazine and Pentagon Research. The same year, he was voted as a member of Poland's Team of the Century in a poll organized on the 100th anniversary of the foundation of the Polish Football Association.\nIn 2020, Boniek's biography entitled \"Zibi, czyli Boniek\" written by Roman Ko\u0142to\u0144 was published. The footballer himself also published his autobiography the same year entitled \"Zbigniew Boniek. Mecze mojego \u017cycia\" (Zbigniew Boniek: The Matches of My Life).\n\"Scores and results list Poland's goal tally first, score column indicates score after each Boniek goal\".\nHonours.\nWidzew \u0141\u00f3d\u017a\nJuventus\nRoma\nPoland\nIndividual\nOrders\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59378", "revid": "19469213", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59378", "title": "John Dryden", "text": "English poet and playwright (1631\u20131700)\nJohn Dryden (; 19 August\u00a0[O.S. 9 August]\u00a01631 \u2013 12 May\u00a0[O.S. 1 May]\u00a01700) was an English poet, literary critic, translator, and playwright who in 1668 was appointed England's first Poet Laureate.\nHe is seen as dominating the literary life of Restoration England to such a point that the period came to be known in literary circles as the Age of Dryden. Romantic writer Sir Walter Scott called him \"Glorious John\".\nEarly life.\nDryden was born in the village rectory of Aldwincle near Thrapston in Northamptonshire, where his maternal grandfather was the rector of All Saints. He was the eldest of fourteen children born to Erasmus Dryden and wife Mary Pickering. His father was paternal grandson of Sir Erasmus Dryden, 1st Baronet (1553\u20131632), and wife Frances Wilkes, landowning gentry who supported the Puritan cause and Parliament. He was a second cousin once removed of Jonathan Swift. As a boy, Dryden lived in the nearby village of Titchmarsh, where it is likely that he received his first education. In 1644 he was sent as a King's Scholar to Westminster School where his headmaster was Richard Busby, a charismatic teacher and a severe disciplinarian. Having been re-founded by Elizabeth I, Westminster during this period embraced a very different religious and political spirit, encouraging royalism and high Anglicanism. Whatever Dryden's response to this was, he clearly respected the headmaster and would later send two of his sons to school at Westminster.\nAs a humanist public school, Westminster maintained a curriculum which trained pupils in the art of rhetoric and the presentation of arguments for both sides of a given issue. This is a skill which would remain with Dryden and influence his later writing and thinking, as much of it displays these dialectical patterns. The Westminster curriculum included weekly translation assignments which developed Dryden's capacity for assimilation. This was also to be exhibited in his later works. His years at Westminster were eventful, and his first published poem, an elegy with a strong royalist feel on the death of his schoolmate Henry, Lord Hastings, from smallpox, alludes to the execution of King Charles I, which took place on 30 January 1649, very near the school, where Busby had first prayed for the king and then locked in his schoolboys to prevent their attending the spectacle.\nIn 1650 Dryden went up to Trinity College, Cambridge. Here he would have experienced a return to the religious and political ethos of his childhood: the Master of Trinity was a Puritan preacher by the name of Thomas Hill who had been a rector in Dryden's home village. Though there is little specific information on Dryden's undergraduate years, he would probably have followed the standard curriculum of classics, rhetoric, and mathematics. In 1654 he graduated as a BA, at the top of the list for Trinity that year. In June of the same year Dryden's father died, leaving him some land which generated a little income, but not enough to live on.\nReturning to London during the Protectorate, Dryden obtained work with Oliver Cromwell's Secretary of State, John Thurloe. This appointment may have been the result of influence exercised on his behalf by his cousin the Lord Chamberlain, Sir Gilbert Pickering. At Cromwell's funeral on 23 November 1658 Dryden processed with the Puritan poets John Milton and Andrew Marvell. Soon afterwards he published his first important poem, \"Heroic Stanzas\" (1659), a eulogy on Cromwell's death which is cautious and prudent in its emotional display. In 1660 Dryden celebrated the Restoration of the monarchy and the return of Charles II with \"Astraea Redux\", an authentic royalist panegyric. In this work the Interregnum is illustrated as a time of chaos, and Charles is seen as the restorer of peace and order.\nLater life and career.\nAfter the Restoration, as Dryden quickly established himself as the leading poet and literary critic of his day, he transferred his allegiances to the new government. Along with \"Astraea Redux\", Dryden welcomed the new regime with two more panegyrics: \"To His Sacred Majesty: A Panegyric on his Coronation\" (1662) and \"To My Lord Chancellor\" (1662). These poems suggest that Dryden was looking to court a possible patron, but he was to instead make a living in writing for publishers, not for the aristocracy, and thus ultimately for the reading public. These, and his other nondramatic poems, are occasional\u2014that is, they celebrate public events. Thus they are written for the nation rather than the self, and the Poet Laureate (as he would later become) is obliged to write a certain number of these per annum. In November 1662, Dryden was proposed for membership in the Royal Society, and he was elected an early fellow. However, Dryden was inactive in Society affairs and in 1666 was expelled for non-payment of his dues.\nOn 1 December 1663, Dryden married the royalist sister of Sir Robert Howard\u2014Lady Elizabeth. Dryden's works occasionally contain outbursts against the married state but also celebrations of the same. Thus, little is known of the intimate side of his marriage. Lady Elizabeth bore three sons, one of whom (Erasmus Henry) became a Roman Catholic priest.\nWith the reopening of the theatres in 1660 after the Puritan ban, Dryden began writing plays. His first play \"The Wild Gallant\" appeared in 1663, and was not successful, but was still promising, and from 1668 on he was contracted to produce three plays a year for the King's Company in which he became a shareholder. During the 1660s and 1670s, theatrical writing was his main source of income. He led the way in Restoration comedy, his best-known work being \"Marriage \u00e0 la Mode\" (1673), as well as heroic tragedy and regular tragedy, in which his greatest success was \"All for Love\" (1678).\nDryden was never satisfied with his theatrical writings and frequently suggested that his talents were wasted on unworthy audiences. He thus was making a bid for poetic fame off-stage. In 1667, around the same time his dramatic career began, he published \"Annus Mirabilis\", a lengthy historical poem which described the English defeat of the Dutch naval fleet and the Great Fire of London in 1666. It was a modern epic in pentameter quatrains that established him as the preeminent poet of his generation, and was crucial in his attaining the posts of Poet Laureate (1668) and historiographer royal (1670).\nWhen the Great Plague of London closed the theatres in 1665, Dryden retreated to Wiltshire where he wrote \"Of Dramatick Poesie\" (1668), arguably the best of his unsystematic prefaces and essays. Dryden constantly defended his own literary practice, and \"Of Dramatick Poesie\", the longest of his critical works, takes the form of a dialogue in which four characters\u2014each based on a prominent contemporary, with Dryden himself as 'Neander'\u2014debate the merits of classical, French and English drama. The greater part of his critical works introduce problems which he is eager to discuss, and show the work of a writer of independent mind who feels strongly about his own ideas, ideas which demonstrate the breadth of his reading. He felt strongly about the relation of the poet to tradition and the creative process, and his best heroic play \"Aureng-zebe\" (1675) has a prologue which denounces the use of rhyme in serious drama. His play \"All for Love\" (1678) was written in blank verse, and was to immediately follow \"Aureng-Zebe\".\nDryden's poem \"An Essay upon Satire\" contained a number of attacks on King Charles II, his mistresses and courtiers, but most pointedly on the Earl of Rochester, a notorious womaniser. Rochester responded by hiring thugs who attacked Dryden whilst walking back from Will's Coffee House (a popular London coffee house where the Wits gathered to gossip, drink and conduct their business) to his house on Gerrard Street. \nAt around 8 pm on 18 December 1679, Dryden was attacked in Rose Alley behind the Lamb &amp; Flag pub, near his home in Covent Garden. Dryden survived the attack, offering \u00a350 for the identity of the thugs placed in the London Gazette, and a Royal Pardon if one of them would confess. No one claimed the reward.\nDryden's greatest achievements were in satiric verse: the mock-heroic \"Mac Flecknoe\", a more personal product of his laureate years, was a lampoon circulated in manuscript and an attack on the playwright Thomas Shadwell. Dryden's main goal in the work is to \"satirize Shadwell, ostensibly for his offenses against literature but more immediately we may suppose for his habitual badgering of him on the stage and in print.\" It is not a belittling form of satire, but rather one which makes his object great in ways which are unexpected, transferring the ridiculous into poetry. This line of satire continued with \"Absalom and Achitophel\" (1681) and \"The Medal\" (1682). His other major works from this period are the religious poems \"Religio Laici\" (1682), written from the position of a member of the Church of England [against catholicism]; his 1683 edition of \"Plutarch's Lives Translated From the Greek by Several Hands\" in which he introduced the word 'biography' to English readers; and \"The Hind and the Panther,\" (1687) which celebrates his conversion to Roman Catholicism.\nHe wrote \"Britannia Rediviva\" celebrating the birth of a son and heir to the Catholic King and Queen on 10 June 1688.\nWhen, later in the same year, James II was deposed in the Glorious Revolution, Dryden's refusal to take the oaths of allegiance to the new monarchs, William and Mary, left him out of favour at court. Thomas Shadwell succeeded him as Poet Laureate, and he was forced to give up his public offices and live by the proceeds of his pen. Dryden translated works by Horace, Juvenal, Ovid, Lucretius, and Theocritus, a task which he found far more satisfying than writing for the stage. In 1694 he began work on what would be his most ambitious and defining work as translator, \"The Works of Virgil\" (1697), which was published by subscription. The publication of the translation of Virgil was a national event and brought Dryden the sum of \u00a31,400. Dryden translated the \"Aeneid\" into couplets, turning Virgil's almost 10,000 lines into 13,700 lines; Joseph Addison wrote the (prose) prefaces for each book, and William Congreve checked the translation against the Latin original. His final translations appeared in the volume \"Fables Ancient and Modern\" (1700), a series of episodes from Homer, Ovid, and Boccaccio, as well as modernised adaptations from Geoffrey Chaucer interspersed with Dryden's own poems. As a translator, he made great literary works in the older languages available to readers of English.\nDeath.\nDryden died on 12 May 1700, and was initially buried in St. Anne's cemetery in Soho, before being exhumed and reburied in Westminster Abbey ten days later. He was the subject of poetic eulogies, such as \"Luctus Brittannici: or the Tears of the British Muses; for the Death of John Dryden, Esq.\" (London, 1700), and \"The Nine Muses\". A Royal Society of Arts blue plaque commemorates Dryden at 43 Gerrard Street in London's Chinatown. He lived at 137 Long Acre from 1682 to 1686 and at 43 Gerrard Street from 1686 until his death.\nIn his will, he left The George Inn at Northampton to trustees, to form a school for the children of the poor of the town. This became John Dryden's School, later The Orange School.\nReputation and influence.\nDryden was the dominant literary figure and influence of his age. He established the heroic couplet as a standard form of English poetry by writing successful satires, religious pieces, fables, epigrams, compliments, prologues, and plays with it; he also introduced the alexandrine and triplet into the form. In his poems, translations, and criticism, he established a poetic diction appropriate to the heroic couplet\u2014Auden referred to him as \"the master of the middle style\"\u2014that was a model for his contemporaries and for much of the 18th century. The considerable loss felt by the English literary community at his death was evident in the elegies written about him. Dryden's heroic couplet became the dominant poetic form of the 18th century. Alexander Pope was heavily influenced by Dryden and often borrowed from him; other writers were equally influenced by Dryden and Pope. Pope famously praised Dryden's versification in his imitation of Horace's Epistle II.i: \"Dryden taught to join / The varying pause, the full resounding line, / The long majestic march, and energy divine.\" Samuel Johnson summed up the general attitude with his remark that \"the veneration with which his name is pronounced by every cultivator of English literature, is paid to him as he refined the language, improved the sentiments, and tuned the numbers of English poetry.\" His poems were very widely read, and are often quoted, for instance, in Henry Fielding's \"Tom Jones\" and Johnson's essays.\nJohnson also noted, however, that \"He is, therefore, with all his variety of excellence, not often pathetic; and had so little sensibility of the power of effusions purely natural, that he did not esteem them in others. Simplicity gave him no pleasure.\" Readers in the first half of the 18th century did not mind this too much, but later generations considered Dryden's absence of sensibility a fault.\nOne of the first attacks on Dryden's reputation was by William Wordsworth, who complained that Dryden's descriptions of natural objects in his translations from Virgil were much inferior to the originals. However, several of Wordsworth's contemporaries, such as George Crabbe, Lord Byron, and Walter Scott (who edited Dryden's works), were still keen admirers of Dryden. Besides, Wordsworth did admire many of Dryden's poems, and his famous \"Intimations of Immortality\" ode owes something stylistically to Dryden's \"Alexander's Feast\". John Keats admired the \"Fables\", and imitated them in his poem \"Lamia\". Later 19th-century writers had little use for verse satire, Pope, or Dryden; Matthew Arnold famously dismissed them as \"classics of our prose\". He did have a committed admirer in George Saintsbury, and was a prominent figure in quotation books such as Bartlett's, but the next major poet to take an interest in Dryden was T. S. Eliot, who wrote that he was \"the ancestor of nearly all that is best in the poetry of the eighteenth century\", and that \"we cannot fully enjoy or rightly estimate a hundred years of English poetry unless we fully enjoy Dryden.\" However, in the same essay, Eliot accused Dryden of having a \"commonplace mind\". Critical interest in Dryden has increased recently, but, as a relatively straightforward writer (William Empson, another modern admirer of Dryden, compared his \"flat\" use of language with Donne's interest in the \"echoes and recesses of words\"), his work has not occasioned as much interest as Andrew Marvell's, John Donne's or Pope's.\nDryden is believed to be the first person to assert that English sentences should not end in prepositions because Latin sentences cannot end in prepositions. Dryden created the proscription against preposition stranding in 1672 when he objected to Ben Jonson's 1611 phrase, 'The bodies that those souls were frighted from.' However, he did not provide the rationale for his preference. Dryden often translated his writing into Latin, to check whether his writing was concise and elegant, Latin being considered an elegant and long-lived language with which to compare; then Dryden translated his writing back to English according to Latin-grammar usage. As Latin does not have sentences ending in prepositions, Dryden may have applied Latin grammar to English, thus forming the rule of no sentence-ending prepositions, subsequently adopted by other writers.\nThe phrase \"blaze of glory\" is believed to have originated in Dryden's 1686 poem \"The Hind and the Panther\", referring to the throne of God as a \"blaze of glory that forbids the sight.\"\nPoetic style.\nWhat Dryden achieved in his poetry was neither the emotional excitement of the early nineteenth-century romantics nor the intellectual complexities of the metaphysicals. His subject matter was often factual, and he aimed at expressing his thoughts in the most precise and concentrated manner. Although he uses formal structures such as heroic couplets, he tried to recreate the natural rhythm of speech, and he knew that different subjects need different kinds of verse. In his preface to \"Religio Laici\" he says that \"the expressions of a poem designed purely for instruction ought to be plain and natural, yet majestic... The florid, elevated and figurative way is for the passions; for (these) are begotten in the soul by showing the objects out of their true proportion... A man is to be cheated into passion, but to be reasoned into truth.\"\nTranslation style.\nWhile Dryden had many admirers, he also had his share of critics, Mark Van Doren among them. Van Doren complained that in translating Virgil's \"Aeneid\", Dryden had added \"a fund of phrases with which he could expand any passage that seemed to him curt.\" Dryden did not feel such expansion was a fault, arguing that as Latin is a naturally concise language it cannot be duly represented by a comparable number of words in English. \"He...recognized that Virgil 'had the advantage of a language wherein much may be comprehended in a little space' (5:329\u201330). The 'way to please the best Judges...is not to Translate a Poet literally; and Virgil least of any other' (5:329).\"\nFor example, take lines 789\u2013795 of Book 2 when Aeneas sees and receives a message from the ghost of his wife, Creusa.\n&lt;poem&gt;\"iamque vale et nati serva communis amorem.'\"\n\"haec ubi dicta dedit, lacrimantem et multa volentem\"\n\"dicere deseruit, tenuisque recessit in auras.\"\n\"ter conatus ibi collo dare bracchia circum;\"\n\"ter frustra comprensa manus effugit imago,\"\n\"par levibus ventis volucrique simillima somno.\"\n\"sic demum socios consumpta nocte reviso\"&lt;/poem&gt;\nDryden translates it like this:\n&lt;poem&gt;I trust our common issue to your care.'\nShe said, and gliding pass'd unseen in air.\nI strove to speak: but horror tied my tongue;\nAnd thrice about her neck my arms I flung,\nAnd, thrice deceiv'd, on vain embraces hung.\nLight as an empty dream at break of day,\nOr as a blast of wind, she rush'd away.\nThus having pass'd the night in fruitless pain,\nI to my longing friends return again&lt;/poem&gt;\nDryden's translation is based on presumed authorial intent and smooth English. In line 790 the literal translation of \"haec ubi dicta dedit\" is \"when she gave these words.\" But \"she said\" gets the point across, uses half the words, and makes for better English. A few lines later, with \"ter conatus ibi collo dare bracchia circum; ter frustra comprensa manus effugit imago\", he alters the literal translation \"Thrice trying to give arms around her neck; thrice the image grasped in vain fled the hands,\" in order to fit it into the metre and the emotion of the scene.\nIn his own words,\nThe way I have taken, is not so streight as Metaphrase, nor so loose as Paraphrase: Some things too I have omitted, and sometimes added of my own. Yet the omissions I hope, are but of Circumstances, and such as wou'd have no grace in English; and the Addition, I also hope, are easily deduc'd from Virgil's Sense. They will seem (at least I have the Vanity to think so), not struck into him, but growing out of him. (5:529)\nIn a similar vein, Dryden writes in his Preface to the translation anthology \"Sylvae\":\nWhere I have taken away some of [the original authors'] Expressions, and cut them shorter, it may possibly be on this consideration, that what was beautiful in the Greek or Latin, would not appear so shining in the English; and where I have enlarg\u2019d them, I desire the false Criticks would not always think that those thoughts are wholly mine, but that either they are secretly in the Poet, or may be fairly deduc\u2019d from him; or at least, if both those considerations should fail, that my own is of a piece with his, and that if he were living, and an Englishman, they are such as he wou\u2019d probably have written.\nPersonal life.\nOn 1 December 1663, Dryden married Lady Elizabeth Howard (died 1714) at St Swithin's, London, and the consent of the parents is noted on the licence, although Lady Elizabeth was then about twenty-five.\nThe couple met after 1660, when Dryden began lodging in London with her brother, Sir Robert Howard, son of the earl of Berkshire. The marriage lasted until his death, but there is little evidence about how they lived as a couple. A small estate in Wiltshire was settled upon them by her father. The lady's intellect and temper were apparently not good; her husband was treated as an inferior by those of her social status.\nBoth Dryden and his wife were warmly attached to their children. They had three sons: Charles (1666\u20131704), John (1668\u20131701), and Erasmus Henry (1669\u20131710). Lady Elizabeth Dryden survived her husband, but reportedly lost her wits after becoming a widow. Although some have historically claimed to be from the lineage of John Dryden, his three children, one of whom became a Roman Catholic priest, had no children themselves.\nSelected works.\nDramatic works.\nDates given are (acted/published) and unless otherwise noted are taken from Scott's edition.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59381", "revid": "46166101", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59381", "title": "Dorchester County, Maryland", "text": "County in Maryland, United States\nDorchester County is a county located in the U.S. state of Maryland. At the 2020 census, the population was 32,531. Its county seat is Cambridge. The county was formed in 1669 and named for the Earl of Dorset, a family friend of the Calverts (the founding family of the Maryland colony). The county is part of the Mid-Eastern Shore region of the state.\nDorchester County comprises the Cambridge, MD Micropolitan Statistical Area, which is also included in the Salisbury-Cambridge, MD-DE Combined Statistical Area.\nDorchester County is the largest county by total area in Maryland. It is bordered by the Choptank River to the north, Talbot County to the northwest, Caroline County to the northeast, Wicomico County to the southeast, Sussex County, Delaware, to the east, and the Chesapeake Bay to the west. Dorchester County uses the slogan, \"The Heart of Chesapeake Country\", due to its geographical location and the heart-like shape of the county on a map.\nHistory.\nMany residents of Dorchester County have historically been watermen and farmers. The Chesapeake Bay and its tributaries provide harvests of crabs, oysters and many fish species to both commercial and recreational fishermen. Dorchester County was the birthplace of Harriet Tubman, who escaped from slavery and afterward worked to guide other refugee slaves to freedom in the North.\nDorchester County has been hit by two deadly tornadoes. The first occurred on June 23, 1944, in Cambridge, where two people were killed and 33 were injured. The other was on May 8, 1984, in Hurlock, where one death and six injuries were reported. Both storms caused between 500,000 and 5 million dollars of damage.\nDuring the 1960s, Dorchester County was home to many key civil rights events, including the Cambridge movement from 1961 to 1964, the Cambridge riot of 1963, and the Cambridge riot of 1967.\nThe Cambridge movement led to the negotiation of \"The Treaty of Cambridge\" among federal, state, and local leaders in July 1963, initiating desegregation in the city prior to passage of federal civil rights laws. Notable signatories of the treaty include U.S. Attorney General Robert F. Kennedy, U.S. Assistant Attorney General Burke Marshall, chairman of the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee (SNCC) John Lewis, Maryland Attorney General Thomas B. Finan, NAACP secretary Stanley Branche, and civil rights activist Gloria Richardson.\nPolitics, government and law.\nDorchester County operates under the charter home rule form of government, and the affairs of the county are managed by five county council members. Each is elected from a single-member district defined within the county. Meetings of the county council are held weekly. The agenda and the minutes of each week's proceedings are public record.\nIn earlier times, unlike highly secessionist Wicomico, Worcester, Queen Anne's and Cecil counties, Dorchester was a swing county in the late 19th century due to the voting power of its freedman population, who strongly supported the Republican Party. The conservative whites voted Democratic for William Jennings Bryan in 1908, after Maryland had passed laws raising barriers to voter registration among blacks, resulting in a dramatic drop in their voting until after passage of civil rights legislation in the 1960s.\nThe white population of Dorchester has historically voted very conservatively. Along with rock-ribbed Unionist Garrett County, located in Appalachia, its white majority was one of only two Maryland counties to vote for Barry Goldwater in 1964. During the following election, Dorchester was the only county in the state where the segregationist George Wallace outpolled either Nixon or Humphrey. In the late 20th century, white conservatives in the South shifted from the Democratic to the Republican Party. Since then the only Democratic presidential nominee to carry Dorchester County was southern native son Bill Clinton in 1996.\nThe county has trended less conservative in recent years, with Democrat Barack Obama coming within five percentage points of beating Mitt Romney in the 2012 presidential election; Obama won nationally.\nLaw enforcement.\nThe county is policed by the Dorchester County Sheriff's Office (DSO), the Maryland State Police, and the DNR Police. The DSO is a full service agency, headed by Sheriff James W. Phillips Jr. since December 2002.\nGeography.\nAccording to the U.S. Census Bureau, the county has a total area of , of which is land and (45%) is water. It is the largest county in Maryland by area.\nClimate.\nDorchester has a humid subtropical climate (\"Cfa\") according to the K\u00f6ppen climate classification. The Trewartha climate classification has only the area near the bay as \"Cf\" and the remainder of the county as oceanic (\"Do\".) Average monthly temperatures in Cambridge range from 36.1\u00a0\u00b0F in January to 78.4\u00a0\u00b0F in July.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\nDorchester County is sparsely populated and is the least densely populated county in Maryland. The largest town is Cambridge with a population of 12,326 as of the 2010 census. Much of this county is made up of marshlands, forest, and farmland.\n2010 census.\nAt the 2010 United States census, there were 32,618\u00a0people, 13,522\u00a0households and 8,894\u00a0families residing in the county. The population density was . There were 16,554 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the county was 67.6% white, 27.7% black or African American, 0.9% Asian, 0.3% American Indian, 1.4% from other races, and 1.9% from two or more races. Those of Hispanic or Latino origin made up 3.5% of the population. In terms of ancestry, 17.0% were American, 13.9% were English, 11.4% were German, and 11.1% were Irish.\nOf the 13,522\u00a0households, 28.7% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 44.6% were married couples living together, 16.0% had a female householder with no husband present, 34.2% were non-families, and 28.4% of all households were made up of individuals. The average household size was 2.37 and the average family size was 2.88. The median age was 43.3 years.\nThe median household income was $45,151 and the median family income was $56,662. Males had a median income of $40,814 and females $30,184. The per capita income was $25,139. About 9.5% of families and 13.4% of the population were below the poverty line, including 19.4% of those under age 18 and 9.2% of those age 65 or over.\nIn 2010, the racial makeup of the county was 66.16% Non-Hispanic whites, 27.70% blacks, 0.34% Native Americans, 0.92% Asians, 0.03% Pacific Islanders, 0.09% Non-Hispanics from some other race, 1.64% Non-Hispanics reporting two or more races and 3.64% Hispanic or Latino.\n2000 census.\nAt the 2000 census, there were 30,674 people, 12,706 households and 8,500 families residing in the county. The population density was . There were 14,681 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the county was 69.45% White, 28.39% Black or African American, 0.23% Native American, 0.66% Asian, 0.00% Pacific Islander, 0.39% from other races, and 0.89% from two or more races. 1.26% of the population was Hispanic or Latino of any race. 20.1% were of American, 12.7% English, 9.8% German and 8.2% Irish ancestry.\nThere were 12,706 households, of which 27.30% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 47.50% were married couples living together, 15.50% had a female householder with no husband present, and 33.10% were non-families. 28.20% of all households were made up of individuals, and 13.50% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.36 and the average family size was 2.86.\n23.30% of the population were under the age of 18, 6.70% from 18 to 24, 26.80% from 25 to 44, 25.50% from 45 to 64, and 17.70% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 41 years. For every 100 females there were 89.80 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 86.40 males.\nThe median household income was $34,077 and the median family income was $41,917. Males had a median income of $29,014 and females $22,284. The per capita income was $18,929. 13.80% of the population and 10.10% of families were below the poverty line. 18.10% of those under the age of 18 and 14.20% of those 65 and older were living below the poverty line.\nEducation.\nPublic schools.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nMedia.\nThe local newspapers are \"The Dorchester Banner\" and \"The Dorchester Star\" (a free, weekly publication). A regional newspaper, \"The Star Democrat\", serves several counties on the Mid-Shore, including Dorchester.\nDorchester County is included in the coverage area of local television stations WBOC, WMDT and WRDE-LD. It also receives coverage from television stations based in Baltimore and Washington, D.C. It is also by a local LPFM radio station, WHCP-LP (101.5FM), operated by the locally based non-profit Cambridge Community Radio, Inc.\nCommunities.\nTowns.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59382", "revid": "42454206", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59382", "title": "Kent County, Maryland", "text": "County in Maryland, United States\nKent County is a county located in the U.S. state of Maryland. As of the 2020 census, its population was 19,198, making it the least populous county in Maryland. Its county seat is Chestertown. The county was named for the county of Kent in England. The county is part of the Mid-Eastern Shore region of the state and is the oldest county in Maryland.\nAlong with Caroline and Garrett Counties, it is one of three counties in the state that are not part of a metropolitan statistical area.\nHistory.\nIn 1608, Captain John Smith explored and mapped a portion of what is now Kent County. In 1642, the governor and council appointed commissioners for the Isle and County of Kent. This act appears to have led to the establishment of Kent County. In 1675, the first county seat was New Yarmouth. The seat was briefly moved upriver to Quaker Neck, and then to the site of modern Chestertown. Before the American Revolution, New Town on Chester, now Chestertown, was a port entry for the counties of Cecil, Kent, and Queen Anne's.\nThe county has a number of properties which are listed on the National Register of Historic Places.\nKent County was the mean center of U.S. population in the 1790 census.\nIn 1793, the county had its first newspaper, called \"Apollo\", or \"Chestertown Spy.\" It was succeeded by local papers such as the \"Chestertown Gazette\".\nWashington College, the oldest college in Maryland, is located in Kent County. It was the first college charted in the nation after the Declaration of Independence and was founded by William Smith in 1782. George Washington authorized the use of his name and gave the college its largest gift of 50 guineas. Washington served on the Board of Visitors and Governors for five years. The college has been host to four United States Presidents, including George Washington, Harry S. Truman, Dwight D. Eisenhower, and Franklin D. Roosevelt. All were awarded honorary degrees from the college.\nWar of 1812.\nThe War of 1812 was the only war Kent County experienced on its soil. During the spring and summer of both 1813 and 1814, residents faced immediate threats from the enemy as the British terrorized the Chesapeake, looting and burning farms and towns. Kent County citizens and local militia were tested and stood their ground with ingenuity and determination during the burning of Georgetown, the rescue of the Kitty Knight House and the Battle of Caulk's Field.\nHistorical churches.\nSt. Paul's, the oldest Episcopal Church in Maryland used continuously as a place of worship. The earliest part of the building was constructed in 1711. It is located approximately nine miles west of Chestertown.\nChrist Church, frequently called I.U., was founded in 1765. Colonel Philip Reed a Continental Army and War of 1812 soldier is buried here.\nShrewsbury Church is believed to be the first structure erected in the county, in 1693. John Cadwalader is buried in the Shrewsbury churchyard. The eulogy on his tomb was written by Thomas Paine.\nPolitics and government.\nKent County was granted home rule in 1970 under a state code.\nIn the early post-Civil War era, Kent County was heavily Confederate-leaning and leaned towards the Democratic Party. William McKinley was the only Republican to carry the county between 1876 and 1924. After that, although carried by Franklin Roosevelt and Harry Truman during the five consecutive Democratic victories between 1932 and 1948, the county trended Republican relative to national voting. Currently, along with Talbot County further south, Kent County is the most politically competitive county on the Eastern Shore of Maryland. In 2004, Republican George W. Bush won it with 52.8% of the vote to Democrat John Kerry's 46.1%. In the 2008 United States Presidential Election, Barack Obama won Kent County by 48 votes more than John McCain. In 2012, Republican Mitt Romney won Kent County by 28 votes over Democrat Barack Obama. In 2016, Republican Donald Trump won Kent County with 48.7% of the vote to Democrat Hillary Clinton's 45.7%, and a 20-year record high of 5.7% of the vote for third-party candidates. In 2020, Joe Biden flipped the county, winning it by 134 votes. In 2024, the county voted for Trump again, this time over Kamala Harris.\nThe members of the County Council as of 2022 are:\nKent County lies wholly in Senate District 36 and elects three House of Delegates Members who serve at-large countywide. Members listed below as of 2018 are:\nLaw enforcement.\nThe Kent County Sheriff is Dennis Hickman.\nGeography.\nAccording to the U.S. Census Bureau, the county has a total area of , of which is land and (33%) is water.\nAccording to the Maryland Geological Survey, the highest point in Kent County is 102\u00a0ft above sea level, approximately 2.25\u00a0mi west of Coleman's Corner (shown on maps as \"Coleman\"), just northeast of the mouth of Still Pond Creek.\nKent County has a 209-mile shoreline, including Eastern Neck Island. The Chesapeake Bay is on the west, Sassafras River on the north, and the Chester River on the south. The eastern border with Delaware is part of the Mason\u2013Dixon line.\nNearby cities: Baltimore, MD; Washington D.C.; Philadelphia, PA; Wilmington, DE\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\n2010 census.\nAs of the 2010 U.S. census, there were 20,197\u00a0people, 8,165\u00a0households, and 5,272\u00a0families living in the county. The population density was . There were 10,549 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the county was 80.1% white, 15.1% black or African American, 0.8% Asian, 0.2% American Indian, 1.9% from other races, and 1.8% from two or more races. Those of Hispanic or Latino origin made up 4.5% of the population. In terms of ancestry, 18.7% were English, 18.7% were German, 15.5% were Irish, 7.9% were American, and 5.8% were Italian.\nOf the 8,165\u00a0households, 24.4% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 49.2% were married couples living together, 10.9% had a female householder with no husband present, 35.4% were non-families, and 29.6% of all households were made up of individuals. The average household size was 2.29 and the average family size was 2.78. The median age was 45.6 years.\nThe median income for a household in the county was $50,141 and the median income for a family was $63,507. Males had a median income of $41,046 versus $35,161 for females. The per capita income for the county was $29,536. About 5.1% of families and 12.2% of the population were below the poverty line, including 14.9% of those under age 18 and 7.8% of those age 65 or over.\nEducation.\nKent County Public Schools is the school district for all of Kent County.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nCommunities.\nThis county contains the following incorporated municipalities:\nCensus-designated places.\nThe United States Census Bureau recognizes the following Census-designated places in Kent County:\nUnincorporated communities.\nOther unincorporated places not listed as Census-Designated Places but known in the area include:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59383", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59383", "title": "Fly agaric", "text": ""}
{"id": "59384", "revid": "49245627", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59384", "title": "Gordon McBean", "text": "Canadian climatologist\nGordon McBean is a Canadian climatologist who serves as chairman of the board of trustees of the Canadian Foundation for Climate and Atmospheric Sciences. He is a professor at the University of Western Ontario and Chair for Policy in the Institute for Catastrophic Loss Reduction. Previously he was the Assistant Deputy Minister of Meteorological Service of Canada.\nBiography.\nProfessor McBean was born in British Columbia, Canada. He studied physics at McGill University and obtained a PhD in physics and oceanography from the University of British Columbia (UBC), Vancouver, in 1970.\nFrom 1970 to 1988, McBean was a scientist with Environment Canada. In 1988, he became Professor of Geography and Chair of the Atmospheric Sciences Program and in 1992, Professor of Oceanography and Head of the Department of Oceanography. He returned to Environment Canada as Assistant Deputy Minister from 1994 to 2000, responsible for climate, weather and air quality sciences and services in the federal government.\nIn 1995, McBean gave a speech to the World Meteorological Organization on global warming. In 2006, McBean, with Andrew Weaver and Ken Denman, authored an open letter, signed by 90 Canadian climate scientists, to Prime Minister Stephen Harper calling for an effective national climate change strategy.\nThe letter was a response to an earlier open letter to Harper from 60 scientists (seven of them climatologists, 19 of them Canadians) arguing against the Kyoto accord and questioning its scientific basis.\nIn addition to his involvement with the Canadian Foundation for Climate and Atmospheric Sciences, McBean is member of the U.S. National Academy of Sciences partnerships committee and since 2014 president of the International Council for Science (ICSU) (before 2014 member of the environment advisory committee).\nIn 2018, he was professor in the Departments of Geography, Political Science and Physics at the University of Western Ontario, London, Canada, and is currently Director of Policy Studies at the Institute for Catastrophic Loss Reduction and Co-Director of the Centre for Environment and Sustainability there. He also acts as a mentor for the Loran Scholars Foundation.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59385", "revid": "10863197", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59385", "title": "Amanita muscaria", "text": "Species of mushroom\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Taxobox/core/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAmanita muscaria, commonly known as the fly agaric or fly amanita, is a basidiomycete fungus of the genus \"Amanita\". It is a large white-gilled, white-spotted mushroom typically featuring a bright red cap covered with distinctive white warts. It is one of the most recognisable fungi in the world.\n\"A.muscaria\" exhibits complex genetic diversity that suggests it is a species complex rather than a single species. It is a widely distributed mushroom native to temperate and boreal forests of the Northern Hemisphere, now also naturalised in the Southern Hemisphere, forming symbiotic relationships with various trees and spreading invasively in some regions.\nIts name derives from its traditional use as an insecticide. It can cause poisoning, especially in children and those seeking its hallucinogenic effects, due to psychoactive compounds like muscimol and the ibotenic acid; however, fatal poisonings are extremely rare. Boiling it reduces toxicity by removing water-soluble ibotenic acid into the discarded water. Drying converts ibotenic acid into muscimol, lowering toxicity but retaining psychoactive effects. Some cultures use it as food after preparation. Indigenous peoples of Siberia used \"A.muscaria\" as an inebriant and entheogen. It has been controversially linked to Santa Claus, Viking berserkers, Vedic soma, and early Christianity, though evidence is sparse and disputed. Its rise in the 2020s as a legal hallucinogen alternative has led to Food and Drug Administration scrutiny.\n\"A.muscaria\" has appeared in art and literature since the Renaissance, becoming iconic in fairy tales, children\u2019s books, and media like the Super Mario games and Disney\u2019s Fantasia. It has also influenced literary depictions of altered perception\u2014most notably in \"Alice\u2019s Adventures in Wonderland\"\u2014and has been referenced in novels by writers including Oliver Goldsmith, Thomas Pynchon, and Alan Garner.\nTaxonomy.\nThe name of the mushroom in many European languages is thought to derive from its use as an insecticide when sprinkled in milk. This practice has been recorded from Germanic- and Slavic-speaking parts of Europe, as well as the Vosges region and pockets elsewhere in France, and Romania. Albertus Magnus was the first to record it in his work \"De vegetabilibus\" some time before 1256, commenting \"vocatur fungus muscarum, eo quod in lacte pulverizatus interficit muscas\" (\"it is called the fly mushroom because it is powdered in milk to kill flies\").\nThe 16th-century Flemish botanist Carolus Clusius traced the practice of sprinkling it into milk to Frankfurt in Germany, while Carl Linnaeus, the \"father of taxonomy\", reported it from Sm\u00e5land in southern Sweden, where he had lived as a child. He described it in volume two of his \"Species Plantarum\" in 1753, giving it the name \"Agaricus muscarius\", the specific epithet deriving from Latin \"musca\" meaning \"fly\". It gained its current name in 1783, when placed in the genus \"Amanita\" by Jean-Baptiste Lamarck, a name sanctioned in 1821 by the \"father of mycology\", Swedish naturalist Elias Magnus Fries. The starting date for all the mycota had been set by general agreement as January 1, 1821, the date of Fries's work, and so the full name was then \"Amanita muscaria\" (L.:Fr.) Hook. The 1987 edition of the International Code of Botanical Nomenclature changed the rules on the starting date and primary work for names of fungi, and names can now be considered valid as far back as May 1, 1753, the date of publication of Linnaeus's work. Hence, Linnaeus and Lamarck are now taken as the namers of \"Amanita muscaria\" (L.) Lam..\nThe English mycologist John Ramsbottom reported that \"Amanita muscaria\" was used for getting rid of bugs in England and Sweden, and \"bug agaric\" was an old alternative name for the species. French mycologist Pierre Bulliard reported having tried without success to replicate its fly-killing properties in his work \"\" (1784), and proposed a new binomial name \"Agaricus pseudo-aurantiacus\" because of this. One compound isolated from the fungus is 1,3-diolein (1,3-di(cis-9-octadecenoyl)glycerol), which attracts insects.\nIt has been hypothesised that the flies intentionally seek out the fly agaric for its intoxicating properties.\nAn alternative derivation proposes that the term \"fly-\" refers not to insects as such but rather the delirium resulting from consumption of the fungus. This is based on the medieval belief that flies could enter a person's head and cause mental illness. Several regional names appear to be linked with this connotation, meaning the \"mad\" or \"fool's\" version of the highly regarded edible mushroom \"Amanita caesarea\". Hence there is ' \"mad oriol\" in Catalan, \"mujolo folo\" from Toulouse, ' from the Aveyron department in Southern France, \"\" from Trentino in Italy. A local dialect name in Fribourg in Switzerland is \"tsapi de diablhou\", which translates as \"Devil's hat\".\nClassification.\n\"Amanita muscaria\" is the type species of the genus. By extension, it is also the type species of \"Amanita\" subgenus \"Amanita\", as well as section \"Amanita\" within this subgenus. \"Amanita\" subgenus \"Amanita\" includes all \"Amanita\" with inamyloid spores. \"Amanita\" section \"Amanita\" includes the species with patchy universal veil remnants, including a volva that is reduced to a series of concentric rings, and the veil remnants on the cap to a series of patches or warts. Most species in this group also have a bulbous base. \"Amanita\" section \"Amanita\" consists of \"A.\u00a0muscaria\" and its close relatives, including \"A.\u00a0pantherina\" (the panther cap), \"A.\u00a0gemmata\", \"A.\u00a0farinosa\", and \"A.\u00a0xanthocephala\". Modern fungal taxonomists have classified \"A.\u00a0muscaria\" and its allies this way based on gross morphology and spore inamyloidy. Two recent molecular phylogenetic studies have confirmed this classification as natural.\nDescription.\nA large, conspicuous mushroom, \"A.\u00a0muscaria\" is generally common and numerous where it grows, and is often found in groups with basidiocarps in all stages of development.\nFly agaric fruiting bodies emerge from the soil looking like white eggs. After emerging from the ground, the cap is covered with numerous small white to yellow pyramid-shaped warts. These are remnants of the universal veil, a membrane that encloses the entire mushroom when it is still very young. Dissecting the mushroom at this stage reveals a characteristic yellowish layer of skin under the veil, which helps identification. As the fungus grows, the red colour appears through the broken veil and the warts become less prominent; they do not change in size, but are reduced relative to the expanding skin area. The cap changes from globose to hemispherical, and finally to plate-like and flat in mature specimens. Fully grown, the bright red cap is usually around in diameter, although larger specimens have been found. The red colour may fade after rain and in older mushrooms.\nThe free gills are white, as is the spore print. The oval spores measure 9\u201313 by 6.5\u20139\u00a0\u03bcm; they do not turn blue with the application of iodine. The stipe is white, high by wide, and has the slightly brittle, fibrous texture typical of many large mushrooms. At the base is a bulb that bears universal veil remnants in the form of two to four distinct rings or ruffs. Between the basal universal veil remnants and gills are remnants of the partial veil (which covers the gills during development) in the form of a white ring. It can be quite wide and flaccid with age. There is generally no associated smell other than a mild earthiness.\nAlthough very distinctive in appearance, the fly agaric has been mistaken for other yellow to red mushroom species in the Americas, such as \"Armillaria\" cf. \"mellea\" and the edible \"A.\u00a0basii\"\u2014a Mexican species similar to \"A.\u00a0caesarea\" of Europe. Poison control centres in the United States and Canada have become aware that (Spanish for 'yellow') is a common name for the \"A.\u00a0caesarea\"-like species in Mexico. \"A.\u00a0caesarea\" is distinguished by its entirely orange to red cap, which lacks the numerous white warty spots of the fly agaric (though these sometimes wash away during heavy rain). Furthermore, the stem, gills and ring of \"A.\u00a0caesarea\" are bright yellow, not white. The volva is a distinct white bag, not broken into scales. In Australia, the introduced fly agaric may be confused with the native \"A.\u00a0xanthocephala\" (vermilion grisette), which grows in association with eucalypts. The latter species generally lacks the white warts of \"A.\u00a0muscaria\" and bears no ring. Additionally, immature button forms resemble puffballs.\nControversy.\n\"Amanita muscaria\" varies considerably in its morphology, and many authorities recognise several subspecies or varieties within the species. In \"The Agaricales in Modern Taxonomy\", German mycologist Rolf Singer listed three subspecies, though without description: \"A.\u00a0muscaria\" ssp. \"muscaria\", \"A.\u00a0muscaria\" ssp. \"americana\", and \"A.\u00a0muscaria\" ssp. \"flavivolvata\".\nHowever, a 2006 molecular phylogenetic study of different regional populations of \"A.\u00a0muscaria\" by mycologist J\u00f3zsef Geml and colleagues found three distinct clades within this species representing, roughly, Eurasian, Eurasian \"subalpine\", and North American populations. Specimens belonging to all three clades have been found in Alaska; this has led to the hypothesis that this was the centre of diversification for this species. The study also looked at four named varieties of the species: var. \"alba\", var. \"flavivolvata\", var. \"formosa\" (including var. \"guessowii\"), and var. \"regalis\" from both areas. All four varieties were found within both the Eurasian and North American clades, evidence that these morphological forms are polymorphisms rather than distinct subspecies or varieties. Further molecular study by Geml and colleagues published in 2008 show that these three genetic groups, plus a fourth associated with oak\u2013hickory\u2013pine forest in the southeastern U.S. and two more on Santa Cruz Island in California, are delineated from each other enough genetically to be considered separate species. Thus \"A.\u00a0muscaria\" as it stands currently is, evidently, a species complex. The complex also includes at least three other closely related taxa that are currently regarded as species: \"A.\u00a0breckonii\" is a buff-capped mushroom associated with conifers from the Pacific Northwest, and the brown-capped \"A.\u00a0gioiosa\" and \"A.\u00a0heterochroma\" from the Mediterranean Basin and from Sardinia respectively. Both of these last two are found with \"Eucalyptus\" and \"Cistus\" trees, and it is unclear whether they are native or introduced from Australia.\n\"Amanitaceae.org\" lists four varieties as of May\u00a02019[ [update]], but says that they will be segregated into their own taxa \"in the near future\". They are:\nDistribution and habitat.\n\"A. muscaria\" is a cosmopolitan mushroom, native to conifer and deciduous woodlands throughout the temperate and boreal regions of the Northern Hemisphere, including higher elevations of warmer latitudes in regions such as Hindu Kush, the Mediterranean and also Central America. A recent molecular study proposes that it had an ancestral origin in the Siberian\u2013Beringian region in the Tertiary period, before radiating outwards across Asia, Europe and North America. The season for fruiting varies in different climates: fruiting occurs in summer and autumn across most of North America, but later in autumn and early winter on the Pacific coast. This species is often found in similar locations to \"Boletus edulis\", and may appear in fairy rings. Conveyed with pine seedlings, it has been widely transported into the Southern Hemisphere, including Australia, New Zealand, South Africa and South America, where it can be found in the Brazilian states of Paran\u00e1, S\u00e3o Paulo, Minas Gerais and Rio Grande do Sul.\nEctomycorrhizal, \"A. muscaria\" forms symbiotic relationships with many trees, including pine, oak, spruce, fir, birch, and cedar. Commonly seen under introduced trees, \"A.\u00a0muscaria\" is the fungal equivalent of a weed in New Zealand, Tasmania and Victoria, forming new associations with southern beech (\"Nothofagus\"). The species is also invading a rainforest in Australia, where it may be displacing the native species. It appears to be spreading northwards, with recent reports placing it near Port Macquarie on the New South Wales north coast. It was recorded under silver birch (\"Betula pendula\") in Manjimup, Western Australia in 2010. Although it has apparently not spread to eucalypts in Australia, it has been recorded associating with them in Portugal. Commonly found throughout the great Southern region of western Australia, it is regularly found growing on \"Pinus radiata\".\nToxicity.\n\"A. muscaria\" poisoning has occurred in young children and in people who ingested the mushrooms for a hallucinogenic experience, or who confused it with an edible species.\n\"A. muscaria\" contains several biologically active agents, at least one of which, muscimol, is known to be psychoactive. Ibotenic acid, a neurotoxin, serves as a prodrug to muscimol, with a small amount likely converting to muscimol after ingestion. An active dose in adults is approximately 6\u00a0mg muscimol or 30 to 60\u00a0mg ibotenic acid; this is typically about the amount found in one cap of \"A.\u00a0muscaria\". The amount and ratio of chemical compounds per mushroom varies widely from region to region and season to season, which can further confuse the issue. Spring and summer mushrooms have been reported to contain up to 10 times more ibotenic acid and muscimol than autumn fruitings. A. muscaria, unlike other mushrooms that belong to the Amanita genus, do not contain the highly toxic cyclic peptide \u03b1-Amanitin.\nDeaths from \"A. muscaria\" have been reported in historical journal articles and newspaper reports, but with modern medical treatment, fatal poisoning from ingesting this mushroom is extremely rare. Many books list \"A.\u00a0muscaria\" as deadly, but according to David Arora, this is an error that implies the mushroom is far more toxic than it is. Furthermore, the North American Mycological Association has stated that there were \"no reliably documented cases of death from toxins in these mushrooms in the past 100 years\".\nThe active constituents of \"A.\u00a0muscaria\" are water-soluble; boiling and then discarding the cooking water at least partly detoxifies it. Drying may increase potency, as the process facilitates the conversion of ibotenic acid to the more potent muscimol. According to some sources, once detoxified, the mushroom becomes edible. Patrick Harding describes the Sami custom of processing the fly agaric through reindeer.\nPharmacology.\nMuscarine.\nMuscarine, discovered in 1869, was long thought to be the active hallucinogenic agent in \"A.\u00a0muscaria\". Muscarine binds with muscarinic acetylcholine receptors leading to the excitation of neurons bearing these receptors. The levels of muscarine in \"A.\u00a0muscaria\" are minute when compared with other poisonous fungi such as \"Inosperma erubescens\", the small white \"Clitocybe\" species \"C.\u00a0dealbata\" and \"C.\u00a0rivulosa\". The level of muscarine in \"A.\u00a0muscaria\" is too low to play a role in the symptoms of poisoning.\nMuscimol and ibotenic acid.\nThe major toxins involved in \"A.\u00a0muscaria\" poisoning are muscimol (3-hydroxy-5-aminomethyl-1-isoxazole, an unsaturated cyclic hydroxamic acid) and the related amino acid ibotenic acid. Muscimol is the product of the decarboxylation (usually by drying) of ibotenic acid. Muscimol and ibotenic acid were discovered in the mid-20th century. Researchers in England, Japan and Switzerland showed that the effects produced were due mainly to ibotenic acid and muscimol, not muscarine. These toxins are not distributed uniformly in the mushroom. Most are detected in the cap of the fruit, a moderate amount in the base, with the smallest amount in the stalk. Quite rapidly, between 20 and 90 minutes after ingestion, a substantial fraction of ibotenic acid is excreted unmetabolised in the urine of the consumer. Almost no muscimol is excreted when pure ibotenic acid is eaten, but muscimol is detectable in the urine after eating \"A.\u00a0muscaria\", which contains both ibotenic acid and muscimol.\nIbotenic acid and muscimol are structurally related to each other and to two major neurotransmitters of the central nervous system: glutamic acid and GABA respectively. Ibotenic acid and muscimol act like these neurotransmitters, muscimol being a potent GABAA receptor agonist, while ibotenic acid is an agonist of NMDA glutamate receptors and certain metabotropic glutamate receptors which are involved in the control of neuronal activity. It is these interactions which are thought to cause the psychoactive effects found in intoxication.\nMuscazone.\nMuscazone is another compound that has more recently been isolated from European specimens of the fly agaric. It is a product of the breakdown of ibotenic acid by ultraviolet radiation. Muscazone is of minor pharmacological activity compared with the other agents. \"Amanita muscaria\" and related species are known as effective bioaccumulators of vanadium; some species concentrate vanadium to levels of up to 400 times those typically found in plants. Vanadium is present in fruit-bodies as an organometallic compound called amavadine. The biological importance of the accumulation process is unknown.\nSymptoms.\nFly agarics are best known for the unpredictability of their effects. Depending on habitat and the amount ingested per body weight, effects can range from mild nausea and twitching to drowsiness, cholinergic crisis-like effects (low blood pressure, sweating and salivation), auditory and visual distortions, mood changes, euphoria, relaxation, ataxia, and loss of equilibrium (like with tetanus.)\nIn cases of serious poisoning the mushroom causes delirium, somewhat similar in effect to anticholinergic poisoning (such as that caused by \"Datura stramonium\"), characterised by bouts of marked agitation with confusion, hallucinations, and irritability followed by periods of central nervous system depression. Seizures and coma may also occur in severe poisonings. Symptoms typically appear after around 30 to 90 minutes and peak within three hours, but certain effects can last for several days. In the majority of cases recovery is complete within 12 to 24\u00a0hours. The effect is highly variable between individuals, with similar doses potentially causing quite different reactions. Some people suffering intoxication have exhibited headaches up to ten hours afterwards. Retrograde amnesia and somnolence can result following recovery.\nTreatment.\nMedical attention should be sought in cases of suspected poisoning. If the delay between ingestion and treatment is less than four hours, activated charcoal is given. Gastric lavage can be considered if the patient presents within one hour of ingestion. Inducing vomiting with syrup of ipecac is no longer recommended in any poisoning situation.\nThere is no antidote, and supportive care is the mainstay of further treatment for intoxication. Though sometimes referred to as a deliriant and while muscarine was first isolated from \"A. muscaria\" and as such is its namesake, muscimol does not have action, either as an agonist or antagonist, at the muscarinic acetylcholine receptor site, and therefore atropine or physostigmine as an antidote is not recommended. If a patient is delirious or agitated, this can usually be treated by reassurance and, if necessary, physical restraints. A benzodiazepine such as diazepam or lorazepam can be used to control combativeness, agitation, muscular overactivity, and seizures. Only small doses should be used, as they may worsen the respiratory depressant effects of muscimol. Recurrent vomiting is rare, but if present may lead to fluid and electrolyte imbalances; intravenous rehydration or electrolyte replacement may be required. Serious cases may develop loss of consciousness or coma, and may need intubation and artificial ventilation. Hemodialysis can remove the toxins, although this intervention is generally considered unnecessary. With modern medical treatment the prognosis is typically good following supportive treatment.\nUses.\nPsychoactive.\nThe wide range of psychoactive effects have been variously described as depressant, sedative-hypnotic, psychedelic, dissociative, or deliriant; paradoxical effects such as stimulation may occur however. Perceptual phenomena such as synesthesia, macropsia, and micropsia may occur; the latter two effects may occur either simultaneously or alternatingly, as part of Alice in Wonderland syndrome, collectively known as dysmetropsia, along with related distortions pelopsia and teleopsia. Some users report lucid dreaming under the influence of its hypnotic effects. Unlike \"Psilocybe cubensis\", \"A.\u00a0muscaria\" cannot be commercially cultivated, due to its mycorrhizal relationship with the roots of pine trees. However, following the outlawing of psilocybin mushrooms in the United Kingdom in 2006, the sale of the still legal \"A.\u00a0muscaria\" began increasing.\nMarija Gimbutas reported to R. Gordon Wasson that in remote areas of Lithuania, \"A.\u00a0muscaria\" has been consumed at wedding feasts, in which mushrooms were mixed with vodka. She also reported that the Lithuanians used to export \"A.\u00a0muscaria\" to the Sami in the Far North for use in shamanic rituals. The Lithuanian festivities are the only report that Wasson received of ingestion of fly agaric for religious use in Eastern Europe.\nSiberia.\n\"A. muscaria\" was widely used as an entheogen by many of the indigenous peoples of Siberia. Its use was known among almost all of the Uralic-speaking peoples of western Siberia and the Paleosiberian-speaking peoples of the Russian Far East. There are only isolated reports of \"A.\u00a0muscaria\" use among the Tungusic and Turkic peoples of central Siberia and it is believed that on the whole entheogenic use of \"A.\u00a0muscaria\" was not practised by these peoples. In western Siberia, the use of \"A.\u00a0muscaria\" was restricted to shamans, who used it as an alternative method of achieving a trance state. (Normally, Siberian shamans achieve trance by prolonged drumming and dancing.) In eastern Siberia, \"A.\u00a0muscaria\" was used by both shamans and laypeople alike, and was used recreationally as well as religiously. In eastern Siberia, the shaman would take the mushrooms, and others would drink his urine. This urine, still containing psychoactive elements, may be more potent than the \"A.\u00a0muscaria\" mushrooms with fewer negative effects such as sweating and twitching, suggesting that the initial user may act as a screening filter for other components in the mushroom.\nThe Koryak of eastern Siberia have a story about the fly agaric (\"wapaq\") which enabled Big Raven to carry a whale to its home. In the story, the deity \"Vahiyinin\" (\"Existence\") spat onto earth, and his spittle became the \"wapaq\", and his saliva becomes the warts. After experiencing the power of the \"wapaq\", Raven was so exhilarated that he told it to grow forever on earth so his children, the people, could learn from it. Among the Koryaks, one report said that the poor would consume the urine of the wealthy, who could afford to buy the mushrooms. It was reported that the local reindeer would often follow an individual intoxicated by the muscimol mushroom, and if said individual were to urinate in snow the reindeer would become similarly intoxicated and the Koryak people's would use the drunken state of the reindeer to more easily rope and hunt them.\nRecent rise in popularity.\nAs a result of a lack of regulation, the use of \"A.\u00a0muscaria\" as a popular legal alternative to hallucinogens has grown significantly in recent years. In 2024, Google searches for \"Amanita muscaria\" rose nearly 200% from the previous year, a trend that an article published in the \"American Journal of Preventive Medicine\" correlated with the sudden commercialisation of \"A.\u00a0muscaria\" products on the internet.\nWhile Amanita mushrooms are unscheduled in the U.S., they are listed as a poison by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA). Amanita mushrooms and muscimol are not approved as an ingredient in food, with some drawing comparisons to the controversial legal status of hemp-derived cannabinoids. The FDA is currently evaluating the use of \"A.\u00a0muscaria\" and its constituents in dietary supplements, reminding manufacturers to ensure their ingredients meet safety standards and encouraging them to consult the Office of Dietary Supplement Programs with any questions.\nA recent outbreak of poisonings and at least one death associated with products containing \"A.\u00a0muscaria\" extracts has sparked debates regarding the regulatory status of Amanita mushrooms and their psychoactive constituents, prompting an FDA ban of their use in food products in December 2024. These products often use misleading advertising, such as erroneous comparisons to Psilocybin mushrooms or simply not disclosing the inclusion of Amanita mushrooms on the packaging.\nOther reports and theories.\nThe Finnish historian T. I. Itkonen mentions that \"A.\u00a0muscaria\" was once used among the S\u00e1mi peoples. Sorcerers in Inari would consume fly agarics with seven spots. In 1979, Said Gholam Mochtar and Hartmut Geerken published an article in which they claimed to have discovered a tradition of medicinal and recreational use of this mushroom among a Parachi-speaking group in Afghanistan. There are also unconfirmed reports of religious use of \"A.\u00a0muscaria\" among two Subarctic Native American tribes. Ojibwa ethnobotanist Keewaydinoquay Peschel reported its use among her people, where it was known as (an abbreviation of the name (= \"red-top mushroom\"). This information was enthusiastically received by Wasson, although evidence from other sources was lacking. There is also one account of a Euro-American who claims to have been initiated into traditional Tlicho use of \"A.\u00a0muscaria\". \nMycophilosopher Martijn Benders has proposed a novel evolutionary theory involving \"A.\u00a0muscaria\". In his book \"Amanita Muscaria \u2013 the Book of the Empress\", he argues that a precursor of ibotenic acid, a compound found in the mushroom, was present in ancient seaweed and played a significant role in the evolution of life. According to this hypothesis, the compound influenced the twitching movements of early aquatic organisms, leading to the development of behaviors such as jumping onto land\u2014a crucial step in the evolution of terrestrial species.\nThe flying reindeer of Santa Claus, who is called Joulupukki in Finland, could symbolise the use of \"A.\u00a0muscaria\" by S\u00e1mi shamans. However, S\u00e1mi scholars and the S\u00e1mi peoples themselves refute any connection between Santa Claus and S\u00e1mi history or culture.The story of Santa emerging from a S\u00e1mi shamanic tradition has a critical number of flaws,\" asserts Tim Frandy, assistant professor of Nordic Studies at the University of British Columbia and a member of the S\u00e1mi descendent community in North America. \"The theory has been widely criticized by S\u00e1mi people as a stereotypical and problematic romanticized misreading of actual S\u00e1mi culture.\nVikings.\nThe notion that Vikings used \"A.\u00a0muscaria\" to produce their berserker rages was first suggested by the Swedish professor Samuel \u00d6dmann in 1784. \u00d6dmann based his theories on reports about the use of fly agaric among Siberian shamans. The notion has become widespread since the 19th century, but no contemporary sources mention this use or anything similar in their description of berserkers. Muscimol is generally a mild relaxant, but it can create a range of different reactions within a group of people. It is possible that it could make a person angry, or cause them to be \"very jolly or sad, jump about, dance, sing or give way to great fright\". Comparative analysis of symptoms have, however, since shown \"Hyoscyamus niger\" to be a better fit to the state that characterises the berserker rage.\nSoma.\nIn 1968, R. Gordon Wasson proposed that \"A.\u00a0muscaria\" was the \"soma\" talked about in the Rigveda of India, a claim which received widespread publicity and popular support at the time. He noted that descriptions of \"soma\" omitted any description of roots, stems or seeds, which suggested a mushroom, and used the adjective \"h\u00e1ri\" \"dazzling\" or \"flaming\" which the author interprets as meaning red. One line described men urinating \"soma\"; this recalled the practice of recycling urine in Siberia. Soma is mentioned as coming \"from the mountains\", which Wasson interpreted as the mushroom having been brought in with the Aryan migrants from the north. Indian scholars Santosh Kumar Dash and Sachinanda Padhy pointed out that both eating of mushrooms and drinking of urine were prescribed, using as a source the \"Manusm\u1e5bti\".\nIn 1971, Vedic scholar John Brough from Cambridge University rejected Wasson's theory and noted that the language was too vague to determine a description of Soma. In his 1976 survey, \"Hallucinogens and Culture\", anthropologist Peter T. Furst evaluated the evidence for and against the identification of the fly agaric mushroom as the Vedic Soma, concluding cautiously in its favour. Kevin Feeney and Trent Austin compared the references in the Vedas with the filtering mechanisms in the preparation of \"A.\u00a0muscaria\" and published findings supporting the proposal that fly-agaric mushrooms could be a likely candidate for the sacrament. Other proposed candidates include \"Psilocybe cubensis\", \"Peganum harmala\", and \"Ephedra.\"\nChristianity.\nPhilologist, archaeologist, and Dead Sea Scrolls scholar John Marco Allegro postulated that early Christian theology was derived from a fertility cult revolving around the entheogenic consumption of \"A. muscaria\" in his 1970 book \"The Sacred Mushroom and the Cross.\" This theory has found little support by scholars outside the field of ethnomycology. The book was widely criticised by academics and theologians, including Sir Godfrey Driver, emeritus Professor of Semitic Philology at Oxford University and Henry Chadwick, the Dean of Christ Church, Oxford. Christian author John C. King wrote a detailed rebuttal of Allegro's theory in the 1970 book \"A Christian View of the Mushroom Myth\"; he notes that neither fly agarics nor their host trees are found in the Middle East, even though cedars and pines are found there, and highlights the tenuous nature of the links between biblical and Sumerian names coined by Allegro. He concludes that if the theory were true, the use of the mushroom must have been \"the best kept secret in the world\" as it was so well concealed for two thousand years.\nFly trap.\n\"Amanita muscaria\" is traditionally used for catching flies possibly due to its content of ibotenic acid and muscimol, which lead to its common name \"fly agaric\". Recently, an analysis of nine different methods for preparing \"A. muscaria\" for catching flies in Slovenia have shown that the release of ibotenic acid and muscimol did not depend on the solvent (milk or water) and that thermal and mechanical processing led to faster extraction of ibotenic acid and muscimol.\nCulinary.\nThe toxins in \"A.\u00a0muscaria\" are water-soluble: parboiling \"A.\u00a0muscaria\" fruit bodies can detoxify them and render them edible, although consumption of the mushroom as a food has never been widespread. The consumption of detoxified \"A.\u00a0muscaria\" has been practiced in some parts of Europe (notably by Russian settlers in Siberia) since at least the 19th century, and likely earlier. The German physician and naturalist Georg Heinrich von Langsdorff wrote the earliest published account on how to detoxify this mushroom in 1823. In the late 19th century, the French physician F\u00e9lix Archim\u00e8de Pouchet was a populariser and advocate of \"A.\u00a0muscaria\" consumption, comparing it to manioc, an important food source in tropical South America that must also be detoxified before consumption.\nUse of this mushroom as a food source also seems to have existed in North America. A classic description of this use of \"A.\u00a0muscaria\" by an African-American mushroom seller in Washington, D.C., in the late 19th century is described by American botanist Frederick Vernon Coville. In this case, the mushroom, after parboiling, and soaking in vinegar, is made into a mushroom sauce for steak. It is also consumed as a food in parts of Japan. The most well-known current use as an edible mushroom is in Nagano Prefecture, Japan. There, it is primarily salted and pickled.\nA 2008 paper by food historian William Rubel and mycologist David Arora gives a history of consumption of \"A.\u00a0muscaria\" as a food and describes detoxification methods. They advocate that \"A.\u00a0muscaria\" be described in field guides as an edible mushroom, though accompanied by a description on how to detoxify it. The authors state that the widespread descriptions in field guides of this mushroom as poisonous is a reflection of cultural bias, as several other popular edible species, notably morels, are also toxic unless properly cooked.\nIn culture.\nThe red-and-white spotted toadstool is a common image in many aspects of popular culture. Garden ornaments and children's picture books depicting gnomes and fairies, such as the Smurfs, often show fly agarics used as seats, or homes. Fly agarics have been featured in paintings since the Renaissance, albeit in a subtle manner. For instance, in Hieronymus Bosch's painting, \"The Garden of Earthly Delights\", the mushroom can be seen on the left-hand panel of the work. In the Victorian era they became more visible, becoming the main topic of some fairy paintings. Two of the most famous uses of the mushroom are in the \"Mario\" franchise (specifically two of the Super Mushroom power-up items and the platforms in several stages which are based on a fly agaric), and the dancing mushroom sequence in the 1940 Disney film \"Fantasia\".\nAn account of the journeys of Philip von Strahlenberg to Siberia and his descriptions of the use of the \"mukhomor\" there was published in English in 1736. The drinking of urine of those who had consumed the mushroom was commented on by Anglo-Irish writer Oliver Goldsmith in his widely read 1762 novel, \"Citizen of the World\". The mushroom had been identified as the fly agaric by this time. Other authors recorded the distortions of the size of perceived objects while intoxicated by the fungus, including naturalist Mordecai Cubitt Cooke in his books \"The Seven Sisters of Sleep\" and \"A Plain and Easy Account of British Fungi\". This observation is thought to have formed the basis of the effects of eating the mushroom in the 1865 popular story \"Alice's Adventures in Wonderland\". A hallucinogenic \"scarlet toadstool\" from Lappland is featured as a plot element in Charles Kingsley's 1866 novel \"Hereward the Wake\" based on the medieval figure of the same name. Thomas Pynchon's 1973 novel \"Gravity's Rainbow\" describes the fungus as a \"relative of the poisonous Destroying angel\" and presents a detailed description of a character preparing a cookie bake mixture from harvested \"A.\u00a0muscaria\". Fly agaric shamanism\u2014in the context of a surviving Dionysian cult in the Peak District\u2014is also explored in the 2003 novel \"Thursbitch\" by Alan Garner.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWorks cited.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59386", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59386", "title": "Canadian Foundation for Climate and Atmospheric Sciences", "text": "Climatological research organization\nThe Canadian Foundation for Climate and Atmospheric Sciences (CFCAS) was Canada's main funding body for university-based research on climate, atmospheric, and related oceanic work. It is now the Canadian Climate Forum. As an autonomous, charitable foundation established in 2000, CFCAS funded research that improved the scientific understanding of processes and predictions, provided relevant science to policy makers, and improved understanding of the ways in which these challenges affect human health and the natural environment in addition to strengthening Canada's scientific capacity. Its chair is Gordon McBean.\nCFCAS fosters partnerships in support of innovation, investment, policy, skills development, and service delivery. It funds the generation of new knowledge that is essential to the competitiveness of industries and to the health and safety of Canadians. The foundation has invested over $117 million in university-based research related to climate and atmospheric sciences, in 24 collaborative networks, two major initiatives, and 158 projects. Several of the networks are linked to international research programs; all involved multiple partners. Complementary (leveraged) support for networks has doubled the resources available to them. The Foundation has also hosted or co-hosted a number of workshops and symposia on topics such as extreme weather and Arctic climate, and provides support to international project offices.\nResearch.\nResearch funded by CFCAS informs decision- and policy-makers in government and industry, including those working in:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59391", "revid": "21499863", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59391", "title": "Morphing", "text": "Special effect\nMorphing is a special effect in motion pictures and animations that changes (or morphs) one image or shape into another through a seamless transition. Traditionally such a depiction would be achieved through dissolving techniques on film. Since the early 1990s, this has been replaced by computer software to create more realistic transitions. A similar method is applied to audio recordings, for example, by changing voices or vocal lines.\nEarly transformation techniques.\nLong before digital morphing, several techniques were used for similar image transformations. Some of those techniques are closer to a matched dissolve \u2013 a gradual change between two pictures without warping the shapes in the images \u2013 while others did change the shapes in between the start and end phases of the transformation.\nTabula scalata.\nKnown since at least the end of the 16th century, Tabula scalata is a type of painting with two images divided over a corrugated surface. Each image is only correctly visible from a certain angle. If the pictures are matched properly, a primitive type of morphing effect occurs when changing from one viewing angle to the other.\nMechanical transformations.\nAround 1790 French shadow play showman Fran\u00e7ois Dominique S\u00e9raphin used a metal shadow figure with jointed parts to have the face of a young woman changing into that of a witch.\nSome 19th century mechanical magic lantern slides produced changes to the appearance of figures. For instance a nose could grow to enormous size, simply by slowly sliding away a piece of glass with black paint that masked part of another glass plate with the picture.\nMatched dissolves.\nIn the first half of the 19th century \"dissolving views\" were a popular type of magic lantern show, mostly showing landscapes gradually dissolving from a day to night version or from summer to winter. Other uses are known, for instance Henry Langdon Childe showed groves transforming into cathedrals.\nThe 1910 short film \"Narren-grappen\" shows a dissolve transformation of the clothing of a female character.\nMaurice Tourneur's 1915 film Alias Jimmy Valentine featured a subtle dissolve transformation of the main character from respected citizen Lee Randall into his criminal alter ego Jimmy Valentine.\n\"The Peter Tchaikovsky Story\" in a 1959 TV-series episode of \"Disneyland\" features a swan automaton transforming into a real ballet dancer.\nIn 1985, Godley &amp; Creme created a \"morph\" effect using analogue cross-fades on parts of different faces in the video for \"Cry\".\nAnimation.\nIn animation, the morphing effect was created long before the introduction of cinema. A phenakistiscope designed by its inventor Joseph Plateau was printed around 1835 and shows the head of a woman changing into a witch and then into a monster.\n\u00c9mile Cohl's 1908 animated film \"Fantasmagorie\" featured much morphing of characters and objects drawn in simple outlines.\nDigital morphing.\nIn the early 1990s, computer techniques capable of more convincing results saw increasing use. These involved distorting one image at the same time that it faded into another through marking corresponding points and vectors on the \"before\" and \"after\" images used in the morph. For example, one would morph one face into another by marking key points on the first face, such as the contour of the nose or location of an eye, and mark where these same points existed on the second face. The computer would then distort the first face to have the shape of the second face at the same time that it faded the two faces. To compute the transformation of image coordinates required for the distortion, the algorithm of Beier and Neely can be used.\nConcerns.\nIn 1993 concerns were raised about the authenticity of digitally altered images arising from morphing. Images of fake \"tween\" people found half way between two morphed people created a skeptical media long before AI.\nEarly examples.\nIn or before 1986, computer graphics company Omnibus created a digital animation for a Tide commercial with a Tide detergent bottle smoothly morphing into the shape of the United States. The effect was programmed by Bob Hoffman. Omnibus re-used the technique in the movie \"Flight of the Navigator\" (1986). It featured scenes with a computer generated spaceship that appeared to change shape. The plaster cast of a model of the spaceship was scanned and digitally modified with techniques that included a reflection mapping technique that was also developed by programmer Bob Hoffman.\nThe 1986 movie \"The Golden Child\" implemented early digital morphing effects from animal to human and back.\n\"Willow\" (1988) featured a more detailed digital morphing sequence with a person changing into different animals. A similar process was used a year later in \"Indiana Jones and the Last Crusade\" to create Walter Donovan's gruesome demise. Both effects were created by Industrial Light &amp; Magic, using software developed by Tom Brigham and Doug Smythe (AMPAS).\nIn 1991, morphing appeared notably in the Michael Jackson music video \"Black or White\" and in the movies ' and '. The first application for personal computers to offer morphing was Gryphon Software Morph on the Macintosh. Other early morphing systems included ImageMaster, MorphPlus and CineMorph, all of which premiered for the Amiga in 1992. Other programs became widely available within a year, and for a time the effect became common to the point of clich\u00e9. For high-end use, Elastic Reality (based on MorphPlus) saw its first feature film use in \"In The Line of Fire\" (1993) and was used in \"Quantum Leap\" (work performed by the Post Group). At VisionArt Ted Fay used Elastic Reality to morph Odo for \"\". The Snoop Dogg music video \"Who Am I? (What's My Name?)\", where Snoop Dogg and the others morph into dogs. Elastic Reality was later purchased by Avid, having already become the de facto system of choice, used in many hundreds of films. The technology behind Elastic Reality earned two Academy Awards in 1996 for Scientific and Technical Achievement going to Garth Dickie and Perry Kivolowitz. The effect is technically called a \"spatially warped cross-dissolve\". The first social network designed for user-generated morph examples to be posted online was Galleries by Morpheus.\nIn late 1991 Yeti Productions employed a young Stephen Regelous to run it's 486 computer graphics system in Wellington New Zealand. After producer Barry Thomas showed him Michael Jackson's \"Black or White\", Regelous wrote 10,000 lines of C++ code of triangle-based digital morphing software. Together they created morphing based TV commercials for The NZ Cancer Society, Fit food, Salvation Army and others. The Fit food commercial employed morphing with 35mm, pin registered, digitally controlled motion control.\nIn Taiwan, Aderans, a hair loss solutions provider, did a TV commercial featuring a morphing sequence in which people with lush, thick hair morph into one another, reminiscent of the end sequence of the \"Black or White\" video.\nPresent use.\nMorphing algorithms continue to advance and programs can automatically morph images that correspond closely enough with relatively little instruction from the user. This has led to the use of morphing techniques to create convincing slow-motion effects where none existed in the original film or video footage by morphing between each individual frame using optical flow technology. Morphing has also appeared as a transition technique between one scene and another in television shows, even if the contents of the two images are entirely unrelated. The algorithm in this case attempts to find corresponding points between the images and distort one into the other as they crossfade.\nWhile perhaps less obvious than in the past, morphing is used heavily today. Whereas the effect was initially a novelty, today, morphing effects are most often designed to be seamless and invisible to the eye.\nA particular use for morphing effects is modern digital font design. Using morphing technology, called interpolation or multiple master tech, a designer can create an intermediate between two styles, for example generating a semibold font by compromising between a bold and regular style, or extend a trend to create an ultra-light or ultra-bold. The technique is commonly used by font design studios.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59392", "revid": "1248288838", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59392", "title": "Surface anatomy", "text": "Study of the external features of the body of an animal\nSurface anatomy (also called superficial anatomy and visual anatomy) is the study of the external features of the body of an animal. In birds, this is termed \"topography\". Surface anatomy deals with anatomical features that can be studied by sight, without dissection. As such, it is a branch of gross anatomy, along with endoscopic and radiological anatomy. Surface anatomy is a descriptive science. In particular, in the case of human surface anatomy, these are the form and proportions of the human body and the surface landmarks which correspond to deeper structures hidden from view, both in static pose and in motion.\nIn addition, the science of surface anatomy includes the theories and systems of body proportions and related artistic canons. The study of surface anatomy is the basis for depicting the human body in classical art.\nSome pseudo-sciences such as physiognomy, phrenology and palmistry rely on surface anatomy.\nHuman surface anatomy.\nSurface anatomy of the thorax.\nKnowledge of the surface anatomy of the thorax (chest) is particularly important because it is one of the areas most frequently subjected to physical examination, like auscultation and percussion. In cardiology, Erb's point refers to the third intercostal space on the left sternal border where S2 heart sound is best auscultated. Some sources include the fourth left interspace.\nHuman female breasts are located on the chest wall, most frequently between the second and sixth rib.\nList of features.\nFollowing are lists of surface anatomical features in humans and other animals. Sorted roughly from head to tail, cranial to caudal. Homologues share a bullet point and are separated by commas. Subcomponents are nested. Class in which component occurs in \"italic\".\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59393", "revid": "47937478", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59393", "title": "Meteorological Service of Canada", "text": "Weather and meteorological institute\nThe Meteorological Service of Canada (MSC; ) is a branch of Environment and Climate Change Canada, which primarily provides public meteorological information and weather forecasts and warnings of severe weather and other environmental hazards. MSC also monitors and conducts research on the climate, atmospheric science, air quality, water quantities, ice and other environmental issues. MSC operates a network of radio stations throughout Canada transmitting weather and environmental information 24 hours a day called Weatheradio Canada.\nHistory.\nPrivate Observations.\nPrior to 1840, meteorological observations in Canada were made by private individuals, other entities (like HBC), and explorers, but this information was not provided to the general public.\nHer Majesty's Magnetic and Meteorological Observatory.\nIn 1840, British officials (British Ordnance Department) and the Royal Society established an observatory in Toronto, Canada West, one of a few across the British Empire and likely modeled after the Royal Observatory, Greenwich.\nMeteorological Service of the Dominion.\nThe Toronto observatory ended in 1853, but the colonial government of the province of Canada took over the service and continued collecting climate data. On May 1, 1871, the new Dominion of Canada established the Meteorological Service of Canada by providing a $5000 grant to Professor G. T. Kingston of the University of Toronto to establish a network of weather observations. This information was collected and made available to the public from 1877 onwards. The MSC was then assigned under the Department of Marine and Fisheries.\nMeteorological Division of the Air Services Branch.\nFrom 1936 to 1946 the services assigned under the Department of Transport as the \"Meteorological Division of the Air Services Branch\"' and as the \"Meteorological Branch\" from 1956.\nIn 1939, the \"Meteorological Division, Air Services Branch\" was expanding rapidly to serve commercial aviation. In September 1939 the full-time staff of the Meteorological Division based in Toronto numbered 213, of which 51 were meteorologists and 57 were meteorological observers.\nAtmospheric Environment Service and Meteorological Service of Canada.\nIn 1971 the Canadian Meteorological Service was established under the Department of Environment (Environment Canada) in 1971. The AES was renamed later as the Meteorological Service of Canada.\nOrganization.\nThere are currently six public weather forecast offices:\nThere are two centres dedicated to aviation weather forecasting: Canadian Meteorological Aviation Centre-East, located in Montreal, and Canadian Meteorological Aviation Centre-West, located in Edmonton.\nMSC also operates the Canadian Center for Meteorological and Environmental Prediction, which is tasked with providing forecast guidance, and the Canadian Ice Service, which provides ice observations and forecasts for mariners. In support of Canada's military, some MSC meteorologists are seconded to the Department of National Defence.\nThe Meteorological Service of Canada was Certified for their Hydrometric Monitoring Program.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59394", "revid": "1306417981", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59394", "title": "Haijin", "text": "Isolationist policy in early modern China\nThe Haijin () or sea ban was a series of related policies in China restricting private maritime trading during much of the Ming dynasty and early Qing dynasty. The sea ban was an anomaly in Chinese history as such restrictions were unknown during other eras;\nthe bans were each introduced for specific circumstances, rather than based on an age-old inward orientation.\nIn the first sea ban introduced in 1371 by the Ming founder Zhu Yuanzhang, Ming China's legal foreign trade was limited to tribute missions, placing international trade under a government monopoly. Initially imposed to deal with Japanese piracy amid anti-Ming insurgency, the Ming was not able to enforce the policy, and trade continued in forms such as smuggling. The sea ban was counterproductive: smuggling and piracy became endemic periodically (though not continuously), mostly perpetrated by Chinese who had been dispossessed by the policy. Piracy dropped to negligible levels upon the end of the policy in 1567. The policy slowed the growth of China's domestic trade, although the empire's weak enforcement of the policy opened the way for an unprecedented commercial revolution from the mid-1500s onward. \nThe early Qing dynasty established an anti-insurgent \"Great Clearance\" (1661\u20131683), prohibiting all residence and activities on the coast to weaken Ming loyalists. The order also caused considerable devastating effects on communities along the coast, until the Qing seized control of Ming loyalist bases in Taiwan, then reopened coastal ports to foreign trade. Separately, strict travel restrictions were temporarily implemented during the brief trade ban between 1717 and 1727, also to prevent the growth of anti-Qing resistance. Later, the need to control trade gave birth to the Canton System of the Thirteen Factories (1757\u20131842), where trade was legalised but restricted.\nSimilar sea bans occurred in other East Asian countries, such as the \"Sakoku\" policy in Edo period Japan by the Tokugawa shogunate; or the isolationist policies of Joseon Korea, before they were forced to end their isolation militarily in 1853 and 1876 respectively.\nMing dynasty.\nBackground.\nThe 14th century was a time of chaos throughout East Asia. The second bubonic plague pandemic began in Mongolia around 1330 and may have killed the majority of the population in Hebei and Shanxi and millions elsewhere. Another epidemic raged for three years from 1351 to 1354. Existing revolts over the government salt monopoly and severe floods along the Yellow River provoked the Red Turban Rebellion. The declaration of the Ming in 1368 did not end its wars with Mongol remnants under Toghon Tem\u00fcr in the north and under the Prince of Liang in the south. King Gongmin of Korea had begun freeing himself from the Mongols as well, retaking his country's northern provinces, when a Red Turban invasion devastated the areas and laid waste to Pyongyang. In Japan, Emperor Daigo II's Kenmu Restoration succeeded in overthrowing the Kamakura shogunate but ultimately simply replaced them with the weaker Ashikaga. The loose control over Japan's periphery led to pirates setting up bases on the realm's outlying islands, particularly Tsushima, Iki, and the Got\u014ds. These wokou (\"Japanese pirates\") raided Japan as well as Korea and China. The followers of rival Chinese warlords Zhang Shicheng and Fang Guozhen, who had emerged during the collapse of the Yuan but were defeated by the ascendant Ming, also fled to sea where they cooperated with Japanese outlaws to continue resisting the new dynasty.\nThe first Ming Emperor, Zhu Yuanzhang, regarded the Japanese piracy as an act of disrespect to his authority: his message to the Japanese that his army would \"capture and exterminate your bandits, head straight for your country, and put your king in bonds\" received the Ashikaga shogun's reply that \"your great empire may be able to invade Japan but our small state is not short of a strategy to defend ourselves\", causing the angered Ming Emperor to restrict trade further.\nInitial implementation.\nAs a rebel leader, Zhu Yuanzhang promoted foreign trade as a source of revenue. As Emperor, however, he issued the first sea ban in 1371. All foreign trade was to be conducted by official tribute missions, handled by representatives of the Ming Empire and its \"vassal\" states. Private foreign trade was made punishable by death, with the offender's family and neighbors exiled from their homes. A few years later, in 1384, the Maritime Trade Intendancies (\"Shibo Tiju Si\") at Ningbo, Guangzhou, and Quanzhou were shuttered. Ships, docks, and shipyards were destroyed and ports sabotaged with rocks and pine stakes. Although the policy is now associated with imperial China generally, it was then at odds with Chinese tradition, which had pursued foreign trade as a source of revenue and become particularly important under the Tang, Song, and Yuan.\nThe Ming's third ruler the Yongle emperor launched the treasure voyages of Zheng He, which were partly intended to monopolise overseas trade under the government. The Yongle emperor succeeded in dramatically reducing piracy after 1403 by striking an agreement with Japan's Ashikaga Yoshimitsu, restoring full tribute trade privileges and sending Ming fleets to Japan to help defeat the pirates. The initial wave of Japanese pirates were independently dealt with by Ch\u014fng Mong-ju and Imagawa Sadayo, who returned their booty and slaves to Korea; Ashikaga Yoshimitsu delivered 20 more to China in 1405, which boiled them alive in a cauldron in Ningbo.\nHowever, Emperor Yingzong of Ming's capture at the Battle of Tumu in 1449 greatly increased Mongol boldness in frontier attacks, while the still-growing private overseas trade caused price competition for the Ming government's import purchases, such as warhorses for the northern frontier. Hence, while Chinese trade within Asia continued after the treasure voyages, the Ming shifted their resources away from maritime affairs to deal with the Mongol threat. As the Ming became increasingly focused on their north, the court also neglected tributary trade missions arriving at the maritime frontier; after 1500, maritime tribute missions mostly stopped and those few that continued were treated as purely commercial transactions in the port cities, without visiting the capital. The court thus failed to notice the ensuing rapid changes in global trade. Private, including unauthorised, Chinese trade in Southeast Asia expanded rapidly in the second half of the Ming dynasty. When the Portuguese arrived in Malacca and the Moluccas in the early 1500s, trade patterns shifted as armed European ships started to bypass Muslim merchant networks and engage with private Chinese and Japanese merchants. This rise in private merchants coupled with the court prioritizing the northern frontier led to the collapse of the tribute trade system and its replacement by widespread smuggling.\nUnder the Jiajing Emperor, after two Japanese factions clashed over the right to conduct the tribute trade mission in 1523, the emperor restricted trade further, causing sea raiders to overrun the entire southeastern coast.\nNonetheless, because the sea ban was added by the Hongwu Emperor to his \"Ancestral Injunctions\", it continued to be broadly kept through most of the rest of his dynasty. For the next two centuries, the rich farmland of the south and the military theaters of the north were linked almost solely by the Jinghang Canal.\nRationale.\nAlthough the policy has generally been ascribed to national defense against the pirates, it was so obviously counterproductive and yet carried on for so long that other explanations have been offered. The initial conception seems to have been to use the Japanese need for Chinese goods to force them to terms. The Hongwu emperor seemed to indicate that the policy was designed to prevent foreign nations from collaborating with his subjects to challenge his rule; for instance, Srivijaya was banned from trading as the emperor suspected them of spying. It may have been the case that the Hongwu Emperor prioritized protecting his state against the Northern Yuan remnants, giving little attention to the maritime frontier defences. In the absence of a comprehensive frontier policy, the emperor attempted to use trade restrictions to manipulate foreign states like Japan and the former followers of rival Chinese warlords such as Zhang Shicheng and Fang Guozhen into submission. The emperor's mention of the restrictions in his \"Ancestral Injunctions\" may have been responsible for their continuation.\nThe usage of trade was also a powerful tool to entice foreign governments to abide by the tributary system and pressure uncooperative leaders. The Ming state hence had a vested interest in maintaining the sea ban to protect the government trade monopoly and its associated benefits in diplomacy. This interest, while powerful, may not have been enough on its own to motivate Chinese leaders to maintain the bans. The tribute system created undue stress according to the Ming Shilu. In an entry from May 1390, it is detailed that: \"...the transport was difficult and it caused hardship for the people.\" Entries like these reflect the strain that a centralized, tribute-based trade system may have placed on the Chinese public. It is also possible that the bans were counteractive to China's economic growth. Tribute missions were so demanding that the government often placed restrictions on how often foreign traders could come to court.\nParallels with Song and Yuan measures restricting outflows of bullion have led some to argue that it was intended to support the Hongwu Emperor's printing of fiat currency, whose use was continued by his successors as late as 1450. (By 1425, rampant counterfeiting and hyperinflation meant people were already trading at about 0.014% of their original value.)\nKangying Li asserts that the sea ban was a side effect of Zhu Yuanzhang's desire to elevate Confucian humaneness (, \"ren\") and eliminate greed from the realm's foreign relations. In Li's view, the sea ban could be linked to other early Ming policies such as sumptuary laws and land redistribution which attempted to curb luxury and wealth inequality, and hence shore up the legitimacy of the Ming regime. For the emperor, wealthy merchants living decadent lifestyles and buying up huge tracts of land were a threat to the smallholding peasantry which he saw as the foundation of Ming power. Others suggest that the sea ban was a ploy to weaken the realm's southern subjects to the benefit of the central government. \nEffects.\nAlthough the sea ban left the Ming army free to extirpate the remaining Yuan loyalists and secure China's borders, it tied up local resources. 74 coastal garrisons were established from Guangzhou in Guangdong to Shandong; under the Yongle Emperor, these outposts were notionally manned by 110,000 subjects. The loss of income from taxes on trade contributed to chronic funding difficulties throughout the Ming, particularly for Zhejiang and Fujian provinces. The Ming also spent heavily on managing the tribute missions: the cost of accommodation for the embassy, escorting them to the capital and back, and presenting diplomatic gifts outweighed any profits the Ming received through the tribute trade.\nThe policy offered too little\u2014decennial tribute trade missions\u2014to meet the massive Japanese demand for Chinese goods, forcing the populace into smuggling for survival and worsening instability along the coast. Whenever coastal defences attempted to interfere with the smuggling, the smugglers would turn to pillaging and kidnapping for ransom, increasing the problem it was purporting to solve. In the 16th century Jiajing wokou raids, the \"Japanese\", \"dwarf\", and \"eastern barbarian\" pirates were mostly non-Japanese.\nThe sea ban was largely unenforceable from its earliest years, and no effective enforcement was ever implemented. Local authorities themselves were frequently involved in the illicit trade, and usually ignored edicts to restrict trade. Military officers brokered trade deals and the wealthy families in the coastal settlements depended on its income. Ordinary workers found employment in trade-related industries. Many of the official posts to enforce trade regulations were left vacant and the court generally ignored the issue of overseas trade. In the 1520s the emperor rejected all attempts to halt illegal trade as these came from officials who had opposed the emperor's policy on rituals, and very little trade took place under governmental channels instead of illicit means. The Grand Secretary of the court in the 1530s was from coastal Zhejiang province, and he proceeded to block any attempt to enforce the sea ban. The most significant attempt to crush out the illicit trade was made by Zhu Wan, an official appointed by the court in the 1540s, but just as he was making headway in wiping out the smugglers he was removed by the court on accusations of unauthorised killings. Bribery and disinterest occasionally permitted more leeway, as when the Portuguese began trading at Guangzhou (1517), Shuangyu (\"Liampo\"), and Quanzhou (\"Chincheu\"), but crackdowns also occurred, as with the expulsion of the Portuguese in the 1520s, on the islands off Ningbo and Zhangzhou in 1547, or at Yuegang in 1549. The Portuguese were permitted to settle at Macao in 1557, but only after several years of helping the Chinese suppress piracy.\nHence, trade with Japan continued unobstructed despite the embargo, through Chinese smugglers, Southeast Asian ports, or Portuguese; China remained entirely integrated in the world trading system. According to Kaoru Sugihara, China's restrictions on trade were less stringent than feudal restrictions on merchants in Europe and Japan, and Chinese traders relentlessly sought out foreign markets for Chinese exports. China's merchants from the mid-1500s prospered as much as those of any other nation operating in Asian waters.\nOn the other hand, coupled with the end of the expensive treasure voyages, the sea ban had the effect of suspending development of Chinese long-distance shipbuilding and navigation, replacing those with shorter Chinese smuggling routes in the East China Sea and South China Sea.\nGlobal trade developments.\nEuropean nations had a great desire for Chinese goods such as silk and porcelain, but Europeans did not have any goods which China desired except silver. Silver hence became the primary export to China to make up for the trade deficit. Aware of China's shortage of silver for use as currency in China's surging economy, Japanese warlords in Kyushu sought to increase silver production, needed to trade for Chinese luxury goods in high demand in Japan. From the 1540s, silver imports into China acted as the cog running the wheel of global trade. \nSpain discovered vast amounts of silver, such as in the Potos\u00ed silver mines, to fuel their trade. Spanish America became the world's cheapest source of silver, producing 40,000 tons of silver in 200 years. The ultimate destination for the mass amounts of silver produced in the world was China. From 1500 to 1800, Mexico and Peru produced about 80% of the world's silver with 30% of it eventually ending up in China. In the late 16th and early 17th century, Japan also heavily exported silver into China. The discovery of the Iwami silver mines triggered Chinese merchants to swarm at Kyushu ports by 1540, overpowering the Ming's ability to regulate trade through the tributary system and turning the island of Shuangyu into a major smuggling post for silver imports.\nWhile large amounts of silver crossed the Pacific directly from the Americas, major outposts for the silver trade were in Southeast Asia such as in the Philippines, and Manila served as a primary outpost for exchange of goods between the Americas, Japan, India, Indonesia and China. The galleon trade was supplied by merchants largely from ports of Fujian who traveled to Manila to sell the Spaniards spices, porcelain, ivory, lacquerware, silk cloth and other valuable commodities. Trade with Ming China via Manila served as a major source of revenue for the Spanish Empire and for Spanish in the Philippines. The trade became so lucrative that Seville merchants petitioned their king to protect the monopoly of Seville's Casa de Contrataci\u00f3n. This led to a 1593 decree that set a limit of two ships sailing each year from either Acapulco and Manila, with one kept in reserve in each port, and further limits on cargo quantities. Smuggling became widespread as Chinese and Spanish merchants cooperated to circumvent these Spanish rules.\nLifting.\nPirate-smuggler groups continued to proliferate, and one such outlaw Wang Zhi established a base at Hirado and the Got\u014d Islands in Japan and declared himself the King of Hui (\u5fbd, named after his home region of Huizhou in Anhui province). In 1552, Wang sent a petition to the Ming court to abolish the sea ban. Although Wang was executed by the Ming in 1559 while attempting to reconcile with the court, it was clear to many court officials that the cause of piracy was the sea ban, and lobbied for its abolition.\nPiracy dropped to negligible levels only after the general abolition of the policy in 1567 upon the ascension of the Longqing Emperor and at the urging of the governor of Fujian Tu Zemin. Chinese merchants for both maritime and overland trade could apply for permits to engage in all foreign trade except with Japan (although some still traded there anyway, and Japanese traders also set themselves up in Southeast Asia to trade with incoming Chinese) or involving weapons or other contraband goods; these included iron, sulfur, and copper. The number of foreign traders was capped by a license and quota system; no trading could take them away from China for longer than a year. The lifting of the sea ban coincided with the arrival of the first Spanish galleons from the Americas, creating a global trade link that would not be interrupted until the following century.\nMaritime trade intendancies were re-established at Guangzhou and Ningbo in 1599, and Chinese merchants turned Yuegang (modern Haicheng, Fujian) into a thriving port.\nThe end of the sea ban did not mark an imperial change of heart, however, so much as a recognition that the weakness of the later Ming state made it impossible to continue the prohibition. The state continued to attempt to regulate trade as heavily as it could, and foreigners were restricted to doing business through approved agents, with prohibitions against any direct business with ordinary Chinese. Accommodations could be made, but were slow in coming: the merchants of Yuegang were trading heavily with the Spanish within a year of Maynila's 1570 conquest by Mart\u00edn de Goiti but it was not until 1589 that the throne approved the city's requests for more merchant licenses to expand the trade. A 1613 edict prohibited maritime trade between the lands north and south of the Yangtze River, attempting to put a stop to captains claiming to be heading to Jiangsu and then diverting to Japan. Fu Yuanchu's 1639 memorial to the throne made the case that trade between Fujian and Dutch Formosa had made bans entirely unworkable.\nQing dynasty.\nBackground.\nAs the Qing expanded south following their victory at Shanhai Pass, the Southern Ming were supported by the Zheng clan. Zheng Zhilong surrendered the passes through Zhejiang in exchange for a wealthy retirement, but his son Zheng Chenggong\u2014better known by his Hokkien honorific Koxinga\u2014continued to resist from Xiamen but were driven from their mainland bases in 1661. After wresting its control from the Dutch, the House of Koxinga developed Taiwan as the Kingdom of Tungning.\nPolicy.\nThe Qing regent Prince Rui resumed the sea ban in 1647, but it was not effective until a more severe order followed in 1661 upon the ascension of the Kangxi Emperor. In an evacuation as the \"Great Clearance\" or \"Frontier Shift\", coastal residents of Guangdong, Fujian, Zhejiang, Jiangsu, and parts of Shandong were required to destroy their property and move inland 30\u201350 li (about ), with Qing soldiers erecting boundary markers and enforcing the death penalty on those beyond it. Ships were destroyed, and foreign trade was again limited to that passing through Macao. Checks and adjustments were made the following year, and the inhabitants of five counties\u2014Panyu, Shunde, Xinhui, Dongguan, and Zhongshan\u2014moved again the year after that. Following numerous high-level memorials, the evacuation was no longer enforced after 1669. In 1684, following the destruction of Tungning, other bans were lifted. The year after that, customs offices were established in Guangzhou, Xiamen, Ningbo, and Songjiang to deal with foreign trade.\nRepressive Qing policies such as the queue caused Chinese traders to emigrate in such large numbers, however, that the Kangxi Emperor began to fear the military implications. The immigrant community in Jakarta was estimated at 100,000 and imperial agents were sent to Luzon to investigate rumors that a Ming heir was living there. A ban on trade in the \"Southern Sea\" followed in 1717, with tighter port inspections and travel restrictions. Emigrants were ordered to return to China within the next three years upon penalty of death; those emigrating in future were to face the same punishment.\nRelaxation.\nLegal trade in the South China Sea resumed in 1727, but the East India Company's discovery that the prices and duties at Ningbo were both much lower than those at Guangzhou prompted them to begin shifting their trade north from 1755 to 1757. The Qianlong Emperor's attempt to discourage this shift through higher fees failed; in the winter of 1757, he declared that\u2014effective the next year\u2014Guangzhou (then romanized as \"Canton\") was to be the only Chinese port permitted to foreign traders, beginning the Canton System, with its Cohong and Thirteen Factories. Under the Canton system, the Qianlong Emperor restricted foreign merchants to trade only with licensed Chinese merchants, while the British government on their part issued a monopoly charter for trade only to the British East India Company. This arrangement was not challenged until the 19th century when the idea of free trade was popularised in the West. Chinese merchants trading at foreign ports, on the other hand, were not affected by any of these regulations. Chinese merchants could also trade freely and legally with Westerners (Spanish and Portuguese) in Xiamen and Macao, or with any country when trade was conducted through ports outside China such as Manila and Batavia. The Canton system did not completely affect Chinese trade with the rest of the world as Chinese merchants, with their large three-masted ocean junks, were heavily involved in global trade. By sailing to and from Siam, Indonesia and Philippines, they were major facilitators of the global trading system; the era was even described by Carl Trocki as a \"Chinese century\" of global commerce. \nEffects.\nThe initial Qing sea ban curtailed Koxinga's influence on the Chinese mainland and ended with his state's defeat, which brought Taiwan into the Qing Empire.\nNonetheless, it was quite harmful to the Chinese themselves, as documented in governors' and viceroys' memorials to the throne. Even before the Kangxi Emperor's restrictions, Jin Fu's 1659 memorial to the throne argued that the ban on foreign trade was limiting China's access to silver, harmfully restricting the money supply, and that lost trading opportunities cost Chinese merchants 7 or 8 million taels a year. European countries' trade with China was so extensive that they were forced to risk silver deficits to supply merchants in Asia. As supplies of silver decreased in Europe, Europeans had less ability to purchase highly coveted Chinese goods. Merchants were no longer able to sustain the China trade through profits made by selling Chinese goods in the West and were forced to take bullion out of circulation in Europe to buy goods in China.\nThe policies revived piracy along the coast, while also providing a boon for black markets. The Great Clearance was completely disruptive to China's southern coasts. Of the roughly 16,000 residents of Xin'an County (roughly modern Shenzhen and Hong Kong) who were driven inland in 1661, only 1,648 were recorded returning in 1669. Powerful typhoons that year and in 1671 further destroyed local communities and discouraged resettlement. When trade restrictions were released, Fujian and Guangdong saw enormous outflows of migrants. The conflicts between the former residents and the newcomers such as the Hakka provoked lingering feuds that erupted into local wars in the 1850s and 1860s and that fueled Guangdong's piracy into the 20th century.\nThe restrictions imposed by the Qianlong Emperor that established the Canton System were highly lucrative for Guangzhou's Cohong\u2014the merchant Howqua became one of the world's wealthiest individuals\u2014and normalized Guangzhou's tax base and inflow of foreign silver. Since imports were mostly bullion, however, there emerged strong pressure on the British\u2014for whom tea had become the national drink over the course of the 17th century\u2014to find any means possible to adjust the balance of trade. This turned out to be opium grown on plantations in India, which became so lucrative and important that the viceroy Lin Zexu's vigorous enforcement of existing laws against the smuggling of opium prompted the First Opium War and the beginning of the unequal treaties that restricted Qing sovereignty in the 19th century. The 1842 Treaty of Nanking opened the ports of Xiamen (\"Amoy\"), Fuzhou (\"Fuchow\"), Ningbo (\"Ningpo\"), and Shanghai, but legal trade continued to be limited to specified ports to the end of the dynasty.\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59396", "revid": "46834214", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59396", "title": "Reggie Jackson", "text": "American baseball player and coach (born 1946)\nReginald Martinez Jackson (born May 18, 1946) is an American former professional baseball right fielder who played 21 seasons in Major League Baseball (MLB) for the Kansas City / Oakland Athletics, Baltimore Orioles, New York Yankees, and California Angels. Jackson was inducted into the National Baseball Hall of Fame in 1993 in his first year of eligibility.\nJackson was nicknamed \"Mr. October\" for his clutch hitting in the postseason with the Athletics and the Yankees. He helped Oakland win five consecutive American League West divisional titles, three straight American League pennants and three consecutive World Series titles from 1972 to 1974. Jackson helped New York win four American League East divisional pennants, three American League pennants and back-to-back World Series titles, in 1977 and 1978. He also helped the California Angels win two AL West divisional titles in 1982 and 1986. Jackson hit three consecutive home runs at Yankee Stadium in the clinching game six of the 1977 World Series.\nJackson hit 563 career home runs and was an American League (AL) All-Star for 14 seasons. He won two Silver Slugger Awards, the AL Most Valuable Player (MVP) Award in 1973, two World Series MVP Awards and the Babe Ruth Award in 1977. Jackson additionally holds the record for most career strikeouts by a batter. The Yankees retired his uniform number in 1993, and the Athletics retired it in 2004. Jackson currently serves as a special advisor to the Houston Astros, and a sixth championship associated with Jackson came with Houston's win in the 2022 World Series.\nJackson led his teams to first place eleven times over his 21-year baseball career and had only two losing seasons.\nEarly life.\nReginald Martinez Jackson was born on May 18, 1946, in the Wyncote neighborhood of Cheltenham Township, Pennsylvania, just north of Philadelphia. His father, Martinez Jackson, who was half Puerto Rican, worked as a tailor and was a former second baseman with the Newark Eagles of Negro league baseball. He was the youngest of his mother Clara's four children. He also had two half-siblings from his father's first marriage. His parents divorced when he was six; his mother took three of his siblings with her, while his father took two of Jackson's siblings from his first marriage, though one sibling later returned to Wyncote. Martinez Jackson was a single father, and theirs was one of the few Black families in Wyncote.\nJackson graduated from Cheltenham High School in 1964, where he excelled in football, basketball, baseball, and track and field. A tailback in football, he injured his knee in an early season game in his junior year in the fall of 1962. He was told by the doctors he was never to play football again, but Jackson returned for the final game of the season. In that game, Jackson fractured five cervical vertebrae, which caused him to spend six weeks in the hospital and another month in a neck cast. Doctors told Jackson that he might never walk again, let alone play football, but Jackson defied the odds again. On the baseball team, he batted .550 and threw several no-hitters. In the middle of Jackson's senior year, his father was arrested for bootlegging and was sentenced to six months in jail.\nCollegiate athletic career.\nFor football, Jackson was recruited by Alabama, Georgia, and Oklahoma, all of whom were willing to break the color barrier just for him. (Oklahoma had black football players before 1964, including Prentice Gautt, a star running back recruited in 1957, who played in the NFL). Jackson declined Alabama and Georgia because he was fearful of the South at the time, and declined Oklahoma because they told him to stop dating white girls. For baseball, Jackson was scouted by Hans Lobert of the San Francisco Giants who was desperate to sign him. The Los Angeles Dodgers and Minnesota Twins also made offers, and the hometown Philadelphia Phillies gave him a tryout but declined because of his \"hitting skills\".\nHis father wanted him to go to college, where Jackson wanted to play both football and baseball. He accepted a football scholarship from Arizona State University in Tempe; his high school football coach knew ASU's head football coach Frank Kush, and they discussed the possibility of his playing both sports. After a recruiting trip, Kush decided that Jackson had the ability and willingness to work to join the squad.\nOne day, after football practice, he approached ASU baseball coach Bobby Winkles and asked if he could join the team. Winkles said he would give Jackson a look, and the next day while still in his football gear, he hit a home run on the second pitch he saw; in five at-bats he hit three home runs. He was allowed to practice with the team, but could not join the squad because the NCAA had a rule forbidding the use of freshman players. Jackson switched permanently to baseball following his freshman year, as he did not want to become a defensive back. To hone his skills, Winkles assigned him to a Baltimore Orioles-affiliated amateur team called Leone's. He broke numerous team records for the squad, and the Orioles offered him a $50,000 signing bonus if he joined the team. Jackson declined the offer stating that he did not want to forfeit his college scholarship.\nIn the beginning of his sophomore year in 1966, Jackson replaced Rick Monday (the first player ever selected in the Major League Baseball draft and a future teammate with the A's) at center field. He broke the team record for most home runs in a single season, led the team in numerous other categories and was first team All-American. Many scouts were looking at him play, including Tom Greenwade of the New York Yankees (who discovered Mickey Mantle), and Danny Murtaugh of the Pittsburgh Pirates. In his final game at Arizona State, he showed his potential by being only a triple away from hitting for the cycle, making a sliding catch, and having an assist at home plate. Jackson was the first college player to hit a home run out of Phoenix Municipal Stadium.\nMinor leagues.\nIn the 1966 Major League Baseball draft on June 7, Jackson was selected by the Kansas City Athletics. He was the second overall pick, behind 17-year-old catcher Steve Chilcott, who was taken by the New York Mets. According to Jackson, Winkles told him that the Mets did not select him because he had a white girlfriend. Winkles later denied the story, stating that he did not know the reason why Jackson was not drafted by the Mets. It was later confirmed by Joe McDonald that the Mets drafted Steve Chilcott because of need, the person running the Mets at the time was George Weiss, so the true motive may never be known.\nJackson, age 20, signed with the A's for $95,000 on June 13 and reported for his first training camp with the Lewis-Clark Broncs of the short season Single-A Northwest League in Lewiston, Idaho, managed by Grady Wilson. He made his professional debut as a center fielder in the season opener on June 24 at Bethel Park in Eugene, Oregon, but was hitless in five at-bats. In the next game, Jackson singled in the first inning and homered in the ninth. In the home opener at Bengal Field in Lewiston on June 30, he hit a double and a triple. In his final game as a Bronc on July 6, Jackson was hit in the head by a pitch in the first inning, but stayed in the game and drove in runs with two sacrifice flies. Complaining of a headache, he left the game in the ninth inning, was admitted to St. Joseph's Hospital in Lewiston, and remained overnight for observation.\nJackson played for two Class A teams in 1966, with the Broncs for just 12 games, and then 56 games with Modesto in the California League, where he hit 21 homers. He began 1967 with the Birmingham A's in the Double-A Southern League in Birmingham, Alabama, being one of only a few black players on the team. He credits the team's manager at the time, John McNamara, for helping him through that difficult season.\nMLB career.\nKansas City / Oakland Athletics (1967\u20131975).\nJackson debuted in the major leagues with the A's in 1967 in a Friday doubleheader in Kansas City on June 9, a shutout sweep of the Cleveland Indians by scores of 2\u20130 and 6\u20130 at Municipal Stadium. Jackson had his first career hit in the nightcap, a lead-off triple in the fifth inning off of long reliever Orlando Pe\u00f1a.\nThe Athletics moved west to Oakland prior to the 1968 season. Jackson hit a career-high 47 home runs in 1969, and was briefly ahead of the pace that Roger Maris set when he broke the single-season record for home runs with 61 in 1961, and that of Babe Ruth when he set the previous record of 60 in 1927. Jackson later said that the sportswriters were claiming he was \"dating a lady named 'Ruth Maris.'\"\nWhen Jackson slumped at the plate in May 1970, Athletics owner Charlie O. Finley threatened to send him to the minors. Jackson hit 23 home runs while batting .237 for the 1970 season. The Athletics sent him to play in Puerto Rico, where he played for the Santurce team and hit 20 homers and knocked in 47 runs to lead the league in both departments. Jackson hit a memorable home run in the 1971 All-Star Game at Tiger Stadium in Detroit. Batting for the American League against Pittsburgh Pirates pitcher Dock Ellis, the ball he hit soared above the right-field stands, striking the transformer of a light standard on the right field roof. While with the Angels in 1984, he hit a home run over that roof.\nIn 1971, the Athletics won the American League's West division, their first title of any kind since 1931, when they played in Philadelphia. They were swept in three games in the American League Championship Series by the Baltimore Orioles. The A's won the division again in 1972; their series with the Tigers went the full five games, and Jackson scored the tying run in the clincher on a steal of home. In the process, however, he tore a hamstring and was unable to play in the World Series. The A's still managed to defeat the Cincinnati Reds in seven games. It was only the second championship won by a San Francisco Bay Area team in any major league sport, the first being the Oakland Oaks of the American Basketball Association, who captured the title in 1969, the league's second season of existence.\nDuring spring training in 1972, Jackson showed up with a mustache. Though his teammates wanted him to shave it off, Jackson refused. Finley liked the mustache so much that he offered each player $300 to grow one, and hosted a \"Mustache Day\" featuring the last MLB player to wear a mustache, Frenchy Bordagaray, as master of ceremonies.\nJackson helped the Athletics win the pennant again in 1973, and was named Most Valuable Player of the American League for the season. The A's defeated the New York Mets in seven hard-fought games in the World Series, and Jackson earned the Series' MVP award. In the third inning of that seventh game, which ended in a 5\u20132 score, the A's jumped out to a 4\u20130 lead as both Bert Campaneris and Jackson hit two-run home runs off Jon Matlack\u2014the only two home runs Oakland hit the entire Series. The A's won the World Series again in 1974, defeating the Los Angeles Dodgers in five games.\nBesides hitting 254 home runs in nine years with the Athletics, Jackson was also no stranger to controversy or conflict in Oakland. Sports author Dick Crouser wrote, \"When the late Al Helfer was broadcasting the Oakland A's games, he was not too enthusiastic about Reggie Jackson's speed or his hustle. Once, with Jackson on third, teammate Rick Monday hit a long home run. 'Jackson should score easily on that one,' commented Helfer. Crouser also noted that, \"Nobody seems to be neutral on Reggie Jackson. You're either a fan or a detractor.\" When teammate Darold Knowles was asked if Jackson was a hotdog (i.e., a show-off), he famously replied, \"There isn't enough mustard in the world to cover Reggie Jackson.\"\nIn February 1974, Jackson won an arbitration case for a $135,000 salary for the season, nearly doubling his previous year's $70,000. On June 5, outfielder Billy North and Jackson engaged in a clubhouse fight at Detroit's Tiger Stadium. Jackson injured his shoulder, and catcher Ray Fosse, attempting to separate the combatants, suffered a crushed disk in his neck, costing him three months on the disabled list. In October, the A's went on to win a third consecutive World Series.\nPrior to the 1975 season, Jackson sought $168,000, but arbitration went against him this time and he settled for $140,000. The A's won a fifth consecutive division title, but the loss of pitcher Catfish Hunter, baseball's first modern free agent, left them vulnerable, and they were swept in the ALCS by the Boston Red Sox.\nBaltimore Orioles (1976).\nPaid $140,000 in 1975 and one of nine Oakland players refusing to sign 1976 contracts, Jackson sought a three-year $600,000 pact. With free agency imminent after the season and the expectations of higher salaries for which Athletics owner Finley was unwilling to pay, he was traded along with Ken Holtzman and minor-league right-handed pitcher Bill Van Bommel to the Baltimore Orioles for Don Baylor, Mike Torrez, and Paul Mitchell on April 2, 1976. Jackson had not signed a contract and threatened to sit out the season; he reported to the Orioles four weeks later, and made his first plate appearance on Baltimore and Oakland both finished second in their respective divisions in ; the Yankees and Royals advanced to the ALCS, the first without the A's since 1970. During Jackson's lone season in Baltimore he stole 28 bases, a career-best. Jim Palmer later wrote, \"I would say Reggie Jackson was arrogant. But the word \"arrogant\" isn't arrogant enough.\" However, he thought the Orioles made a \"brick-brained\" mistake by not signing him to a contract, allowing him to become a free agent.\nNew York Yankees (1977\u20131981).\nThe Yankees won the pennant in 1976 but were swept in the World Series by the Reds. A month later on November 29, they signed Jackson to a five-year contract totaling $2.96 million ($ in current dollar terms). The number 9 that he had worn in Oakland and Baltimore was already used by Yankees third baseman Graig Nettles; Jackson asked for number 42 in memory of Jackie Robinson, but that number was given to pitching coach Art Fowler before the start of the season. Noting that Hank Aaron, at the time the holder of the career record for the most home runs, had just retired, Jackson asked for and received number 44 as a tribute to Aaron. Jackson wore number 20 on the first day of 1977 spring training as a tribute to the also recently retired Frank Robinson, then he switched to his now famous number 44, a number Jackson would wear for the rest of his career. Coincidentally, all three numbers Jackson had either asked for or briefly worn before 44 would later be retired by the Yankees (9 for Roger Maris, 20 for Jorge Posada, and 42 for Mariano Rivera), with 42 also retired by the team through MLB in honor of Jackie Robinson.\nJackson's first season with the Yankees in 1977 was a difficult one. Although team owner George Steinbrenner and several players, most notably catcher and team captain Thurman Munson and outfielder Lou Piniella, were excited about his arrival, the team's field manager Billy Martin was not. Martin had managed the Tigers in 1972, when Jackson's A's beat them in the playoffs. Jackson was once quoted as saying of Martin, \"I hate him, but if I played for him, I'd probably love him.\"\nThe relationship between Jackson and his new teammates was strained due to an interview with \"SPORT\" magazine writer Robert Ward. During spring training at the Yankees' camp in Fort Lauderdale, Jackson and Ward were having drinks at a nearby bar. Jackson's version of the story is that he noted that the Yankees had won the pennant the year before, but lost the World Series to the Reds, and suggested that they needed one thing more to win it all, and pointed out the various ingredients in his drink. Ward suggested that Jackson might be \"the straw that stirs the drink.\" But when the story appeared in the June 1977 issue of \"SPORT\", Ward quoted Jackson as saying, \"This team, it all flows from me. I'm the straw that stirs the drink. Maybe I should say me and Munson, but he can only stir it bad.\"Jackson has consistently denied saying anything negative about Munson in the interview and he has said that his quotes were taken out of context. However, Dave Anderson of \"The New York Times\" subsequently wrote that he had drinks with Jackson in July 1977, and that Jackson told him, \"I'm still the straw that stirs the drink. Not Munson, not nobody else on this club.\" Since Munson was beloved by his teammates, Martin, Steinbrenner and Yankee fans, the relationships between them and Jackson became very strained.\nOn June 18, in a 10\u20134 loss to the Boston Red Sox in a nationally televised game at Fenway Park in Boston, Jim Rice hit a ball into shallow right field that Jackson appeared to weakly attempt to field. Jackson failed to reach the ball, which fell far in front of him, thereby allowing Rice to reach second base. Furious, Martin removed Jackson from the game without even waiting for the end of the inning, sending Paul Blair out to replace him. When Jackson arrived at the dugout, Martin yelled that Jackson had shown him up. They argued, and Jackson said that Martin's heavy drinking had impaired his judgment. Despite Jackson being 18 years younger, about two inches taller and maybe 40 pounds heavier, Martin lunged at him, and had to be restrained by coaches Yogi Berra and Elston Howard. Red Sox fans could see this in the dugout and began cheering wildly, and the NBC TV cameras broadcast the confrontation to the entire country.\nYankees management defused the situation by the next day, but the relationship between Jackson and Martin was permanently damaged. However, George Steinbrenner made a crucial intervention when he gave Martin the choice of either having Jackson bat in the fourth or \"cleanup\" spot for the remainder of the season, or lose his job. Martin made the change and Jackson's hitting improved (he had 13 home runs and 49 RBIs over his next 50 games), and the team went on a winning streak. On September 14, while in a tight three-way race for the American League Eastern Division crown with the Red Sox and Orioles, Jackson ended a game with the Red Sox by hitting a home run off Reggie Cleveland, giving the Yankees a 2\u20130 win. The Yankees won the division by two and a half games over the Red Sox and Orioles, and came from behind in the top of the ninth inning in the fifth and final game of the American League Championship Series to beat the Kansas City Royals for the pennant.\nMr. October.\nDuring the World Series against the Dodgers, Munson was interviewed, and suggested that Jackson, because of his past postseason performances, might be the better interview subject. \"Go ask Mister October\", he said, giving Jackson a nickname that would stick. (In Oakland, he had been known as \"Jax\" and \"Buck.\") Jackson hit home runs in Games Four and Five of the Series.\nJackson's crowning achievement came with his three-home-run performance in World Series-clinching Game Six, each on the first pitch, off three Dodgers pitchers. (His first plate appearance, during the second inning, resulted in a four-pitch walk.) The first came off starter Burt Hooton, and was a line drive shot into the lower right field seats at Yankee Stadium. The second was a much faster line drive off reliever El\u00edas Sosa into roughly the same area. With the fans chanting his name, \"Reg-GIE! Reg-GIE! Reg-GIE!\", the third came off reliever Charlie Hough, a knuckleball pitcher, making the distance of this home run particularly remarkable. It was a towering drive into the black-painted batter's eye seats in center, away. Jackson stated afterwards that the scouting reports provided by Gene Michael and Birdie Tebbetts played a large role in his success. Their reports indicated that the Dodgers would attempt to pitch him inside and Jackson was prepared.\nSince Jackson had hit a home run off Dodger pitcher Don Sutton in his last at bat in Game Five, his three home runs in Game Six meant that he had hit four home runs on four consecutive swings of the bat against as many Dodgers pitchers. Jackson became the first player to win the World Series MVP award for two teams. In 27 World Series games, he amassed 10 home runs, including a record five during the 1977 Series (the last three on first pitches), 24 RBI and a .357 batting average. Babe Ruth, Albert Pujols, and Pablo Sandoval are the only other players to hit three home runs in a single World Series game, with Ruth accomplishing the feat twice \u2013 in 1926 and 1928 (both in Game Four). With 25 total bases, Jackson also broke Ruth's record of 22 in the latter Series; this remains a World Series record, Willie Stargell tying it in the 1979 World Series. Chase Utley (2009, Philadelphia) and George Springer (2017, Houston) have since tied Jackson's record for most home runs in a single World Series.\nFans had been getting rowdy in anticipation of Game 6's end, and some had actually thrown firecrackers out near Jackson's area in right field. Jackson was alarmed enough about this to walk off the field, in order to get a helmet from the Yankee bench to protect himself. Shortly after this point, as the end of the game neared, fans were bold enough to climb over the wall, draping their legs over the side in preparation for the moment when they planned to rush onto the field. When that moment came, after pitcher Mike Torrez caught a pop-up for the game's final out, Jackson started running at top speed off the field, actually body-checking past some of these fans filling the playing field in the manner of a football linebacker.\nThe Bronx Zoo.\nThe Yankees' home opener of the 1978 season, on April 13 against the Chicago White Sox, featured a new product, the \"Reggie!\" bar. In 1976, while playing in Baltimore, Jackson had said, \"If I played in New York, they'd name a candy bar after me.\" The Standard Brands company responded with a circular \"bar\" of peanuts dipped in caramel and covered in chocolate, a confection that was originally named the \"Wayne Bun\" as it was made in Fort Wayne, Indiana. The \"Reggie!\" bars were handed to fans as they walked into Yankee Stadium. Jackson hit a home run, and when he returned to right field the next inning, fans began throwing the Reggie bars on the field in celebration. Jackson told the press that this confused him, thinking that maybe the fans did not like the candy. The Yankees won the game, 4\u20132.\nBut the Yankees could not maintain their success, as manager Billy Martin lost control. On July 23, after suspending Jackson for disobeying a sign during a July 17 game, Martin made a statement about his two main antagonists, referring to comments Jackson had made and team owner George Steinbrenner's 1972 violation of campaign-finance laws: \"They're made for each other. One's a born liar, the other's convicted.\" It was moments like these that gave the Yankees the nickname \"The Bronx Zoo.\"\nMartin resigned the next day (some sources have said he was actually fired), and was replaced by Bob Lemon, a Hall of Fame pitcher for the Cleveland Indians who had been recently fired as manager of the White Sox. Steinbrenner, a Cleveland-area native, had hired former Indians star Al Rosen as his team president (replacing another Cleveland figure, Gabe Paul). Steinbrenner jumped at the chance to involve another hero of his youth with the Yankees; Lemon had been one of Steinbrenner's coaches during the Bombers' pennant-winning 1976 season.\nAfter being 14 games behind the first-place Red Sox on July 18, the Yankees finished the season in a tie for first place. The two teams played a one-game playoff for the division title at Fenway Park, with the Yankees winning 5\u20134. Although the home run by light-hitting shortstop Bucky Dent in the seventh inning got the most notice, it was an eighth-inning home run by Jackson that gave the Yankees the fifth run they ended up needing. The next day, with the American League Championship Series with the Royals beginning, Jackson hit a home run off the Royals' top reliever at the time, Al Hrabosky, the flamboyant \"Mad Hungarian.\" The Yankees won the pennant in four games, their third straight.\nJackson was once again in the center of events in the World Series, again against the Dodgers. Los Angeles won the first two games at Dodger Stadium, taking the second when rookie reliever Bob Welch struck Jackson out with two men on base with two outs in the ninth inning. The series then moved to New York, and after the Yankees won Game Three on several fine defensive plays by third baseman Graig Nettles, Game Four saw Jackson in the middle of a controversial play on the basepaths. In the sixth inning, after collecting an RBI single, Jackson was struck in the hip\u2013possibly on purpose\u2013by a ball thrown by Dodger shortstop Bill Russell as Jackson was being forced at second base. Instead of completing a double play that would have ended the inning, the ball caromed into foul territory and allowed Thurman Munson to score the Yankees' second run of the inning. In spite of the Dodgers' protests of interference on Jackson's part, the umpires allowed the play to stand. The Yankees tied the game in the eighth inning and eventually won in the tenth.\nFollowing a blowout win in Game Five, both teams headed back to Los Angeles. In Game Six, Jackson got his revenge against Welch by blasting a two-run home run in the seventh inning, putting the finishing touch on a series-clinching, 7\u20132 win for the Yankees.\nOn April 19, 1979, following a Yankee loss to the Baltimore Orioles, Jackson started kidding Cliff Johnson about his inability to hit Goose Gossage. While Johnson was showering, Gossage insisted to Jackson that he struck out Johnson all the time when he used to face him, and that he was terrible at the plate. \"He either homers or strikes out\", Gossage said. He had previously given Johnson the nickname \"Breeze\" in reference to how his big swing kept Gossage cool on the pitcher's mound in hot weather. When Jackson relayed this information to Johnson upon his return to the locker room, all the players assembled, egged on by Jackson, started laughing at him and in unison loudly called him \"Breeze\" with some waving their arms and hands before doubling over. Johnson, infuriated, went after Gossage and a fight broke out, resulting in Gossage suffering torn ligaments in the thumb on his pitching hand; both men were fined (Jackson, despite instigating the fracas, was not), Gossage missed three months due to the injury, and Johnson was traded away two months later. Teammate Tommy John called it \"a demoralizing blow to the team.\" Jackson joined Gossage on the disabled list for a month in June with a torn calf muscle. In 131 games, he batted .297 with 29 home runs and 89 RBI.\n1980\u201381 seasons.\nIn 1980, Jackson batted .300 for the only time in his career, and his 41 home runs tied with Ben Oglivie of the Milwaukee Brewers for the American League lead. However, the Yankees were swept in the ALCS by the Kansas City Royals. That year, he won the inaugural Silver Slugger Award as a designated hitter.\nAs he entered the last year of his Yankee contract in 1981, Jackson endured several difficulties from George Steinbrenner. After the owner consulted Jackson about signing then-free agent Dave Winfield, Jackson expected Steinbrenner to work out a new contract for him as well. Steinbrenner never did (some say never intending to) and Jackson played the season as a free agent. Jackson started slowly with the bat, and when the 1981 Major League Baseball strike began, Steinbrenner invoked a clause in Jackson's contract forcing him to take a complete physical examination. Jackson was outraged and blasted Steinbrenner in the media. When the season resumed, Jackson's hitting improved, partly to show Steinbrenner he wasn't finished as a player. He hit a long home run into the upper deck in Game Five of the strike-forced 1981 American League Division Series with the Brewers, and the Yankees went on to win the pennant again. However, Jackson injured himself running the bases in Game Two of the 1981 ALCS and missed the first two games of the World Series, both of which the Yankees won.\nJackson was medically cleared to play Game Three, but manager Bob Lemon refused to start him or even play him, allegedly acting under orders from Steinbrenner. The Yankees lost that game and Jackson played the remainder of the series, hitting a home run in Game Four. However, they lost the last three games and the World Series to the Dodgers.\nCalifornia Angels (1982\u20131986) and Return to Oakland (1987).\nJackson became a free-agent again once the 1981 season was over. The owner of the California Angels, entertainer Gene Autry, had heard of Jackson's desire to return to California to play, and signed him to a five-year contract.\nOn April 27, 1982, in Jackson's first game back at Yankee Stadium with the Angels, he broke out of a terrible season-starting slump to hit a home run off former teammate Ron Guidry. The at-bat began with Yankee fans, angry at Steinbrenner for letting Jackson get away, starting the \"Reg-GIE!\" chant, and ended it with the fans chanting \"Steinbrenner sucks!\" By the time of Jackson's election to the Hall of Fame, Steinbrenner had begun to say that letting him go was the biggest mistake he had made as Yankee owner.\nThat season, the Angels won the American League West, and would do so again in 1986, but lost the American League Championship Series both times. On September 17, 1984, on the 17th anniversary of the day he hit his first home run, he hit his 500th, at Anaheim Stadium off Bud Black of the Royals.\nIn 1987, he signed a one-year contract to return to the A's, wearing the number 44 with which he was now most associated rather than the number 9 he previously wore in Oakland, which was now being wore by teammate Mike Gallego. He announced he would retire after the season, at the age of 41. In his last at-bat, at Comiskey Park in Chicago on October 4, he collected a broken-bat single up the middle, but the A's lost to the White Sox, 5\u20132. Jackson was the last player in the major leagues to have played for the Kansas City Athletics. \nHowever, in January 1988, Jackson told reporters while he wasn't planning to play the 1988 season, he did receive an offer to play in Japan. \"I got a price. The number is getting to the point where I can't say that I won't do it,\" Jackson said. In August 1988, there were reports that Jackson approached his former team the New York Yankees about coming out of retirement for the stretch run. Jackson later denied the rumors and opted to stay retired. \"No, no way. You will not see me in uniform. I'm done. Stick a fork in me,\" Jackson said.\nLegacy.\nJackson played 21 seasons and reached the postseason in 11 of them, winning six pennants and five World Series. Moreover, he suffered only two losing seasons in his career, illustrating his penchant for making teams better. His accomplishments include winning both the regular-season and World Series MVP awards in 1973, hitting 563 career home runs (sixth all-time at the time of his retirement), maintaining a .490 career slugging percentage, being named to 14 All-Star teams, and the dubious distinction of being the all-time leader in strikeouts with 2,597 (he finished with 13 more career strikeouts than hits) and second on the all-time list for most Golden sombreros (at least four strikeouts in a game) with 23 \u2013 he led this statistic until 2014, when he was surpassed by Ryan Howard. Jackson was the first major leaguer to hit 100 home runs for three different clubs, having hit over 100 for the Athletics, Yankees, and Angels. He is the only player in the 500 home run club that never had consecutive 30 home run seasons in a career.\nWith the Yankees, Jackson was the center of attention when it came to the media. Tommy John thought this was ultimately helpful to the team. \"He was a two-way buffer between the team and Steinbrenner, and between us and the press. That allowed other guys to go about their business in relative peace.\"\nPost-playing career.\nFollowing his playing career, Jackson spent much of his time with the New York Yankees organization as a special advisor.\nJackson then joined the Houston Astros on May 12, 2021, as a special advisor to owner Jim Crane, with a focus on community support. He assists The Astros Foundation and The Astros Golf Foundation, Crane Capital, and numerous community initiatives affiliated with Crane's enterprises \"to invest in diversity and inclusion with STEM programming and skills development.\" He also serves as an ambassador for Crane in select baseball-related matters.\nWith Houston having defeated the Philadelphia Phillies in six games to win the World Series in 2022, it was the first championship season for Jackson as a member of the Astros organization. On November 10, 2024, Jackson stepped down from his role to spend more time with his family in California.\nPersonal life.\nDuring his freshman year at Arizona State, he met Jennie Campos, a Mexican-American. Jackson asked Campos on a date, and discovered many similarities, including the ability to speak Spanish, and being raised in a single parent home (Campos's father was killed in the Korean War). An assistant football coach tried to break up the couple because Jackson was black and Campos was considered white. The coach contacted Campos's uncle, a wealthy benefactor of the school, and he warned the couple that their being together was a bad idea. But the relationship held up and she later became his wife. They divorced in 1973. Kimberly, his only child, was born in the early '90s.\nDuring the off-season, though still active in baseball, Jackson worked as a field reporter and color commentator for ABC Sports. Just over a month before signing with the Yankees in the fall of 1976, Jackson did analysis in the ABC booth with Keith Jackson and Howard Cosell the night his future team won the American League pennant on a homer by Chris Chambliss. During the 1980s (1983, 1985, and 1987 respectively), Jackson was given the task of presiding over the World Series Trophy presentations. In addition, Jackson did color commentary for the 1984 National League Championship Series (alongside Don Drysdale and Earl Weaver). After his retirement as an active player, Jackson returned to his color commentary role covering the 1988 American League Championship Series (alongside Gary Bender and Joe Morgan) for ABC.\nJackson appeared in the film ', portraying an Angels outfielder hypnotically programmed to kill Queen Elizabeth II. He also appeared in \"Richie Rich\", \"BASEketball\", \"Summer of Sam\" and \"The Benchwarmers\". In 1979, Jackson was a guest-star in an episode of the television sitcom \"Diff'rent Strokes\" and in an episode of \"The Love Boat\" as himself. He played himself in the \"Archie Bunker's Place\" episode \"Reggie-3 Archie-0\" in 1982; a , \"Squeeze Play\"; \"The Jeffersons\" episode \"The Unnatural\" from 1985; and the \"Malcolm in the Middle\" episode \"Polly in the Middle\", from 2004. Jackson was also considered for the role of Geordi La Forge in the series ', a role that ultimately went to LeVar Burton. From 1981 to 1982, he hosted \"Reggie Jackson's World of Sports\" for Nickelodeon, which continued in reruns until 1985.\nHe co-authored a book in 2010, \"Sixty-Feet Six-Inches\", with fellow Hall of Famer Bob Gibson. The book, whose title refers to the distance between the pitcher's mound and home plate, details their careers and approach to the game.\nThe 1988 Sega Master System baseball video game \"Reggie Jackson Baseball\", endorsed by Jackson, was sold exclusively in the United States. Outside of the U.S., it was released as \"American Baseball\".\nJackson was the de facto spokesperson for the Upper Deck Company during the early 1990s, appearing in numerous advertisements, appearances, and participating in the company's Heroes of Baseball exhibition games. This affiliation also included the company's \"Find the Reggie\" promotion which inserted 2500 autograph cards into packs of 1990 Upper Deck Baseball High Series packs. This inclusion of an autograph card marked an important first in what would become a very popular trend in the trading card hobby.\nJackson has endured three fires to personal property, including a June 20, 1976, fire at his home in Oakland that destroyed his 1973 MVP award, World Series trophies and All-Star rings. The same home was again burned down during the Oakland firestorm of 1991, which destroyed more baseball memorabilia in addition to other valuable collections. In 1988, a warehouse holding several of Jackson's collectible cars was damaged in a fire, with several of the cars, valued at $3.2 million (~$8 million in 2022 terms) ruined.\nIn Tampa in 2005, Jackson's car was struck from behind and flipped over several times. Jackson escaped with minor injuries, later saying: \"...it was God tapping me on the shoulder... It makes you think about your purpose, about His plan for you.\"\nJackson called on former San Francisco 49ers head coach and ordained minister Mike Singletary for spiritual guidance. Jackson credits Singletary, stating, \"he helped me drop that shell I put up.\"\nVehicle- and parking-related attacks on Jackson.\nJackson was the victim of an attempted shooting in the early morning hours of June 1, 1980. A few hours after hitting the game-winning 11th inning home run at a home game against the Toronto Blue Jays, Jackson drove his vehicle to the singles bars he frequented in a \"posh\" neighborhood of \"swinging pubs and night spots amid expensive high-rise apartments\" in Manhattan's Upper East Side to celebrate. While searching for a parking spot, he asked the driver of a vehicle that was blocking the way to move, and a passenger in that vehicle then began yelling obscenities and racial slurs at Jackson, before throwing a broken bottle at Jackson's car.\nAfter other passersby recognized Jackson and began joking with him about apprehending them, one of the men in the other car, 25-year-old Manhattan resident Angel Viera, allegedly returned with a .38 caliber revolver and fired three shots at Jackson, each missing. Viera was criminally charged with attempted murder and illegal possession of deadly weapon. News of the incident was the third story ever broadcast on CNN, which held its inaugural broadcast later that day.\nIn the early morning of August 12, 1980, as Jackson completed a night of celebrating his 400th career home run slugged several hours earlier against the White Sox, Jackson was accosted as he left his favored nightspot, Jim McMullen's Bar on the Upper East Side, and entered his Rolls-Royce parked outside. A young man leveled a large-bore pistol, likely a .45 caliber automatic, at Jackson's face. Jackson told police that the gun was the largest that he had ever seen, and Jackson believed that he was going to be shot. When the man lowered the weapon to reach into Jackson's car to take the ignition key, Jackson shoved the door open into the man, sending him sprawling. The man then ran off and dropped the car keys near the scene, eluding pursuers.\nOn March 22, 1985, Jackson was attacked after a California Angels spring training 8\u20131 exhibition victory over the Cleveland Indians at Hi Corbett Field in Tucson, Arizona. Witnesses said that a man who had heckled Jackson throughout the game followed Jackson out to the field's parking lot to continue to do so. As Jackson finished signing autographs for fans, he attempted to enter a vehicle belonging to teammate Brian Downing, but the man blocked his entry and insisted on fighting Jackson. According to Jackson, the man began pounding on the door and windshield of the car, yelling at Jackson in Spanish for an autograph and then to offer cocaine. Jackson and other fans nearby restrained the man until he calmed down, at which point the man again asked for an autograph.\nOn the morning of March 30, 1985, as Jackson left his bungalow at the Angels' spring training residence of the Gene Autry Hotel in Palm Springs (now the Parker Palm Springs) before a Giants game, he noticed two men driving an automobile on the hotel lawns and pedestrian paths while drinking alcohol. After the men recognized Jackson and asked for directions to the Palm Spring strip business district, he warned them to leave before they got into trouble and before he was forced to call the police. They then began heckling his baseball abilities and used an obscenity and racial slur against him. After the men left, Jackson called police, but before police arrived, the men came back to the hotel, asked the front desk to call Jackson to the front lobby, and when he arrived, threatened to assault Jackson. When Jackson grabbed one of the men, the other raised a tire iron over his head. As Jackson moved towards the second man, he ran away but was blocked by a parked car, allowing Jackson to capture him and seize the tire iron and pass it to a nearby Angels executive who had witnessed the event. One of the men was arrested on suspicion of assault with a deadly weapon and the other cited for disturbing the peace.\nIn an inverse situation, on July 19, 1977, Jackson was signing autographs for fans after the conclusion of the 1977 Major League Baseball All-Star Game, held at Yankee Stadium that year, in the stadium parking lot. According to a statement from Yankees owner George Steinbrenner, several teens entered the parking lot and began shouting obscenities at Jackson. Jackson ignored the teens until one made a \"particularly vile remark\" about Jackson's mother. Jackson then chased off the teens, one of whom fell while running. The teen claimed that Jackson's foot made contact with the teen's wrist, which Jackson denied. Against the advice of criminal court judge Bernard Klieger, the teen's lawyer insisted that a criminal complaint for harassment be authorized against Jackson, which Klieger did \"reluctantly\".\nPost-retirement honors.\nJackson and Steinbrenner reconciled and Steinbrenner hired Jackson as a \"special assistant to the principal owner\", making him a consultant and a liaison to the team's players, particularly those of minority standing. By this point, the Yankees, long noted for being slow to adapt to changes in race relations, had come to develop many minority players in their farm system and seek out others via trades and free agency. Jackson usually appeared in uniform at the Yankees' spring training complex in Tampa, Florida and was sought out for advice by recent stars as Derek Jeter and Alex Rodriguez. \"His experience is vast and he's especially good with the young players in our minor league system, the 17- and 18-year old kids. They respect him and what he's accomplished in his career. When Reggie Jackson tells a young kid how he might improve his swing, he tends to listen,\" said Hal Steinbrenner, Yankees managing general partner and co-chairperson.\nJackson was inducted to the Hall of Fame in 1993. He chose to wear a Yankees cap on his Hall of Fame plaque after the Oakland Athletics unceremoniously fired him from a coaching position in 1991.\nThe Yankees retired Jackson's uniform number 44 on August 14, 1993, shortly after his induction into the Hall of Fame. The Athletics retired his number 9 on May 22, 2004. He is one of only ten MLB players to have their numbers retired by more than one team and one of only five to have different numbers retired by two MLB teams.\nIn 1999, Jackson placed 48th on the \"Sporting News\"' 100 Greatest Baseball Players list. That same year, he was named one of 100 finalists for the Major League Baseball All-Century Team, but was not one of the 30 players chosen by the fans.\nThe Yankees dedicated a plaque in Jackson's honor on July 6, 2002, that now hangs in Monument Park at Yankee Stadium. The plaque calls him \"One of the most colorful and exciting players of his era\" and \"a prolific hitter who thrived in pressure situations.\" Each Yankee so honored and still living was on hand for the dedication: Phil Rizzuto, Yogi Berra, Whitey Ford and Don Mattingly. Ron Guidry, a teammate of Jackson's for all five of his seasons with the Yankees, was there and going to be honored with a Monument Park plaque the next season. Willie Mays, Hank Aaron and Ernie Banks, players whom Jackson admired while growing up, attended the ceremony at his invitation. Like Jackson, each was a member of the Hall of Fame and had hit over 500 career home runs. Each had also played in the Negro leagues, as had Jackson's father, Martinez Jackson.\nJackson expanded his love of antique cars into a chain of auto dealerships in California, and used his contacts to become one of the foremost traders of sports memorabilia. He has also been the public face of a group attempting to purchase a major league team, already having made unsuccessful attempts to buy the Athletics and the Angels. His attempt to acquire the Angels along with Jimmy Nederlander (minority owner of the New York Yankees), Jackie Autry (widow of former Angels owner Gene Autry) and other investors was thwarted by Mexican-American billionaire Arturo Moreno, who outbid Jackson's group by nearly $50 million for the team in the winter of 2002.\nIn a July 2012 interview with \"Sports Illustrated\", Jackson was critical of the Baseball Writers' Association of America as he believes that the organization has lowered its standards for admission into the Hall of Fame. He has also been critical of players associated with performance-enhancing drugs, including distant cousin Barry Bonds, stating \"I believe that Hank Aaron is the home run king, not Barry Bonds, as great of a player Bonds was.\" Of Alex Rodriguez, Jackson remarked, \"Al's a very good friend. But I think there are real questions about his numbers. As much as I like him, what he admitted about his usage does cloud some of his numbers.\" On July 12, the Yankees released a statement regarding the \"Sports Illustrated\" interview in which Jackson said, \"In trying to convey my feelings about a few issues that I am passionate about, I made the mistake of naming some specific players.\" It had been reported that he was told by the Yankees to steer clear from the team, although general manager Brian Cashman stated that Jackson had not been banned but only told to not join the club on a road trip to Boston and would later be free to interact with the club. Jackson stated, \"I continue to have a strong relationship with the club, and look forward to continuing my role with the team.\"\nIn 2007, ESPN aired a miniseries called \"The Bronx Is Burning\" about the 1977 Yankees, with the conflicts and controversies involving Jackson, portrayed by Daniel Sunjata, a central part of the storyline. The series infuriated Jackson since he felt he was portrayed as selfish and arrogant. He also expressed frustration that the filmmakers did not consult with him while making the miniseries, saying \"I feel betrayed.\"\nIn 2008, Jackson threw the ceremonial first pitch at the Yankees' opening-day game, the last at the original Yankee Stadium. He also threw out the first pitch at the first game at the new Yankee Stadium (an exhibition game).\nOn October 9, 2009, Jackson threw the ceremonial opening pitch at Game 2 of the ALDS between the Yankees and the Minnesota Twins. On October 18, 2010, the Ride of Fame honored Jackson with his image on a New York City double-decker tour bus.\nOn September 5, 2018, before an Athletics game against the Yankees in Oakland, Jackson was inducted into the new Oakland Athletics Hall of Fame. He joined fellow inductees Rickey Henderson, Dave Stewart, Dennis Eckersley, Catfish Hunter and Rollie Fingers.\nDuring the MLB at Rickwood Field tribute game in Birmingham, Alabama on June 20, 2024, Jackson joined dozens of baseball legends to celebrate the Negro leagues and honor the recently departed Willie Mays. On a broadcast before the game with Alex Rodriguez, David Ortiz, and Derek Jeter, Jackson spoke about the racism he faced when he was last in the city and challenges he faced during his playing days.\"Coming back here is not easy. The racism when I played here, the difficulty of going through different places where we traveled. Fortunately I had a manager and I had players on the team that helped me get through it. But I wouldn't wish it on anybody. People said to me, today I spoke and said, 'Do you think you're a better person, do you think you won when you played here and conquered?' I said, you know, I would never want to do it again. I walked into restaurants and they would point at me and say, 'the nigger can't eat here.' I would go to a hotel and they say the nigger can't stay here. We went to Charlie Finley's country club for a welcome home dinner and they pointed me out with the N word... Finley marched the whole team out, finally they let me in there. He said, 'we're going to go to the diner and eat hamburgers, we'll go where we're wanted...\n...I wouldn't wish it on anyone. At the same time, had it not been for my white friends, had it not been for a white manager... I would have never made it. I was too physically violent, I was ready to physically fight someone. I'd have got killed here because I'd have beat someone's ass, and you'd have saw me in an oak tree somewhere.\"\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59399", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59399", "title": "Lumber", "text": "Wood that has been processed into beams and planks\nLumber, also called timber in the United Kingdom, Australia, and New Zealand, is wood that has been processed into uniform and useful sizes (dimensional lumber), including beams and planks or boards. Lumber is mainly used for construction framing, as well as finishing (floors, wall panels, window frames). Lumber has many uses beyond home building. In some parts of the world, including the United States and Canada, the term \"timber\" refers specifically to unprocessed wood fiber, such as cut logs or standing trees that have yet to be cut.\nLumber may be supplied either rough-sawn, or surfaced on one or more of its faces. \"Rough lumber\" is the raw material for furniture-making, and manufacture of other items requiring cutting and shaping. It is available in many species, including hardwoods and softwoods, such as white pine and red pine, because of their low cost.\n\"Finished lumber\" is supplied in standard sizes, mostly for the construction industry \u2013 primarily softwood, from coniferous species, including pine, fir and spruce (collectively spruce-pine-fir), cedar, and hemlock, but also some hardwood, for high-grade flooring. It is more commonly made from softwood than hardwoods, and 80% of lumber comes from softwood.\nTerminology.\nIn the United States and Canada, milled boards are called \"lumber\", while \"timber\" describes standing or felled trees.\nIn contrast, in Britain, and some other Commonwealth nations and Ireland, the term \"timber\" is used in both senses. (In the UK, the word \"lumber\" is rarely used in relation to wood and has several other meanings.)\nRe-manufactured lumber.\nRe-manufactured lumber is the result of secondary or tertiary processing of previously milled lumber. Specifically, it refers to lumber cut for industrial or wood-packaging use. Lumber is cut by ripsaw or resaw to create dimensions that are not usually processed by a primary sawmill.\nRe-sawing is the splitting of hardwood or softwood lumber into two or more thinner pieces of full-length boards. For example, splitting a 2\u00d74 () into two 2\u00d72s () of the same length is considered re-sawing.\nPlastic lumber.\nStructural lumber may also be produced from recycled plastic and new plastic stock. Its introduction has been strongly opposed by the forestry industry. Blending fiberglass in plastic lumber enhances its strength, durability, and fire resistance. Plastic fiberglass structural lumber can have a \"class 1 flame spread rating of 25 or less, when tested in accordance with ASTM standard E 84,\" which means it burns more slowly than almost all treated wood lumber.\nTimber mark.\nA timber mark is a code beaten on to cut wood by a specially made hammer to show the logging licence.\nHistory.\nThe definition of the word \"lumber\" as sawn planks of wood originated in the 17th century in North America.\nIn 1420, the archipelago of Madeira was colonized by the Portuguese Empire. Prince Henry the Navigator sent settlers to Madeira, who cleared the huge expanses of forest to grow crops. The felled trees were processed at sawmills and shipped to the mainland.\nCornelis Corneliszoon (or Krelis Lootjes) was a Dutch windmill owner from Uitgeest who invented the first wind-powered sawmill in 1593. This made the conversion of logs into planks thirty times faster than previous manually operated sawmills.\nConversion of wood logs.\nLogs are \"converted\" into lumber by being sawn, hewn, or split. Sawing with a rip saw is the most common method, because sawing allows logs of lower quality, with irregular grain and large knots, to be used and is more economical. There are various types of sawing:\nDimensional lumber.\nDimensional lumber is lumber that is cut to standardized width and depth, often specified in millimetres or inches (but see below for information on nominal dimensions vs. actual dimensions). Carpenters extensively use dimensional lumber in framing wooden buildings. Common sizes include \"2\u00d74\" (pictured) (also \"two-by-four\" and other variants, such as \"four-by-two\" in Australia, New Zealand, and the UK), \"2\u00d76\", and \"4\u00d74\". The length of a board is usually specified separately from the width and depth. It is thus possible to find 2\u00d74s that are four, eight, and twelve feet in length. In Canada and the United States, the standard lengths of lumber are . For wall framing, precut \"stud\" lengths are available, and are commonly used. For ceilings heights of , studs are available in , , and .\nNorth American softwoods.\nThe length of a unit of dimensional lumber is limited by the height and girth of the tree it is milled from. In general the maximum length is . Engineered wood products, manufactured by binding the strands, particles, fibers, or veneers of wood, together with adhesives, to form composite materials, offer more flexibility and greater structural strength than typical wood building materials.\nPre-cut studs save a framer much time, because they are pre-cut by the manufacturer for use in 8-, 9-, and 10-foot ceiling applications, which means the manufacturer has removed a few inches or centimetres of the piece to allow for the sill plate and the double top plate with no additional sizing necessary.\nIn the Americas, \"two-bys\" (2\u00d74s, 2\u00d76s, 2\u00d78s, 2\u00d710s, and 2\u00d712s), named for traditional board thickness in inches, along with the 4\u00d74 (), are common lumber sizes used in modern construction. They are the basic building blocks for such common structures as balloon-frame or platform-frame housing. Dimensional lumber made from softwood is typically used for construction, while hardwood boards are more commonly used for making cabinets or furniture.\nLumber's \"nominal\" dimensions are larger than the actual standard dimensions of finished lumber. Historically, the nominal dimensions were the size of the green (not dried), rough (unfinished) boards that eventually became smaller finished lumber through drying and planing (to smooth the wood). Today, the standards specify the final finished dimensions and the mill cuts the logs to whatever size it needs to achieve those final dimensions. Typically, that rough cut is smaller than the nominal dimensions because modern technology makes it possible to use the logs more efficiently. For example, a \"2\u00d74\" board historically started out as a green, rough board actually . After drying and planing, it would be smaller by a nonstandard amount. Today, a \"2\u00d74\" board starts out as something smaller than 2 inches by 4 inches and not specified by standards, and after drying and planing is minimally .\nAs previously noted, less wood is needed to produce a given finished size than when standards called for the green lumber to be the full nominal dimension. However, even the dimensions for finished lumber of a given nominal size have changed over time. In 1910, a typical finished board was . In 1928, that was reduced by 4%, and yet again by 4% in 1956. In 1961, the Committee on Grade Simplification and Standardization agreed to what is now the current U.S. standard: in part, the dressed size of a 1-inch (nominal) board was fixed at &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;3\u20444\u00a0inch; while the dressed size of 2\u00a0inch (nominal) lumber was \"reduced\" from &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1+5\u20448\u00a0inch to the current &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1+1\u20442\u00a0inch.\nIn 1964, Popular Mechanics magazine hired an independent agency to test the comparative strength of multiple samples of (A) a full-size 2\u00d74 inches, (B) &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1+5\u20448\u00d7&lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;3+5\u20448 inches, (C) &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1+5\u20448\u00d7&lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;3+1\u20442 inches, and (D) &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1+1\u20442\u00d7&lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;3+1\u20442 inches (today\u2019s standard). With A\u2019s compressive strength benchmarked as \u201c100%,\u201d B-C-D were 90.7%, 82.2%, and 73.6% the strength of A\u2019s full-size 2\u00d74. Stated another way, the 1960s\u2019 reduction of the smaller dimension from &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1+5\u20448 to &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1+1\u20442 inches reduced compressive strength by 10.46%. \nDimensional lumber is available in green, unfinished state, and for that kind of lumber, the nominal dimensions are the actual dimensions.\nGrades and standards.\nIndividual pieces of lumber exhibit a wide range in quality and appearance with respect to knots, slope of grain, shakes and other natural characteristics. Therefore, they vary considerably in strength, utility, and value.\nThe move to set national standards for lumber in the United States began with the publication of the American Lumber Standard in 1924, which set specifications for lumber dimensions, grade, and moisture content; it also developed inspection and accreditation programs. These standards have changed over the years to meet the changing needs of manufacturers and distributors, with the goal of keeping lumber competitive with other construction products. Current standards are set by the American Lumber Standard Committee, appointed by the U.S. Secretary of Commerce.\nDesign values for most species and grades of visually graded structural products are determined in accordance with ASTM standards, which consider the effect of strength reducing characteristics, load duration, safety, and other influencing factors. The applicable standards are based on results of tests conducted in cooperation with the USDA Forest Products Laboratory. Design Values for Wood Construction, which is a supplement to the ANSI/AF&amp;PA National Design Specification\u00ae for Wood Construction, provides these lumber design values, which are recognized by the model building codes.\nCanada has grading rules that maintain a standard among mills manufacturing similar woods to assure customers of uniform quality. Grades standardize the quality of lumber at different levels and are based on moisture content, size, and manufacture at the time of grading, shipping, and unloading by the buyer. The National Lumber Grades Authority (NLGA) is responsible for writing, interpreting and maintaining Canadian lumber grading rules and standards. The Canadian Lumber Standards Accreditation Board (CLSAB) monitors the quality of Canada's lumber grading and identification system. Their common grade abbrievation, CLS, Canadian Lumber Standard is well utilised in the construction industry.\nAttempts to maintain lumber quality over time have been challenged by historical changes in the timber resources of the United States \u2013 from the slow-growing virgin forests common over a century ago to the fast-growing plantations now common in today's commercial forests. Resulting declines in lumber quality have been of concern to both the lumber industry and consumers and have caused increased use of alternative construction products.\nMachine stress-rated and machine-evaluated lumber are readily available for end-uses where high strength is critical, such as trusses, rafters, laminating stock, I-beams and web joints. Machine grading measures a characteristic such as stiffness or density that correlates with the structural properties of interest, such as bending strength. The result is a more precise understanding of the strength of each piece of lumber than is possible with visually graded lumber, which allows designers to use full-design strength and avoid overbuilding.\nIn Europe, strength grading of rectangular sawn lumber/timber (both softwood and hardwood) is done according to EN-14081 and commonly sorted into classes defined by EN-338. For softwoods, the common classes are (in increasing strength) C16, C18, C24, and C30. There are also classes specifically for hardwoods and those in most common use (in increasing strength) are D24, D30, D40, D50, D60, and D70. For these classes, the number refers to the required 5th percentile bending strength in newtons per square millimetre. There are other strength classes, including T-classes based on tension intended for use in glulam.\nGrading rules for African and South American sawn lumber have been developed by ATIBT according to the rules of the Sciages Aviv\u00e9s Tropicaux Africains (SATA) and is based on clear cuttings \u2013 established by the percentage of the clear surface.\nNorth American hardwoods.\nIn North America, market practices for dimensional lumber made from hardwoods varies significantly from the regularized \"standardized 'dimension lumber' sizes\" used for sales and specification of softwoods \u2013 hardwood boards are often sold totally rough cut, or machine planed only on the two (broader) face sides. When hardwood boards are also supplied with planed faces, it is usually both by random widths of a specified thickness (normally matching milling of softwood dimensional lumber) and somewhat random lengths. But besides those older (traditional and normal) situations, in recent years some product lines have been widened to also market boards in standard stock sizes; these usually retail in big-box stores and using only a relatively small set of specified lengths; in all cases hardwoods are sold to the consumer by the board-foot (), whereas that measure is not used for softwoods at the retailer (to the cognizance of the buyer).\nAlso in North America, hardwood lumber is commonly sold in a \"quarter\" system, when referring to thickness; 4/4 (four quarter) refers to a board, 8/4 (eight quarter) is a board, etc. This \"quarter\" system is rarely used for softwood lumber; although softwood decking is sometimes sold as 5/4, even though it is actually one inch thick (from milling off each side in a motorized planing step of production). The \"quarter\" system of reference is a traditional North American lumber industry nomenclature used specifically to indicate the thickness of rough sawn hardwood lumber.\nIn rough-sawn lumber it immediately clarifies that the lumber is not yet milled, avoiding confusion with milled dimension lumber which is measured as actual thickness after machining. Examples include &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;3\u20444-inch, 19\u00a0mm, or 1x. In recent years architects, designers, and builders have begun to use the \"quarter\" system in specifications as a vogue of insider knowledge, though the materials being specified are finished lumber, thus conflating the separate systems and causing confusion.\nHardwoods cut for furniture are cut in the fall and winter, after the sap has stopped running in the trees. If hardwoods are cut in the spring or summer the sap ruins the natural color of the lumber and decreases the value of the wood for furniture.\nEngineered lumber.\nEngineered lumber is lumber created by a manufacturer and designed for a certain structural purpose. The main categories of engineered lumber are:\nTimber piles.\nIn the United States, pilings are mainly cut from southern yellow pines and Douglas-fir. Treated pilings are available in chromated copper arsenate retentions of if treatment is required.\nHistorical Chinese construction.\nUnder the prescription of the \"Method of Construction\" (\u71df\u9020\u6cd5\u5f0f) issued by the Song dynasty government in the early twelfth century, timbers were standardized to eight cross-sectional dimensions. Regardless of the actual dimensions of the timber, the ratio between width and height was maintained at 1:1.5. Units are in Song dynasty inches (31.2\u00a0mm).\nTimber smaller than the 8th class were called \"unclassed\" (\u7b49\u5916). The width of a timber is referred to as one \"timber\" (\u6750), and the dimensions of other structural components were quoted in multiples of \"timber\"; thus, as the width of the actual timber varied, the dimensions of other components were easily calculated, without resorting to specific figures for each scale. The dimensions of timbers in similar applications show a gradual diminution from the Sui dynasty (580\u2013618) to the modern era; a 1st class timber during the Sui was reconstructed as 15\u00d710 (Sui dynasty inches, or 29.4\u00a0mm).\nDefects in lumber.\nDefects occurring in lumber are grouped into the following four divisions:\nConversion.\nDuring the process of converting timber to commercial forms of lumber the following defects may occur:\nDefects due to fungi and animals.\nFungi attack wood (both timber and lumber) when these conditions are all present:\nWood with less than 25% moisture (dry weight basis) can remain free of decay for centuries. Similarly, wood submerged in water may not be attacked by fungi if the amount of oxygen is inadequate.\nFungi lumber/timber defects:\nFollowing are the insects and molluscs which are usually responsible for the decay of timber/lumber:\nNatural forces.\nThere are two main natural forces responsible for causing defects in timber and lumber: abnormal growth and rupture of tissues. Rupture of tissue includes cracks or splits in the wood called \"shakes\". \"Ring shake\", \"wind shake\", or \"ring failure\" is when the wood grain separates around the growth rings either while standing or during felling. Shakes may reduce the strength of a timber and the appearance thus reduce lumber grade and may capture moisture, promoting decay. Eastern hemlock is known for having ring shake. A \"check\" is a crack on the surface of the wood caused by the outside of a timber shrinking as it seasons. Checks may extend to the pith and follow the grain. Like shakes, checks can hold water promoting rot. A \"split\" goes all the way through a timber. Checks and splits occur more frequently at the ends of lumber because of the more rapid drying in these locations.\nNext to defects, uneven expansion or contraction caused by changes in moisture content will cause sawed timber to warp, making it less suitable for many purposes.\nSeasoning.\nThe seasoning of lumber is typically either kiln- or air-dried. Defects due to seasoning are the main cause of splits, bowing and honeycombing. Seasoning is the process of drying timber to remove the bound moisture contained in the walls of the wood cells to produce seasoned timber.\nDurability and service life.\nUnder proper conditions, wood provides excellent, lasting performance. However, it also faces several potential threats to service life, including fungal activity and insect damage \u2013 which can be avoided in numerous ways. Section 2304.11 of the International Building Code addresses protection against decay and termites. This section provides requirements for non-residential construction applications, such as wood used above ground (e.g., for framing, decks, stairs, etc.), as well as other applications.\nThere are four recommended methods to protect wood-frame structures against durability hazards and thus provide maximum service life for the building. All require proper design and construction:\nMoisture control.\nWood is a hygroscopic material, which means it naturally absorbs and releases water to balance its internal moisture content with the surrounding environment. The moisture content of wood is measured by the weight of water as a percentage of the oven-dry weight of the wood fiber. The key to controlling decay is controlling moisture. Once decay fungi are established, the minimum moisture content for decay to propagate is 22 to 24 percent, so building experts recommend 19 percent as the maximum safe moisture content for untreated wood in service. Water by itself does not harm the wood, but rather, wood with consistently high moisture content enables fungal organisms to grow.\nThe primary objective when addressing moisture loads is to keep water from entering the building envelope in the first place and to balance the moisture content within the building itself. Moisture control by means of accepted design and construction details is a simple and practical method of protecting a wood-frame building against decay. For applications with a high risk of staying wet, designers specify durable materials such as naturally decay-resistant species or wood that has been treated with preservatives. Cladding, shingles, sill plates and exposed timbers or glulam beams are examples of potential applications for treated wood.\nPreservatives.\nTo avoid decay and termite infestation, untreated wood is separated from the ground and other sources of moisture. These separations are required by many building codes and are considered necessary to maintain wood elements in permanent structures at a safe moisture content for decay protection. When it is not possible to separate wood from the sources of moisture, designers often rely on preservative-treated wood.\nWood can be treated with a preservative that improves service life under severe conditions without altering its basic characteristics. It can also be pressure-impregnated with fire-retardant chemicals that improve its performance in a fire. One of the early treatments to \"fireproof lumber\", which retard fires, was developed in 1936 by the Protexol Corporation, in which lumber is heavily treated with salt. Wood does not deteriorate simply because it gets wet. When wood breaks down, it is because an organism is eating it. Preservatives work by making the food source inedible to these organisms. Properly preservative-treated wood can have 5 to 10 times the service life of untreated wood. Preserved wood is used most often for railroad ties, utility poles, marine piles, decks, fences and other outdoor applications. Various treatment methods and types of chemicals are available, depending on the attributes required in the particular application and the level of protection needed.\nThere are two basic methods of treating: with and without pressure. Non-pressure methods are the application of preservatives by brushing, spraying, or dipping the piece to be treated. Deeper, more thorough penetration is achieved by driving the preservative into the wood cells with pressure. Various combinations of pressure and vacuum are used to force adequate levels of chemical into the wood. Pressure-treating preservatives consist of chemicals carried in a solvent.\nChromated copper arsenate, once the most commonly used wood preservative in North America began being phased out of most residential applications in 2004. Replacing it are amine copper quat and copper azole.\nAll wood preservatives used in the United States and Canada are registered and regularly re-examined for safety by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency and Health Canada's Pest Management and Regulatory Agency, respectively.\nTimber framing.\n\"Timber framing\" is a style of construction that uses heavier framing elements (larger posts and beams) than modern stick framing, which uses smaller standard dimensional lumber. The timbers are cut from log boles and squared with a saw, broadaxe or adze, and then joined together with joinery without nails. Modern timber framing has been growing in popularity in the United States since the 1970s.\nEnvironmental effects of lumber.\nGreen building minimizes the impact or \"environmental footprint\" of a building. Wood is a major building material that is renewable and replenishable in a continuous cycle. Studies show manufacturing wood uses less energy and results in less air and water pollution than steel and concrete. However, demand for lumber is blamed for deforestation.\nResidual wood.\nThe conversion from coal to biomass power is a growing trend in the United States.\nThe United Kingdom, Uzbekistan, Kazakhstan, Australia, Fiji, Madagascar, Mongolia, Russia, Denmark, Switzerland, and Eswatini governments all support an increased role for energy derived from biomass, which are organic materials available on a renewable basis and include residues and/or byproducts of the logging, saw milling and paper-making processes. In particular, they view it as a way to lower greenhouse gas emissions by reducing the consumption of oil and gas while supporting the growth of forestry, agriculture and rural economies. Studies by the U.S. government have found the country's combined forest and agriculture land resources have the power to sustainably supply more than one-third of its current petroleum consumption.\nBiomass is already an important source of energy for the North American forest products industry. It is common for companies to have cogeneration facilities, also known as combined heat and power, which convert some of the biomass that results from wood and paper manufacturing to electrical and thermal energy in the form of steam. The electricity is used to, among other things, dry lumber and supply heat to the dryers used in paper-making.\nEnvironmental impacts.\nLumber is a sustainable and environmentally friendly construction material that could replace modern building materials (e.g. concrete and steel) given its structural performance, capacity to fixate CO2 and low energy demand during the manufacturing process.\nSubstituting lumber for concrete or steel avoids the carbon emissions of those materials. Cement and concrete manufacture is responsible for around 8% of global GHG emissions while the iron and steel industry is responsible for another 5% (half a ton of CO2 is emitted to manufacture a ton of concrete; two tons of CO2 \u00a0are emitted in the manufacture of a ton of steel).\nAdvantages of lumber:\nEnd-of-life.\nAn EPA study showed the typical end-of-life scenario for wood waste from municipal solid waste (MSW), wood packaging, and other miscellaneous wood products in the US. Based on the 2018 data, about 67% of wood waste was landfilled, 16% incinerated with energy recovery, and 17% recycled.\nA 2020 study conducted by Edinburgh Napier University demonstrated the proportional waste stream of recovered lumber in the UK. The study showed that timber from municipal solid waste and packaging waste made up 13 and 26% of waste collected. Construction and demolition waste made up the biggest bulk of waste collectively at 52%, with the remaining 10% coming from industry.\nIn the circular economy.\nThe lumber industry creates large amounts of waste, especially in its manufacturing process. From log debarking to finished products, there are several stages of processing that generate a considerable volume of waste, which includes solid wood waste, harmful gases, and residual water.\nOne of the studies conducted in Hong Kong was done using life-cycle assessment (LCA). The study aimed to assess and compare the environmental impacts of wood waste management from building construction activities using different alternative management scenarios in Hong Kong. Despite various advantages of lumber and its waste, the contribution to the study of the circular economy of lumber is still very small. Some areas where improvements can be made to improve the circularity of lumber is as follows:\nSecondary raw material.\nThe term \"secondary raw material\" denotes waste material that has been recycled and injected back into use as productive material. Lumber has a high potential to be used as a secondary raw material at various stages, as listed below:\nTimber undergo multiple processing stages before lumber of desired shapes, size, and standards are achieved for commercial use. The process generates a lot of waste which in most cases is disregarded. But being an organic waste, the positive aspect of such waste is that it can be used as a fertiliser or to protect the soil in severe weather conditions.\nWaste generated during the manufacturing of lumber products can be used to produce thermal energy. Lumber products after their end-of-life can be downcycled into chips and be used as biomass to produce thermal energy. It is beneficial for industries that need thermal energy.\nCircular economy practices offer effective solutions concerning waste. It targets its unnecessary generation through waste reduction, reuse, and recycling. There is no clear explicit evidence of circular economy in the wood panel industry. However, based on the circular economy concept and its characteristics, there are opportunities present in the wood panel industry from the raw material extraction phase to its end-of-life. Therefore, there lies a gap yet to be explored.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt; \nExplanatory notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59400", "revid": "921531", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59400", "title": "Rust (fungus)", "text": "Order of fungi\nRusts are fungal plant pathogens of the order Pucciniales (previously known as Uredinales) causing plant fungal diseases.\nAn estimated 168 rust genera and approximately 7,000 species, more than half of which belong to the genus \"Puccinia\", are currently accepted. Rust fungi are highly specialized plant pathogens with several unique features. Taken as a group, rust fungi are diverse and affect many kinds of plants. However, each species has a range of hosts and cannot be transmitted to non-host plants. In addition, most rust fungi cannot be grown easily in pure culture.\nMost species of rust fungi are able to infect two different plant hosts in different stages of their life cycle, and may produce up to five morphologically and cytologically distinct spore-producing structures viz., spermogonia, aecia, uredinia, telia, and basidia in successive stages of reproduction. Each spore type is very host-specific, and can typically infect only one kind of plant.\nRust fungi are obligate plant pathogens that only infect living plants. Infections begin when a spore lands on the plant surface, germinates, and invades its host. Infection is limited to plant parts such as leaves, petioles, tender shoots, stem, fruits, etc. Plants with severe rust infection may appear stunted, chlorotic (yellowed), or may display signs of infection such as rust fruiting bodies. Rust fungi grow intracellularly, and make spore-producing fruiting bodies within or, more often, on the surfaces of affected plant parts. Some rust species form perennial systemic infections that may cause plant deformities such as growth retardation, witch's broom, stem canker, galls, or hypertrophy of affected plant parts.\nRusts get their name because they are most commonly observed as deposits of powdery rust-coloured or brown spores on plant surfaces. The Roman agricultural festival Robigalia (April 25) has ancient origins in combating wheat rust.\nImpacts.\nRusts are among the most harmful pathogens to agriculture, horticulture and forestry. Rust fungi are major concerns and limiting factors for successful cultivation of agricultural and forest crops. White pine blister rust, wheat stem rust, soybean rust, and coffee rust are examples of notoriously damaging threats to economically important crops. Climate change may increase the prevalence of some rust species while causing others to decline through increased CO2 and O3, changes to temperature and humidity, and enhanced spore dispersal due to more frequent extreme weather events.\nLife cycle.\nAll rusts are obligate or biotrophic parasites, meaning that they require a living host to complete their life cycle. They generally do not kill the host plant but can severely reduce growth and yield. Cereal crops can be devastated in one season; oak trees infected in the main stem within their first five years by the rust \"Cronartium quercuum\" often die.\nRust fungi can produce up to five spore types from corresponding fruiting body types during their life cycle, depending on the species. Roman numerals have traditionally been used to refer to these morphological types.\nRust fungi are often categorized by their life cycle. Three basic types of life cycles are recognized based on the number of spore types as macrocyclic, demicyclic, and microcyclic. The macrocyclic life cycle has all spore states, the demicyclic lacks the uredinial state, and the microcyclic cycle lacks the basidial, pycnial, and the aecial states, thus possess only uredinia and telia. Spermagonia may be absent from each type but especially the microcyclic life cycle. In macrocyclic and demicyclic life cycles, the rust may be either host alternating (heteroecious) (i.e., the aecial stage is on one kind of plant but the telial stage on a different and unrelated plant), or single-host (autoecious) (i.e., the aecial and telial states on the same plant host). Heteroecious rust fungi require two unrelated hosts to complete their life cycle, with the primary host being infected by aeciospores and the alternate host being infected by basidiospores. This can be contrasted with an autoecious fungus, such as \"Puccinia porri\", which can complete all parts of its life cycle on a single host species. Understanding the life cycles of rust fungi allows for proper disease management.\nHost plant\u2013rust fungus relationship.\nThere are definite patterns of relationship with host plant groups and the rust fungi that parasitize them. Some genera of rust fungi, especially \"Puccinia\" and \"Uromyces\", comprise species that are capable of parasitizing plants of many families. Other rust genera appear to be restricted to certain plant groups. Host restriction may, in heteroecious species, apply to both phases of life cycle or to only one phase. As with many pathogen/host pairs, rusts are often in gene-for-gene relationships with their plants. This rust-plant gene-for-gene interaction differs somewhat from other gene-for-gene situations and has its own quirks and agronomic significance. Rust fungi decrease photosynthesis and elicit the emissions of different stress volatiles with increasing severity of infection.\nInfection process.\nThe spores of rust fungi may be dispersed by wind, water or insect vectors. When a spore encounters a susceptible plant, it can germinate and infect plant tissues. A rust spore typically germinates on a plant surface, growing a short hypha called a germ tube. This germ tube may locate a stoma by a touch responsive process known as thigmotropism. This involves orienting to ridges created by epidermal cells on the leaf surface, and growing directionally until it encounters a stoma. Over the stoma, a hyphal tip produces an infection structure called an appressorium. From the underside of an appressorium, a slender hypha grows downward to infect plant cells. It is thought that the whole process is mediated by stretch-sensitive calcium ion channels located in the tip of the hypha, which produce electric currents and alter gene expression, inducing appressorium formation.\nOnce the fungus has invaded the plant, it grows into plant mesophyll cells, producing specialized hyphae known as haustoria. The haustoria penetrate cell walls but not cell membranes: plant cell membranes invaginate around the main haustorial body forming a space known as the \"extra-haustorial matrix\". An iron- and phosphorus-rich neck band bridges the plant and fungal membranes in the space between the cells for water flow, known as the apoplast, thus preventing the nutrients reaching the plant's cells. The haustorium contains amino acid- and hexose sugar- transporters and H+-ATPases which are used for active transport of nutrients from the plant, nourishing the fungus. The fungus continues growing, penetrating more and more plant cells, until spore growth occurs. The process repeats every 10\u201314 days, producing numerous spores that can be spread to other parts of the same plant, or to new hosts.\nManagement.\nResearch.\nEfforts to control rusts began to be scientifically based in the 20th century. Elvin C. Stakman initiated the scientific study of host resistance, which had heretofore been poorly understood and handled by individual growers as part of the breeding process. Stakman was followed by H. H. Flor's extensive discoveries of rust genetics. In order to study rust metabolics, Tervet \"et al.\", 1951 developed the &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Visible anchor/styles.css\" /&gt;Cyclone Separator. The cyclone separator uses the cyclonic separation mechanism to allow the mechanised collection of spores for study \u2013 Cherry &amp; Peet 1966's improved version gathers even more efficiently. This device was first put to work testing the composition of the spores themselves, especially substances coating the outside of the spores which signal population density. When detected they help prevent crowding.\nGene cloning and other methods of genetic engineering can provide a much wider range of R genes and other sources of rust resistance \u2013 with reduced delay before deployment \u2013 if regulation of genetic engineering permits.\nControl.\nThe control methods of rust fungus diseases depend largely on the life cycle of the particular pathogen. The following are examples of disease management plans used to control macrocyclic and demicyclic diseases:\nMacrocyclic disease: Developing a management plan for this type of disease depends largely on whether the urediniospores (rarely termed the \"repeating stage\") occur on the economically important host plant or the alternate host. For example, the repeating stage in white pine blister rust disease does not occur on white pines but on the alternate host, \"Ribes\" spp. During August and September \"Ribes\" spp. give rise to teliospores which infect white pines. Removal of the alternate host disrupts the life cycle of the rust fungi \"Cronartium ribicola\", preventing the formation of basidiospores which infect the primary host. Although spores from white pines cannot infect other white pines, survival spores may overwinter on infected pines and reinfect \"Ribes\" spp. the following season. Infected tissue is removed from white pines and strict quarantines of \"Ribes\" spp. are maintained in high risk areas.\n\"Puccinia graminis\" is a macrocyclic heteroecious fungus that causes wheat stem rust disease. The sexual stage in this fungus occurs on the alternate host \u2013 barberry \u2013 and not wheat. The durable spore type produced on the alternate host allows the disease to persist in wheat even in more inhospitable environments. Planting resistant crops will prevent disease, however, virulence mutations will give rise to new strains of fungi that overcome plant resistance. Although the disease cannot be stopped by removal of the alternate host, the life cycle is disrupted and the rate of evolution is decreased because of reduced genetic recombination. This allows resistance bred crops to remain effective for a longer period of time.\nDemicyclic disease: Because there is no repeating stage in the life cycle of demicyclic fungi, removal of the primary or the alternate host will disrupt the disease cycle. This method, however, is not highly effective in managing all demicyclic diseases. Cedar-apple rust disease, for example, can persist despite removal of one of the hosts since spores can be disseminated from long distances. The severity of cedar-apple rust disease can be managed by removal of basidiospore producing galls from junipers or the application of protective fungicides to junipers.\nHome control.\nRust diseases are very hard to treat. Fungicides, such as Mancozeb, may help but may never eradicate the disease. Some organic preventative solutions are available and sulphur powder is known to stop spore germination. High standards of hygiene, good soil drainage, and careful watering may minimize problems. Any appearance of rust must be immediately dealt with by removing and burning all affected leaves. Composting, or leaving infected vegetation on the ground, will spread the disease.\nCommercial control.\nIn some large acreage crops, fungicides are applied by air. The process is expensive and fungicide application is best reserved for seasons when foliar diseases are severe. Research indicates, the higher the foliar disease severity, the greater the return from the use of fungicides. Southern corn rust disease, can be confused with common rust. Southern rust's distinguishing characteristic is that pustules form mostly on the upper leaf surface and spores are more orange in color. Southern rust spreads more quickly and has a higher economic impact when hot, humid weather conditions persist. Timely fungicide applications to control southern rust are more crucial than with common rust.\nA variety of preventative methods can be employed for rust diseases:\nHost plants affected.\nIt is probable that most plant species are affected by some species of rust. Rusts are often named after a host species that they infect. For example; \"Puccinia xanthii\" infects the flowering plant cocklebur (\"Xanthium\"). Recently, a total of 95 rust fungi belonging to 25 genera associated with 117 forest plant species belonging to 80 host genera under 43 host families were reported from the Western Ghats, Kerala, India. Rust fungi include:\nRust infected host genera include: \nSome of the better known hosts include:\nHyperparasites of rusts.\nIn the family Sphaeropsidaceae of Sphaeropsidales fungi, species of the genus \"Darluca\" are hyperparasites on rusts.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59402", "revid": "1255213272", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59402", "title": "Mediumistic automatism", "text": ""}
{"id": "59403", "revid": "4848309", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59403", "title": "Binghamton, New York", "text": "City in New York, United States\nBinghamton ( ) is a city in the U.S. state of New York, and serves as the county seat of Broome County. Surrounded by rolling hills, it lies in the state's Southern Tier region near the Pennsylvania border, in a bowl-shaped valley at the confluence of the Susquehanna and Chenango rivers. The population was 47,969 at the 2020 census. Binghamton is the principal city of the Binghamton metropolitan area (also known as Greater Binghamton, or historically the Triple Cities, including Endicott and Johnson City), home to a quarter million people.\nFrom the days of the railroad, Binghamton was a transportation crossroads and a manufacturing center, and has been known at different times for the production of cigars, shoes, and computers. IBM was founded nearby, and the flight simulator was invented in the city, leading to a notable concentration of electronics- and defense-oriented firms. This sustained economic prosperity earned Binghamton the moniker of the Valley of Opportunity. However, starting with job cuts made by defense firms towards the end of the Cold War, the region lost a large part of its manufacturing industry.\nToday, while there is a continued concentration of high-tech firms, Binghamton is emerging as a healthcare- and education-focused city, with Binghamton University acting as much of the driving force behind this revitalization.\nHistory.\nEarly settlement.\nThe first known people of European descent to come to the area were the troops of the Sullivan Expedition in 1779, during the American Revolutionary War, who destroyed local villages of the Onondaga and Oneida tribes. The city was named after William Bingham, a wealthy Philadelphian who bought the 10,000 acre patent for the land in 1786, then consisting of parts of the towns of Union and Chenango. Joshua Whitney, Jr., Bingham's land agent, chose land at the junction of the Chenango and Susquehanna Rivers to develop a settlement, then named Chenango Point. After being officially conveyed the land by Bingham on July 4, 1800, Whitney arranged for the construction of the settlement's first two streets, Court Street and Water Street, and the first residence was built later that year. Whitney continued to expand Chenango Point and sell plots to new settlers, and helped erect the first bridge in 1808. The significant growth of Chenango Point led to its incorporation as a village, and its official renaming as Binghamton, in 1834. Daniel S. Dickinson was chosen to be the first village president.\nThe Chenango Canal, completed in 1837, connected Binghamton to the Erie Canal, and was the impetus for the initial industrial development of the area. This growth accelerated with the completion of the Erie Railroad between Binghamton and Jersey City, NJ in 1849. With the Delaware, Lackawanna and Western Railroad arriving soon afterward, the village became an important regional transportation center. Several buildings of importance were built at this time, including the New York State Inebriate Asylum, opened in 1858 as the first center in the United States to treat alcoholism as a disease.\nGrowth as a manufacturing hub.\nBinghamton incorporated as a city in 1867 and, due to the presence of several stately homes, was nicknamed the Parlor City. In the late 19th and early 20th centuries, many immigrants moved to the area, finding an abundance of jobs. During the 1880s, Binghamton became the second-largest manufacturer of cigars in the United States. By the early 1920s, Endicott Johnson, a shoe manufacturer whose development of welfare capitalism resulted in many amenities for local residents, became the region's largest employer. An even larger influx of Europeans immigrated to Binghamton, and the working class prosperity resulted in the area being called the Valley of Opportunity.\nIn 1913, 31 people perished in the Binghamton Clothing Company fire, which resulted in reforms to the New York fire code. Major floods in 1935 and 1936 resulted in a number of deaths and washed out the Ferry Street Bridge (now the Clinton Street Bridge). The floods led the city to build flood walls along the length of the Susquehanna and Chenango Rivers.\nDuring the Second World War, growth continued as IBM, which was founded in greater Binghamton, emerged as a global technology leader. Along with Edwin Link's invention of the flight simulator in Binghamton, IBM's growth helped transition the region to a high-tech economy. Other major manufacturers included Ansco and General Electric. Until the Cold War ended, the area never experienced an economic downfall, due in part to its defense-oriented industries. The city's population peaked at around 85,000 in the mid-1950s.\nDecline and recovery.\nPost-war suburban development led to a decline in the city's population and the rapid growth of the towns of Vestal and Union. Like many other Rust Belt cities, traditional manufacturers saw steep declines, though Binghamton's technology industry limited this impact. Urban renewal efforts to reverse these trends dominated construction in the city during the 1960s and early 1970s and led to the destruction of many ornate city buildings. The construction included the creation of Government Plaza, the Broome County Veterans Memorial Arena, and the Brandywine Highway. While these projects failed to stem most of the losses, they established Binghamton as the region's government and cultural center. The city's population declined from approximately 64,000 in 1969 to 56,000 by the early 1980s.\nAs the Cold War ended in 1991 with the collapse of the Soviet Union, defense-related industries in the Binghamton area began to falter, resulting in several closures and widespread layoffs These were most notable at IBM, which sold its Federal Systems division and laid off several thousands of workers. The local economy went into a deep recession, and the long-prevalent manufacturing jobs dropped by 64% from 1990 to 2013.\nIn the 21st century, the city has tried to diversify its economic base to spur revitalization. The local economy has slowly transitioned toward services and healthcare. Major emphasis has been placed on Binghamton University, which built a downtown campus in 2007 and several student housing complexes. The increased downtown residential population and the university's plans to build additional student housing have spurred development of supporting businesses and a renewed focus on the riverfront. Unfortunately, two severe floods have stymied the recovery: while most of the impact of the Mid-Atlantic United States flood of 2006 was in the surrounding metropolitan area, the remnants of Tropical Storm Lee topped city flood walls in September 2011, causing $1\u00a0billion of damage in greater Binghamton.\nOn April 3, 2009, the deadliest mass shooting in New York history occurred at the American Civic Association's offices in Binghamton.\nGeography.\nCityscape.\nAccording to the U.S. Census Bureau, the city has an area of , of which is land and (5.83%) is water.\nBinghamton, like all of the Southern Tier of New York, lies on the Allegheny Plateau; hence its hilly terrain. As such, elevations can vary in the city--Downtown, for example, is at an elevation of around 860 feet (262 meters), while residential homes in the hills can go up to over 1,800 feet (548 meters), such as on Ingram Hill. The highest peak in Binghamton is Table Rock Ridge, which is at 1,854 feet.\nThe Downtown area sits at the confluence of the Chenango and Susquehanna Rivers, in the middle of a long but relatively narrow valley. The north branch of the Susquehanna River passes south of downtown. This branch rises in eastern New York and receives a number of tributaries above Binghamton. In the center of the city, the Chenango River feeds into the Susquehanna from the north at Confluence Park. The Binghamton River Trail, a 1.5 mile trail along the Chenango, runs between Cheri Lindsey Park on the Northside and Confluence Park in Downtown. Eleven bridges span the rivers inside city limits. Broome County has 17.5 miles of levees, many of which are in Binghamton. Major floods have occurred in 1865, 1935, 1936, 2006, and 2011.\nThe incorporation of Binghamton united various communities on both shores of the two rivers. The majority of the city's population and development lies along the rolling terrain nearest the riverbanks with sparse development in the hills that define the city limits. The old city was laid out on a grid system by Joshua Whitney, Jr., but as development spread to the outer regions of the city and merged with other settlements, several grids were eventually juxtaposed against each other. In the Southside, the grid breaks down, as more curvilinear roads make up the predominantly residential areas along the hills.\nThe city was the traditional economic center of the region and is home to several historic districts. The Railroad Terminal Historic District consists of several factories and buildings along the railroad line in the northern limits of downtown. Over 1,000 properties on the West Side contribute to the Abel Bennett Tract Historic District, mainly made up of residential properties along Riverside Drive. Downtown's State Street-Henry Street Historic District consists of several older low-rise buildings. The Court Street Historic District has some of the city's most notable architecture, including the Press Building and Security Mutual Building, early 20th century high rises, and the Broome County Courthouse. The Press Building was the tallest building in Binghamton until the completion of the State Office Building in Government Plaza, which remains the tallest in the city.\nAway from downtown, most of the buildings are single- and multi-family dwellings, along with low-rise business buildings lining commercial arteries. Along the railroad corridors, several factories, mostly abandoned, rise above the otherwise-uniform landscape.\nMain Street runs through the West Side, and continues west to serve as Main Street in the villages of Johnson City and Endicott. On the east side of the Chenango River, the road becomes Court Street, the major east\u2013west artery in downtown and the East Side.\nNeighborhoods.\nBinghamton is divided into seven neighborhoods. Downtown Binghamton, also known as Center City, is home to most of the city's largest buildings and government services. Located at the northeast corner of the river confluence and increasingly populated by college students, it supports a flourishing arts scene. The North Side is across the Norfolk Southern rail tracks from downtown, along the Chenango River. The North Side is a light commercial and working-class residential area of the city, with Chenango Street serving as its major artery. The East Side lies east of the Brandywine Highway, along the north bank of the Susquehanna River. The neighborhood is largely residential with commercial corridors along Robinson and Court streets, and it has pockets of industrial development along its borders.\nAcross the Chenango River lies the West Side, a primarily residential neighborhood along the banks of the Susquehanna that has a combination of family homes, student housing, and stately mansions. Main Street's large supermarkets, pharmacies, bank branches, pubs, restaurants, auto shops, and a few strip malls form the West Side's commercial corridor. The First Ward, a largely residential neighborhood opposite the railroad tracks from the West Side, is best known for Antique Row, a series of antique shops that line Clinton Street. This part of the city is home to several gold-domed Christian churches built by the area's many Eastern European immigrants. It is also home to several large supermarkets, churches, pharmacies, bank branches, a few bars and restaurants as well as mom and pop shops that provide such goods as video games and music. Ely Park, Binghamton's northernmost neighborhood, contains its municipal golf course. It lies on parts of Prospect Mountain and other hills north of the First Ward.\nThe Southside lies along the south bank of the Susquehanna River and is connected to downtown by several bridges. At the base of the historic South Washington Street Bridge is the Southbridge commercial district. The neighborhood is partitioned into two neighborhood assemblies, divided by Pennsylvania Avenue and Southbridge, due to their distinct characters. Southside East has working-class residences and some public housing projects and is home to the Islamic Awareness Center, while Southside West is primarily made up of larger middle-class residences.\nClimate.\nBinghamton has a humid continental climate (K\u00f6ppen \"Dfb\"), with cold, snowy winters and warm, wet summers. Summers in Binghamton are typified by warm yet temperate days, and there are an average of only 2.6 days annually where the high exceeds , with the highest recorded temperature at on July 16, 1988. Winters are less moderate, with 5.8 days with sub- lows annually on average; the lowest recorded temperature was on January 15, 1957. As with most cities in upstate New York, precipitation in Binghamton is spread evenly throughout the year.\nBinghamton's proximity to the Great Lakes results in significant cloudiness and precipitation. Weather systems traveling over the lakes pick up moisture. Like other cities near the Great Lakes, Binghamton has a large number of days with cloud cover and at least some precipitation. Binghamton has 190 cloudy or mostly cloudy days per year, which is the 11th most among US cities. Cloudiness is most common during winter, with mostly cloudy or overcast skies 37% of the time in August but 68% of the time in January. While average annual precipitation is , which is typical for the eastern half of the United States, Binghamton averages 164 days of measurable (at least .01 inches) precipitation, which is among the highest in the country.\nSnowfall is significant, with an annual total of . Binghamton is not as affected by lake-effect snow as cities further north or west such as Syracuse and Buffalo, which are part of the Great Lakes snowbelt. However, persistent snow bands from both the Great Lakes and the Finger Lakes can reach Binghamton. Binghamton receives occasional major snowfall from nor'easter storms as well (such as the 1993 Storm of the Century, or nearly four feet of snow in December 2020), and competes for the Golden Snowball Award with other upstate cities.\n&lt;section begin=\"weather box\"/&gt;\n&lt;section end=\"weather box\" /&gt;\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAs of the census of 2010, 47,376 people, 21,150 households, and 9,986 families resided in the city. The population density was . There were 23,842 housing units at an average density of . Of all households, 20.8% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 26.9% were married couples living together, 15.6% had a female householder with no husband present, 4.7% had a male householder with no wife present, and 52.8% were non-families. 40.5% of all households were made up of individuals, and 25.5% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.18 and the average family size was 2.94.\nRace and ethnicity.\nBinghamton is home to an ethnically diverse population. During its industrial heyday, thousands of European immigrants moved to the city as they found an abundance of jobs and working-class prosperity. Many Irish, Italians, and Eastern Europeans settled in the area, and the American Civic Association was created to help their transition to life and assimilation in the United States. This influx led to a temporary rise in the local Ku Klux Klan during the 1920s, with Binghamton serving as state headquarters. Area residents, who primarily embraced the different cultural heritages, quelled such anti-immigrant sentiment by founding several ethnic organizations and holding ethnic celebrations, at the encouragement of Endicott-Johnson. This has had a lasting effect on the city, which sports many churches and contemporary ethnic festivals, along with a population that is still predominantly white (though steadily decreasing in proportion). Binghamton also has a sizeable Kurdish community, among the largest in New York, mostly originating from Iraqi Kurdistan. As of 2010, Binghamton's racial makeup was 77.6% White, 11.4% Black or African American, 0.3% Native American, 4.2% Asian, 0.04% Pacific Islander, 2.0% from other races, and 4.4% from two or more races. 6.4% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.\nDue to its diversity, the region is home to many religious denominations. The First Ward, the historic home to much of the city's Eastern European population, houses several gold domed Orthodox churches. As a result of its strong Italian and Irish heritage, the largest religious body in Broome County is the Catholic Church. Binghamton falls under the Roman Catholic Diocese of Syracuse. Throughout the county, 105,064 people, or 52.4% of the total population, are listed as congregational adherents.\nPopulation trends.\nUntil the mid-1950s, Binghamton saw its population grow rapidly due to its industrial boom, and it was one of the largest 100 cities in the United States between 1890 and 1910. Since 1950, the city has experienced sustained population loss, some of which was the result of suburbanization. Much of the recent population loss has occurred throughout the region, and is skewed toward the younger population, resulting in the growth of the relative proportion of the elderly in Broome County.\nAge and sex.\nIn the city, the age distribution was: 19.3% of the population under the age of 18, 15.0% from 18 to 24, 24.7% from 25 to 44, 25.0% from 45 to 64, and 16.1% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 33.2 years. For every 100 females, there were 96.1 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 87.8 males.\nMetropolitan area.\nAs of 2020, the Binghamton metropolitan area is home to 247,138 people. The MSA is composed of all of Broome County and neighboring Tioga County. The urban area, which includes parts of Susquehanna County, Pennsylvania, has a population of 158,054 as of 2010. Alternatively defined, the number of people living in an approximately 30-mile radius of the city center is 316,270. This count includes Broome County and parts of Tioga, Cortland, Delaware, Chenango, and Tompkins Counties in New York, and parts of Susquehanna, Bradford, and Wayne Counties in Pennsylvania.\nIncome and poverty.\nThe city's median household income was $30,978, and the median family income was $43,436. Males had a median full-time income of $40,170 versus $35,060 for females. The city's per capita income was $20,576. About 23.6% of families and 33.3% of the population were below the poverty line, including 47.3% of those under age 18 and 14.9% of those age 65 or over.\nEconomy.\nAfter the boom of the cigar industry in the 1880s, the Binghamton area became increasingly reliant on large manufacturers, with both Endicott Johnson, a shoe manufacturer, and IBM employing 15,000 to 20,000 local workers at their peak. Other companies with a large historical presence included Link Aviation Devices, Ansco, and General Electric. Several other notable businesses started in Binghamton, such as Valvoline, the Nineteen Hundred Washer Company (which merged to form Whirlpool), and \"Dr. Kilmer's Swamp Root\", a famous patent medicine. Dick's Sporting Goods began as a fishing store in the East Side in 1948, and was headquartered in Binghamton until 1994.\nMuch of Binghamton's current employment base is oriented toward technology and defense manufacturing, though the sector has been diminishing since 1990. Areas of specialization include systems integration, flight simulation, and printed circuit board manufacturing. The largest such companies in the area are Lockheed Martin, BAE Systems, IBM, Sanmina-SCI, and Universal Instruments. Other notable technology firms include i3 Electronics, Rockwell Collins, and L-3 Communications, which absorbed the Link Aviation operations. Although not a large employer, the McIntosh Laboratory is a well-known high-end manufacturer of audio amplifiers, receivers, and other components. Despite the sustained job losses, the Binghamton MSA had 13% of New York State's computer and electronics manufacturing jobs as of 2010.\nEducation and health care are also becoming significant sectors in the regional economy. In particular, Binghamton University and Broome Community College employ many researchers and educators. Binghamton University has a New York State Center of Excellence for small-scale systems integration, and it has provided the major impetus for the Southern Tier High Technology Incubator in downtown Binghamton, which encourages the growth of local startups. Upstate Medical University has worked to expand its clinical campus by establishing a permanent home at the former New York State Inebriate Asylum on the East Side. Major companies in the private healthcare industry include United Health Services and Lourdes Hospital.\nBinghamton also has many food services and distribution companies. Maines Paper &amp; Food Service and Willow Run Foods - two of the nation's largest food distributors who serve restaurants throughout the United States - have their headquarters in the area. Maines is one of the largest private companies in the country. Crowley Foods, a subsidiary of HP Hood, maintains headquarters in Binghamton, and Frito-Lay has a large plant in the region.\nAgriculture has long played a notable role in the regional economy, and the farm bureau movement started in Binghamton in 1911.\nOther notable local employers include New York State Electric &amp; Gas and Johnson Outdoors. Two insurance companies, Security Mutual Life and Columbian Financial Group, maintain headquarters in the area.\nThe region has several large shopping areas. Downtown Binghamton is home to a Boscov's department store, and the development of large student housing projects has led to a resurgence of restaurants and service-oriented businesses. While downtown was home to several major department stores and the center of regional shopping, most shopping has moved toward the suburbs. The town of Vestal has several shopping centers and big-box stores along a five-mile stretch of the Vestal Parkway. The village of Johnson City is home to the Oakdale Mall, the area's only indoor super regional mall. Significant commercial development has also taken place in the town of Dickinson, with many shopping centers just north of the city. In the First Ward, Clinton Street is home to Antique Row, a collection of antique shops.\nArts and culture.\nSince the early 2000s, the region has developed a growing and pervasive arts scene. These include a large cluster of art galleries and shops centered around downtown Binghamton. These galleries have given rise to the First Friday Art Walk, through the efforts an association of local artists and merchants in Downtown Binghamton. These events have drawn large crowds downtown since 2004. Artists of local prominence that display or have galleries include photorealist painter Anthony Brunelli, Orazio Salati, and Marla Olmstead, a local child who achieved fame in the art world for her abstract art.\nThe Binghamton Philharmonic is the region's premier professional orchestra. Founded in 1955, it provides symphonic music to all of the Southern Tier. Concerts are performed throughout the year, with a variety of classical, pops and chamber music. The Tri-Cities Opera stages full-scale operas at the Broome County Forum. The professional company has performed since 1949, and is famed for its actor training program. The region also has several other semi-professional and amateur orchestras and theaters such as the Cider Mill Playhouse.\nThe Roberson Museum and Science Center, in the heart of Binghamton, is home to the Binghamton Visitor Center, the Link Planetarium, and a number of exhibits detailing the culture and history of Greater Binghamton and the Southern Tier. The Kopernik Observatory &amp; Science Center observatory is the largest public observatory in the northeast United States. The Binghamton Zoo at Ross Park, in the Southside, opened in 1875 and is the fifth-oldest zoo in the nation.\nBinghamton is known as the Carousel Capital of the World, as it houses six of the remaining antique carousels. Two are within city limits, one at Recreation Park and another at the Binghamton Zoo at Ross Park. Other visitor attractions include the Phelps Mansion museum, the Cutler Botanic Garden, the Bundy Museum of History and Art, and the interactive, child-oriented Discovery Center. The Center for Technology &amp; Innovation, a museum dedicated to local industry, is under construction.\nThe area is home to a popular regional dish known as the spiedie. Many of the area's restaurants serve spiedies, but they have only experienced limited penetration beyond the Southern Tier and Central New York. Spiedies are celebrated at the Spiedie Fest and Balloon Rally, which is held at Otsiningo Park each August and attracts over 100,000 people annually.\nThe city's other annual events include the St. Patrick's Day parade in March, July Fest (a festival of jazz music, arts, and crafts held downtown since 1962), the 100-year-old St. Mary of the Assumption Bazaar in August, the LUMA Projection Arts Festival in September, Binghamton Porchfest (a free annual music festival featuring hundreds of performances staged on West Side residential porches), Blues on the Bridge (a September music festival that takes place on the South Washington Street Bridge), and the Columbus Day Parade and Italian Festival every October, which includes a marching band competition. Broome County is home to several festivals (including a significant concentration of ethnic celebrations due to its heritage), which the New York Department of Economic Development recognized in 2001 as the year's official I Love New York festival, and collectively dubbed the \"Festival of Festivals\". Notable former festivities include the Yegatta Regatta and the Pops on the River concert.\nResidents of Binghamton typically speak the Inland Northern dialect of American English, and the region falls within a distinct isogloss that also contains Buffalo, Rochester, and Syracuse. Much of the local accent has been subject to the Northern Cities Vowel Shift, though this has not fully taken hold. Unlike people in other Inland Northern cities, people in Binghamton typically refer to athletic shoes as \"sneakers\" (as opposed to \"tennis shoes\") and to soft drinks as \"soda\" (as opposed to \"pop\").\nBinghamton was also the home of a branch of the Dunder-Mifflin Paper Company from the television show the Office. The branch was closed down on a drunken bender by CEO Robert California starting a branch war between Scranton and Albany.\nSports.\nProfessional and semi-pro teams.\nBinghamton has a long history with minor league sports, having been home to several teams over the years. The Eastern League, one of the older Double-A baseball leagues in the United States prior to the 2021 Minor League Baseball reorganization, was founded at the Arlington Hotel in downtown Binghamton in 1923. Today, the city hosts two professional minor league teams, the Binghamton Rumble Ponies (a baseball team affiliated with the New York Mets) and the Binghamton Black Bears (an ice hockey team in the Federal Prospects Hockey League). In 2018, the \"Sports Business Journal\" ranked the city as the 10th best minor-league sports market in the country.\nBaseball.\nThe area is home to the Eastern League's Binghamton Rumble Ponies, the Double-A affiliate of the New York Mets. The former Binghamton Mets have sent stars like Daniel Murphy, Noah Syndergaard, Steven Matz, Juan Lagares, Jos\u00e9 Reyes, David Wright, Preston Wilson, Ike Davis, Zack Wheeler, Edgardo Alfonzo, Jon Niese, Pete Alonso and Jay Payton to the majors.\nBinghamton has a long history in professional baseball dating back to 1877. Teams nicknamed the Crickets, the Bingoes, and for many years the Triplets represented Binghamton in the New York State League (now defunct), the New York\u2013Pennsylvania League, the International League, and the Eastern League (1892\u201394, 1938\u20131963, 1967\u20131968, 1992\u20132021).\nThe 1887 Binghamton Bingoes of the International League attracted national attention when the white players revolted against the two black players on the team. The reaction around the league forced Binghamton to release the black players, and the team folded soon after.\nThe Binghamton Triplets of the Eastern League, founded in 1923, became a farm club of the New York Yankees in 1932, and sent many players to New York through 1968, when the team folded. Notably, the Hall of Fame pitcher Whitey Ford was a starting pitcher for the Triplets in 1949.\nFootball.\nBinghamton has also been home to two semiprofessional football teams, the Broome County Dragons (members of the Empire Football League) and the Southern Tier Green Machine (members of the North American Football League). In addition, two women's football teams called Binghamton home; the Binghamton Tiger Cats (members of the Independent Women's Football League) and the Southern Tier Spitfire (members of the Women's Football Alliance). As of 2015, none of these teams play. Founded in 2018, the Broome County Stallions play as part of the Northeastern Football Alliance.\nGolf.\nThe B.C. Open was an official PGA Tour event held annually from 1971 to 2005 at Endicott's En-Joie Golf Course. (Note that the 2006 B.C. Open had to be played in Verona, N.Y. due to extensive damage during the June 2006 Flooding of the Susquehanna River.) Beginning in 2007, the area hosted a PGA Tour Champions event, the Dick's Sporting Goods Open. The event replaced the B.C. Open and continues to be played at En-Joie Golf Course in Endicott.\nHockey.\nProfessional hockey arrived in Binghamton in 1973 with the founding of the Broome Dusters of the North American Hockey League. The Dusters were known for their wide-open style of play, which was unusual in professional hockey at the time. While crowds were sparse at the beginning of the 1973 season, the team's popularity grew and the strength of the Dusters fan base, combined with continuous sellouts, led \"The Hockey News\" to declare Binghamton as Hockey Town USA. When the league folded in 1977, the Providence team of the American Hockey League moved to Binghamton and became the Binghamton Dusters. The team became the Binghamton Whalers from 1980 to 1990 and the Binghamton Rangers from 1990 to 1997 as a result of affiliations with the National Hockey League's (NHL) Hartford Whalers and New York Rangers.\nLater the Binghamton Senators who were the AHL affiliate of the Ottawa Senators were formed. The B-Sens won division titles in 2003 and 2005, reached the AHL conference finals in 2003 and won the Calder Cup in 2011. The B-Sens sent players such as Jason Spezza, Robin Lehner, Chris Kelly, Jakob Silfverberg, and Jean-Gabriel Pageau to the NHL. The B-Sens relocated to Canada for the 2017\u201318 season.\nWhen the Senators were relocated, the NHL's New Jersey Devils brought their AHL franchise to the city as the Binghamton Devils with home games at Floyd L. Maines Veterans Memorial Arena. The B-Devils left Binghamton in 2020 during the COVID-19 pandemic and then relocated as the Utica Comets in 2021.\nAn expansion team in the Federal Prospects Hockey League (FPHL) called the Binghamton Black Bears replaced the Devils at the Veterans Memorial Arena starting with the 2021\u201322 season. In May 2024, the Binghamton Black Bears won the Commissioner's Cup, sweeping the Carolina Thunderbirds 3-0 in the best-of-five FPHL Finals.\nTennis.\nThe area was home to an annual Professional Tennis Challenger, the Levene Gouldin &amp; Thompson Tennis Challenger, part of the USTA pro circuit (Known as the Frito-Lay Tennis Challenger in years past) and ATP Challenger Tour, from 1994 to 2019. Tennis greats such as Lleyton Hewitt, James Blake and, more recently, Andy Murray found their start with this tournament, using it as a springboard to the U.S. Open (tennis).\nNCAA sports.\nBinghamton University plays Division I college sports as a member of the America East Conference. Division III College Sports are played at Broome Community College. Bobby Gonzalez, former head coach of Seton Hall's men's basketball team was born here, and still has family in the area. King Rice, head basketball coach at Monmouth University, attended Binghamton High School.\nMotorsports.\nSince 1978 a round of the American Motorcyclist Association's Motocross Championship has taken place at the nearby Broome-Tioga Sports Center. This round of the series recently moved to Texas and is no longer hosted by the Broome-Tioga Sports Center. They also host the New York State Motocross Championships each fall and many other semi-pro events throughout the season.\nParks and recreation.\nBinghamton is known for its bicycling and walking clubs, facilities, and trails. The Binghamton River Trail is an urban trail starting at Confluence Park, where the rivers merge, and traveling alongside the Chenango River, past the Martin Luther King, Jr. Promenade and Noyes Island, up to Cheri A. Lindsey Park in the North Side.\nGovernment.\nSince its incorporation as a city in 1867, Binghamton has been a municipality with a \"strong\" mayor\u2013council form of government. The city government, originally housed in the old Municipal Building on Collier Street (now the Grand Royale Hotel), is now based at the Binghamton City Hall which occupies the west-wing of Government Plaza on the corner of State and Hawley streets. The mayor and councilors are elected to four-year terms and are limited to serving two terms. The Binghamton City Council is a unicameral body of seven Council members whose districts are defined by geographic population boundaries.\nExecutive.\nThe mayor of Binghamton is Jared M. Kraham (R).\nEducation.\nPrimary and secondary education.\nThe public Binghamton City School District is the largest school district in the metropolitan area, with about 5,000 students enrolled as of 2021[ [update]]. The district consists of Binghamton High School, two middle schools, and seven elementary schools. While the district maintains an International Baccalaureate program and has received several academic awards, it is classified as high needs, and has had difficulty meeting several educational requirements. The Catholic Schools of Broome County, a private school district affiliated with the Roman Catholic Diocese of Syracuse, operate Seton Catholic Central High School and an elementary school in the city of Binghamton.\nHigher education.\nThe city of Binghamton is home to three satellite campuses:\nThe city was home to the now-defunct Ridley-Lowell Business &amp; Technical Institute, which was founded in Binghamton in 1850.\nThe suburb of Vestal is home to the main campus of Binghamton University. The university, one of four university centers in the SUNY system, has approximately 19,000 students. Binghamton University is a selective top-ranking public university, and is considered to be a Public Ivy. It also has a large research presence, including a New York State Center of Excellence for small-scale systems integration. While the campus is in Vestal, many students who live off-campus find housing in the West Side. There has also been a recent push for student housing downtown to help revitalize the business district. In addition to its downtown campus, the university operates the Southern Tier High Technology Incubator in the city, and it is restoring the New York State Inebriate Asylum on the East Side for future use.\nSUNY Broome (formerly Broome Community College) is just north of the city in Dickinson. A two-year SUNY college, the school has 6,000 commuter students. Formerly specializing in technical education, SUNY Broome started in downtown Binghamton and stood at the Washington Street Armory until a fire in 1951. The college built the Student Village residence hall on campus in 2014 to attract residential students. SUNY Broome also offers courses at several off-campus locations, two of which are in the city. The college is renovating the former Carnegie Library into the SUNY Broome Culinary &amp; Event Center, which will house its hospitality programs.\nMedia.\nThe \"Press &amp; Sun-Bulletin\" is the only major daily paper in Binghamton. As of 2014, the region makes up the 159th largest television market in the United States, as well as the 187th largest radio market. The market is served by TV stations affiliated with the major American broadcast networks, including WBNG-TV 12 (CBS/CW), WBGH-CD 20 (NBC), WIVT 34 (ABC), and WICZ-TV 40 (Fox). WSKG-TV 46 is Binghamton's PBS member station, and serves a large portion of the Southern Tier. Most Binghamton radio stations are owned by one of three groups: Townsquare Media, iHeartMedia, or the locally based Equinox Broadcasting.\nInfrastructure.\nTransportation.\nBinghamton is a major junction in the Interstate Highway System, much as it was during the days of the railroad. Interstate 81, a major north\u2013south route, connects the city to Syracuse and Ontario, as well as to Pennsylvania and Appalachia. Binghamton is also the western terminus of Interstate 88, which gives a direct route to Albany. New York State Route 17, the Southern Tier Expressway, is being upgraded to Interstate 86, and spans the southern border of New York, providing access to New York City, as well as to the western Southern Tier and Erie, Pennsylvania. Between 1953 and 1966, the state built an arterial system to alleviate traffic, which includes the Brandywine Highway (New York State Route 7), North Shore Drive (New York State Route 363), and the portion of the Vestal Parkway (New York State Route 434) within city limits. Other major thoroughfares in the city include Chenango Street, Main Street (New York State Route 17C), and Court/Front Streets (U.S. Route 11).\nB.C. Transit, a daily bus service provided by Broome County, offers public transportation in Binghamton and outlying areas. Binghamton University students are also served by Off-Campus College Transport. Intercity buses originate from the Greater Binghamton Transportation Center, which was opened in 2010 and also serves as the B.C. Transit hub. OurBus offers bus daily service between Ithaca-Binghamton-Manhattan. Greyhound Lines provides direct routes to Buffalo, Syracuse, Rochester, Scranton, Toronto, and New York City. Short Line Buses offer service to Olean, Ithaca, Utica, Albany, New York City, and Long Island. Trailways of New York also has direct service to Albany and Rochester and Megabus has direct service to New York City.\nThe Greater Binghamton Airport (IATA code BGM, ICAO code KBGM) is a small regional airport, and the only area airport that offers scheduled airline service. Located north of downtown, it currently has non-stop flights to Detroit on Delta Air Lines and to Orlando, Florida on Avelo Airlines. The region's general aviation airport, Tri-Cities Airport, is to the west, in the town of Endicott.\nThree freight railroads serve Binghamton. Norfolk Southern Railway serves Binghamton with its Southern Tier Main Line (the former Erie Lackawanna mainline) and on the main line between Schenectady and Scranton, Pennsylvania (formerly the Delaware and Hudson Railway). The New York, Susquehanna and Western Railway maintains lines from Binghamton to Syracuse and Utica, and the Central New York Railroad offers freight service to Port Jervis. Binghamton has no railroad passenger service. The last scheduled service, the \"Lake Cities\" train from Hoboken, New Jersey to Chicago, ended on January 6, 1970. New York Senator Chuck Schumer is pushing for passenger rail service between Binghamton and New York City via Scranton and the Lackawanna Cut-Off.\nUtilities.\nElectricity and natural gas service are supplied and distributed by New York State Electric and Gas. The city's only cable provider is Charter Spectrum, which also offers high-speed internet and digital phone. Verizon provides local telephone and internet service. Greenlight Networks offers fiber-optic internet. The City Department of Public Works handles garbage and recycling, and maintains city street lights.\nThe city government maintains water and sewer services. Binghamton's primary source of potable water is the Susquehanna River, which is fed through a water treatment facility. Sewage is treated and released back into the Susquehanna downstream, at the Binghamton\u2013Johnson City Joint Sewage Treatment Plant. The sewage plant was severely damaged by Tropical Storm Lee, and will require $90\u00a0million of repairs.\nHealthcare.\nUnited Health Services (UHS) operates Binghamton General Hospital in the Southside and Wilson Medical Center in Johnson City, while the Guthrie Clinic operates Guthrie Lourdes Hospital on the West Side. The Dr. Garabed A. Fattal Community Free Clinic is run by Upstate Medical University, and offers services with the Broome County Health Department and United Health Services.\nThe New York State Office of Mental Health operates the Greater Binghamton Health Center, which will become a regional center of excellence for children's behavior.\nSister cities.\nBinghamton has two sister cities, as designated by Sister Cities International:\nBinghamton also has a local sister city project:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59404", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59404", "title": "Terminal object", "text": ""}
{"id": "59405", "revid": "46155110", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59405", "title": "Initial and terminal objects", "text": "Special objects used in (mathematical) category theory\nIn category theory, a branch of mathematics, an initial object of a category C is an object I in C such that for every object X in C, there exists precisely one morphism \"I\" \u2192 \"X\".\nThe dual notion is that of a terminal object (also called terminal element): T is terminal if for every object X in C there exists exactly one morphism \"X\" \u2192 \"T\". Initial objects are also called coterminal or universal, and terminal objects are also called final.\nIf an object is both initial and terminal, it is called a zero object or null object. A pointed category is one with a zero object.\nA strict initial object I is one for which every morphism into I is an isomorphism (strict terminal objects are defined analogously).\nProperties.\nExistence and uniqueness.\nInitial and terminal objects are not required to exist in a given category. However, if they do exist, they are essentially unique. Specifically, if \"I\"1 and \"I\"2 are two different initial objects, then there is a unique isomorphism between them. Moreover, if I is an initial object then any object isomorphic to I is also an initial object. The same is true for terminal objects.\nFor complete categories there is an existence theorem for initial objects. Specifically, a (locally small) complete category C has an initial object if and only if there exist a set I (not a proper class) and an I-indexed family (\"K\"\"i\") of objects of C such that for any object X of C, there is at least one morphism \"K\"\"i\" \u2192 \"X\" for some \"i\" \u2208 \"I\".\nEquivalent formulations.\nTerminal objects in a category C may also be defined as limits of the unique empty diagram 0 \u2192 \"C\". Since the empty category is vacuously a discrete category, a terminal object can be thought of as an empty product (a product is indeed the limit of the discrete diagram {\"X\"\"i\"}, in general). Dually, an initial object is a colimit of the empty diagram 0 \u2192 \"C\" and can be thought of as an empty coproduct or categorical sum.\nIt follows that any functor which preserves limits will take terminal objects to terminal objects, and any functor which preserves colimits will take initial objects to initial objects. For example, the initial object in any concrete category with free objects will be the free object generated by the empty set (since the free functor, being left adjoint to the forgetful functor to Set, preserves colimits).\nInitial and terminal objects may also be characterized in terms of universal properties and adjoint functors. Let 1 be the discrete category with a single object (denoted by \u2022), and let \"U\" : \"C\" \u2192 1 be the unique (constant) functor to 1. Then\nRelation to other categorical constructions.\nMany natural constructions in category theory can be formulated in terms of finding an initial or terminal object in a suitable category."}
{"id": "59406", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59406", "title": "Zero object", "text": ""}
{"id": "59407", "revid": "47561297", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59407", "title": "Pea", "text": "Species of plant with edible seeds\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Taxobox/core/styles.css\" /&gt;\nPea is a pulse or fodder crop, but the word often refers to the seed or sometimes the pod of this flowering plant species. Peas are eaten as a vegetable.\nCarl Linnaeus gave the species the scientific name Pisum sativum in 1753 (meaning cultivated pea). Some sources now treat it as Lathyrus oleraceus; however the need and justification for the change is disputed. The name \"Pea\" is also used to describe other edible seeds from the Fabaceae such as the pigeon pea (\"Cajanus cajan\"), the cowpea (\"Vigna unguiculata\"), the seeds from several species of \"Lathyrus\", and Sturt's desert pea (\"Swainsona formosa\").\nEach pod contains several seeds (peas), which can have green or yellow cotyledons when mature. Botanically, pea pods are fruit, since they contain seeds and develop from the ovary of a \"pea\" flower.\nPeas are annual plants, with a life cycle of one year. They are a cool-season crop grown in many parts of the world; planting can take place from winter to early summer depending on location. The average pea weighs between . The immature peas (and in snow peas and snap peas the tender pod as well) are used as a vegetable, fresh, frozen or canned; varieties of the species typically called field peas are grown to produce dry peas like the split pea shelled from a matured pod. These are the basis of pease porridge and pea soup, staples of medieval cuisine; in Europe, consuming fresh immature green peas was an innovation of early modern cuisine.\nDescription.\nA pea is a most commonly green, occasionally golden yellow, or infrequently purple pod-shaped vegetable, widely grown as a cool-season crop. The seeds may be planted as soon as the soil temperature reaches , with the plants growing best at temperatures of . They do not thrive in the summer heat of warmer temperate and lowland tropical climates, but do grow well in cooler, high-elevation, tropical areas. Many cultivars reach maturity about 60 days after planting.\nPeas have both low-growing and vining cultivars. The vining cultivars grow thin tendrils from leaves that coil around any available support and can climb to be high. A traditional approach to supporting climbing peas is to thrust branches pruned from trees or other woody plants upright into the soil, providing a lattice for the peas to climb. Branches used in this fashion are called pea sticks or sometimes pea brush. Metal fences, twine, or netting supported by a frame are used for the same purpose. In dense plantings, peas give each other some measure of mutual support. Pea plants can self-pollinate.\nGenome.\nThe pea karyotype consists of seven chromosomes, five of which are acrocentric and two submetacentric. Despite its scientific popularity, its relatively large genome size (4.45Gb) made it challenging to sequence compared to other legumes such as \"Medicago truncatula\" and soybeans. The International Pea Genome Sequencing Consortium was formed to develop the first pea reference genome, and the draft assembly was officially announced in September 2019. It covers 88% of the genome (3.92Gb) and predicted 44,791 gene-coding sequences. The pea used for the assembly was the inbred French cultivar \"Cam\u00e9or\". In 2022, a pea pangenome was published.\nTaxonomy.\nCarl Linnaeus gave the species the scientific name Pisum sativum in 1753 (meaning cultivated pea). Some sources now treat it as Lathyrus oleraceus, although the need and justification for this change is disputed.\nEtymology.\nThe term \"pea\" originates from the Latin word , which is the latinisation of the Greek (), neuter variant form of () 'pea'. It was adopted into English as the noun \"pease\" (plural \"peasen\"), as in pease pudding. However, by analogy with other plurals ending in \"-s\", speakers began construing \"pease\" as a plural and constructing the singular form by dropping the \"-s\", giving the term \"pea\". This process is known as back-formation.\nVarieties.\nGarden peas.\nThere are many varieties (cultivars) of garden peas. Some of the most common varieties are listed here. \"PMR\" indicates some degree of powdery mildew resistance; \"afila\" types, also called semi-leafless, have clusters of tendrils instead of leaves. Unless otherwise noted these are so called dwarf varieties which grow to an average height of about 1m. Giving the vines support is recommended, but not required. Extra dwarf are suitable for container growing, reaching only about 25\u00a0cm. Tall varieties grow to about 2m with support required.\nEdible-pod peas.\nSome peas lack the tough membrane inside the pod wall and have tender edible pods, allowing them to be eaten whole. There are two main types:\nThe name sugar pea can include both types or be synonymous with either snow peas or snap peas in different dictionaries. The term mangetout (; from , 'eat-all pea') is generally used in British English to refer to the snow pea specifically, but may also refer to a snap pea, especially when used in other contexts.\nSnow peas and snap peas both belong to Macrocarpon Group, a cultivar group based on the variety \"Pisum sativum\" var. \"macrocarpum\" named in 1825. It was described as having very compressed non-leathery edible pods in the original publication.\nField peas.\nThe field pea is a type of pea sometimes called \"Pisum sativum\" subsp. \"arvense\" (L.) Asch. It is also known as dun (grey-brown) pea, Kapucijner pea, or Austrian winter pea, and is one of the oldest domesticated crops, cultivated for at least 7,000 years. Field peas are now grown in many countries for both human consumption and stockfeed. There are several cultivars and colors including blue, dun (brown), maple and white. This pea should not be confused with the cowpea (\"Vigna unguiculata\") which is sometimes called the \"field pea\" in warmer climates.\nIt is a climbing annual legume with weak, viny, and relatively succulent stems. Vines often are 4 to 5 feet (120 to 150\u00a0cm) long, but when grown alone, field pea's weak stems prevent it from growing more than 1.5 to 2 feet (45 to 60\u00a0cm) tall. Leaves have two leaflets and a tendril. Flowers are white, pink, or purple. Pods carry seeds that are large (4,000 seeds/lb), nearly spherical, and white, gray, green, or brown. The root system is relatively shallow and small, but well nodulated.\nThe field pea is a cool-season legume crop that is grown on over 25 million acres worldwide. It has been an important grain legume crop for millennia, seeds showing domesticated characteristics dating from at least 7,000 years ago have been found in archaeological sites around what is now Turkey. Field peas or \"dry peas\" are marketed as a dry, shelled product for either human or livestock food, unlike the garden pea, which is marketed as a fresh or canned vegetable. The major producing countries of field peas are Russia and China, followed by Canada, Europe, Australia and the United States. Europe, Australia, Canada and the U.S. raise over 4.5 million acres (18,000 km\u00b2) and are major exporters of peas. In 2002, there were approximately 300,000 acres (1,200 km\u00b2) of field peas grown in the U.S.\nDistribution and habitat.\nThe wild pea is restricted to the Mediterranean Basin and the Near East. The earliest archaeological finds of peas date from the late Neolithic era of current Syria, Anatolia, Israel, Iraq, Jordan and Greece. In Egypt, early finds date from c.\u20094800\u20134400\u00a0BC in the Nile Delta area, and from c. 3800\u20133600\u00a0BC in Upper Egypt. In northern Europe, specifically Fennoscandia, findings of pea data back to 4000 BC. The pea was also present in Georgia in the 5th millennium BC. Farther east, the finds are younger. Peas were present in Afghanistan c.\u00a02000\u00a0BC, in Harappan civilization around modern-day Pakistan and western- and northwestern India in 2250\u20131750\u00a0BC. In the second half of the 2nd millennium BC, this legume crop appears in the Ganges Basin and southern India.\nCultivation.\nHistory.\nIn early times, peas were grown mostly for their dry seeds. From plants growing wild in the Mediterranean Basin, constant selection since the Neolithic dawn of agriculture improved their yield.\nPeas are mentioned in Aristophanes's \"The Birds\". The Greeks and Romans were cultivating this legume from around 500 BC to 400 BC, with vendors in the streets of Athens selling hot pea soup.\nIn the early 3rd century BC, Theophrastus mentions peas among the legumes that are sown late in the winter because of their tenderness. \nIn the first and second centuries BC, Cato the Elder and Varro both mention peas in their respective works De agri cultura and De re rustica. It is also mentioned frequently in de re coquinaria by Apicius and occurs in many different recipes.\nIn the Middle Ages, field peas are constantly mentioned, as they were the staple that kept famine at bay, as Charles the Good, count of Flanders, noted explicitly in 1124.\nGreen \"garden\" peas, eaten immature and fresh, were an innovative luxury of Early Modern Europe. In England, the distinction between \"field peas\" and \"garden peas\" dates from the early 17th century: John Gerard and John Parkinson both mention garden peas. Snow and snap peas, which the French called , because they were eaten pods and all, were introduced to France from the market gardens of Holland in the time of Henri IV, through the French ambassador. Green peas were introduced from Genoa to the court of Louis XIV of France in January 1660, with some staged fanfare. A hamper of them was presented before the King. They were shelled by the Savoyan comte de Soissons, who had married a niece of Cardinal Mazarin. Little dishes of peas were then presented to the King, the Queen, Cardinal Mazarin and Monsieur, the king's brother. Immediately established and grown for earliness warmed with manure and protected under glass, they were still a luxurious delicacy in 1696, when Mme de Maintenon and Mme de Sevign\u00e9 each reported that they were \"a fashion, a fury\".\nThe first \"sweet tasting pea\" was developed in the 18th century by amateur plant breeder Thomas Edward Knight of Downton, near Salisbury, England. Modern split peas, with their indigestible skins rubbed off, are a development of the later 19th century. The first pea harvesting machine (\"pea viner\") able to shell peas through impact was invented around 1890 by John Alexander Chisholm.\nHarvesting.\nLarge-scale commercial harvesting of peas without edible pods can be accomplished using specialized pea harvester machines (also called \"pea viners\") that strip them from their vines.\nBy contrast, the two edible-pod pea varieties snow peas and snap peas are still usually picked by hand. A prototype for an automated snap pea harvester was being researched in 2017.\nGrading.\nPea grading involves sorting peas by size, in which the smallest peas are graded as the highest quality for their tenderness. Brines may be used, in which peas are floated, from which their density can be determined.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Table alignment/tables.css\" /&gt;\nPests and diseases.\nA variety of diseases affect peas through a number of pathogens, including insects, viruses, bacteria and fungi. In particular, virus disease of peas has worldwide economic importance. Additionally, the diseases limiting to global yield potential of pea are members of the pea root rot complex.\nAdditionally, insects such as the pea leaf weevil (\"Sitona lineatus\") can damage peas and other pod fruits. The pea leaf weevil is native to Europe, but has spread to other places such as Alberta, Canada. They are about \u2014 long and are distinguishable by three light-coloured stripes running length-wise down the thorax. The weevil larvae feed on the root nodules of pea plants, which are essential to the plants' supply of nitrogen, and thus diminish leaf and stem growth. Adult weevils feed on the leaves and create a notched, \"c-shaped\" appearance on the outside of the leaves.\nThe pea moth can be a serious pest producing caterpillars that resemble small white maggots in the pea pods. The caterpillars eat the developing peas making them unsightly and unsuitable for culinary use. Prior to the use of modern insecticides, pea moth caterpillars were a very common sight in pea pods.\nProduction.\nIn 2023, world production of green peas was 21.5 million tonnes, led by China and India with 86% of the total when combined (table).\nPotential adverse effects.\nSome people experience allergic reactions to peas, with vicilin or convicilin as the most common allergens.\nUses.\nNutrition.\nRaw green peas are 79% water, 14% carbohydrates, 5% protein, and contain negligible fat. In a reference amount of , raw green peas supply of food energy, and are a rich source (20% or more of the Daily Value, DV) of vitamin C, vitamin K, and thiamine, with several B vitamins and dietary minerals in moderate amounts (10\u201318% DV) (table).\nCulinary.\nIn modern times peas are usually boiled or steamed, which breaks down the cell walls and makes them taste sweeter and the nutrients more bioavailable. Along with broad beans and lentils, these formed an important part of the diet of most people in the Middle East, North Africa and Europe during the Middle Ages. By the 17th and 18th centuries, it had become popular to eat peas \"green\", that is, while they are immature and right after they are picked. New cultivars of peas were developed by the English during this time, which became known as \"garden\" or \"English\" peas. The popularity of green peas spread to North America. Thomas Jefferson grew more than 30 cultivars of peas on his estate. With the invention of canning, peas were one of the first vegetables to be canned.\nFresh peas are often eaten boiled and flavored with butter or spearmint as a side dish vegetable. Salt and pepper are also commonly added to peas when served. Fresh peas are also used in pot pies, salads and casseroles. Pod peas (snow peas and snap peas) are used in stir-fried dishes, particularly those in American Chinese cuisine. Pea pods do not keep well once picked, and if not used quickly, are best preserved by drying, canning or freezing within a few hours of harvest.\nDried peas are often made into a soup or simply eaten on their own. In Japan, China, Taiwan and some Southeast Asian countries, including Thailand, the Philippines and Malaysia, peas are roasted and salted, and eaten as snacks. In the Philippines, peas, while still in their pods, are a common ingredient in viands and pansit. In the UK, dried yellow or green split peas are used to make pease pudding (or \"pease porridge\"), a traditional dish. In North America, a similarly traditional dish is split pea soup.\nPea soup is eaten in many other parts of the world, including northern Europe, parts of middle Europe, Russia, Iran, Iraq and India.\nIn India, fresh peas are used in various dishes such as \"aloo matar\" (curried potatoes with peas) or \"mattar paneer\" (paneer cheese with peas), though they can be substituted with frozen peas as well. Peas are also eaten raw, as they are sweet when fresh off the bush. Green peas known as hasiru batani in Kannada are used to make curry and gasi. Split peas are also used to make \"dal\", particularly in Guyana, and Trinidad, where there is a significant population of Indians.\nIn Chinese cuisine, the tender new growth [leaves and stem] (; ) are commonly used in stir-fries. Much like picking the leaves for tea, the farmers pick the tips off of the pea plant.\nIn Greece, Tunisia, Turkey, Cyprus, and other parts of the Mediterranean, peas are made into a stew with lamb and potatoes.\nIn Hungary and Serbia, pea soup is often served with dumplings and spiced with hot paprika.\nIn the United Kingdom, dried, rehydrated and mashed marrowfat peas, or cooked green split peas, known as mushy peas, are popular, originally in the north of England, but now ubiquitously, and especially as an accompaniment to fish and chips or meat pies, particularly in fish and chip shops. Sodium bicarbonate is sometimes added to soften the peas. In 2005, a poll of 2,000 people revealed the pea to be Britain's seventh favourite culinary vegetable.\nProcessed peas are mature peas which have been dried, soaked and then heat treated (processed) to prevent spoilage\u2014in the same manner as pasteurizing. Cooked peas are sometimes sold dried and coated with wasabi, salt, or other spices.\nIn North America pea milk is produced and sold as an alternative to cow milk for a variety of reasons.\nPea sprouts.\nIn East Asia, pea sprouts or shoots (; ) were once dedicated cuisine when the plant was less highly available. Today, when the plant can be easily grown, fresh pea shoots are available in supermarkets or may be grown at home.\nManufacturing.\nFrozen peas.\nIn order to freeze and preserve peas, they must first be grown, picked, and shelled. Usually, the more tender the peas are, the more likely that they will be used in the final product. The peas must be put through the process of freezing shortly after being picked so that they do not spoil too soon. Once the peas have been selected, they are placed in ice water and allowed to cool. After, they are sprayed with water to remove any residual dirt or dust that may remain on them. The next step is blanching. The peas are boiled for a few minutes to remove any enzymes that may shorten their shelf life. They are then cooled and removed from the water. The final step is the actual freezing to produce the final product. This step may vary considerably; some companies freeze their peas by air blast freezing, where the vegetables are put through a tunnel at high speeds and frozen by cold air. Finally, the peas are packaged and shipped out for retail sale.\nScience.\nIn the mid-19th century, Austrian monk Gregor Mendel's observations of pea pods led to the principles of Mendelian genetics, the foundation of modern genetics. He ended up growing and examining about 28,000 pea plants in the course of his experiments.\nMendel chose peas for his experiments because he could grow them easily, pure-bred strains were readily available, and the structure of the flowers protect them from cross-pollination, and cross pollination was easy. Mendel cross-bred tall and dwarf pea plants, green and yellow peas, purple and white flowers, wrinkled and smooth peas, and a few other traits. He then observed the resulting offspring. In each of these cases, one trait is dominant and all the offspring, or Filial-1 (abbreviated F1) generation, showed the dominant trait. Then he allowed the F1 generation to self pollinate and observed their offspring, the Filial-2 (abbreviated F2) generation. The F2 plants had the dominant trait in approximately a 3:1 ratio. He studied later generations of self pollinated plants, and performed crosses to determine the nature of the pollen and egg cells.\nMendel reasoned that each parent had a 'vote' in the appearance of the offspring, and the non-dominant, or recessive, trait appeared only when it was inherited from both parents. He did further experiments that showed each trait is separately inherited. Unwittingly, Mendel had solved a major problem with Charles Darwin's theory of evolution: how new traits were preserved and not blended back into the population, a question Darwin himself did not answer. Mendel's work was published in an obscure Austrian journal and was not rediscovered until about 1900.\nNitrogen fixation.\nPeas, like many legumes, contain symbiotic bacteria called \"Rhizobia\" within root nodules of their root systems. These bacteria have the special ability to fix nitrogen from atmospheric, molecular nitrogen () into ammonia (). The chemical reaction is:\nAmmonia is then converted to another form, ammonium (), usable by (some) plants by the following reaction:\nThe root nodules of peas and other legumes are sources of nitrogen that they can use to make amino acids, constituents of proteins. Hence, legumes are good sources of plant protein.\nWhen a pea plant dies in the field, for example following the harvest, all of its remaining nitrogen, incorporated into amino acids inside the remaining plant parts, is released back into the soil. In the soil, the amino acids are converted to nitrate (), that is available to other plants, thereby serving as fertilizer for future crops.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59408", "revid": "40781349", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59408", "title": "Pedology", "text": "Study of soils in their natural environment\nPedology (from Greek: \u03c0\u03ad\u03b4\u03bf\u03bd, \"pedon\", \"soil\"; and \u03bb\u03cc\u03b3\u03bf\u03c2, \"logos\", \"study\") is a discipline within soil science which focuses on understanding and characterizing soil formation, evolution, and the theoretical frameworks for modeling soil bodies, often in the context of the natural environment. Pedology is often seen as one of two main branches of soil inquiry, the other being edaphology which is traditionally more agronomically oriented and focuses on how soil properties influence plant communities (natural or cultivated). \nIn studying the fundamental phenomenology of soils, e.g. soil formation (aka pedogenesis), pedologists pay particular attention to observing soil morphology and the geographic distributions of soils, and the placement of soil bodies into larger temporal and spatial contexts. In so doing, pedologists develop systems of soil classification, soil maps, and theories for characterizing temporal and spatial interrelations among soils. There are a few noteworthy sub-disciplines of pedology; namely pedometrics and soil geomorphology. Pedometrics focuses on the development of techniques for quantitative characterization of soils, especially for the purposes of mapping soil properties whereas soil geomorphology studies the interrelationships between geomorphic processes and soil formation.\nOverview.\nSoil is not only a support for vegetation, but it is also the pedosphere, the locus of numerous interactions between climate (water, air, temperature), soil life (micro-organisms, plants, animals) and its residues, the mineral material of the original and added rock, and its position in the landscape. During its formation and genesis, the soil profile slowly deepens and develops characteristic layers, called 'horizons', while a steady state balance is approached.\nSoil users (such as agronomists) showed initially little concern in the dynamics of soil. They saw it as medium whose chemical, physical and biological properties were useful for the services of agronomic productivity. On the other hand, pedologists and geologists did not initially focus on the agronomic applications of the soil characteristics (edaphic properties) but upon its relation to the nature and history of landscapes. Today, there is an integration of the two disciplinary approaches as part of landscape and environmental sciences.\nPedologists are now also interested in the practical applications of a good understanding of pedogenesis processes (the evolution and functioning of soils), like interpreting its environmental history and predicting consequences of changes in land use, while agronomists understand that the cultivated soil is a complex medium, often resulting from several thousands of years of evolution. They understand that the current balance is fragile and that only a thorough knowledge of its history makes it possible to ensure its sustainable use.\nConcepts.\nImportant pedological concepts include:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59411", "revid": "9748069", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59411", "title": "Measure for Measure", "text": "Play by Shakespeare (1604)\nMeasure for Measure is a play by William Shakespeare, believed to have been written in 1603 or 1604 and first performed in 1604. It was published in the First Folio of 1623.\nThe play centres on the despotic and puritan Angelo, a deputy entrusted to rule the city of Vienna in the absence of Duke Vincentio, who instead disguises himself as a humble friar to observe Angelo's regency and his citizens' lives. Angelo persecutes a young man, Claudio, for the crime of fornication, sentencing him to death on a technicality. Angelo then attempts to exploit Claudio's sister Isabella, a chaste and innocent nun, when she comes to plead for her brother's life.\n\"Measure for Measure\" was printed as a comedy in the First Folio and continues to be classified as one. Though it shares features with other Shakespearean comedies, such as word play, irony and disguise and substitution as plot devices, it also features tragic elements such as executions and soliloquies, with Claudio's speech \"Ay, but to die, and go we know not where...\" in particular having been favourably compared to those of tragic heroes like Prince Hamlet. Because of this ambiguous tone, it is often cited as one of Shakespeare's problem plays.\nSynopsis and themes.\nVincentio, the Duke of Vienna, must leave the city on a diplomatic mission. He instates a strict judge, Angelo, to act as his deputy until he returns.\nLucio and a group of soldiers banter about religion, prostitution, and venereal disease as they walk along a Viennese street, hopeful that they will soon find work when war breaks out with Hungary. Mistress Overdone, the operator of a nearby brothel, interjects to scold them for their flippant talk. She compares their behaviour to that of the relatively upstanding Claudio who is, she tells them, soon to be executed for the crime of sleeping with a woman out of wedlock. One of the gentlemen, Claudio's friend Lucio, a \"fantastic\", is astonished at this news and rushes off. Pompey Bum, an employee of Mistress Overdone, enters as he leaves, bringing more distressing news: Angelo has issued a proclamation that all the brothels in the suburbs are to be torn down.\nThe Provost leads Claudio past Pompey and Overdone as they speak, and explains to Lucio what has happened to him. Claudio was engaged to be married to his lover, Juliet, but, as they had not yet completed the legal technicalities, they were still considered unmarried when Juliet became pregnant by him. As the interim ruler of the city, Angelo has enforced laws that Vincentio had let slide, including an outdated legal clause stating that fornication is punishable by death. Hearing this, Lucio leaves to visit Claudio's sister Isabella, a novice nun, and asks her to intercede with Angelo on Claudio's behalf.\nIsabella quickly obtains an audience with Angelo, and pleads for mercy on Claudio's behalf. As they exchange arguments, Angelo is increasingly overcome by desire for Isabella, and eventually offers her a deal: he will spare Claudio's life if Isabella yields to him her virginity. Isabella refuses and threatens to publicly expose his lechery, but he points out that no one would believe her given his reputation. She leaves to visit Claudio in prison, and counsels him to prepare himself for death. Claudio desperately begs Isabella to save his life, but Isabella, though torn, ultimately repeats her refusal to yield to Angelo, on the ground that it would be wrong for her to sacrifice her own immortal soul (and that of Claudio, if his entreaties were responsible for her loss of her virtue) to save Claudio's transient earthly life.\nSubterfuge.\nVincentio, meanwhile, has not truly left the city. Instead, he has disguised himself as a friar named Lodowick, wanting to secretly view the city's affairs and the effects of Angelo's temporary rule. In his guise as a friar, he befriends Isabella and arranges two tricks with her to thwart Angelo's intentions:\nResolution.\nThe plot comes to a climax with Vincentio's \"return\" to Vienna. Isabella and Mariana publicly petition him, and he hears their claims against Angelo, which Angelo smoothly denies. As the scene develops, it appears that Friar Lodowick will be blamed for the accusations levelled against Angelo. Vincentio leaves Angelo to judge the cause against Lodowick, returning in his disguise when Lodowick is summoned moments later. When Angelo attempts to seal the case against Lodowick, Vincentio reveals himself, exposing Angelo as a liar and confirming Isabella's and Mariana's allegations. He proposes that Angelo be executed, but first compels him to marry Mariana, so that his estate may go to Mariana as compensation for her lost dowry.\nMariana pleads for Angelo's life, even enlisting the aid of Isabella (who is not yet aware her brother Claudio is still alive). Vincentio pretends not to heed the women's petition until he reveals that Claudio has not, in fact, been executed, at which point he relents. He then proposes marriage to Isabella. Isabella does not reply. For Shakespeare's audiences, silence would have been interpreted as an unequivocal \"yes\", meaning that additional dialogue was unnecessary. This is one of the \"open silences\" of the play, and has been variously interpreted in different adaptations.\nA subplot concerns Lucio, who frequently slanders the duke to the friar, and in the last act slanders the friar to the duke, providing opportunities for comic consternation on Vincentio's part and landing Lucio in trouble when it is revealed that the duke and the friar are one and the same. Lucio's punishment is to be forced to marry Kate Keepdown, a prostitute he impregnated and abandoned.\nAnalysis.\nThe play's main themes include justice, \"morality and mercy in Vienna\", and the dichotomy between corruption and purity: \"some rise by sin, and some by virtue fall\". Mercy and virtue prevail, as the play does not end tragically, with virtues such as compassion and forgiveness exercised at its end. While the play focuses on justice overall, the final scene illustrates that Shakespeare intended for moral justice to temper strict civil justice: several of the characters receive understanding and leniency instead of the harsh punishment to which they, according to the law, could have been sentenced. \nVincentio's reappearance is considered an early use of the deus ex machina in English literature.\nSource texts.\nThe play draws on two distinct sources. The original is \"The Story of Epitia\", from Cinthio's \"Gli Hecatommithi\", first published in 1565. Shakespeare was familiar with this book; it contains the original source for his \"Othello\". Cinthio also published the story with some small differences as a play, of which Shakespeare may have been aware. The original story is an unmitigated tragedy: Isabella's counterpart is forced to sleep with Angelo's counterpart, and her brother is killed.\nThe play's other main source is George Whetstone's 1578 two-part closet drama \"Promos and Cassandra\", itself sourced from Cinthio. Whetstone adapted Cinthio's story by adding the comic elements and the bed and head tricks.\nThe title of the play appears as a :\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\u2014\u200a\nThis is generally understood to be a reference to the Sermon on the Mount in Matthew 7:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;For in the same way you judge others, you will be judged, and with the measure you use, it will be measured to you.\u2014\u200a\nPeter Meilaender has argued that \"Measure for Measure\" is largely based on biblical references, focusing on the themes of sin, restraint, mercy, and rebirth. Amongst such Gospel comparisons, the Gospel of Matthew has been viewed as a source. \nA 2016 essay by the literary critic Giuseppe Leone analyses parallels between the episode of Claudio's supposed beheading and that of John the Baptist, as narrated in Matthew 14:1\u201312. Leone argues that in Shakespeare's treatment of the perpetrator's demand for Claudio's head there is an expression of Angelo's pleasure in his power to have his will enacted, and to reap satisfaction from that power through the tangible token: he orders the severed head be brought \"for my better satisfaction\". The demand for the Baptist's head from Herodias, through her daughter, fulfils a similar function. Herod Antipas' public oath of providing Herodias' daughter with whatever she demanded ensured the Baptist's execution, without necessitating the production of his remains. In Leone's view, his stepdaughter's demand, \"Give me here John Baptist's head on a platter\", serves the same purpose of allowing for self-satisfied gloating in power over others. Neither Cinthio's nor Whetstone's source text has anything similar. The executed victim in those works is ordered to be sent to the sister, without either of the perpetrators, Iuriste and Promos, showing any interest in obtaining or viewing the remains. Their satisfaction comes solely from their sister's mistreatment. For Leone, this divergence from \"Measure\"'s literary precursors and concurrence with the Gospel text is a strong case for Matthew's Gospel as a source.\nDate, text and authorship.\n\"Measure for Measure\" is believed to have been written in 1603 or 1604. The play was first published in 1623 in the First Folio.\nIn their book \"Shakespeare Reshaped, 1606\u20131623\", Gary Taylor and John Jowett argue that part of the text of \"Measure\" that survives is not in its original form, but rather the product of a revision by Thomas Middleton after Shakespeare's death. They present stylistic evidence that patches of writing are by Middleton, and argue that Middleton changed the setting to Vienna from the original Italy. Braunmuller and Watson say their suggestion should be seen as \"an intriguing hypothesis rather than a fully proven attribution\". David Bevington suggests an alternate theory: that the text can be stylistically credited to the professional scrivener Ralph Crane, who is usually credited for some of the better and unchanged texts in the Folio, including \"The Tempest\".\nIt is generally accepted that a garbled sentence during the Duke's opening speech (lines 8\u20139 in most editions) represents a place where a line has been lost, possibly due to a printer's error. Because the folio is the only source, the line cannot be recovered.\nPerformance history.\nThe earliest recorded performance of \"Measure for Measure\" took place on St. Stephen's night, 26 December 1604.\nDuring the Restoration, \"Measure\" was one of many Shakespeare plays adapted to the tastes of a new audience. Sir William Davenant inserted Benedick and Beatrice from \"Much Ado About Nothing\" into his adaptation, called \"The Law Against Lovers\". Samuel Pepys saw the hybrid play on 18 February 1662; he describes it in his diary as \"a good play, and well performed\"; he was especially impressed by the singing and dancing of the young actress who played Viola, Beatrice's sister (Davenant's creation). Davenant rehabilitated Angelo, who is now only testing Isabella's chastity; the play ends with a triple marriage. This, among the earliest of Restoration adaptations, appears not to have succeeded on stage. Charles Gildon returned to Shakespeare's text in a 1699 production at Lincoln's Inn Fields. Gildon's adaptation, entitled \"Beauty the Best Advocate\", removes all of the low-comic characters. Moreover, by making both Angelo and Mariana, and Claudio and Juliet, secretly married, and by removing the scene in which the Duke propositions Isabella, he eliminates almost all of the illicit sexuality that is so central to Shakespeare's play. In addition, he integrates into the play scenes from Henry Purcell's opera \"Dido and Aeneas\", which Angelo watches sporadically throughout the play. Gildon also offers a partly facetious epilogue, spoken by Shakespeare's ghost, who complains of the constant revisions of his work. Like Davenant's, Gildon's version did not gain currency and was not revived. John Rich presented a version closer to Shakespeare's original in 1720.\nIn late Victorian times, the subject matter of the play was deemed controversial, and there was an outcry when Adelaide Neilson appeared as Isabella in the 1870s. The Oxford University Dramatic Society found it necessary to edit it when staging it in February 1906, with Gervais Rentoul as Angelo and Maud Hoffman as Isabella, and the same text was used when Oscar Asche and Lily Brayton staged it at the Adelphi Theatre in the following month. William Poel produced the play in 1893 at the Royalty and in 1908 at the Gaiety in Manchester, with himself as Angelo. In line with his other Elizabethan performances, these used the uncut text of Shakespeare's original with only minimal alterations. The use of an un-localised stage lacking scenery, and the swift, musical delivery of dramatic speech, set the standard for the rapidity and continuity shown in modern productions. Poel's work also marked the first determined attempt by a producer to give a modern psychological or theological reading of both the characters and the overall message of the play.\nNotable 20th-century productions of \"Measure for Measure\" include Charles Laughton as Angelo at the Old Vic Theatre in 1933, and Peter Brook's 1950 staging at the Shakespeare Memorial Theatre with John Gielgud as Angelo and Barbara Jefford as Isabella. In 1957 John Houseman and Jack Landau directed a production at the Phoenix Theatre in New York City that starred Nina Foch and Richard Waring (Jerry Stiller appeared in the minor role of Barnardine). In 1962, the Royal Shakespeare Company staged a production directed by John Blatchley starring Marius Goring as Angelo and Judi Dench as Isabella. The play has only once been produced on Broadway, in a 1973 production also directed by Houseman that featured David Ogden Stiers as Vincentio, Kevin Kline in the small role of Friar Peter, and Patti Lupone in two small roles. In 1976, a New York Shakespeare Festival production featured Sam Waterston as the Duke, Meryl Streep as Isabella, John Cazale as Angelo, Lenny Baker as Lucio, Jeffrey Tambor as Elbow, and Judith Light as Francisca. In 1981, director Michael Rudman presented a version with an all-black cast at London's National Theatre. Rudman restaged his concept at the New York Shakespeare Festival in 1993, starring Kevin Kline as the Duke, Andr\u00e9 Braugher as Angelo, and Lisa Gay Hamilton as Isabella.\nIn 2013, Robert Falls directed a version at Chicago's Goodman Theatre set in seedy 1970s Times Square, New York. It was available for streaming in April to May 2021. Between 2013 and 2017, the theatre company Cheek by Jowl staged a Russian-language version of the play in association with the Pushkin Theatre, Moscow, and the Barbican Centre, London. It was directed by Declan Donnellan and designed by Nick Ormerod. In 2018, Josie Rourke directed a gender-reversal production at the Donmar Warehouse in London, in which Jack Lowden and Hayley Atwell alternated in the roles of Angelo and Isabella. In 2025, the Royal Shakespeare Company's production directed by Emily Burns, with Isis Hainsworth as Isabella, Adam James as the Duke, Oli Higginson as Claudio, and Tom Mothersdale as Angelo, dispensed with the comic subplots, one glowing review noting its underlining of \"Measure for Measure\"'s contemporary political relevance.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59412", "revid": "42430230", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59412", "title": "Syriac language", "text": "Dialect of Middle Aramaic\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nThe Syriac language ( ; ), also known natively in its spoken form in early Syriac literature as Edessan (), the Mesopotamian language () and Aramaic (), is an Eastern Middle Aramaic dialect. Classical Syriac is the academic term used to refer to the dialect's literary usage and standardization, distinguishing it from other Aramaic dialects also known as 'Syriac' or 'Syrian'. In its West-Syriac tradition, Classical Syriac is often known as (lit.\u2009'the written language or the book language') or simply , or , while in its East-Syriac tradition, it is known as (lit.\u2009'the old language') or (lit.\u2009'scribal or literary').\nIt emerged during the first century AD from a local Eastern Aramaic dialect that was spoken in the ancient region of Osroene, centered in the city of Edessa. During the Early Christian period, it became the main literary language of various Aramaic-speaking Christian communities in the historical region of Ancient Syria and throughout the Near East. As a liturgical language of Syriac Christianity, it gained a prominent role among Eastern Christian communities that used both Eastern Syriac and Western Syriac rites. Following the spread of Syriac Christianity, it also became a liturgical language of eastern Christian communities as far as India and China. It flourished from the 4th to the 8th century, and continued to have an important role during the next centuries, but by the end of the Middle Ages it was gradually reduced to liturgical use, since the role of vernacular language among its native speakers was overtaken by several emerging Neo-Aramaic languages.\nClassical Syriac is written in the Syriac alphabet, a derivation of the Aramaic alphabet. The language is preserved in a large body of Syriac literature, which comprises roughly 90% of the extant Aramaic literature. Along with Greek and Latin, Syriac became one of the three most important languages of Early Christianity. Already from the first and second centuries AD, the inhabitants of the region of Osroene began to embrace Christianity, and by the third and fourth centuries, local Edessan Aramaic language became the vehicle of the specific Christian culture that came to be known as Syriac Christianity. Because of theological differences, Syriac-speaking Christians diverged during the 5th century into the Church of the East that followed the East Syriac Rite under Persian rule, and the Syriac Orthodox Church that followed the West Syriac Rite under the Byzantine rule.\nAs a liturgical language of Syriac Christianity, Classical Syriac spread throughout Asia as far as the Southwestern India (Malabar Coast), and Eastern China, and became the medium of communication and cultural dissemination for the later Arabs, and (to a lesser extent) the other peoples of Parthian and Sasanian empires. Primarily a Christian medium of expression, Syriac had a fundamental cultural and literary influence on the development of Arabic, which largely replaced it during the later medieval period.\nSyriac remains the sacred language of Syriac Christianity to this day. It is used as the liturgical language of several denominations, like those who follow the East Syriac Rite, including the Assyrian Church of the East, the Ancient Church of the East, the Chaldean Catholic Church, the Syro-Malabar Catholic Church, and the Assyrian Pentecostal Church, and also those who follow the West Syriac Rite, including: Syriac Orthodox Church, the Syriac Catholic Church, the Maronite Catholic Church, the Malankara Mar Thoma Syrian Church, the Malankara Orthodox Syrian Church and the Syro-Malankara Catholic Church. Classical Syriac was originally the liturgical language of the Syriac Melkites within the Greek Orthodox Patriarchate of Antioch in Antioch and parts of ancient Syria. The Syriac Melkites changed their church's West Syriac Rite to that of Constantinople in the 9th\u201311th centuries, necessitating new translations of all their Syriac liturgical books.\nName.\nIn the English language, the term \"Syriac\" is used as a linguonym (language name) designating a specific variant of the Aramaic language in relation to its regional origin in northeastern parts of Ancient Syria, around Edessa, which lay outside of the provincial borders of Roman Syria. Since Aramaic was used by various Middle Eastern peoples, having several variants (dialects), this specific dialect that originated in northeastern Syria became known under its regional (Syrian/Syriac) designation (\"Suryaya\").\nIn English scholarly literature, the term \"Syriac\" is preferred over the alternative form \"Syrian\", since the latter is much more polysemic and commonly relates to Syria in general. That distinction is used in English as a convention and does not exist on the ancient endonymic level. Several compound terms like \"Syriac Aramaic\", \"Syrian Aramaic\" or \"Syro-Aramaic\" are also used, thus emphasizing both the Aramaic nature of the language and its Syrian/Syriac regional origin.\nEndonyms and exonyms.\nEarly native speakers and writers used several endonymic terms as designations for their language. In addition to common endonym (native name) for the Aramaic language in general (\"Aramaya\"), another endonymic term was also used, designating more specifically the local Edessan dialect, known as \"Urhaya\", a term derived directly from the native Aramaic name for the city of Edessa (\"Urhay\"). Among similar endonymic names with regional connotations, term \"Nahraya\" was also used. It was derived from choronym (regional name) Bet-Nahrain, an Aramaic name for Mesopotamia in general.\nOriginal endonymic (native) designations, for Aramaic in general (\"Aramaya\"), and Edessan Aramaic in particular (\"Urhaya\"), were later (starting from the 5th century) accompanied by another term, exonymic (foreign) in origin: \"Suryaya\" (Syrian/Syriac), adopted under the influence of a long-standing Greek custom of referring to speakers of Aramaic as \"Syrians\". Among ancient Greeks, term \"Syrian language\" was used as a common designation for Aramaic language in general, and such usage was also reflected in Aramaic, by subsequent (acquired) use of the term \"Suryaya\" as the most preferred synonym for \"Aramaya\" (Aramaic).\nPractice of interchangeable naming (Aramaya, Urhaya, Nahraya, and Suryaya) persisted for centuries, in common use and also in works of various prominent writers. One of those who used various terms was theologian Jacob of Edessa (d. 708), who was referring to the language as \"\"Syrian or Aramaic\" (Sury\u0101y\u0101 awk\u0113t \u0100r\u0101m\u0101y\u0101), and also as \"Urh\u0101y\u0101\", when referring to Edessan Aramaic, or \"Na\u1e25r\u0101y\u0101\" when pointing to the region of Bet-Nahrain (Aramaic term for Mesopotamia in general).\nPlurality of terms among native speakers (\u0101r\u0101m\u0101y\u0101, urh\u0101y\u0101, na\u1e25r\u0101y\u0101, and sury\u0101y\u0101) was not reflected in Greek and Latin terminology, that preferred Syrian/Syriac designation, and the same preference was adopted by later scholars, with one important distinction: in western scholarly use, Syrian/Syriac label was subsequently reduced from the original Greek designation for Aramaic language in general to a more specific (narrower) designation for Edessan Aramaic language, that in its literary and liturgical form came to be known as \"Classical Syriac\". That reduction resulted in the creation of a specific field of Syriac studies, within Aramaic studies.\nPreference of early scholars towards the use of the Syrian/Syriac label was also relied upon its notable use as an alternative designation for Aramaic language in the \"Cave of Treasures\"\", long held to be the 4th century work of an authoritative writer and revered Christian saint Ephrem of Edessa (d. 373), who was thus believed to be proponent of various linguistic notions and tendencies expressed in the mentioned work. Since modern scholarly analyses have shown that the work in question was written much later (c. 600) by an unknown author, several questions had to be reexamined. In regard to the scope and usage of Syrian/Syriac labels in linguistic terminology, some modern scholars have noted that diversity of Aramaic dialects in the wider historical region of Syria should not be overlooked by improper and unspecific use of Syrian/Syriac labels.\nDiversity of Aramaic dialects was recorded by Theodoret of Cyrus (d. c.\u2009466), who accepted Syrian/Syriac labels as common Greek designations for the Aramaic language in general, stating that \"the Osro\u00ebnians, the Syrians, the people of the Euphrates, the Palestinians, and the Phoenicians all speak Syriac, but with many differences in pronunciation\". Theodoret's regional (provincial) differentiation of Aramaic dialects included an explicit distinction between the \"Syrians\" (as Aramaic speakers of Syria proper, western of Euphrates), and the \"Osroenians\" as Aramaic speakers of Osroene (eastern region, centered in Edessa), thus showing that dialect of the \"Syrians\" (Aramaic speakers of proper Syria) was known to be different from that of the \"Osroenians\" (speakers of Edessan Aramaic).\nNative (endonymic) use of the term \"Aramaic language\" (Aramaya/Oromoyo) among its speakers has continued throughout the medieval period, as attested by the works of prominent writers, including the Oriental Orthodox Patriarch Michael of Antioch (d. 1199).\nWider and narrower meanings.\nSince the proper dating of the \"Cave of Treasures\", modern scholars were left with no indications of native Aramaic adoption of Syrian/Syriac labels before the 5th century. In the same time, a growing body of later sources showed that both in Greek, and in native literature, those labels were most commonly used as designations for Aramaic language in general, including its various dialects (both eastern and western), thus challenging the conventional scholarly reduction of the term \"Syriac language\" to a specific designation for Edessan Aramaic. Such use, that excludes non-Edessan dialects, and particularly those of Western Aramaic provenience, persist as an accepted convention, but in the same time stands in contradiction both with original Greek, and later native (acquired) uses of Syrian/Syriac labels as common designations for Aramaic language in general.\nThose problems were addressed by prominent scholars, including Theodor N\u00f6ldeke (d. 1930) who noted on several occasions that term \"\"Syriac language\" has come to have two distinctive meanings, wider and narrower, with first (historical and wider) serving as a common synonym for Aramaic language in general, while other (conventional and narrower) designating only the Edessan Aramaic, also referred to more specifically as the \"Classical Syriac\".\nNoting the problem, scholars have tried to resolve the issue by being more consistent in their use of the term \"Classical Syriac\"\" as a strict and clear scientific designation for the old literary and liturgical language, but the consistency of such use was never achieved within the field.\nInconsistent use of \"Syrian/Syriac\" labels in scholarly literature has led some researchers to raise additional questions, related not only to terminological issues but also to some more fundamental (methodological) problems, that were undermining the integrity of the field. Attempts to resolve those issues were unsuccessful, and in many scholarly works, related to the old literary and liturgical language, reduction of the term \"\"Classical Syriac\" to \"Syriac\" (only) remained a manner of convenience, even in titles of works, including encyclopedic entries, thus creating a large body of unspecific references, that became a base for the emergence of several new classes of terminological problems at the advent of the informational era. Those problems culminated during the process of international standardization of the terms \"Syriac\" and \"Classical Syriac\" within the ISO 639 and MARC systems.\nThe term \"Classical Syriac\" was accepted in 2007 and codified (ISO code: https://) as a designation for the old literary and liturgical language, thus confirming the proper use of the term. In the same time, within the MARC standard, code syc was accepted as designation for \"Classical Syriac\", but under the name \"Syriac\", while the existing general code syr, that was until then named \"Syriac\", was renamed to \"Syriac, Modern\". Within ISO 639 system, large body of unspecific references related to various linguistic uses of the term \"Syriac\" remained related to the original ISO 639-2 code syr (\"Syriac\"), but its scope is defined within the ISO 639-3 standard as a macrolanguage that currently includes only some of the Neo-Aramaic languages. Such differences in classification, both terminological and substantial, within systems and between systems (ISO and MARC), led to the creation of several additional problems, that remain unresolved.\nWithin linguistics, mosaic of terminological ambiguities related to Syrian/Syriac labels was additionally enriched by introduction of the term \"Palaeo-Syrian language\"\" as a variant designation for the ancient Eblaite language from the third millennium BC, that is unrelated to the much later Edessan Aramaic, and its early phases, that were commonly labeled as Old/Proto- or even Paleo/Palaeo-Syrian/Syriac in scholarly literature. Newest addition to the terminological mosaic occurred c.\u20092014, when it was proposed, also by a scholar, that one of regional dialects of the Old Aramaic language from the first centuries of the 1st millennium BC should be called \"\"Central Syrian Aramaic\", thus introducing another ambiguous term, that can be used, in its generic meaning, to any local variant of Aramaic that occurred in central regions of Syria during any period in history.\nAfter more than five centuries of Syriac studies, which were founded by western scholars at the end of the 15th century, main terminological issues related to the name and classification of the language known as Edessan Aramaic, and also referred to by several other names combined of Syrian/Syriac labels, remain opened and unsolved. Some of those issues have special sociolinguistic and ethnolinguistic significance for the remaining Neo-Aramaic speaking communities.\nSince the occurrence of major political changes in the Near East (2003), those issues have acquired additional complexity, related to legal recognition of the language and its name. In the Constitution of Iraq (Article 4), adopted in 2005, and also in subsequent legislation, term \"Syriac\"\" () is used as official designation for the language of Neo-Aramaic-speaking communities, thus opening additional questions related to linguistic and cultural identity of those communities. Legal and other practical (educational and informational) aspects of the linguistic self-identification also arose throughout Syriac-speaking diaspora, particularly in European countries (Germany, Sweden, Netherlands).\nGeographic distribution.\nSyriac was the local dialect of Aramaic in Edessa, and evolved under the influence of the Church of the East and the Syriac Orthodox Church into its current form. Before Arabic became the dominant language, Syriac was a major language among Christian communities in the Middle East, Central Asia and the Malabar Coast in India, and remains so among the Syriac Christians to this day. It has been found as far afield as Hadrian's Wall in Great Britain, with inscriptions written by Aramaic-speaking soldiers of the Roman Empire.\nHistory.\nHistory of Syriac language is divided into several successive periods, defined primarily by linguistic, and also by cultural criteria. Some terminological and chronological distinctions exist between different classifications, that were proposed among scholars.\nOrigins.\nDuring the first three centuries of the Common Era, a local Aramaic dialect spoken in the Kingdom of Osroene, centered in Edessa, eastern of Euphrates, started to gain prominence and regional significance. There are about eighty extant early inscriptions, written in Old-Edessan Aramaic, dated to the first three centuries AD, with the earliest inscription being dated to the 6th year AD, and the earliest parchment to 243\u00a0AD. All of these early examples of the language are non-Christian.\nAs a language of public life and administration in the region of Osroene, Edessan Aramaic was gradually given a relatively coherent form, style and grammar that is lacking in other Aramaic dialects of the same period. Since Old-Edessan Aramaic later developed into Classical Syriac, it was retroactively labeled by western scholars as \"Old Syrian/Syriac\" or \"Proto-Syrian/Syriac\", although the linguistic homeland of the language in the region of Osroene, was never part of contemporary (Roman) Syria.\nLiterary Syriac.\nIn the 3rd century, churches in Edessa began to use local Aramaic dialect as the language of worship. Early literary efforts were focused on creation of an authoritative Aramaic translation of the Bible, the Peshitta ( ). At the same time, Ephrem the Syrian was producing the most treasured collection of poetry and theology in the Edessan Aramaic language, that later became known as Syriac.\nIn 489, many Syriac-speaking Christians living in the eastern reaches of the Roman Empire fled to the Sasanian Empire to escape persecution and growing animosity with Greek-speaking Christians. The Christological differences with the Church of the East led to the bitter Nestorian Schism in the Syriac-speaking world. As a result, Syriac developed distinctive western and eastern varieties. Although remaining a single language with a high level of comprehension between the varieties, the two employ distinctive variations in pronunciation and writing system, and, to a lesser degree, in vocabulary.\nThe Syriac language later split into a western variety, used mainly by the Syriac Orthodox Church in upper Mesopotamia and Syria proper, and an eastern variety used mainly by the Church of the East in central and northeastern Mesopotamia. Religious divisions were also reflected in linguistic differences between the Western Syriac Rite and the Eastern Syriac Rite. During the 5th and the 6th century, Syriac reached its height as the lingua franca of Mesopotamia and surrounding regions. It existed in literary (liturgical) form, as well as in vernacular forms, as the native language of Syriac-speaking populations.\nFollowing the Arab conquest in the 7th century, vernacular forms of Syriac were gradually replaced during the next centuries by the advancing Arabic language. Having an Aramaic (Syriac) substratum, the regional Arabic dialect (Mesopotamian Arabic) developed under the strong influence of local Aramaic (Syriac) dialects, sharing significant similarities in language structure, as well as having evident and stark influences from previous (ancient) languages of the region.\nSyriac-influenced Arabic dialects developed among Iraqi Muslims, as well as Iraqi Christians, most of whom descend from native Syriac speakers.\nWestern Syriac is the official language of the West Syriac Rite, practiced by the Syriac Orthodox Church, the Syriac Catholic Church, the Maronite Catholic Church, the Malankara Orthodox Syrian Church, the Malabar Independent Syrian Church, the Malankara Mar Thoma Syrian Church, the Syro-Malankara Catholic Church and some Parishes in the Syro-Malabar Knanaya Archeparchy of Kottayam.\nEastern Syriac is the liturgical language of the East Syriac Rite, practised in modern times by the ethnic Assyrian followers of the Assyrian Church of the East, the Assyrian Pentecostal Church, the Ancient Church of the East, the Chaldean Catholic Church, as well as the Syro-Malabar Catholic Church in India.\nSyriac literature is by far the most prodigious of the various Aramaic languages. Its corpus covers poetry, prose, theology, liturgy, hymnody, history, philosophy, science, medicine and natural history. Much of this wealth remains unavailable in critical editions or modern translation.\nFrom the 7th century onwards, Syriac gradually gave way to Arabic as the spoken language of much of the region, excepting northern Iraq and Mount Lebanon. The Mongol invasions and conquests of the 13th century, and the religiously motivated massacres of Syriac Christians by Timur further contributed to the rapid decline of the language. In many places outside of Upper Mesopotamia and Mount Lebanon, even in liturgy, it was replaced by Arabic.\nCurrent status.\nRevivals of literary Syriac in recent times have led to some success with the creation of newspapers in written Syriac ( \"), similar to the use of Modern Standard Arabic has been employed since the early decades of the 20th century. Modern forms of literary Syriac have also been used not only in religious literature but also in secular genres, often with Assyrian nationalistic themes.\nSyriac is spoken as the liturgical language of the Syriac Orthodox Church, as well as by some of its adherents. Syriac has been recognised as an official minority language in Iraq. It is also taught in some public schools in Iraq, Syria, Palestine, Israel, Sweden, Augsburg (Germany) and Kerala (India).\nIn 2014, an Assyrian nursery school could finally be opened in Ye\u015filk\u00f6y, Istanbul, after waging a lawsuit against the Ministry of National Education which had denied it permission, but was required to respect non-Muslim minority rights as specified in the Treaty of Lausanne.\nIn August 2016, the Ourhi Centre was founded by the Assyrian community in the city of Qamishli, to educate teachers in order to make Syriac an additional language to be taught in public schools in the Jazira Region of the Autonomous Administration of North and East Syria, which then started with the 2016/17 academic year.\nIn April 2023, a team of AI researchers completed the first AI translation model and website for classical Syriac.\nGrammar.\nMany Syriac words, like those in other Semitic languages, belong to triconsonantal roots, collations of three Syriac consonants. New words are built from these three consonants with variable vowel and consonant sets. For example, the following words belong to the root (\"), to which a basic meaning of \"taking\" can be assigned:\nNouns.\nMost Syriac nouns are built from triliteral roots. Nouns carry grammatical gender (masculine or feminine), they can be either singular or plural in number (a very few can be dual) and can exist in one of three grammatical states. These states should not be confused with grammatical cases in other languages.\nHowever, very quickly in the development of Classical Syriac, the emphatic state became the ordinary form of the noun, and the absolute and construct states were relegated to certain stock phrases (for example, , , \"man, person\", literally \"son of man\").\nIn Old and early Classical Syriac, most genitive noun relationships are built using the construct state, but contrary to the genitive case, it is the head-noun which is marked by the construct state. Thus, , , means \"the taxes of the kingdom\". Quickly, the construct relationship was abandoned and replaced by the use of the relative particle , \"\". Thus, the same noun phrase becomes , , where both nouns are in the emphatic state. Very closely related nouns can be drawn into a closer grammatical relationship by the addition of a pronominal suffix. Thus, the phrase can be written as , . In this case, both nouns continue to be in the emphatic state, but the first has the suffix that makes it literally read \"her taxes\" (\"kingdom\" is feminine), and thus is \"her taxes, [those] of the kingdom\".\nAdjectives always agree in gender and number with the nouns they modify. Adjectives are in the absolute state if they are predicative, but agree with the state of their noun if attributive. Thus, , ', means \"the taxes are evil\", whereas , ', means \"evil taxes\".\nVerbs.\nMost Syriac verbs are built on triliteral roots as well. Finite verbs carry person, gender (except in the first person) and number, as well as tense and conjugation. The non-finite verb forms are the infinitive and the active and passive participles.\nSyriac has only two true morphological tenses: perfect and imperfect. Whereas these tenses were originally aspectual in Aramaic, they have become a truly temporal past and future tenses respectively. The present tense is usually marked with the participle followed by the subject pronoun. Such pronouns are usually omitted in the case of the third person. This use of the participle to mark the present tense is the most common of a number of \"compound\" tenses that can be used to express varying senses of tense and aspect.\nSyriac also employs derived verb stems such as are present in other Semitic languages. These are regular modifications of the verb's root to express other changes in meaning. The first stem is the ground state, or ' (this name models the shape of the root) form of the verb, which carries the usual meaning of the word. The next is the intensive stem, or ', form of the verb, which usually carries an intensified meaning. The third is the extensive stem, or ', form of the verb, which is often causative in meaning. Each of these stems has its parallel passive conjugation: the ', ' and ' respectively. To these six cardinal stems are added a few irregular stems, like the ' and ', which generally have an extensive meaning.\nThe basic G-stem or \"Peal\" conjugation of \"to write\" in the perfect and imperfect is as follows:\nPhonology.\nPhonologically, like the other Northwest Semitic languages, Syriac has 22 consonants. The consonantal phonemes are:\nPhonetically, there is some variation in the pronunciation of Syriac in its various forms. The various Modern Eastern Aramaic vernaculars have quite different pronunciations, and these sometimes influence how the classical language is pronounced, for example, in public prayer. Classical Syriac has two major streams of pronunciation: western and eastern.\nConsonants.\nSyriac shares with Aramaic a set of lightly contrasted stop/fricative pairs. In different variations of a certain lexical root, a root consonant might exist in stop form in one variation and fricative form in another. In the Syriac alphabet, a single letter is used for each pair. Sometimes a dot is placed above the letter (\"qu\u0161\u0161\u0101y\u0101\" \"strengthening\"; equivalent to a dagesh in Hebrew) to mark that the stop pronunciation is required, and a dot is placed below the letter (\"rukk\u0101\u1e35\u0101\" \"softening\") to mark that the fricative pronunciation is required. The pairs are:\nLike some Semitic languages, Syriac too has emphatic consonants, and it has three of them, being a historically emphatic variant of . These are consonants that have a coarticulation in the pharynx or slightly higher. There are two pharyngeal fricatives, another class of consonants typically found in Semitic languages. Syriac also has a rich array of sibilants:\nVowels.\nAs with most Semitic languages, the vowels of Syriac are mostly subordinated to consonants. Especially in the presence of an emphatic consonant, vowels tend to become mid-centralised.\nClassical Syriac had the following distinguishable vowels:\nIn the western dialect, has become , and the original has merged with . In eastern dialects, there is more fluidity in the pronunciation of front vowels, with some speakers distinguishing five qualities of such vowels, and others only distinguishing three. Vowel length is generally not important: close vowels tend to be longer than open vowels.\nThe open vowels form diphthongs with the approximants and . In almost all dialects, the full sets of possible diphthongs collapses into two or three actual pronunciations:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59413", "revid": "13286072", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59413", "title": "Soil science", "text": "Study of soil as a natural resource on the surface of Earth\nSoil science is the study of soil as a natural resource on the surface of the Earth including soil formation, classification and mapping; physical, chemical, biological, and fertility properties of soils; and these properties in relation to the use and management of soils.\nThe main branches of soil science are \"pedology\" \u2015 the study of formation, chemistry, morphology, and classification of soil \u2015 and \"edaphology\" \u2015 the study of how soils interact with living things, especially plants. Sometimes terms which refer to those branches are used as if synonymous with soil science. The diversity of names associated with this discipline is related to the various associations concerned. Indeed, engineers, agronomists, chemists, geologists, physical geographers, ecologists, biologists, microbiologists, silviculturists, sanitarians, archaeologists, and specialists in regional planning, all contribute to further knowledge of soils and the advancement of the soil sciences.\nSoil scientists have raised concerns about how to preserve soil and arable land in a world with a growing population, possible future water crisis, increasing per capita food consumption, and land degradation.\nFields of study.\nSoil occupies the pedosphere, one of Earth's spheres that the geosciences use to organize the Earth conceptually. This is the conceptual perspective of pedology and edaphology, the two main branches of soil science. Pedology is the study of soil in its natural setting. Edaphology is the study of soil in relation to soil-dependent uses. Both branches apply a combination of soil physics, soil chemistry, and soil biology. Due to the numerous interactions between the biosphere, atmosphere and hydrosphere that are hosted within the pedosphere, more integrated, less soil-centric concepts are also valuable. Many concepts essential to understanding soil come from individuals not identifiable strictly as soil scientists. This highlights the interdisciplinary nature of soil concepts.\nResearch.\nExploring the diversity and dynamics of soil continues to yield fresh discoveries and insights. New avenues of soil research are compelled by a need to understand soil in the context of climate change, greenhouse gases, and carbon sequestration. Interest in maintaining the planet's biodiversity and in exploring past cultures has also stimulated renewed interest in achieving a more refined understanding of soil.\nClassification.\nIn 1998, the World Reference Base for Soil Resources (WRB) replaced the FAO soil classification as the international soil classification system. The currently valid version of WRB is the 4th edition, 2022. The FAO soil classification, in turn, borrowed from modern soil classification concepts, including USDA soil taxonomy.\nWRB is based mainly on soil morphology as an expression of pedogenesis. A major difference with USDA soil taxonomy is that soil climate is not part of the system, except insofar as climate influences soil profile characteristics.\nMany other classification schemes exist, including vernacular systems. The structure in vernacular systems is either nominal (giving unique names to soils or landscapes) or descriptive (naming soils by their characteristics such as red, hot, fat, or sandy). Soils are distinguished by obvious characteristics, such as physical appearance (e.g., color, texture, landscape position), performance (e.g., production capability, flooding), and accompanying vegetation. A vernacular distinction familiar to many is classifying texture as heavy or light. Light soil content and better structure take less effort to turn and cultivate. Light soils do not necessarily weigh less than heavy soils on an air dry basis, nor do they have more porosity.\nHistory.\nThe earliest known soil classification system comes from China, appearing in the book \"Yu Gong\" (5th century BCE), where the soil was divided into three categories and nine classes, depending on its color, texture and hydrology.\nContemporaries Friedrich Albert Fallou (the German founder of modern soil science) and Vasily Dokuchaev (the Russian founder of modern soil science) are both credited with being among the first to identify soil as a resource whose distinctness and complexity deserved to be separated conceptually from geology and crop production and treated as a whole. As a founding father of soil science, Fallou has primacy in time. Fallou was working on the origins of soil before Dokuchaev was born; however Dokuchaev's work was more extensive and is considered to be the more significant to modern soil theory than Fallou's.\nPreviously, soil had been considered a product of chemical transformations of rocks, a dead substrate from which plants derive nutritious elements. Soil and bedrock were in fact equated. Dokuchaev considers the soil as a natural body having its own genesis and its own history of development, a body with complex and multiform processes taking place within it. The soil is considered as different from bedrock. The latter becomes soil under the influence of a series of soil-formation factors (climate, vegetation, country, relief and age). According to him, soil should be called the \"daily\" or outward horizons of rocks regardless of the type; they are changed naturally by the common effect of water, air and various kinds of living and dead organisms.\nA 1914 encyclopedic definition: \"the different forms of earth on the surface of the rocks, formed by the breaking down or weathering of rocks\". serves to illustrate the historic view of soil which persisted from the 19th century. Dokuchaev's late 19th century soil concept developed in the 20th century to one of soil as earthy material that has been altered by living processes. A corollary concept is that soil without a living component is simply a part of Earth's outer layer.\nFurther refinement of the soil concept is occurring in view of an appreciation of energy transport and transformation within soil. The term is popularly applied to the material on the surface of the Earth's moon and Mars, a usage acceptable within a portion of the scientific community. Accurate to this modern understanding of soil is Nikiforoff's 1959 definition of soil as the \"excited skin of the sub aerial part of the Earth's crust\".\nAreas of practice.\nAcademically, soil scientists tend to be drawn to one of five areas of specialization: microbiology, pedology, edaphology, physics, or chemistry. Yet the work specifics are very much dictated by the challenges facing our civilization's desire to sustain the land that supports it, and the distinctions between the sub-disciplines of soil science often blur in the process. Soil science professionals commonly stay current in soil chemistry, soil physics, soil microbiology, pedology, and applied soil science in related disciplines.\nOne exciting effort drawing in soil scientists in the U.S. as of 2004[ [update]] is the Soil Quality Initiative. Central to the Soil Quality Initiative is developing indices of soil health and then monitoring them in a way that gives us long-term (decade-to-decade) feedback on our performance as stewards of the planet. The effort includes understanding the functions of soil microbiotic crusts and exploring the potential to sequester atmospheric carbon in soil organic matter. Relating the concept of agriculture to soil quality, however, has not been without its share of controversy and criticism, including critiques by Nobel Laureate Norman Borlaug and World Food Prize Winner Pedro Sanchez.\nA more traditional role for soil scientists has been to map soils. Almost every area in the United States now has a published soil survey, including interpretive tables on how soil properties support or limit activities and uses. An internationally accepted soil taxonomy allows uniform communication of soil characteristics and soil functions. National and international soil survey efforts have given the profession unique insights into landscape-scale functions. The landscape functions that soil scientists are called upon to address in the field seem to fall roughly into six areas:\nThere are also practical applications of soil science that might not be apparent from looking at a published soil survey.\nDepression storage capacity.\nDepression storage capacity, in soil science, is the ability of a particular area of land to retain water in its pits and depressions, thus preventing it from flowing. Depression storage capacity, along with infiltration capacity, is one of the main factors involved in Horton overland flow, whereby water volume surpasses both infiltration and depression storage capacity and begins to flow horizontally across land, possibly leading to flooding and soil erosion. The study of land's depression storage capacity is important in the fields of geology, ecology, and especially hydrology.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59414", "revid": "19014806", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59414", "title": "Nitrogen cycle", "text": "Biogeochemical cycle by which nitrogen is converted into various chemical forms\nThe nitrogen cycle is the biogeochemical cycle by which nitrogen is converted into multiple chemical forms as it circulates among atmospheric, terrestrial, and marine ecosystems. The conversion of nitrogen can be carried out through both biological and physical processes. Important processes in the nitrogen cycle include fixation, ammonification, nitrification, and denitrification. The majority of Earth's atmosphere (78%) is atmospheric nitrogen, making it the largest source of nitrogen. However, atmospheric nitrogen has limited availability for biological use, leading to a scarcity of usable nitrogen in many types of ecosystems.\nThe nitrogen cycle is of particular interest to ecologists because nitrogen availability can affect the rate of key ecosystem processes, including primary production and decomposition. Human activities such as fossil fuel combustion, use of artificial nitrogen fertilizers, and release of nitrogen in wastewater have dramatically altered the global nitrogen cycle. Human modification of the global nitrogen cycle can negatively affect the natural environment system and also human health.\nProcesses.\nNitrogen is present in the environment in a wide variety of chemical forms including organic nitrogen, ammonium (), nitrite (), nitrate (), nitrous oxide (), nitric oxide (NO) or inorganic nitrogen gas (). Organic nitrogen may be in the form of a living organism, humus or in the intermediate products of organic matter decomposition. The processes in the nitrogen cycle is to transform nitrogen from one form to another. Many of those processes are carried out by microbes, either in their effort to harvest energy or to accumulate nitrogen in a form needed for their growth. For example, the nitrogenous wastes in animal urine are broken down by nitrifying bacteria in the soil to be used by plants. The diagram alongside shows how these processes fit together to form the nitrogen cycle.\nNitrogen fixation.\nThe conversion of nitrogen gas () into nitrates and nitrites through atmospheric, industrial and biological processes is called nitrogen fixation. Atmospheric nitrogen must be processed, or \"fixed\", into a usable form to be taken up by plants. Between 5 and 10 billion kg per year are fixed by lightning strikes, but most fixation is done by free-living or symbiotic bacteria known as diazotrophs. These bacteria have the nitrogenase enzyme that combines gaseous nitrogen with hydrogen to produce ammonia, which is converted by the bacteria into other organic compounds. Most biological nitrogen fixation occurs by the activity of molybdenum (Mo)-nitrogenase, found in a wide variety of bacteria and some Archaea. Mo-nitrogenase is a complex two-component enzyme that has multiple metal-containing prosthetic groups. An example of free-living bacteria is \"Azotobacter\". Symbiotic nitrogen-fixing bacteria such as \"Rhizobium\" usually live in the root nodules of legumes (such as peas, alfalfa, and locust trees). Here they form a mutualistic relationship with the plant, producing ammonia in exchange for carbohydrates. Because of this relationship, legumes will often increase the nitrogen content of nitrogen-poor soils. A few non-legumes can also form such symbioses. Today, about 30% of the total fixed nitrogen is produced industrially using the Haber-Bosch process, which uses high temperatures and pressures to convert nitrogen gas and a hydrogen source (natural gas or petroleum) into ammonia.\nAssimilation.\nPlants can absorb nitrate or ammonium from the soil by their root hairs. If nitrate is absorbed, it is first reduced to nitrite ions and then ammonium ions for incorporation into amino acids, nucleic acids, and chlorophyll. In plants that have a symbiotic relationship with rhizobia, some nitrogen is assimilated in the form of ammonium ions directly from the nodules. It is now known that there is a more complex cycling of amino acids between \"Rhizobia\" bacteroids and plants. The plant provides amino acids to the bacteroids so ammonia assimilation is not required and the bacteroids pass amino acids (with the newly fixed nitrogen) back to the plant, thus forming an interdependent relationship. While many animals, fungi, and other heterotrophic organisms obtain nitrogen by ingestion of amino acids, nucleotides, and other small organic molecules, other heterotrophs (including many bacteria) are able to utilize inorganic compounds, such as ammonium as sole N sources. Utilization of various N sources is carefully regulated in all organisms.\nAmmonification.\nWhen a plant or animal dies or an animal expels waste, the initial form of nitrogen is organic, present in forms such as amino acids and DNA. Bacteria and fungi convert this organic nitrogen into ammonia and sometimes ammonium through a series of processes called ammonification or mineralization. This is the last step in the nitrogen cycle step involving organic compounds. Myriad enzymes are involved including dehydrogenases, proteases, and deaminases such as glutamate dehydrogenase and glutamine synthetase. Nitrogen mineralization and ammonification have a positive correlation with organic nitrogen in the soil, soil microbial biomass, and average annual precipitation. They also respond closely to changes in temperature. However, these processes slow in the presence of vegetation with high carbon to nitrogen ratios and fertilization with sugar.\nNitrification.\nThe conversion of ammonium to nitrate is performed primarily by soil-living bacteria and other nitrifying bacteria. In the primary stage of nitrification, the oxidation of ammonium () is performed by bacteria such as the \"Nitrosomonas\" species, which converts ammonia to nitrites (). Other bacterial species such as \"Nitrobacter\", are responsible for the oxidation of the nitrites () into nitrates (). It is important for the ammonia () to be converted to nitrates or nitrites because ammonia gas is toxic to plants.\nDue to their very high solubility and because soils are highly unable to retain anions, nitrates can enter groundwater. Elevated nitrate in groundwater is a concern for drinking water use because nitrate can interfere with blood-oxygen levels in infants and cause methemoglobinemia or blue-baby syndrome. Where groundwater recharges stream flow, nitrate-enriched groundwater can contribute to eutrophication, a process that leads to high algal population and growth, especially blue-green algal populations. While not directly toxic to fish life, like ammonia, nitrate can have indirect effects on fish if it contributes to this eutrophication. Nitrogen has contributed to severe eutrophication problems in some water bodies. Since 2006, the application of nitrogen fertilizer has been increasingly controlled in Britain and the United States. This is occurring along the same lines as control of phosphorus fertilizer, restriction of which is normally considered essential to the recovery of eutrophied waterbodies.\nDenitrification.\nDenitrification is the reduction of nitrates back into nitrogen gas (N2), completing the nitrogen cycle. This process is performed by bacterial species such as \"Pseudomonas\" and \"Paracoccus\", under anaerobic conditions. They use the nitrate as an electron acceptor in the place of oxygen during respiration. These facultatively (meaning optionally) anaerobic bacteria can also live in aerobic conditions. Denitrification happens in anaerobic conditions e.g. waterlogged soils. The denitrifying bacteria use nitrates in the soil to carry out respiration and consequently produce nitrogen gas, which is inert and unavailable to plants. Denitrification occurs in free-living microorganisms as well as obligate symbionts of anaerobic ciliates.\nDissimilatory nitrate reduction to ammonium.\nDissimilatory nitrate reduction to ammonium\u00a0(DNRA), or nitrate/nitrite ammonification, is an anaerobic respiration process. Microbes which undertake DNRA oxidise organic matter and use nitrate as an electron acceptor, reducing it to nitrite, then ammonium (). Both denitrifying and nitrate ammonification bacteria will be competing for nitrate in the environment, although DNRA acts to conserve bioavailable nitrogen as soluble ammonium rather than producing dinitrogen gas.\nAnaerobic ammonia oxidation.\nThe ANaerobic AMMonia OXidation process is also known as the ANAMMOX process, an abbreviation coined by joining the first syllables of each of these three words. This biological process is a redox comproportionation reaction, in which ammonia (the reducing agent giving electrons) and nitrite (the oxidizing agent accepting electrons) transfer three electrons and are converted into one molecule of diatomic nitrogen (N2) gas and two water molecules. This process makes up a major proportion of nitrogen conversion in the oceans. The stoichiometrically balanced formula for the ANAMMOX chemical reaction can be written as following, where an ammonium ion includes the ammonia molecule, its conjugated base: \n (\u0394\"G\"\u00b0 = ).\nThis an exergonic process (here also an exothermic reaction) releasing energy, as indicated by the negative value of \u0394\"G\"\u00b0, the difference in Gibbs free energy between the products of reaction and the reagents.\nOther processes.\nThough nitrogen fixation is the primary source of plant-available nitrogen in most ecosystems, in areas with nitrogen-rich bedrock, the breakdown of this rock also serves as a nitrogen source. Nitrate reduction is also part of the iron cycle, under anoxic conditions Fe(II) can donate an electron to and is oxidized to Fe(III) while is reduced to , and depending on the conditions and microbial species involved. The fecal plumes of cetaceans also act as a junction in the marine nitrogen cycle, concentrating nitrogen in the epipelagic zones of ocean environments before its dispersion through various marine layers, ultimately enhancing oceanic primary productivity.\nMarine nitrogen cycle.\nThe nitrogen cycle is an important process in the ocean as well. While the overall cycle is similar, there are different players and modes of transfer for nitrogen in the ocean. Nitrogen enters the water through the precipitation, runoff, or as N2 from the atmosphere. Nitrogen cannot be utilized by phytoplankton as N2 so it must undergo nitrogen fixation which is performed predominately by cyanobacteria. Without supplies of fixed nitrogen entering the marine cycle, the fixed nitrogen would be used up in about 2000 years. Phytoplankton need nitrogen in biologically available forms for the initial synthesis of organic matter. Ammonia and urea are released into the water by excretion from plankton. Nitrogen sources are removed from the euphotic zone by the downward movement of the organic matter. This can occur from sinking of phytoplankton, vertical mixing, or sinking of waste of vertical migrators. The sinking results in ammonia being introduced at lower depths below the euphotic zone. Bacteria are able to convert ammonia to nitrite and nitrate but they are inhibited by light so this must occur below the euphotic zone. Ammonification or Mineralization is performed by bacteria to convert organic nitrogen to ammonia. Nitrification can then occur to convert the ammonium to nitrite and nitrate. Nitrate can be returned to the euphotic zone by vertical mixing and upwelling where it can be taken up by phytoplankton to continue the cycle. N2 can be returned to the atmosphere through denitrification.\nAmmonium is thought to be the preferred source of fixed nitrogen for phytoplankton because its assimilation does not involve a redox reaction and therefore requires little energy. Nitrate requires a redox reaction for assimilation but is more abundant so most phytoplankton have adapted to have the enzymes necessary to undertake this reduction (nitrate reductase). There are a few notable and well-known exceptions that include most \"Prochlorococcus\" and some \"Synechococcus\" that can only take up nitrogen as ammonium.\nThe nutrients in the ocean are not uniformly distributed. Areas of upwelling provide supplies of nitrogen from below the euphotic zone. Coastal zones provide nitrogen from runoff and upwelling occurs readily along the coast. However, the rate at which nitrogen can be taken up by phytoplankton is decreased in oligotrophic waters year-round and temperate water in the summer resulting in lower primary production. The distribution of the different forms of nitrogen varies throughout the oceans as well.\nNitrate is depleted in near-surface water except in upwelling regions. Coastal upwelling regions usually have high nitrate and chlorophyll levels as a result of the increased production. However, there are regions of high surface nitrate but low chlorophyll that are referred to as HNLC (high nitrogen, low chlorophyll) regions. The best explanation for HNLC regions relates to iron scarcity in the ocean, which may play an important part in ocean dynamics and nutrient cycles. The input of iron varies by region and is delivered to the ocean by dust (from dust storms) and leached out of rocks. Iron is under consideration as the true limiting element to ecosystem productivity in the ocean.\nAmmonium and nitrite show a maximum concentration at 50\u201380 m (lower end of the euphotic zone) with decreasing concentration below that depth. This distribution can be accounted for by the fact that nitrite and ammonium are intermediate species. They are both rapidly produced and consumed through the water column. The amount of ammonium in the ocean is about 3 orders of magnitude less than nitrate. Between ammonium, nitrite, and nitrate, nitrite has the fastest turnover rate. It can be produced during nitrate assimilation, nitrification, and denitrification; however, it is immediately consumed again.\nNew vs. regenerated nitrogen.\nNitrogen entering the euphotic zone is referred to as new nitrogen because it is newly arrived from outside the productive layer. The new nitrogen can come from below the euphotic zone or from outside sources. Outside sources are upwelling from deep water and nitrogen fixation. If the organic matter is eaten, respired, delivered to the water as ammonia, and re-incorporated into organic matter by phytoplankton it is considered recycled/regenerated production.\nNew production is an important component of the marine environment. One reason is that only continual input of new nitrogen can determine the total capacity of the ocean to produce a sustainable fish harvest. Harvesting fish from regenerated nitrogen areas will lead to a decrease in nitrogen and therefore a decrease in primary production. This will have a negative effect on the system. However, if fish are harvested from areas of new nitrogen the nitrogen will be replenished.\nFuture acidification.\nAs illustrated by the diagram on the right, additional carbon dioxide (CO2) is absorbed by the ocean and reacts with water, carbonic acid (H2CO3) is formed and broken down into both bicarbonate () and hydrogen (H+) ions (gray arrow), which reduces bioavailable carbonate () and decreases ocean pH (black arrow). This is likely to enhance nitrogen fixation by diazotrophs (gray arrow), which utilize H+ ions to convert nitrogen into bioavailable forms such as ammonia (NH3) and ammonium ions (). However, as pH decreases, and more ammonia is converted to ammonium ions (gray arrow), there is less oxidation of ammonia to nitrite (NO), resulting in an overall decrease in nitrification and denitrification (black arrows). This in turn would lead to a further build-up of fixed nitrogen in the ocean, with the potential consequence of eutrophication. Gray arrows represent an increase while black arrows represent a decrease in the associated process.\nHuman influences on the nitrogen cycle.\nAs a result of extensive cultivation of legumes (particularly soy, alfalfa, and clover), growing use of the Haber\u2013Bosch process in the production of chemical fertilizers, and pollution emitted by vehicles and industrial plants, human beings have more than doubled the annual transfer of nitrogen into biologically available forms. In addition, humans have significantly contributed to the transfer of nitrogen trace gases from Earth to the atmosphere and from the land to aquatic systems. Human alterations to the global nitrogen cycle are most intense in developed countries and in Asia, where vehicle emissions and industrial agriculture are highest.\nGeneration of Nr, reactive nitrogen, has increased over 10 fold in the past century due to global industrialisation. This form of nitrogen follows a cascade through the biosphere via a variety of mechanisms, and is accumulating as the rate of its generation is greater than the rate of denitrification. Nr burial in lakes and oceans has been increasing in tandem with anthropogenic input, now double the Nr burial flux pre-industrial revolution. Reactive nitrogen can be denitrified in water or buried in sediments to accumulate. This buried Nr lies latent until its sediments are disturbed through events like storms or floods, when large amounts of nitrogen are reintroduced to the water where it can be denitrified and impact the environment.\nNitrous oxide (N2O) has risen in the atmosphere as a result of agricultural fertilization, biomass burning, cattle and feedlots, and industrial sources. N2O has deleterious effects in the stratosphere, where it breaks down and acts as a catalyst in the destruction of atmospheric ozone. Nitrous oxide is also a greenhouse gas and is currently the third largest contributor to global warming, after carbon dioxide and methane. While not as abundant in the atmosphere as carbon dioxide, it is, for an equivalent mass, nearly 300 times more potent in its ability to warm the planet.\nAmmonia (NH3) in the atmosphere has tripled as the result of human activities. It is a reactant in the atmosphere, where it acts as an aerosol, decreasing air quality and clinging to water droplets, eventually resulting in nitric acid (HNO3) that produces acid rain. Atmospheric ammonia and nitric acid also damage respiratory systems.\nThe very high temperature of lightning naturally produces small amounts of NOx, NH3, and HNO3, but high-temperature combustion has contributed to a 6- or 7-fold increase in the flux of NOx to the atmosphere. Its production is a function of combustion temperature - the higher the temperature, the more NOx is produced. Fossil fuel combustion is a primary contributor, but so are biofuels and even the burning of hydrogen. However, the rate that hydrogen is directly injected into the combustion chambers of internal combustion engines can be controlled to prevent the higher combustion temperatures that produce NOx.\nAmmonia and nitrous oxides actively alter atmospheric chemistry. They are precursors of tropospheric (lower atmosphere) ozone production, which contributes to smog and acid rain, damages plants and increases nitrogen inputs to ecosystems. Ecosystem processes can increase with nitrogen fertilization, but anthropogenic input can also result in nitrogen saturation, which weakens productivity and can damage the health of plants, animals, fish, and humans.\nDecreases in biodiversity can also result if higher nitrogen availability increases nitrogen-demanding grasses, causing a degradation of nitrogen-poor, species-diverse heathlands.\nConsequence of human modification of the nitrogen cycle.\nImpacts on natural systems.\nIncreasing levels of nitrogen deposition is shown to have several adverse effects on both terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems. Nitrogen gases and aerosols can be directly toxic to certain plant species, affecting the aboveground physiology and growth of plants near large point sources of nitrogen pollution. Changes to plant species may also occur as nitrogen compound accumulation increases availability in a given ecosystem, eventually changing the species composition, plant diversity, and nitrogen cycling. Ammonia and ammonium \u2013 two reduced forms of nitrogen \u2013 can be detrimental over time due to increased toxicity toward sensitive species of plants, particularly those that are accustomed to using nitrate as their source of nitrogen, causing poor development of their roots and shoots. Increased nitrogen deposition also leads to soil acidification, which increases base cation leaching in the soil and amounts of aluminum and other potentially toxic metals, along with decreasing the amount of nitrification occurring and increasing plant-derived litter. Due to the ongoing changes caused by high nitrogen deposition, an environment's susceptibility to ecological stress and disturbance \u2013 such as pests and pathogens \u2013 may increase, thus making it less resilient to situations that otherwise would have little impact on its long-term vitality.\nAdditional risks posed by increased availability of inorganic nitrogen in aquatic ecosystems include water acidification; eutrophication of fresh and saltwater systems; and toxicity issues for animals, including humans. Eutrophication often leads to lower dissolved oxygen levels in the water column, including hypoxic and anoxic conditions, which can cause death of aquatic fauna. Relatively sessile benthos, or bottom-dwelling creatures, are particularly vulnerable because of their lack of mobility, though large fish kills are not uncommon. Oceanic dead zones near the mouth of the Mississippi in the Gulf of Mexico are a well-known example of algal bloom-induced hypoxia. Even though there have been some efforts at reducing Nitrogen agricultural runoff, there has been no significant reduction in dead zone size. The New York Adirondack Lakes, Catskills, Hudson Highlands, Rensselaer Plateau and parts of Long Island display the impact of nitric acid rain deposition, resulting in the killing of fish and many other aquatic species.\nFreshwater has a lower ability to neutralize acidity, so acidification can occur with less nitrogen deposition. This acidification can negatively impact fish and aquatic invertebrates while favoring phytoplankton that can handle more acidic environments.\nAmmonia (NH3) is highly toxic to fish, and the level of ammonia discharged from wastewater treatment facilities must be closely monitored. Nitrification via aeration before discharge is often desirable to prevent fish deaths. Land application can be an attractive alternative to aeration.\nImpacts on human health: nitrate accumulation in drinking water.\nLeakage of Nr (reactive nitrogen) from human activities can cause nitrate accumulation in the natural water environment, which can create harmful impacts on human health. Excessive use of N-fertilizer in agriculture has been a significant source of nitrate pollution in groundwater and surface water. Due to its high solubility and low retention by soil, nitrate can easily escape from the subsoil layer to the groundwater, causing nitrate pollution. Some other non-point sources for nitrate pollution in groundwater originate from livestock feeding, animal and human contamination, and municipal and industrial waste. Since groundwater often serves as the primary domestic water supply, nitrate pollution can be extended from groundwater to surface and drinking water during potable water production, especially for small community water supplies, where poorly regulated and unsanitary waters are used.\nThe WHO standard for drinking water is 50\u00a0mg L\u22121 for short-term exposure, and for 3\u00a0mg L\u22121 chronic effects. Once it enters the human body, nitrate can react with organic compounds through nitrosation reactions in the stomach to form nitrosamines and nitrosamides, which are involved in some types of cancers (e.g., oral cancer and gastric cancer).\nImpacts on human health: air quality.\nHuman activities have also dramatically altered the global nitrogen cycle by producing nitrogenous gases associated with global atmospheric nitrogen pollution. There are multiple sources of atmospheric reactive nitrogen (Nr) fluxes. Agricultural sources of reactive nitrogen can produce atmospheric emission of ammonia (), nitrogen oxides (NOx) and nitrous oxide (N2O). Combustion processes in energy production, transportation, and industry can also form new reactive nitrogen via the emission of NOx, an unintentional waste product. When those reactive nitrogens are released into the lower atmosphere, they can induce the formation of smog, particulate matter, and aerosols, all of which are major contributors to adverse health effects on human health from air pollution. In the atmosphere, NO2 can be oxidized to nitric acid (HNO3), and it can further react with NH3 to form ammonium nitrate (), which facilitates the formation of particulate nitrate. Moreover, NH3 can react with other acid gases (sulfuric and hydrochloric acids) to form ammonium-containing particles, which are the precursors for the secondary organic aerosol particles in photochemical smog.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59415", "revid": "11127889", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59415", "title": "Soil degradation", "text": ""}
{"id": "59416", "revid": "13286072", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59416", "title": "Soil erosion", "text": "Displacement of soil by water, wind, and lifeforms\nSoil erosion is the denudation or wearing away of the upper layer of soil. It is a form of soil degradation. This natural process is caused by the dynamic activity of erosive agents, that is, water, ice (glaciers), snow, air (wind), plants, and animals (including humans). In accordance with these agents, erosion is sometimes divided into water erosion, glacial erosion, snow erosion, wind (aeolian) erosion, zoogenic erosion and anthropogenic erosion such as tillage erosion. \nSoil erosion may be a slow process that continues relatively unnoticed, or it may occur at an alarming rate causing a serious loss of topsoil. The loss of soil from farmland may be reflected in reduced crop production potential, lower surface water quality and damaged drainage networks. Soil erosion could also cause sinkholes.\nHuman activities have increased by 10\u201350 times the rate at which erosion is occurring world-wide.\nExcessive (or accelerated) erosion causes both \"on-site\" and \"off-site\" problems. On-site impacts include decreases in agricultural productivity and (on natural landscapes) ecological collapse, both because of loss of the nutrient-rich upper soil layers. In some cases, the eventual result is desertification. Off-site effects include sedimentation of waterways and eutrophication of water bodies, as well as sediment-related damage to roads and houses. Water and wind erosion are the two primary causes of land degradation; combined, they are responsible for about 84% of the global extent of degraded land, making excessive erosion one of the most significant environmental problems worldwide.\nIntensive agriculture, deforestation, roads, acid rains, anthropogenic climate change and urban sprawl are amongst the most significant human activities in regard to their effect on stimulating erosion. However, there are many prevention and remediation practices that can curtail or limit erosion of vulnerable soils.\nPhysical processes.\nRainfall and surface runoff.\nRainfall, and the surface runoff which may result from rainfall, produces four main types of soil erosion: \"splash erosion\", \"sheet erosion\", \"rill erosion\", and \"gully erosion\". Splash erosion is generally seen as the first and least severe stage in the soil erosion process, which is followed by sheet erosion, then rill erosion and finally gully erosion (the most severe of the four).\nIn \"splash erosion\", the impact of a falling raindrop creates a small crater in the soil, ejecting soil particles. The distance these soil particles travel can be as much as 0.6\u00a0m (two feet) vertically and 1.5\u00a0m (five feet) horizontally on level ground.\nIf the soil is saturated, or if the rainfall rate is greater than the rate at which water can infiltrate into the soil, surface runoff occurs. If the runoff has sufficient flow energy, it will transport loosened soil particles (sediment) down the slope. \"Sheet erosion\" is the transport of loosened soil particles by overland flow.\n\"Rill erosion\" refers to the development of small, ephemeral concentrated flow paths which function as both sediment source and sediment delivery systems for erosion on hillslopes. Generally, where water erosion rates on disturbed upland areas are greatest, rills are active. Flow depths in rills are typically of the order of a few centimeters (about an inch) or less and along-channel slopes may be quite steep. This means that rills exhibit hydraulic physics very different from water flowing through the deeper wider channels of streams and rivers.\n\"Gully erosion\" occurs when runoff water accumulates and rapidly flows in narrow channels during or immediately after heavy rains or melting snow, removing soil to a considerable depth. Another cause of gully erosion is grazing, which often results in ground compaction. Because the soil is exposed, it loses the ability to absorb excess water, and erosion can develop in susceptible areas.\nRivers and streams.\n\"Valley\" or \"stream erosion\" occurs with continued water flow along a linear feature. The erosion is both downward, deepening the valley, and headward, extending the valley into the hillside, creating head cuts and steep banks. In the earliest stage of stream erosion, the erosive activity is dominantly vertical, the valleys have a typical V cross-section and the stream gradient is relatively steep. When some base level is reached, the erosive activity switches to lateral erosion, which widens the valley floor and creates a narrow floodplain. The stream gradient becomes nearly flat, and lateral deposition of sediments becomes important as the stream meanders across the valley floor. In all stages of stream erosion, by far the most erosion occurs during times of flood, when more and faster-moving water is available to carry a larger sediment load. In such processes, it is not the water alone that erodes: suspended abrasive particles, pebbles and boulders can also act erosively as they traverse a surface, in a process known as \"traction\".\n\"Bank erosion\" is the wearing away of the banks of a stream or river. This is distinguished from changes on the bed of the watercourse, which is referred to as \"scour\". Erosion and changes in the form of river banks may be measured by inserting metal rods into the bank and marking the position of the bank surface along the rods at different times.\n\"Thermal erosion\" is the result of melting and weakening permafrost due to moving water. It can occur both along rivers and at the coast. Rapid river channel migration observed in the Lena River of Siberia is due to thermal erosion, as these portions of the banks are composed of permafrost-cemented non-cohesive materials. Much of this erosion occurs as the weakened banks fail in large slumps. Thermal erosion also affects the Arctic coast, where wave action and near-shore temperatures combine to undercut permafrost bluffs along the shoreline and cause them to fail. Annual erosion rates along a segment of the Beaufort Sea shoreline averaged per year from 1955 to 2002.\nFloods.\nAt extremely high flows, kolks, or vortices are formed by large volumes of rapidly rushing water. Kolks cause extreme local erosion, plucking bedrock and creating pothole-type geographical features called rock-cut basins. Examples can be seen in the flood regions result from glacial Lake Missoula, which created the channeled scablands in the Columbia Basin region of eastern Washington.\nWind erosion.\nWind erosion is a major geomorphological force, especially in arid and semi-arid regions. It is also a major source of land degradation, evaporation, desertification, harmful airborne dust, and crop damage\u2014especially after being increased far above natural rates by human activities such as deforestation, urbanization, and agriculture.\nWind erosion is of two primary varieties: \"deflation\", where the wind picks up and carries away loose particles; and \"abrasion\", where surfaces are worn down as they are struck by airborne particles carried by wind. Deflation is divided into three categories: (1) \"surface creep\", where larger, heavier particles slide or roll along the ground; (2) \"saltation\", where particles are lifted a short height into the air, and bounce and saltate across the surface of the soil; and (3) \"suspension\", where very small and light particles are lifted into the air by the wind, and are often carried for long distances. Saltation is responsible for the majority (50\u201370%) of wind erosion, followed by suspension (30\u201340%), and then surface creep (5\u201325%). Silty soils tend to be the most affected by wind erosion; silt particles are relatively easily detached and carried away.\nWind erosion is much more severe in arid areas and during times of drought. For example, in the Great Plains, it is estimated that soil loss due to wind erosion can be as much as 6100 times greater in drought years than in wet years.\nMass movement.\n\"Mass movement\" is the downward and outward movement of rock and sediments on a sloped surface, mainly due to the force of gravity.\nMass movement is an important part of the erosional process, and is often the first stage in the breakdown and transport of weathered materials in mountainous areas. It moves material from higher elevations to lower elevations where other eroding agents such as streams and glaciers can then pick up the material and move it to even lower elevations. Mass-movement processes are always occurring continuously on all slopes; some mass-movement processes act very slowly; others occur very suddenly, often with disastrous results. Any perceptible down-slope movement of rock or sediment is often referred to in general terms as a landslide. However, landslides can be classified in a much more detailed way that reflects the mechanisms responsible for the movement and the velocity at which the movement occurs. One of the visible topographical manifestations of a very slow form of such activity is a scree slope.\n\"Slumping\" happens on steep hillsides, occurring along distinct fracture zones, often within materials like clay that, once released, may move quite rapidly downhill. They will often show a spoon-shaped isostatic depression, in which the material has begun to slide downhill. In some cases, the slump is caused by water beneath the slope weakening it. In many cases it is simply the result of poor engineering along highways where it is a regular occurrence.\n\"Surface creep\" is the slow movement of soil and rock debris by gravity which is usually not perceptible except through extended observation. However, the term can also describe the rolling of dislodged soil particles in diameter by wind along the soil surface.\nFactors affecting soil erosion.\nClimate.\nThe amount and intensity of precipitation is the main climatic factor governing soil erosion by water. The relationship is particularly strong if heavy rainfall occurs at times when, or in locations where, the soil's surface is not well protected by vegetation. This might be during periods when agricultural activities leave the soil bare, or in semi-arid regions where vegetation is naturally sparse. Wind erosion requires strong winds, particularly during times of drought when vegetation is sparse and soil is dry (and so is more erodible). Other climatic factors such as average temperature and temperature range may also affect erosion, via their effects on vegetation and soil properties. In general, given similar vegetation and ecosystems, areas with more precipitation (especially high-intensity rainfall), more wind, or more storms are expected to have more erosion.\nIn some areas of the world (e.g. the Midwestern United States and the Amazon Rainforest), rainfall intensity is the primary determinant of erosivity, with higher intensity rainfall generally resulting in more soil erosion by water. The size and velocity of rain drops is also an important factor. Larger and higher-velocity rain drops have greater kinetic energy, and thus their impact will displace soil particles by larger distances than smaller, slower-moving rain drops.\nIn other regions of the world (e.g. western Europe), runoff and erosion result from relatively low intensities of stratiform rainfall falling onto previously saturated soil. In such situations, rainfall amount rather than intensity is the main factor determining the severity of soil erosion by water.\nSoil structure and composition.\nThe composition, moisture, and compaction of soil are all major factors in determining the erosivity of rainfall. Sediments containing more clay tend to be more resistant to erosion than those with sand or silt, because the clay helps bind soil particles together. Soil containing high levels of organic materials are often more resistant to erosion, because the organic materials coagulate soil colloids and create a stronger, more stable soil structure. The amount of water present in the soil before the precipitation also plays an important role, because it sets limits on the amount of water that can be absorbed by the soil (and hence prevented from flowing on the surface as erosive runoff). Wet, saturated soils will not be able to absorb as much rainwater, leading to higher levels of surface runoff and thus higher erosivity for a given volume of rainfall. Soil compaction also affects the permeability of the soil to water, and hence the amount of water that flows away as runoff. More compacted soils will have a larger amount of surface runoff than less compacted soils.\nVegetative cover.\nVegetation acts as an interface between the atmosphere and the soil. It increases the permeability of the soil to rainwater, thus decreasing runoff. It shelters the soil from winds, which results in decreased wind erosion, as well as advantageous changes in microclimate. The roots of the plants bind the soil together, and interweave with other roots, forming a more solid mass that is less susceptible to both water and wind erosion. The removal of vegetation increases the rate of surface erosion.\nTopography.\nThe topography of the land determines the velocity at which surface runoff will flow, which in turn determines the erosivity of the runoff. Longer, steeper slopes (especially those without adequate vegetative cover) are more susceptible to very high rates of erosion during heavy rains than shorter, less steep slopes. Steeper terrain is also more prone to mudslides, landslides, and other forms of gravitational erosion processes.\nHuman activities that aid soil erosion.\nAgricultural practices.\nUnsustainable agricultural practices increase rates of erosion by one to two orders of magnitude over the natural rate and far exceed replacement by soil production. The tillage of agricultural lands, which breaks up soil into finer particles, is one of the primary factors. The problem has been exacerbated in modern times, due to mechanized agricultural equipment that allows for deep plowing, which severely increases the amount of soil that is available for transport by water erosion. Others include monocropping, farming on steep slopes, pesticide and chemical fertilizer usage (which kill organisms that bind soil together), row-cropping, and the use of surface irrigation. A complex overall situation with respect to defining nutrient losses from soils, could arise as a result of the size selective nature of soil erosion events. Loss of total phosphorus, for instance, in the finer eroded fraction is greater relative to the whole soil. Extrapolating this evidence to predict subsequent behaviour within receiving aquatic systems, the reason is that this more easily transported material may support a lower solution P concentration compared to coarser sized fractions. Tillage also increases wind erosion rates, by dehydrating the soil and breaking it up into smaller particles that can be picked up by the wind. Exacerbating this is the fact that most of the trees are generally removed from agricultural fields, allowing winds to have long, open runs to travel over at higher speeds. Heavy grazing reduces vegetative cover and causes severe soil compaction, both of which increase erosion rates.\nDeforestation.\nIn an undisturbed forest, the mineral soil is protected by a layer of \"leaf litter\" and an \"humus\" that cover the forest floor. These two layers form a protective mat over the soil that absorbs the impact of rain drops. They are porous and highly permeable to rainfall, and allow rainwater to slow percolate into the soil below, instead of flowing over the surface as runoff. The roots of the trees and plants hold together soil particles, preventing them from being washed away. The vegetative cover acts to reduce the velocity of the raindrops that strike the foliage and stems before hitting the ground, reducing their kinetic energy. However it is the forest floor, more than the canopy, that prevents surface erosion. The terminal velocity of rain drops is reached in about . Because forest canopies are usually higher than this, rain drops can often regain terminal velocity even after striking the canopy. However, the intact forest floor, with its layers of leaf litter and organic matter, is still able to absorb the impact of the rainfall.\nDeforestation causes increased erosion rates due to exposure of mineral soil by removing the humus and litter layers from the soil surface, removing the vegetative cover that binds soil together, and causing heavy soil compaction from logging equipment. Once trees have been removed by fire or logging, infiltration rates become high and erosion low to the degree the forest floor remains intact. Severe fires can lead to significant further erosion if followed by heavy rainfall.\nGlobally one of the largest contributors to erosive soil loss in the year 2006 is the slash and burn treatment of tropical forests. In a number of regions of the earth, entire sectors of a country have been rendered unproductive. For example, on the Madagascar high central plateau, comprising approximately ten percent of that country's land area, virtually the entire landscape is sterile of vegetation, with gully erosive furrows typically in excess of deep and wide. Shifting cultivation is a farming system which sometimes incorporates the slash and burn method in some regions of the world. This degrades the soil and causes the soil to become less and less fertile.\nRoads and human impact.\nHuman Impact has major effects on erosion processes\u2014first by denuding the land of vegetative cover, altering drainage patterns, and compacting the soil during construction; and next by covering the land in an impermeable layer of asphalt or concrete that increases the amount of surface runoff and increases surface wind speeds. Much of the sediment carried in runoff from urban areas (especially roads) is highly contaminated with fuel, oil, and other chemicals. This increased runoff, in addition to eroding and degrading the land that it flows over, also causes major disruption to surrounding watersheds by altering the volume and rate of water that flows through them, and filling them with chemically polluted sedimentation. The increased flow of water through local waterways also causes a large increase in the rate of bank erosion.\nClimate change.\nThe warmer atmospheric temperatures observed over the past decades are expected to lead to a more vigorous hydrological cycle, including more extreme rainfall events. The rise in sea levels that has occurred as a result of climate change has also greatly increased coastal erosion rates.\nStudies on soil erosion suggest that increased rainfall amounts and intensities will lead to greater rates of soil erosion. Thus, if rainfall amounts and intensities increase in many parts of the world as expected, erosion will also increase, unless amelioration measures are taken. Soil erosion rates are expected to change in response to changes in climate for a variety of reasons. The most direct is the change in the erosive power of rainfall. Other reasons include: a) changes in plant canopy caused by shifts in plant biomass production associated with moisture regime; b) changes in litter cover on the ground caused by changes in both plant residue decomposition rates driven by temperature and moisture dependent soil microbial activity as well as plant biomass production rates; c) changes in soil moisture due to shifting precipitation regimes and evapo-transpiration rates, which changes infiltration and runoff ratios; d) soil erodibility changes due to decrease in soil organic matter concentrations in soils that lead to a soil structure that is more susceptible to erosion and increased runoff due to increased soil surface sealing and crusting; e) a shift of winter precipitation from non-erosive snow to erosive rainfall due to increasing winter temperatures; f) melting of permafrost, which induces an erodible soil state from a previously non-erodible one; and g) shifts in land use made necessary to accommodate new climatic regimes.\nStudies by Pruski and Nearing indicated that, other factors such as land use unconsidered, it is reasonable to expect approximately a 1.7% change in soil erosion for each 1% change in total precipitation under climate change. In recent studies, there are predicted increases of rainfall erosivity by 17% in the United States, by 18% in Europe, and globally 30 to 66%\nGlobal environmental effects.\nDue to the severity of its ecological effects, and the scale on which it is occurring, erosion constitutes one of the most significant global environmental problems we face today.\nLand degradation.\nWater and wind erosion are now the two primary causes of land degradation; combined, they are responsible for 84% of degraded acreage.\nEach year, about 75 billion tons of soil is eroded from the land\u2014a rate that is about 13\u201340 times as fast as the natural rate of erosion. Approximately 40% of the world's agricultural land is seriously degraded. According to the United Nations, an area of fertile soil the size of Ukraine is lost every year because of drought, deforestation and climate change. In Africa, if current trends of soil degradation continue, the continent might be able to feed just 25% of its population by 2025, according to UNU's Ghana-based Institute for Natural Resources in Africa.\nRecent modeling developments have quantified rainfall erosivity at global scale using high temporal resolution (&lt;30\u2009min) and high fidelity rainfall recordings. The results is an extensive global data collection effort produced the Global Rainfall Erosivity Database (GloREDa) which includes rainfall erosivity for 3,625 stations and covers 63 countries. This first ever Global Rainfall Erosivity Database was used to develop a global erosivity map at 30 arc-seconds(~1\u2009km) based on sophisticated geostatistical process. According to a new study published in Nature Communications, almost 36 billion tons of soil is lost every year due to water, and deforestation and other changes in land use make the problem worse. The study investigates global soil erosion dynamics by means of high-resolution spatially distributed modelling (c. 250\u2009\u00d7\u2009250\u2009m cell size). The geo-statistical approach allows, for the first time, the thorough incorporation into a global soil erosion model of land use and changes in land use, the extent, types, spatial distribution of global croplands and the effects of different regional cropping systems.\nThe loss of soil fertility due to erosion is further problematic because the response is often to apply chemical fertilizers, which leads to further water and soil pollution, rather than to allow the land to regenerate.\nSedimentation of aquatic ecosystems.\nSoil erosion (especially from agricultural activity) is considered to be the leading global cause of diffuse water pollution, due to the effects of the excess sediments flowing into the world's waterways. The sediments themselves act as pollutants, as well as being carriers for other pollutants, such as attached pesticide molecules or heavy metals.\nThe effect of increased sediments loads on aquatic ecosystems can be catastrophic. Silt can smother the spawning beds of fish, by filling in the space between gravel on the stream bed. It also reduces their food supply, and causes major respiratory issues for them as sediment enters their gills. The biodiversity of aquatic plant and algal life is reduced, and invertebrates are also unable to survive and reproduce. While the sedimentation event itself might be relatively short-lived, the ecological disruption caused by the mass die off often persists long into the future.\nOne of the most serious and long-running water erosion problems worldwide is in the People's Republic of China, on the middle reaches of the Yellow River and the upper reaches of the Yangtze River. From the Yellow River, over 1.6\u00a0billion tons of sediment flows into the ocean each year. The sediment originates primarily from water erosion in the Loess Plateau region of the northwest.\nAirborne dust pollution.\nSoil particles picked up during wind erosion of soil are a major source of air pollution, in the form of airborne particulates\u2014\"dust\". These airborne soil particles are often contaminated with toxic chemicals such as pesticides or petroleum fuels, posing ecological and public health hazards when they later land, or are inhaled/ingested.\nDust from erosion acts to suppress rainfall and changes the sky color from blue to white, which leads to an increase in red sunsets. Dust events have been linked to a decline in the health of coral reefs across the Caribbean and Florida, primarily since the 1970s. Similar dust plumes originate in the Gobi desert, which combined with pollutants, spread large distances downwind, or eastward, into North America.\nMonitoring, measuring and modelling soil erosion.\nMonitoring and modeling of erosion processes can help people better understand the causes of soil erosion, make predictions of erosion under a range of possible conditions, and plan the implementation of preventative and restorative strategies for erosion. However, the complexity of erosion processes and the number of scientific disciplines that must be considered to understand and model them (e.g. climatology, hydrology, geology, soil science, agriculture, chemistry, physics, etc.) makes accurate modelling challenging. Erosion models are also non-linear, which makes them difficult to work with numerically, and makes it difficult or impossible to scale up to making predictions about large areas from data collected by sampling smaller plots.\nThe most commonly used model for predicting soil loss from water erosion is the Universal Soil Loss Equation (USLE). This was developed in the 1960s and 1970s. It estimates the average annual soil loss \"A\" on a plot-sized area as:\n \"A = RKLSCP\"\nwhere \"R\" is the \"rainfall erosivity factor\", \"K\" is the \"soil erodibility factor\", \"L\" and \"S\" are topographic factors representing length and slope, \"C\" is the cover and management factor and \"P\" is the support practices factor.\nDespite the USLE's plot-scale spatial basis, the model has often been used to estimate soil erosion on much larger areas, such as watersheds, continents, and globally. One major problem is that the USLE cannot simulate gully erosion, and so erosion from gullies is ignored in any USLE-based assessment of erosion. Yet erosion from gullies can be a substantial proportion (10\u201380%) of total erosion on cultivated and grazed land.\nDuring the 50 years since the introduction of the USLE, many other soil erosion models have been developed. But because of the complexity of soil erosion and its constituent processes, all erosion models can only roughly approximate actual erosion rates when validated i.e. when model predictions are compared with real-world measurements of erosion. Thus new soil erosion models continue to be developed. Some of these remain USLE-based, e.g. the G2 model. Other soil erosion models have largely (e.g. the Water Erosion Prediction Project model) or wholly (e.g. RHEM, the Rangeland Hydrology and Erosion Model ) abandoned usage of USLE elements. Global studies continue to be based on the USLE.\nOn a smaller scale (e.g. for individual channels, dams, or spillways), there are erosion rate models available based on the critical shear stress of erosion as well as the erodibility of the soil. These can be measured using geotechnical engineering methods such as the hole erosion test or the jet erosion test.\nPrevention and remediation.\nThe most effective known method for erosion prevention is to increase vegetative cover on the land, which helps prevent both wind and water erosion. Terracing is an extremely effective means of erosion control, which has been practiced for thousands of years by people all over the world. Windbreaks (also called shelterbelts) are rows of trees and shrubs that are planted along the edges of agricultural fields, to shield the fields against winds. In addition to significantly reducing wind erosion, windbreaks provide many other benefits such as improved microclimates for crops (which are sheltered from the dehydrating and otherwise damaging effects of wind), habitat for beneficial bird species, carbon sequestration, and aesthetic improvements to the agricultural landscape. Traditional planting methods, such as mixed-cropping (instead of monocropping) and crop rotation, have also been shown to significantly reduce erosion rates. Crop residues play a role in the mitigation of erosion, because they reduce the impact of raindrops breaking up the soil particles. There is a higher potential for erosion when producing potatoes than when growing cereals, or oilseed crops. Forages have a fibrous root system, which helps combat erosion by anchoring the plants to the top layer of the soil, and covering the entirety of the field, as it is a non-row crop. In tropical coastal systems, properties of mangroves have been examined as a potential means to reduce soil erosion. Their complex root structures are known to help reduce wave damage from storms and flood impacts while binding and building soils. These roots can slow down water flow, leading to the deposition of sediments and reduced erosion rates. However, in order to maintain sediment balance, adequate mangrove forest width needs to be present.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59418", "revid": "31189105", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59418", "title": "Amoco", "text": "American fuel station chain owned by BP\nAmoco ( ) is a brand of fuel stations operating in the United States and owned by British conglomerate BP since 1998. The Amoco Corporation was an American chemical and oil company, founded by Standard Oil Company in 1889 around a refinery in Whiting, Indiana, and was officially the Standard Oil Company of Indiana until 1985. In 1911, it became an independent corporation as part of the break-up of the Standard Oil trust. Incorporated in Indiana, it was headquartered in Chicago.\nIn 1925, Standard Oil of Indiana absorbed the American Oil Company, founded in Baltimore in 1910, and incorporated in 1922, by Louis Blaustein and his son Jacob. The combined corporation operated or licensed gas stations under both the \"Standard\" name and the \"American\" or \"Amoco\" name (the latter from \"American oil company\") and its logo using these names became a red, white and blue oval with a torch in the center. By the mid-twentieth century it was ranked the largest oil company in the United States. In 1985, it changed its corporate name to Amoco.\nThe firm's innovations included two essential parts of the modern industry, the gasoline tanker truck and the drive-through filling station. Its \"Amoco Super-Premium\" lead-free gasoline was marketed decades before environmental concerns led to the eventual phase out of leaded gasoline throughout the United States. Amoco's headquarters were located in the Amoco Building (also called the Standard Oil Building, and nicknamed \"Big Stan\", now the Aon Center) in Chicago, Illinois.\nAmoco merged with BP in December 1998 to form BP Amoco, which was renamed BP in 2001. The Amoco name was branded at the gas pump for the highest 93 octane blends. The \"Deepwater Horizon\" oil spill of 2010 tarnished the BP brand in the US resulting in a rethinking of US branding. In October 2017, BP announced reintroduction of the Amoco branded stations to select US markets. As of 2023, there were over 600 new Amoco stations in the eastern and midwestern United States.\nHistory.\nStandard Oil of Indiana.\nStandard Oil of Indiana was formed in 1889 by John D. Rockefeller as part of the Standard Oil Trust. The company's operations centered around the Whiting Refinery situated on Lake Michigan, and first operational in 1890. In 1910, with the increased usage of the automobile, Indiana Standard decided to specialize in providing gasoline to consumers. In 1911, the year it became independent from the Standard Oil trust, the company sold 88% of the gasoline and kerosene sold in the Midwest. In 1912, it opened its first gas service station in Minneapolis, Minnesota.\nWhen the Standard Oil Trust was broken up in 1911, Indiana Standard was assigned marketing territory covering most of the Midwestern United States, including Indiana, Michigan, Illinois, Wisconsin, Minnesota, North Dakota, South Dakota, Iowa, Kansas, and Missouri. It had the exclusive rights to use the Standard name in the region. Soon after, Indiana Standard scientist William Burton pioneered a new way to process crude oil, called thermal cracking, which allowed the industry to produce more oil. The company licensed the process to 14 companies between 1914 and 1919, including former parent company Standard Oil of New Jersey. The company opened its Casper refinery in 1914.\nIn 1918, Indiana Standard named Colonel Robert W. Stewart as its first chairman. Under Stewart, it began investing in other oil companies outside its Standard marketing territory, beginning with the purchase of the Dixie Oil Company of Louisiana in 1919 and a one-third interest in Midwest Refining in 1920. By June 1921, Standard Oil owned 85% of Midwest's stock.\nBy 1922, the company also had facilities in Sugar Creek, Missouri; Wood River, Illinois; and Greybull, and Laramie in Wyoming. The Casper facility was the largest volume gasoline refinery in the world by this time, turning 1.35 million barrels of crude oil per month into 615,000 barrels of gasoline. In the 1920s and 1930s, Indiana Standard opened up dozens more refining and oil-drilling facilities. Combined with a new oil-refining process, Indiana Standard created its exploration and production business, Stanolind, in 1931. In the following years, a period of intense exploration and search for oil-rich fields ensued; the company drilled over 1,000 wells in 1937 alone.\nPurchase of American Oil Company.\nAfter working for Standard Oil, Blaustein eventually saved enough capital to found his own oil company with his son in 1910. They called it the American Oil Company (AMOCO). Blaustein incorporated his business in 1922.\nIn 1923, the Blausteins sold a half interest in American Oil to the Pan American Petroleum and Transport Company in exchange for a guaranteed supply of oil. Before this deal, Amoco was forced to depend on Standard Oil of New Jersey, a competitor, for its supplies. Standard Oil of Indiana acquired Pan American in 1925, beginning John D. Rockefeller's association with the Amoco name.\nIn the wake of the infamous Teapot Dome scandal, it was discovered that Harry Sinclair, Robert Stewart, Albert Fall, and others, had been laundering money through a shell company called Continental Trading Company and using the funds to buy more than $3 million in liberty bonds during World War I. Though Stewart was never charged with a crime, John D. Rockefeller Jr. demanded his resignation. After a lengthy proxy fight between the two, Stewart was eventually ousted in March 1929.\nPipelines and oil transport.\nIn 1921\u201322, Indiana Standard bought a half interest in the Sinclair Pipe Line Company, a subsidiary of Sinclair Oil Corporation for $16,390,000, which owned a network of crude oil pipelines in the midwestern United States from Ranger, Texas passing by Tulsa, Oklahoma and Kansas City, Missouri to East Chicago, Indiana (or in other words: to the Whiting, Indiana refinery of Standard Oil). In 1925 Indiana Standard made a $36.7 million stake in the Pan American Petroleum and Transport Company gave the company interest in the American Oil Company, which marketed half of PAT's oil in the United States. Indiana Standard raised its stake in PAT to 81 percent by 1929. The two companies officially merged in 1954.\nIn 1930, Standard completed its acquisition of Sinclair Pipeline and also acquired the remaining half of Sinclair Crude Oil Purchasing Company. The two companies were renamed to Stanolind Pipeline Company and Stanolind Crude Oil Purchasing Company. The pipeline company headquarters were located in the Philcade building in Tulsa, Oklahoma. In 1950, all of the corporation's pipeline activities were merged into a single entity, which was named Service Pipeline Company. By 1964, the company operated 14,500 miles of pipelines located in the central part of the country. It gathered crude oil from 34,300 wells and carried it to 59 refineries, delivering 900,000 to 950,000 barrels a day.\nLead-free gasoline.\nWhile most oil companies were switching to leaded gasolines en masse during the mid-to-late 1920s, American Oil chose to continue marketing its premium-grade \"Amoco-Gas\" (later Amoco Super-Premium) as a lead-free gasoline by using aromatics rather than tetraethyllead to increase octane levels. This was decades before the environmental movement of the early 1970s that led to more stringent auto-emission controls, which ultimately mandated the universal phase out of leaded gasoline.\nThe \"Amoco\" lead-free gasoline was sold at American's stations in the eastern and southern U.S. alongside American Regular gasoline, which was a leaded fuel. By 1970, lead-free Amoco was introduced in the Indiana Standard marketing area in 1970. The Red Crown Regular and White Crown Premium (later Gold Crown Super Premium) gasolines marketed by parent company Standard Oil (Indiana) in its prime marketing area in the Midwest before 1961, also contained lead. By 1978, Amoco had phased out premium lead gas.\nIn November 1986, amid pressures from the EPA to cut down on the usage of lead in gasoline, Amoco became the first major oil company to say it would quit all retail sales of leaded gasoline. In its place, Amoco began selling a mid-grade 89 octane unleaded gasoline (the same number as its leaded regular gasoline), along with its unleaded regular and unleaded premium offerings.\nWorld War II.\nWorld War II followed this period of exploration; Indiana Standard participated in the war effort, discovering new means of refinement and even a way of producing TNT more quickly and easily. In addition, Indiana Standard significantly contributed to the aviation and land gasoline needed for the Allied armies. Also, during the war Indiana Standard created its chemical division, formed from the merger of the Pan American Chemicals Company and the Indoil Chemical Company.\nPost-war.\nIn the late 1940s, after World War II, Indiana Standard returned to focusing on domestic oil refinement and advancement. In 1947, Indiana Standard was the first company to drill off-shore, in the Gulf of Mexico, and in 1948, Stanolind Oil invented Hydrafrac, a hydraulic well fracturing process that increased oil production worldwide. Initially the Hydrafrac process was licensed exclusively to Halliburton.\nBy the early 1950s, Standard Oil of Indiana was ranked as the second-largest American oil company with annual gross sales of $1.5 billion. It had 12 refineries in the United States, marketed its products in 41 states, owned of crude oil pipelines, of trunk lines, and of product pipelines.\nIn October 1954, Standard Indiana opened its Mandan refinery in North Dakota under its American Oil Company subsidiary.\nBusiness expansion.\nIn the late 1950s and early 1960s, Indiana Standard began to diversify its assets. It again led the way with scientific and technological discoveries. Indiana Standard discovered PTA, a chemical for polyester fiber production. In 1968, following that discovery, Indiana Standard acquired the Avisun Corporation and Patchogue-Plymouth, forming the Amoco Fabrics and Fibers Company. By 1992, the company was trying to sell off its yarn factories in Alabama and Georgia.\nThe company's Amoco Foam Products subsidiary made polystyrene cups, plates, carrying trays and other products. The division was sold to Tenneco in June 1996.\nAmoco.\nIn 1956, the Pan-Am stations in the southeastern U.S. were rebranded as Amoco stations. In 1961, Indiana Standard reorganized its marketing giving its American Oil Company unit responsibility for its retail operations nationwide under the Standard name inside the Indiana Standard marketing area (Colorado, Illinois, Indiana, Iowa, Kansas, Michigan, Minnesota, Missouri, Montana, Nebraska, North Dakota, Oklahoma, South Dakota, Wisconsin, and Wyoming) and under the American name outside that region. Both brands shared the same redesigned torch and oval logo for easy identification nationwide. The Utoco name used in Indiana Standard's southwestern region was replaced by the American name. The Amoco name continued to be used outside the U.S. and as a brand on certain American Oil products.\nSoon after, the company began to expand. With an exploration office in Canada, Indiana Standard was now an international gas company. Indiana Standard created several new plants and claimed various new oil fields in this time period, as the company prospered in the post-war boom.\nBy 1971, all the divisions of Indiana Standard bore the Amoco name including American Oil which was renamed Amoco Oil with American stations renamed Amoco stations. By 1975, Amoco began phasing in the Amoco name in the old Indiana Standard sales territory. Standard Oil Company (Indiana) was officially renamed Amoco Corporation in 1985. Facilities, like the one in Casper, were renamed using the new branding.\nPhillips Petroleum's assets in the General American Oil Company, acquired in 1983, were later taken over by Amoco.\nCarlin's Amoco Station was built at Roanoke, Virginia, around 1947; it was listed on the National Register of Historic Places in 2012.\nGlobal expansion.\nStandard of Indiana established operations in Venezuela during the 1920s under dictator Juan Vicente Gomez. However, by 1932, during the worst of the Great Depression, the company sold its interests to Standard Oil of New Jersey.\nIn 1958, Indiana again went overseas by signing a deal with Iran to develop oil interests in the Middle Eastern country, this marked the company's first expansion into the Middle East. However, during the 1978 Iranian Revolution, Indiana faced significant challenges as political unrest escalated. The company swiftly shut down its Iranian operations and evacuated all American employees after they received death threats. This marked Amoco's complete withdrawal from Iran.\nIn the following decades, Amoco expanded globally, creating plants, oil wells, or markets in over 30 countries, including Italy, Australia (acquired by BP in 1984), Britain, Belgium, Brazil, Argentina, South Korea, Taiwan, Pakistan, Norway, Venezuela, Russia, China, Trinidad and Tobago, Egypt, West Germany. In addition, the company also acquired a division of Tenneco Oil Company and Dome Petroleum Limited becoming one of the world's largest oil companies.\nIn April 1981, reorganized Amoco Production, Amoco Oil, Amoco Chemicals, and Amoco Minerals\u2014its four main units\u2014into worldwide operating concerns. The Amoco International Oil Company was also merged into Amoco Production, with its refining and marketing operations transferred to Amoco Oil and its marine transportation operations made part of Indiana Standard's supply and technology department.\nIn July 1988, Amoco acquired Dome Petroleum, a Canadian company. By 1989, Amoco was the fifth-largest gasoline seller in the United States with more than 14,000 stations in 30 states.\nIn 1994 Amoco was involved in a consortium with nine other companies that signed an agreement with the government of Azerbaijan for exclusive rights to develop oil fields in the Caspian Sea. Also in 1994 Amoco combined with competitors Shell Oil and Exxon to construct a $1 billion offshore oil platform in the Gulf of Mexico, the deepest in the world at the time.\nMerger with BP.\nBy the end of the 1990s, worldwide oil prices had slumped to their lowest point in over a decade. Amoco, the fourth largest US oil producer at the time, reported a 50% fall in earnings in second quarter of 1998. Analysts believed Amoco was hurt by its lack of international refining. On August 11, 1998, Amoco announced it would merge with BP in the world's largest industrial merger.\nThough billed as a merger of equals, BP held control of the new entity. Shareholder control was split 60/40 in favor of BP shareholders. The new company was also based on London, where BP was based, with BP chief executive Sir John Browne running the company. BP chairman Peter Sutherland and Amoco chairman Larry Fuller served as co-chairs. The consolidated company would also cut 6,000 jobs worldwide.\nThe new company made efforts to further consolidate by announcing the acquisition of Atlantic Richfield Company (ARCO) for $26.8 billion in April 1999. However, it wasn't until BP Amoco agreed to divest ARCO's Alaska holdings that the FTC approved the deal a year later. The company then cut 2,000 jobs.\nIn August 1999, BP Amoco sold its western Canadian oil properties for $1.1 billion. In September 2001, BP Amoco sold its refineries in Salt Lake City and Mandan, North Dakota to Tesoro Petroleum.\nOriginally, the plan was for all US BP service stations to be converted to Amoco while all overseas Amoco service stations were to be converted to BP. But by 2004, BP announced that all Amoco service stations would either be closed or renamed to BP service stations, including the remaining stations still bearing the \"Standard\" name. BP also chose to rename its gasolines with the Amoco name, changing its midgrade and premium offerings to the Silver and Ultimate brandings that Amoco used. By 2008, the \"Amoco Fuels\" name had been mostly discontinued in favor of \"BP Gasoline with Invigorate\". The Amoco name, however, lives on as BP continues to sell Silver and Ultimate under the BP name.\nIn addition, a few BP stations continued operation under the Amoco name. Most were either converted to BP, demolished and replaced with BP-style stations, abandoned, or switched to competitor brands. On April 1, 2010, in Mississippi, Chevron purchased some BP gas stations, which had been Amoco, to convert them to the Texaco brand.\nIn the aftermath of the \"Deepwater Horizon\" oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico, there were reports in the press that BP was reconsidering rebranding itself as Amoco in the US. Some independently owned BP stations, including former Amoco stations, switched to a different brand due to the public relations fallout as a result of the oil spill.\nCorporate image.\nLogos.\nThe first Indiana Standard logo was unveiled in 1926, after a competition. The logo featured a circle, representing strength, stability, and dependability, with the words \"Standard Oil Company (Indiana)\" in red. The inner circle represents the cycle of service to customers. The word \"Service\" was written in the inside of the circles. In addition, the logo also had a torch with a flame, symbolizing progress. This logo appeared on gas station buildings. The roadside sign was a blue rectangle saying \"STANDARD SERVICE\" in white block letters.\nConcurrently, American Oil introduced in 1932, a logo which was the first to bear the name \"Amoco\". It featured an ellipse divided into three sections horizontally; the top and bottom were red, and the middle had a black background with white lettering. This logo was used in the northeastern U.S.\nA new logo was developed by Indiana Standard and introduced in 1946. It combined the Standard torch with the Amoco oval. The oval colors were, from top to bottom, red, white, and blue. The new logo was called the \"Torch and Oval (T&amp;O)\". In parts of the country where the company could not use the name \"Standard\", the logo read \"Utoco\" or \"Pan-Am\". When the \"Pan-Am\" name was replaced by \"Amoco\", it marked the first time the torch and oval was used with the Amoco name. The red and black logo continued to be used in the northeast and maps distributed by Amoco in the late 1950s through 1960 showed both logos.\nIn 1961, the torch and oval was redesigned with a flatter oval and a more contemporary torch design with the logo bearing the Standard or American name in the U.S. and the Amoco name outside the U.S.\nThe next updated logo, in 1971, enhanced the previous one. It featured a blue bottom and a sleeker-looking torch. In addition, the word \"Standard\" became italicized and thicker. This was used by Midwestern station owners who had the option of using the Amoco name (more familiar in the East and South) or using the more familiar Standard name. Owners used it until they were converted to BP or another franchise. In the 1970s, both the Standard and Amoco brand icons were used on products (such as Amoco Roadmaps, Amoco Motorclub, and the Amaco Credit Card).\nThe final Amoco logo of the company simply changed the name on the logo to \"Amoco\". The logo featured the familiar torch and divided ellipse. A horizontal logo was also used, with the italicized word \"Amoco\" featuring trailing red, white, and blue horizontal stripes, taken from the divided ellipse of the Amoco logo. This logo was used primarily on pumps and service station canopies.\nAfter the rebrand, for a time the Amoco brand was retained as a sub-brand to the main BP helios logo, mainly in the form of the horizontal logo (used on signage as a smaller element beneath the price displays); the black background was replaced with green, to symbolize the new parent company.\nAlthough a few Amoco stations still use their former logo, most have since been converted to the BP livery. In St. Louis, Missouri, https://, both before and after the company's demise, still stands. It stands at the intersection of Clayton Road, Skinker Boulevard, McCausland Avenue, and Interstate 64 (near the southwest corner of Forest Park, home of the St. Louis Zoo, the Saint Louis Art Museum and other prominent attractions). It is visible up to two miles away on the interstate. Most surviving Amoco stations are kept so BP can continue holding the trademarks for Amoco and Standard.\nIn May 2008, United States BP stations mostly discontinued use of the \"Amoco Fuels\" logo as BP introduced its new brand of fuel, \"BP Gasoline with Invigorate\". BP still uses the Silver and Amoco Ultimate brands for its midgrade and premium gasolines. For the 2017 revival (see below), the Amoco logo got a new, modernized refresh to its \"torch and oval\" image.\nSponsorship.\nIn 1968\u20131972, (as American Oil Company) the company sponsored the American Freeway Patrol (AFP) in the metropolitan San Diego area as part of an expansion of service stations into Southern California. The American Freeway Patrol cruised the freeways and assisted disabled motorists free of charge, and provided helicopter traffic reports for local radio stations which was groundbreaking at the time. Don Langford, with KFWB (AM) Los Angeles, joined the American Freeway Patrol, San Diego, as traffic reporter on KOGO-AM-FM, KSON (AM), KITT (FM) San Diego, and KMLO (AM) Vista.\nIn 1976, Amoco (under the \"Standard\" name) sponsored the Barney Oldfield Speedway attraction at Marriott's Great America theme park in Gurnee, Illinois. Although the sponsorship deal ended when Marriott sold the park to Six Flags in 1985, the \"Standard\" logo can still be seen on all of the Barney Oldfield Speedway (now Great America Raceway) cars.\nIn 1988, legendary racer Mario Andretti drove the Amoco Ultimate Lola/Chevrolet for Newman/Haas Racing in the Indianapolis 500 and throughout the season in the CART IndyCar World Series. Andretti provided great publicity for Amoco by winning races at Phoenix and Cleveland that year, part of his 52 career IndyCar wins. Andretti also appeared in Amoco television commercials that aired in local race markets as part of the IndyCar sponsorship campaign.\nDave Blaney drove a #93 Pontiac Grand Prix/Dodge Intrepid under Amoco sponsorship in the NASCAR Cup Series and NASCAR Xfinity Series from 1997 until the brand's demise in 2001.\nIncidents.\nOn August 27, 1955, the Whiting refinery suffered a devastating fire when a processing tower exploded. The fire lasted eight days, consumed 45 acres of storage tanks, and damaged nearby homes and businesses. In all, two people were killed, another 40 were injured, and 1,500 were evacuated. By the following year, the facility was repaired and the company had purchased much of the surrounding area in order to expand.\nIn November 1978, abnormally high temperatures were detected in fuel tanks in the basement of an Amoco gas station in Centralia, Pennsylvania, owned by then-mayor John Coddington. The source was determined to be the town's ongoing mine fire. To prevent risk of the fuel igniting, the gasoline in the tanks was drained. The gas station was shuttered in December 1979, and demolished on November 9, 1981.\nOn March 16, 1978, the very large crude carrier \"Amoco Cadiz\" ran ashore just north of Landunvez, Finist\u00e8re, Brittany, France, causing one of the largest oil spills in history. Amoco was ordered by a federal judge Charles Norgle in a 1990 ruling to pay $120 million in damages and restitution to France.\nOn October 21, 1980, an explosion at an Amoco plant in New Castle, Delaware, killed six people, caused $46 million in property damage, and eventually led to the loss of 300 jobs.\nIn the 1980s and 1990s, six former Amoco chemical engineers at the firm's Naperville, Illinois, research campus developed a deadly form of brain cancer. Researchers who conducted a three-year study of the cancer cluster determined that the cancer cases were workplace-related, but they could not identify the source of the workers' ailments. In June 2010, BP demolished Building 503, where the employees had worked. According to a company spokesperson, the building was \"underused\", and \"required upgrades the company deemed too expensive\". Heirs of one of the cancer-stricken workers won a $2.75 million suit against BP Amoco in 2000.\nBrand relaunch.\nIt was announced on October 10, 2017, that BP would bring the Amoco name back, after an absence of almost a decade. BP had said the first station would relaunch in 2017. Its intention for relaunching the name was to capture more of the U.S. fuel industry.\nAs such, aside from the aforementioned St. Louis station with the large Amoco sign as well as a few other isolated instances, most newer Amoco stations were converted from competitor brands as opposed to BP.\nAs three of BP's Big Oil competitors already sold gasoline under multiple brands that were once competitors (ExxonMobil with Exxon &amp; Mobil, Chevron with its namesake brand &amp; Texaco, and Phillips 66 with its namesake brand, Conoco, &amp; 76), this left Shell Oil Company as the only Big Oil company to sell gasoline under one brand.\nSeveral Gulf stations were rechristened as Amoco stations on Long Island, New York, starting in November 2017.\nThe Amoco brand returned to the Pittsburgh market in fall 2020, when locally based Coen Markets announced a marketing deal with BP to sell Amoco-branded gasoline at all of its fuel-offering locations. As most of Coen's stores were already selling BP gasoline (with a small handful having been Amoco stations before BP), this marked the largest switchover from BP to Amoco since the brand's reintroduction, though a few Coen stations were also selling Exxon, Sunoco, and Citgo prior to the deal. While the deal didn't affect BP as a whole, as BP lost several stations in the market to Marathon Petroleum years before, it essentially relegated the BP brand to 7-Eleven stations in the market as well as a few independent operators.\nFollowing the acquisition of TravelCenters of America in May 2023, BP began converting all pumps to either BP or Amoco branding. In February 2024, there were 675 Amoco gas stations in the United States. In May 2025, Amoco has 900 stations across the United States.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59420", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59420", "title": "Sohio", "text": ""}
{"id": "59421", "revid": "14383484", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59421", "title": "Atlantic Richfield", "text": ""}
{"id": "59422", "revid": "919557", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59422", "title": "Standard Oil of New York", "text": ""}
{"id": "59424", "revid": "37052726", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59424", "title": "Exxon Mobil", "text": ""}
{"id": "59426", "revid": "31189105", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59426", "title": "Standard Oil of New Jersey", "text": ""}
{"id": "59427", "revid": "15953505", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59427", "title": "Standard Oil of Indiana", "text": ""}
{"id": "59428", "revid": "50783195", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59428", "title": "ARCO", "text": "American oil company\nARCO ( ) is a brand of gasoline stations owned by Marathon Petroleum. BP, which formerly owned the brand, uses it in California, Oregon and Washington, while Marathon has rights for the rest of the United States and Mexico.\nARCO was established in 1966 as the Atlantic Richfield Company, an independent oil and gas company formed from the merger of Atlantic Petroleum and the Richfield Oil Corporation.\nHistory.\nFrom 1966 to 2000, the Atlantic Richfield Company, doing business as ARCO, was an independent American oil company with operations in the United States, Indonesia, the North Sea, the South China Sea and Mexico. After its acquisition of Anaconda Copper Mining Company in 1977, ARCO had owned hard rock mines in several western states, which has created environmental clean-up liabilities to the company to this day even after the mines were closed in the early 1980s.\nIn 2000, BP Amoco (now BP) acquired ARCO for $26.8 billion. ARCO's retail and marketing operations were kept separate while the rest of the company was integrated into BP.\nIn 2012, BP sold its Carson refinery, 800 ARCO stations in California, Arizona and Nevada, and the ownership of the ARCO brand to Tesoro for $2.5 billion while paying Tesoro for an exclusive license for use of the ARCO brand on its stations in northern California, Oregon and Washington which will be continued to be supplied from BP's Cherry Point Refinery in Washington state.\nBP has retained the Atlantic Richfield Company as a subsidiary to handle environmental claims against BP for the clean-up of former Anaconda mine properties.\nEarly period.\nARCO was formed by the merger of East Coast\u2013based Atlantic Refining and California-based Richfield Oil Corporation in 1966; the company's name is an acronym of the two companies' names. A merger in 1969, brought in Sinclair Oil Corporation. In the 1970s and 80s, ARCO was one of the largest companies in the world, consistently a top 20 company of the Fortune 500. After its subsequent fracture in the late 1980s and early 90s, ARCO became a subsidiary of UK-based BP plc in 2000 through its BP West Coast Products LLC (BPWCP) affiliate.\n1980s.\nDue to the increasing cost in processing credit card sales, ARCO eliminated its own private credit card program and stopped accepting any bank credit cards, such as Visa and MasterCard, in 1982. In this way, the company was able to pass the resulting savings on to its dealers, which resulted in the company becoming the only major gasoline retailer to accept only cash at its stations.\nIn 1985, ARCO's East Coast stations were not doing very well so ARCO sold 400 service stations in eight states and the District of Columbia to Shell for an undisclosed price and also sold 576 service stations in Pennsylvania and New York plus a refinery in Pennsylvania for $420 million to Dutch trader John Deuss, who rebranded the stations to their former name Atlantic. Deuss later sold the stations plus refinery, pipelines and terminals in 1988 to Sunoco for $513 million.\nIn 1986, ARCO began to accept bank ATM cards (which later became debit cards) at its stations by adding on a transaction fee of initially 10 cents for those sales while maintaining cash-only sales at the previous low price.\n1990s.\nIn the beginning of the 1990s, a subsidiary, ARCO Power Technologies, later Advanced Power Technologies (APTI), was the primary contractor for the High-frequency Active Auroral Research Program (HAARP Project). ARCO having hired Bernard Eastlund led to conspiracy theories about weather control and warfare. \nIn March 1997, ARCO also leased almost all the gas stations of the (now) Santa Fe Springs, California\u2013based independent Thrifty Oil group of 250 stations found throughout California after a damaging price war which the independent Thrifty was unable to win.\nOn July 5, 1990, an explosion at an ARCO Chemical Co. facility in Channelview, Texas killed 17 people and injured five others.\n2000s.\nOn April 18, 2000, ARCO was purchased by BP and completely merged into BP operations. There were two exceptions due to FTC requirements: ARCO Alaska was sold by BP to Phillips Petroleum, and ARCO Pipe Line Company was acquired by TEPPCO, a subsidiary of Enterprise Products.\nHeadquarters buildings.\nFrom 1972 to 2000, ARCO's global corporate headquarters were in the ARCO Plaza in Los Angeles at the corner of 5th and Flower Streets, the site of Richfield's former headquarters. Upon completion in 1972, the ARCO Plaza towers were the tallest buildings in the city for one year before being overtaken by Aon Center, and were the tallest twin towers in the world until the completion of the World Trade Center in New York City. In 1986, joint owners ARCO and Bank of America sold the buildings to Shuwa Investments Corp., the American subsidiary of Shuwa Co. of Tokyo, for $650 million while both remained tenants in their respective named towers. ARCO moved out of the building in 1999. The building was renamed City National Plaza in 2005.\nARCO's Oil &amp; Gas division headquarters were in downtown Dallas, Texas. ARCO Tower, the company's headquarters, was a 46-story office building designed by architect I.M. Pei. The building is now called Energy Plaza.\nResearch Laboratory.\nFrom the 1960s, until the end of the twentieth century, ARCO operated a highly significant research and development center in Plano, Texas, on land purchased in 1964 by the Atlantic Refinery Company. Its golden age was arguably in the early to mid 1980s, when it was led by Robert L. Hirsch. A standout example of ARCO's research at that time was the pioneering study on 4D seismic surveying by Robert Greaves and Terry Fulp. This consisted of repeated 3D seismic surveys which successfully mapped the effects of enhanced oil recovery processes as a function of time. This work was recognized for its seminal importance over 20 years later by the Society of Exploration Geophysicists. Besides Greaves and Fulp, the laboratory produced a number of other distinguished alumni during this golden age, including scientists John Castagna, Michael Batzle, Geoffrey Dorn, and Marius Vassiliou. In later years the laboratory experienced significant contraction. It finally closed shortly after the 2000 acquisition of ARCO by BP.\nARCO Solar.\nDuring the 1970s, the United States government and states such as California sought to encourage companies to invest in the development of low-pollution renewable energy sources. Oil companies such as BP, Shell, and ARCO began to look into photovoltaics. In 1977, ARCO purchased Chatsworth-based Solar Technology International, renamed it ARCO Solar, and moved it to Camarillo. In 1982, ARCO constructed the world's first photovoltaic central utility power plant, a 1-megawatt facility near Hesperia. Unfortunately for ARCO, the solar panel industry was costly and not very profitable, so it was looking for a buyer by 1989. It finally sold the company to the German company Siemens for $36 million in 1990.\nARCO Chemical.\nIn 1987, ARCO Chemical Co. was spun off and taken public, with ARCO selling 19.9% to the public. Lyondell Chemical Company (now LyondellBasell), bought ARCO Chemical in 1998 for $5.6 billion including ARCO's entire 82.2% ownership stake.\nAnaconda Copper.\nARCO merged with Anaconda Copper Mining Company of Montana in 1977. Anaconda's holdings included the Berkeley Pit and the Anaconda, Montana Smelter. ARCO founder Robert Orville Anderson stated \"he hoped Anaconda's resources and expertise would help him launch a major shale-oil venture, but that the world oil glut and the declining price of petroleum made shale oil moot\". The purchase turned out to be a regrettable decision for ARCO. A lack of experience with hard-rock mining and a sudden drop in the price of copper to below seventy cents a pound, the lowest in years, caused ARCO to suspend all operations in Butte, Montana. By 1983, only six years after acquiring rights to the \"Richest Hill on Earth\", the Berkeley Pit was completely idle. By 1986, some ARCO properties were sold to billionaire industrialist Dennis Washington, whose company, Montana Resources, operates a much smaller open-pit mine east of the defunct Berkeley Pit.\nSuperfund site.\nARCO was the responsible party (by its ownership of Anaconda Copper at the time operations were terminated) for the largest U.S. Superfund site\u2014a site that takes in the towns of Butte and Anaconda, and of the Clark Fork River including Milltown Dam. The region's water and soil were polluted by a century of mining and smelting. Chemicals of concern include many heavy metals and arsenic. On 7 February 2008, the United States Environmental Protection Agency announced that prolonged litigation with ARCO ended when ARCO agreed to pay $187 million to finance natural resource restoration activities. Anaconda Copper still nominally exists, but only as a massive environmental liability for BP.\nAtlantic Richfield Co and its then parent BP America agreed to settle a class-action lawsuit brought by about 700 current and former residents of Yerington, Nevada, who lived near the Anaconda mine built in 1941. The company paid in Nevada up to $19.5M for settlement. EPA tested in 2009 wells and found that 79% of the wells north of mine had dangerous levels of uranium and/or arsenic.\nLegal issues.\nIn September 2010, the staff of KCST-FM in Florence, Oregon, noticed that the station's Emergency Alert System (EAS) equipment would repeatedly unmute as if receiving an incoming EAS message several times a week. During each event, which was relayed from KKNU in Springfield, Oregon the same commercial advertisement for ARCO/BP gasoline could be heard, along with the words \"This test has been brought to you by ARCO\". Further investigation by the primary station transmitting the commercial revealed that the spot had been produced using an audio clip of an actual EAS header which had been modified to lower the header's volume and presumably prevent it from triggering false positive alert reactions in EAS equipment. The spot was distributed nationally, and after it had once been identified as the source of the false EAS equipment trips, various stations around the country reported having had similar experiences. After a widespread notification by the Society of Broadcast Engineers was issued, ARCO's ad agency withdrew the commercial from airplay.\nSponsorships.\nSports.\nStarting in 1965, ARCO sponsored the ARCO Jesse Owens Games, an annual track meet for children aged ten to fifteen that was started by Olympics gold medalist Jesse Owens.\nIn 1980, ARCO became a sponsor of the 1984 Summer Olympics that were held in Los Angeles and had helped financed the refurbishing of the Los Angeles Memorial Coliseum.\nIn 1985, ARCO became a sponsor of the just-moved Sacramento Kings basketball franchise and had obtained the long-term naming rights for both their temporary and permanent homes, Original ARCO Arena and the purpose-built ARCO Arena. After BP acquired ARCO in 2000, BP decided not to renew the naming rights to the arena when the sponsorship was due to expire in February 2011.\nMusic.\nDuring the 1980s and 1990s, ARCO had sponsored the annual \"ARCO Concerts in the Sky\" summer jazz series at the Bonaventure Hotel in downtown Los Angeles.\nARCO service station brand.\nCurrently, the brand name ARCO is being used by Marathon Petroleum as a brand of gasoline service stations in the United States and Mexico. In Northern California, Oregon, and Washington states, the ARCO brand is licensed for exclusive use to BP for the sale of gasoline in those areas.\nAny independent station can adopt the ARCO brand in any territory that is covered by the Marathon Petroleum distribution network outside the BP territories of the northwest.\nIt has more than 1,300 gas stations in the western part of the United States, and recently (as of 2017[ [update]]) five gas stations in northwestern Mexico.\nHistory.\nAfter the Atlantic Richfield Company acquired Sinclair Oil in 1969, Atlantic Richfield decided to merge their three separate service brands into one and call it ARCO. $60 million was spent in the rebranding effort.\nOver the course of 2004 and 2005, ARCO signs were replaced with signs that still had the ARCO spark, but BP's Helios (BP's new white, yellow, and green \"sunburst\" mark named after the Greek Sun god, replacing the old British Petroleum shield mark) is also located on the sign. A new tagline \"ARCO\u2014part of BP\" also appeared on some signs and advertisements. ARCO was known for sponsoring the ARCO Arena (now Sleep Train Arena) in Sacramento, California, with a license fee of $750,000/year through 2007.\nOn August 13, 2012, it was announced that Tesoro would purchase ARCO and its refinery for $2.5 billion. The deal came under fire because of increasing fuel prices. Many activists urged state and federal regulators to block the sale because of concerns that it would reduce competition and could lead to higher fuel prices at ARCO stations (ARCO stations make up more than half of all stations with the lowest fuel prices in California). On June 3, 2013, BP sold ARCO and the Carson Refinery to Tesoro for $2.5 billion. BP sold its Southern California terminals (Vinvale, Colton, San Diego, Hathaway, and Hynes) to Tesoro Logistics LP, including the Carson Storage Facility. BP sold the ampm brand to Tesoro for Southern California, Arizona, and Nevada. BP exclusively licensed the ARCO rights from Tesoro for Northern California, Oregon, and Washington.\nARCO is known for its low-priced gasoline compared to other national brands, mainly because of an early 1980s business decision to emphasize cost cutting (cash/debit-only policy) and alternative sources of income (ampm). ARCO is headquartered in La Palma, California.\nTesoro was renamed Andeavor in 2017, and shortly afterwards introduced the ARCO brand for the first time in Mexico by the opening of ARCO branded stations in Tijuana. The introduction of the ARCO brand and other American brands in Mexico came after Mexico ended the monopoly of state-owned Pemex.\nIn spring of 2018, Andeavor began rebranding some SuperAmerica branded stations in North Dakota, South Dakota, Wisconsin and Minnesota to ARCO.\nAndeavor was acquired by Marathon Petroleum in 2018. Following the acquisition, Marathon hinted at keeping the ARCO brand name while rebranding Andeavor's other brands either as standard Marathon stations (for franchised locations) or Speedway locations (for company-owned locations); stations still owned by BP may either remain as ARCO or rebranded as Amoco, as BP does not own the rights to the BP name due to licensing-based reasons in the Western United States. Following the merger, ARCO and Marathon began to be marketed together with Marathon stations replacing various Andeavor brands in the Western markets (including Exxon, Mobil and Shell stations under license with ExxonMobil and Shell, respectively) while ARCO returned to Eastern markets for the first time since 1985. Marathon ultimately sold Speedway to 7-Eleven in 2020, including some former Andeavor properties.\nIn 2021, ARCO reinstituted accepting credit cards, and engaged in an advertising campaign to inform consumers.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59429", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59429", "title": "Standard Oil Company (Ohio)", "text": "American petroleum company (1870\u20131987)\nThe Standard Oil Company (Ohio) was an American petroleum company that existed from 1870 to 1987. The company, known commonly as Sohio, was founded by John D. Rockefeller. It was established as one of the separate entities created after the 1911 breakup.\nIn the 1960s, the Standard Oil Company partnered with BP, in the development of the Prudhoe Bay, Alaska petroleum reserves and the construction of the Trans Alaska pipeline. The complex partnership called for a gradual stock acquisition until BP would eventually gain controlling interest culminating in total acquisition of the American company. The company ceased operations in 1987, although BP continued to sell gasoline under the 'Sohio' brand until 1991.\nHistory.\nUnder the name \"The Standard Oil Company (Ohio)\", the company was established as a separate business after the antitrust breakup the oil conglomerate's monopoly in 1911. It operated service stations under the 'Sohio' brand name in Ohio but was prohibited in using the 'Standard' name in other states. In nearby states, it used the \"Boron\" brand name (introduced in 1954) instead, but with an otherwise-similar logo. Wallace Trevor Holliday was President of the company from 1928 to 1949 and Chairman of the Board from 1949 until his death on November 7, 1950.\nIn 1968, Sohio's CEO, Charles E. Spahr (Charlie), arranged a merger with BP. It was announced as Standard's acquisition of BP's North American interests in exchange for BP receiving 25% of Sohio's stock. However, the contract included a stipulation that BP would assume majority interest when Standard's share of production from the Prudhoe Bay oilfield in Alaska reached . That occurred in 1978, and BP then took control of Standard Oil. The U.S. operations were unified under the BP America corporate name.\nBy 1991, BP had rebranded all Sohio and Boron retail stations as 'BP', except for some marine fuel outlets.\nIn 2011, a BP station in Steubenville, Ohio, that had originally opened as a Sohio station in 1946 ended fuel sales and was restored to 1970s vintage Sohio colors as a museum for Sohio. The site has vintage (inoperable) Sohio pumps and other Sohio memorabilia. The garage itself remains active.\nStations.\nBy 1980, Sohio and Boron had 3,400 gas stations in Ohio, Michigan, Pennsylvania, Indiana, Kentucky and West Virginia. Sohio acquired 5,660 former Gulf stations as a result of FTC anti-trust limitations in Chevron's 1985 takeover of Gulf. These stations, bought for $1 billion, were in Alabama, Georgia, Kentucky, Mississippi, Tennessee, North Carolina and South Carolina. Sohio was allowed to use the \"Gulf\" name for five years after the acquisition.\nBy the end of 1985, all other Standard Oil descendants had minimized use of the name \"Standard\", following Standard Oil of Indiana renaming itself Amoco earlier in the year as well as Chevron's aforementioned merger with Gulf that same year that led to its official corporate name to change from Standard Oil of California to Chevron Corporation. As a result, The Standard Oil Company (Ohio) corporately rebrand itself in 1986 under the Standard name, while continuing to use the \"Sohio\" brand in Ohio. In 1987, BP bought the 45% of Sohio it did not already own for $7.82 Billion and assumed control. Among the first changes was the rebranding of all Sohio, Boron, &amp; Gulf stations that it owned to 'BP' in 1991. Among the conversions included former Mobil stations in Western Pennsylvania (including Pittsburgh) that Standard of Ohio acquired in 1987 when Mobil left that market, most of which had just rebranded as Boron when they were converted to BP. From 1989 to 1991, many Sohio, Boron and Gulf stations used BP's color scheme of green and yellow during the transitional rebranding to BP.\nThe Boron name was used outside of Ohio in neighboring states, like Michigan, Pennsylvania, Kentucky and West Virginia. Boron was also the branding of its premium grade gasoline along with its regular grade fuel \"Extron\" (formerly \"Ex-tane\" later \"Octron\") and its unleaded version \"Cetron\" introduced in 1970.\nStandard Oil's motor oil brands included Boron, Sohio, Cetron, CHD, Duron, Multron, Nitrex, Nitron, Octron, Premex, and Qvo. \nSohio's credit cards, like other oil company cards at the time, could be used at competitors' stations outside the issuing company's competitive territory, which in Sohio's case was Ohio. The benefit died with the Sohio brand. Exxon had a similar arrangement as well. In 1916, Sohio introduced a prefabricated canopy prototype for its stations. Although Sohio gas stations have ceased to exist, a few marina gas stations on Lake Erie and the Ohio River still bear the Sohio name.\nWhen BP merged with Amoco in 1998, its American headquarters moved from the former BP America Building on Public Square in Cleveland to Chicago. Its American headquarters have since moved to the Houston Energy Corridor in Houston, Texas, in line with the corporate offices of Shell and fellow Standard spinoffs ConocoPhillips and Marathon Oil.\nSubsidiaries.\nHospitality Motor Inns.\nHospitality Motor Inns, a wholly owned Sohio subsidiary, operated 11 motor inns in Ohio and surrounding states The company was formed in 1963 as a Sohio subsidiary. Hospitality became a publicly held company when Sohio sold off 51% of the company to the public. Sohio sold its remaining interest of the chain to Hosmin, Inc., in 1978.\nProCare.\nIn the 1980s, as many gas stations began converting their vehicle service bays into convenience stores, Sohio wished to continue performing auto maintenance by launching a specialty auto repair shop. Called Sohio ProCare, these shops were often located near Sohio stations that now had convenience stores instead of auto service and were more specialized compared to traditional auto garages located at gas stations. The locations were mostly in Ohio, but Sohio did expand the concept into Pennsylvania and North Carolina, where they were known as \"Boron ProCare\". Also, unlike many Sohio stations, the ProCare locations were owned and operated directly by Sohio. Commercials for ProCare often featured \"M*A*S*H\" actor Gary Burghoff as \"That Sohio Guy\", as part of a larger Sohio advertising campaign featuring Burghoff. Burghoff himself would stay with BP for a time as a spokesperson after BP converted Sohio and its other brands to BP.\nBP retained ProCare following its absorption of Sohio, rebranding it as \"BP ProCare\" and changing the colors in its logo to match BP. BP continued to operate it until selling the chain to a private investment group in 1999, at which point the shops were simply called ProCare without an oil company prefix and its logo reverted to its Sohio-era colors. Following a bankruptcy under the private investment group's ownership, ProCare would ultimately be acquired by Monro Muffler Brake in 2006, and converted the locations to its own brands.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59430", "revid": "31189105", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59430", "title": "Standard Oil of California", "text": ""}
{"id": "59434", "revid": "49581625", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59434", "title": "Pange lingua gloriosi corporis mysterium", "text": "13th-century hymn written by Saint Thomas Aquinas\n\"Pange lingua gloriosi corporis mysterium\" () is a Medieval Latin hymn attributed to Saint Thomas Aquinas (1225\u20131274) for the Feast of Corpus Christi. It is also sung on Maundy Thursday during the procession from the church to the place where the Blessed Sacrament is kept until Good Friday. The last two stanzas (called, separately, Tantum ergo) are sung at Benediction of the Blessed Sacrament. The hymn expresses the doctrine that the bread and wine are changed into the body and blood of Christ during the celebration of the Eucharist.\nIt is often sung in English as the hymn \"Of the Glorious Body Telling\" to the same tune as the Latin.\nThe opening words recall another famous Latin sequence from which this hymn is derived: Pange lingua gloriosi proelium certaminis by Venantius Fortunatus.\nText.\nThere are many English translations, of varying rhyme scheme and metre. The following has the Latin text with a doxology in the first column, and an English translation by Edward Caswall in the second. The third column is a more literal rendering.\n&lt;poem lang=\"la\" style=\"float:left;\"&gt;Pange, lingua, glori\u00f3si\nC\u00f3rporis myst\u00e9rium,\nSanguin\u00edsque preti\u00f3si,\nQuem in mundi pr\u00e9tium\nFructus ventris gener\u00f3si\nRex eff\u00fadit g\u00e9ntium.\nNobis datus, nobis natus\nEx int\u00e1cta V\u00edrgine,\nEt in mundo convers\u00e1tus,\nSparso verbi s\u00e9mine,\nSui moras incol\u00e1tus\nMiro clausit \u00f3rdine.\nIn supr\u00e9m\u00e6 nocte coen\u00e6\nRec\u00fambens cum fr\u00e1tribus\nObserv\u00e1ta lege plene\nCibis in leg\u00e1libus,\nCibum turb\u00e6 duod\u00e9n\u00e6\nSe dat suis m\u00e1nibus.\nVerbum caro, panem verum\nVerbo carnem \u00e9fficit:\nFitque sanguis Christi merum,\nEt si sensus d\u00e9ficit,\nAd firm\u00e1ndum cor sinc\u00e9rum\nSola fides s\u00fafficit.\nTantum ergo sacram\u00e9ntum\nVener\u00e9mur c\u00e9rnui:\nEt ant\u00edquum docum\u00e9ntum\nNovo cedat r\u00edtui:\nPr\u00e6stet fides supplem\u00e9ntum\nS\u00e9nsuum def\u00e9ctui.\nGenit\u00f3ri, Genit\u00f3que\nLaus et jubil\u00e1tio,\nSalus, honor, virtus quoque\nSit et bened\u00edctio:\nProced\u00e9nti ab utr\u00f3que\nCompar sit laud\u00e1tio.\nAmen. &lt;/poem&gt;\n&lt;poem style=\"margin-left:2em; float:left;\"&gt;Sing, my tongue, the Saviour's glory,\nOf His Flesh, the mystery sing;\nOf the Blood, all price exceeding,\nShed by our Immortal King,\nDestined, for the world's redemption,\nFrom a noble Womb to spring.\nOf a pure and spotless Virgin\nBorn for us on earth below,\nHe, as Man, with man conversing,\nStayed, the seeds of truth to sow;\nThen He closed in solemn order\nWondrously His Life of woe.\nOn the night of that Last Supper,\nSeated with His chosen band,\nHe, the Paschal Victim eating,\nFirst fulfils the Law's command;\nThen as Food to all his brethren\nGives Himself with His own Hand.\nWord-made-Flesh, the bread of nature\nBy His Word to Flesh He turns;\nWine into His Blood He changes:\nWhat though sense no change discerns.\nOnly be the heart in earnest,\nFaith her lesson quickly learns.\nDown in adoration falling,\nLo, the sacred Host we hail,\nLo, o'er ancient forms departing\nNewer rites of grace prevail:\nFaith for all defects supplying,\nWhen the feeble senses fail.\nTo the Everlasting Father\nAnd the Son who comes on high\nWith the Holy Ghost proceeding\nForth from each eternally,\nBe salvation, honor, blessing,\nMight and endless majesty.\nAmen. &lt;/poem&gt;\n&lt;poem style=\"margin-left:2em; float:left;\"&gt;Tell, tongue, the mystery\nof the glorious Body\nand of the precious Blood,\nwhich, for the price of the world,\nthe fruit of a noble Womb,\nthe King of the Nations poured forth.\nGiven to us, born for us,\nfrom the untouched Virgin,\nand dwelt in the world\nafter the seed of the Word had been scattered.\nHis inhabiting ended the delays\nwith wonderful order.\nOn the night of the Last Supper,\nreclining with His brethren,\nonce the Law had been fully observed\nwith the prescribed foods,\nas food to the crowd of Twelve\nHe gives Himself with His hands.\nThe Word as Flesh makes true bread\ninto flesh by a word\nand the wine becomes the Blood of Christ.\nAnd if sense is deficient\nto strengthen a sincere heart\nFaith alone suffices.\nTherefore, the great Sacrament\nlet us reverence, prostrate:\nand let the old Covenant\ngive way to a new rite.\nLet faith stand forth as substitute\nfor defect of the senses.\nTo the Begetter and the Begotten\nbe praise and jubilation,\ngreeting, honour, strength also\nand blessing.\nTo the One who proceeds from Both\nbe equal praise.\nAmen. &lt;/poem&gt;\nMusic history.\nThere are two plainchant settings of the Pange lingua hymn. The better known is a Phrygian mode (Mode III) tune from the Roman liturgy, and the other is from the Mozarabic liturgy from Spain. The Roman tune was originally part of the Gallican Rite.\nThe Roman version of the Pange lingua hymn was the basis for a famous composition by Renaissance composer Josquin des Prez, the \"Missa Pange lingua\". An elaborate fantasy on the hymn, the mass is one of the composer's last works and has been dated to the period from 1515 to 1521, since it was not included by Petrucci in his 1514 collection of Josquin's masses, and was published posthumously. In its simplification, motivic unity, and close attention to the text it has been compared to the late works of Beethoven, and many commentators consider it one of the high points of Renaissance polyphony.\nJuan de Urrede, a Flemish composer active in Spain in the late fifteenth century, composed numerous settings of the Pange lingua, most of them based on the original Mozarabic melody. One of his versions for four voices is among the most popular pieces of the sixteenth century, and was the basis for dozens of keyboard works in addition to masses, many by Spanish composers.\nBuilding on Josquin's treatment of the hymn's third line in the Kyrie of the \"Missa Pange Lingua\", the \"do\u2013re\u2013fa\u2013mi\u2013re\u2013do\"-theme (C\u2013D\u2013F\u2013E\u2013D\u2013C) became one of the most famous in music history, used to this day in even non-religious works by composers including Simon Lohet, Michelangelo Rossi, Fran\u00e7ois Roberday, Johann Caspar Ferdinand Fischer, Johann Jakob Froberger, Johann Caspar Kerll, Johann Sebastian Bach, Johann Fux wrote fugues on it, and the latter's extensive elaborations in the \"Gradus ad Parnassum\" made it known to every aspiring composer \u2013 among them Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart whose \"Jupiter\" theme borrows the first four notes. Anton Bruckner's first composition was a setting of the first strophe of the hymn: Pange lingua, WAB 31.\nThe last two verses of Pange lingua (\"Tantum ergo\") are often separated out. They mark the end of the procession of the monstrance in Holy Thursday liturgy. Various separate musical settings have been written for this, including one by Giovanni Pierluigi da Palestrina, one by Franz Schubert, eight by Anton Bruckner, one by Maurice Durufl\u00e9, and one by Charles-Marie Widor. Beethoven wrote an organ reharmonization of Pange lingua. The work was discovered in October 2012 by the musicologist and professor of the University of Manchester Barry Cooper. It was immediately proposed that the piece served as a sketch for the composer's Missa solemnis.\nFranz Liszt's \"Night Procession\" from \"Two Episodes from Lenau's Faust\" is largely a fantasy on the Pange lingua melody.\nA setting of Pange lingua, written by Ciaran McLoughlin, appears on the Solas 1995 album \"Solas An Domhain\".\nPange lingua has been translated into many different languages for worship throughout the world. However, the Latin version remains the most popular. The Syriac translation of \"Pange lingua\" was used as part of the rite of benediction in the Syro-Malabar Catholic Church of Kerala, India, until the 1970s.\nIndulgence.\nIn the Roman Catholic Church, full recitation of the \"Pange Lingua\", or the \"Tantum Ergo\", is followed by the Latin traditional verses, connected to the indulgence in perpetuity:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;V. Panem de coelo praestit\u00edsti eis.\nR. Omnem delectam\u00e9ntum in se hab\u00e9ntem.\n\"Oration\"\nDeus, qui nobis sub Sacram\u00e9nto mir\u00e1bili Passi\u00f3nis tuae mem\u00f3riam reliqu\u00edsti, tr\u00edbue quaesumus, ita nos C\u00f3rporis et Sanguinis tui sacra myst\u00e9ria vener\u00e1ri, ut redempti\u00f3nis tuae fructum in nobis i\u00fagiter senti\u00e1mus. Qui vivis et regnas cum Deo Patre, in unitate Sp\u00edritus Sancti Deus per \u00f3mnia saecula saecul\u00f3rum. Amen.\u2014\u200a\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Pius VII with Decree 25 August 1818 granted in perpetuity the indulgence of 300 days every time the \"Pange Lingua\" is recited, and 100 days only for those who recite the \"Tantum Ergo\", always understanding that the aforementioned responsory is added \"Panem de coelo\", etc. and the subsequent oration \"Deus qui nobis\". \nWhoever practices this devotion at least 10 times a month has a plenary indulgence once a year on a day of his choice, in addition to the plenary indulgence on Holy Thursday, in Corpus Christi, or on a day of the Octave. These indulgences are applicable [to the souls of] the deceased.\u2014\u200a\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59438", "revid": "5718152", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59438", "title": "Thermal conductivity and resistivity", "text": "Capacity of a material to conduct heat\nThe thermal conductivity of a material is a measure of its ability to conduct heat. It is commonly denoted by formula_1, formula_2, or formula_3 and in SI units is measured in W\u00b7m\u22121\u00b7K\u22121. In such units, it is the amount of thermal energy in watts (joules per second) that flows from a hotter region to a colder region per Kelvin (or degree Celsius) difference in temperature per meter of separation. \nHeat transfer occurs at a lower rate in materials of low thermal conductivity than in materials of high thermal conductivity. For instance, metals typically have high thermal conductivity and are very efficient at conducting heat, while the opposite is true for insulating materials such as mineral wool or Styrofoam. Metals have this high thermal conductivity due to free electrons facilitating heat transfer. Correspondingly, materials of high thermal conductivity are widely used in heat sink applications, and materials of low thermal conductivity are used as thermal insulation. The reciprocal of thermal conductivity is called thermal resistivity.\nThe defining equation for thermal conductivity is formula_4, where formula_5 is the heat flux, formula_6 is the thermal conductivity, and formula_7 is the temperature gradient. This is known as Fourier's law for heat conduction. Although commonly expressed as a scalar, the most general form of thermal conductivity is a second-rank tensor. However, the tensorial description only becomes necessary in materials which are anisotropic.\nDefinition.\nSimple definition.\nConsider a solid material placed between two environments of different temperatures. Let formula_8 be the temperature at formula_9 and formula_10 be the temperature at formula_11, and suppose formula_12. An example of this scenario is a building on a cold winter day; the solid material in this case is the building wall, separating the cold outdoor environment from the warm indoor environment.\nAccording to the second law of thermodynamics, heat will flow from the hot environment to the cold one as the temperature difference is equalized by diffusion. This is quantified in terms of a heat flux formula_13, which gives the rate, per unit area, at which heat flows in a given direction (in this case minus x-direction). In many materials, formula_13 is observed to be directly proportional to the temperature difference and inversely proportional to the separation distance formula_15:\nformula_16\nThe constant of proportionality formula_1 is the thermal conductivity; it is a physical property of the material. In the present scenario, since formula_12 heat flows in the minus x-direction and formula_13 is negative, which in turn means that formula_20. In general, formula_1 is always defined to be positive. The same definition of formula_1 can also be extended to gases and liquids, provided other modes of energy transport, such as convection and radiation, are eliminated or accounted for.\nThe preceding derivation assumes that the formula_1 does not change significantly as temperature is varied from formula_8 to formula_10. Cases in which the temperature variation of formula_1 is non-negligible must be addressed using the more general definition of formula_1 discussed below.\nGeneral definition.\nThermal conduction is defined as the transport of energy due to random molecular motion across a temperature gradient. It is distinguished from energy transport by convection and molecular work in that it does not involve macroscopic flows or work-performing internal stresses.\nEnergy flow due to thermal conduction is classified as heat and is quantified by the vector formula_28, which gives the heat flux at position formula_29 and time formula_30. According to the second law of thermodynamics, heat flows from high to low temperature. Hence, it is reasonable to postulate that formula_28 is proportional to the gradient of the temperature field formula_32, i.e.\nformula_33\nwhere the constant of proportionality, formula_34, is the thermal conductivity. This is called Fourier's law of heat conduction. Despite its name, it is not a law but a definition of thermal conductivity in terms of the independent physical quantities formula_28 and formula_32. As such, its usefulness depends on the ability to determine formula_1 for a given material under given conditions. The constant formula_1 itself usually depends on formula_32 and thereby implicitly on space and time. An explicit space and time dependence could also occur if the material is inhomogeneous or changing with time.\nIn some solids, thermal conduction is anisotropic, i.e. the heat flux is not always parallel to the temperature gradient. To account for such behavior, a tensorial form of Fourier's law must be used:\nformula_40\nwhere formula_41 is symmetric, second-rank tensor called the thermal conductivity tensor.\nAn implicit assumption in the above description is the presence of local thermodynamic equilibrium, which allows one to define a temperature field formula_32. This assumption could be violated in systems that are unable to attain local equilibrium, as might happen in the presence of strong nonequilibrium driving or long-ranged interactions.\nOther quantities.\nIn engineering practice, it is common to work in terms of quantities which are derivative to thermal conductivity and implicitly take into account design-specific features such as component dimensions.\nFor instance, thermal conductance is defined as the quantity of heat that passes in unit time through a plate of \"particular area and thickness\" when its opposite faces differ in temperature by one kelvin. For a plate of thermal conductivity formula_1, area formula_44 and thickness formula_15, the conductance is formula_46, measured in W\u22c5K\u22121. The relationship between thermal conductivity and conductance is analogous to the relationship between electrical conductivity and electrical conductance.\nThermal resistance is the inverse of thermal conductance. It is a convenient measure to use in multicomponent design since thermal resistances are additive when occurring in series.\nThere is also a measure known as the heat transfer coefficient: the quantity of heat that passes per unit time through a unit area of a plate of particular thickness when its opposite faces differ in temperature by one kelvin. In ASTM C168-15, this area-independent quantity is referred to as the \"thermal conductance\". The reciprocal of the heat transfer coefficient is thermal insulance. In summary, for a plate of thermal conductivity formula_1, area formula_44 and thickness formula_15,\nThe heat transfer coefficient is also known as thermal admittance in the sense that the material may be seen as admitting heat to flow.\nAn additional term, thermal transmittance, quantifies the thermal conductance of a structure along with heat transfer due to convection and radiation. It is measured in the same units as thermal conductance and is sometimes known as the \"composite thermal conductance\". The term \"U-value\" is also used.\nFinally, thermal diffusivity formula_54 combines thermal conductivity with density and specific heat:\nformula_55.\nAs such, it quantifies the \"thermal inertia\" of a material, i.e. the relative difficulty in heating a material to a given temperature using heat sources applied at the boundary.\nUnits.\nIn the International System of Units (SI), thermal conductivity is measured in watts per meter-kelvin (W/(m\u22c5K)). Some papers report in watts per centimeter-kelvin [W/(cm\u22c5K)].\nHowever, physicists use other convenient units as well, e.g., in cgs units, where esu/(cm-sec-K) is used. \nThe Lorentz number, defined as L=\u03ba/\u03c3T is a quantity independent of the carrier density and the scattering mechanism. Its value for a gas of non-interacting electrons (typical carriers in good metallic conductors) is 2.72\u00d710\u221213 esu/K2, or equivalently, 2.44\u00d710\u22128 Watt-Ohm/K2.\nIn imperial units, thermal conductivity is measured in BTU/(h\u22c5ft\u22c5\u00b0F).\nThe dimension of thermal conductivity is M1L1T\u22123\u0398\u22121, expressed in terms of the dimensions mass (M), length (L), time (T), and temperature (\u0398).\nOther units which are closely related to the thermal conductivity are in common use in the construction and textile industries. The construction industry makes use of measures such as the R-value (resistance) and the U-value (transmittance or conductance). Although related to the thermal conductivity of a material used in an insulation product or assembly, R- and U-values are measured per unit area, and depend on the specified thickness of the product or assembly.\nLikewise the textile industry has several units including the tog and the clo which express thermal resistance of a material in a way analogous to the R-values used in the construction industry.\nMeasurement.\nThere are several ways to measure thermal conductivity; each is suitable for a limited range of materials. Broadly speaking, there are two categories of measurement techniques: \"steady-state\" and \"transient\". Steady-state techniques infer the thermal conductivity from measurements on the state of a material once a steady-state temperature profile has been reached, whereas transient techniques operate on the instantaneous state of a system during the approach to steady state. Lacking an explicit time component, steady-state techniques do not require complicated signal analysis (steady state implies constant signals). The disadvantage is that a well-engineered experimental setup is usually needed, and the time required to reach steady state precludes rapid measurement.\nIn comparison with solid materials, the thermal properties of fluids are more difficult to study experimentally. This is because in addition to thermal conduction, convective and radiative energy transport are usually present unless measures are taken to limit these processes. The formation of an insulating boundary layer can also result in an apparent reduction in the thermal conductivity.\nExperimental values.\nThe thermal conductivities of common substances span at least four orders of magnitude. Gases generally have low thermal conductivity, and pure metals have high thermal conductivity. For example, under standard conditions the thermal conductivity of copper is over times that of air.\nOf all materials, allotropes of carbon, such as graphite and diamond, are usually credited with having the highest thermal conductivities at room temperature. The thermal conductivity of natural diamond at room temperature is several times higher than that of a highly conductive metal such as copper (although the precise value varies depending on the diamond type).\nThermal conductivities of selected substances are tabulated below; an expanded list can be found in the list of thermal conductivities. These values are illustrative estimates only, as they do not account for measurement uncertainties or variability in material definitions.\nInfluencing factors.\nTemperature.\nThe effect of temperature on thermal conductivity is different for metals and nonmetals. In metals, heat conductivity is primarily due to free electrons. Following the Wiedemann\u2013Franz law, thermal conductivity of metals is approximately proportional to the absolute temperature (in kelvins) times electrical conductivity. In pure metals the electrical conductivity decreases with increasing temperature and thus the product of the two, the thermal conductivity, stays approximately constant. However, as temperatures approach absolute zero, the thermal conductivity decreases sharply. In alloys the change in electrical conductivity is usually smaller and thus thermal conductivity increases with temperature, often proportionally to temperature. Many pure metals have a peak thermal conductivity between 2 K and 10 K.\nOn the other hand, heat conductivity in nonmetals is mainly due to lattice vibrations (phonons). Except for high-quality crystals at low temperatures, the phonon mean free path is not reduced significantly at higher temperatures. Thus, the thermal conductivity of nonmetals is approximately constant at high temperatures. At low temperatures well below the Debye temperature, thermal conductivity decreases, as does the heat capacity, due to carrier scattering from defects.\nChemical phase.\nWhen a material undergoes a phase change (e.g. from solid to liquid), the thermal conductivity may change abruptly. For instance, when ice melts to form liquid water at 0\u00a0\u00b0C, the thermal conductivity changes from 2.18\u00a0W/(m\u22c5K) to 0.56\u00a0W/(m\u22c5K).\nEven more dramatically, the thermal conductivity of a fluid diverges in the vicinity of the vapor-liquid critical point.\nThermal anisotropy.\nSome substances, such as non-cubic crystals, can exhibit different thermal conductivities along different crystal axes. Sapphire is a notable example of variable thermal conductivity based on orientation and temperature, with 35\u00a0W/(m\u22c5K) along the \"c\" axis and 32\u00a0W/(m\u22c5K) along the \"a\" axis.\nWood generally conducts better along the grain than across it. Other examples of materials where the thermal conductivity varies with direction are metals that have undergone heavy cold pressing, laminated materials, cables, the materials used for the Space Shuttle thermal protection system, and fiber-reinforced composite structures.\nWhen anisotropy is present, the direction of heat flow may differ from the direction of the thermal gradient.\nElectrical conductivity.\nIn metals, thermal conductivity is approximately correlated with electrical conductivity according to the Wiedemann\u2013Franz law, as freely moving valence electrons transfer not only electric current but also heat energy. However, the general correlation between electrical and thermal conductance does not hold for other materials, due to the increased importance of phonon carriers for heat in non-metals. Highly electrically conductive silver is less thermally conductive than diamond, which is an electrical insulator but conducts heat via phonons due to its orderly array of atoms.\nMagnetic field.\nThe influence of magnetic fields on thermal conductivity is known as the thermal Hall effect or Righi\u2013Leduc effect.\nGaseous phases.\nIn the absence of convection, air and other gases are good insulators. Therefore, many insulating materials function simply by having a large number of gas-filled pockets which obstruct heat conduction pathways. Examples of these include expanded and extruded polystyrene (popularly referred to as \"styrofoam\") and silica aerogel, as well as warm clothes. Natural, biological insulators such as fur and feathers achieve similar effects by trapping air in pores, pockets, or voids.\nLow density gases, such as hydrogen and helium typically have high thermal conductivity. Dense gases such as xenon and dichlorodifluoromethane have low thermal conductivity. An exception, sulfur hexafluoride, a dense gas, has a relatively high thermal conductivity due to its high heat capacity. Argon and krypton, gases denser than air, are often used in insulated glazing (double paned windows) to improve their insulation characteristics.\nThe thermal conductivity through bulk materials in porous or granular form is governed by the type of gas in the gaseous phase, and its pressure. At low pressures, the thermal conductivity of a gaseous phase is reduced, with this behaviour governed by the Knudsen number, defined as formula_56, where formula_57 is the mean free path of gas molecules and formula_58 is the typical gap size of the space filled by the gas. In a granular material formula_58 corresponds to the characteristic size of the gaseous phase in the pores or intergranular spaces.\nIsotopic purity.\nThe thermal conductivity of a crystal can depend strongly on isotopic purity, assuming other lattice defects are negligible. A notable example is diamond: at a temperature of around 100 K the thermal conductivity increases from 10,000 W\u00b7m\u22121\u00b7K\u22121 for natural type IIa diamond (98.9% 12C), to 41,000 for 99.9% enriched synthetic diamond. A value of 200,000 is predicted for 99.999% 12C at 80 K, assuming an otherwise pure crystal. The thermal conductivity of 99% isotopically enriched cubic boron nitride is ~ 1400 W\u00b7m\u22121\u00b7K\u22121, which is 90% higher than that of natural boron nitride.\nMolecular origins.\nThe molecular mechanisms of thermal conduction vary among different materials, and in general depend on details of the microscopic structure and molecular interactions. As such, thermal conductivity is difficult to predict from first-principles. Any expressions for thermal conductivity which are exact and general, e.g. the Green-Kubo relations, are difficult to apply in practice, typically consisting of averages over multiparticle correlation functions. A notable exception is a monatomic dilute gas, for which a well-developed theory exists expressing thermal conductivity accurately and explicitly in terms of molecular parameters.\nIn a gas, thermal conduction is mediated by discrete molecular collisions. In a simplified picture of a solid, thermal conduction occurs by two mechanisms: 1) the migration of free electrons and 2) lattice vibrations (phonons). The first mechanism dominates in pure metals and the second in non-metallic solids. In liquids, by contrast, the precise microscopic mechanisms of thermal conduction are poorly understood.\nGases.\nIn a simplified model of a dilute monatomic gas, molecules are modeled as rigid spheres which are in constant motion, colliding elastically with each other and with the walls of their container. Consider such a gas at temperature formula_60 and with density formula_61, specific heat formula_62 and molecular mass formula_63. Under these assumptions, an elementary calculation yields for the thermal conductivity\nformula_64\nwhere formula_65 is a numerical constant of order formula_66, formula_67 is the Boltzmann constant, and formula_2 is the mean free path, which measures the average distance a molecule travels between collisions. Since formula_2 is inversely proportional to density, this equation predicts that thermal conductivity is independent of density for fixed temperature. The explanation is that increasing density increases the number of molecules which carry energy but decreases the average distance formula_2 a molecule can travel before transferring its energy to a different molecule: these two effects cancel out. For most gases, this prediction agrees well with experiments at pressures up to about 10 atmospheres. At higher densities, the simplifying assumption that energy is only transported by the translational motion of particles no longer holds, and the theory must be modified to account for the transfer of energy across a finite distance at the moment of collision between particles, as well as the locally non-uniform density in a high density gas. This modification has been carried out, yielding revised Enskog theory, which predicts a density dependence of the thermal conductivity in dense gases.\nTypically, experiments show a more rapid increase with temperature than formula_71 (here, formula_2 is independent of formula_60). This failure of the elementary theory can be traced to the oversimplified \"hard sphere\" model, which both ignores the \"softness\" of real molecules, and the attractive forces present between real molecules, such as dispersion forces.\nTo incorporate more complex interparticle interactions, a systematic approach is necessary. One such approach is provided by Chapman\u2013Enskog theory, which derives explicit expressions for thermal conductivity starting from the Boltzmann equation. The Boltzmann equation, in turn, provides a statistical description of a dilute gas for \"generic\" interparticle interactions. For a monatomic gas, expressions for formula_1 derived in this way take the form\nformula_75\nwhere formula_76 is an effective particle diameter and formula_77 is a function of temperature whose explicit form depends on the interparticle interaction law. For rigid elastic spheres, formula_77 is independent of formula_60 and very close to formula_66. More complex interaction laws introduce a weak temperature dependence. The precise nature of the dependence is not always easy to discern, however, as formula_77 is defined as a multi-dimensional integral which may not be expressible in terms of elementary functions, but must be evaluated numerically. However, for particles interacting through a Mie potential (a generalisation of the Lennard-Jones potential) highly accurate correlations for formula_77 in terms of reduced units have been developed.\nAn alternate, equivalent way to present the result is in terms of the gas viscosity formula_83, which can also be calculated in the Chapman\u2013Enskog approach:\nformula_84\nwhere formula_85 is a numerical factor which in general depends on the molecular model. For smooth spherically symmetric molecules, however, formula_85 is very close to formula_87, not deviating by more than formula_88 for a variety of interparticle force laws. Since formula_1, formula_83, and formula_62 are each well-defined physical quantities which can be measured independent of each other, this expression provides a convenient test of the theory. For monatomic gases, such as the noble gases, the agreement with experiment is fairly good.\nFor gases whose molecules are not spherically symmetric, the expression formula_92 still holds. In contrast with spherically symmetric molecules, however, formula_85 varies significantly depending on the particular form of the interparticle interactions: this is a result of the energy exchanges between the internal and translational degrees of freedom of the molecules. An explicit treatment of this effect is difficult in the Chapman\u2013Enskog approach. Alternately, the approximate expression formula_94 was suggested by Arnold Eucken, where formula_95 is the heat capacity ratio of the gas.\nThe entirety of this section assumes the mean free path formula_2 is small compared with macroscopic (system) dimensions. In extremely dilute gases this assumption fails, and thermal conduction is described instead by an apparent thermal conductivity which decreases with density. Ultimately, as the density goes to formula_97 the system approaches a vacuum, and thermal conduction ceases entirely.\nLiquids.\nThe exact mechanisms of thermal conduction are poorly understood in liquids: there is no molecular picture which is both simple and accurate. An example of a simple but very rough theory is that of Bridgman, in which a liquid is ascribed a local molecular structure similar to that of a solid, i.e. with molecules located approximately on a lattice. Elementary calculations then lead to the expression\nformula_98\nwhere formula_99 is the Avogadro constant, formula_100 is the volume of a mole of liquid, and formula_101 is the speed of sound in the liquid. This is commonly called \"Bridgman's equation\".\nMetals.\nFor metals at low temperatures the heat is carried mainly by the free electrons. In this case the mean velocity is the Fermi velocity which is temperature independent. The mean free path is determined by the impurities and the crystal imperfections which are temperature independent as well. So the only temperature-dependent quantity is the heat capacity \"c\", which, in this case, is proportional to \"T\". So\nformula_102\nwith \"k\"0 a constant. For pure metals, \"k\"0 is large, so the thermal conductivity is high. At higher temperatures the mean free path is limited by the phonons, so the thermal conductivity tends to decrease with temperature. In alloys the density of the impurities is very high, so \"l\" and, consequently \"k\", are small. Therefore, alloys, such as stainless steel, can be used for thermal insulation.\nLattice waves, phonons, in dielectric solids.\nHeat transport in both amorphous and crystalline dielectric solids is by way of elastic vibrations of the lattice (i.e., phonons). This transport mechanism is theorized to be limited by the elastic scattering of acoustic phonons at lattice defects. This has been confirmed by the experiments of Chang and Jones on commercial glasses and glass ceramics, where the mean free paths were found to be limited by \"internal boundary scattering\" to length scales of 10\u22122\u00a0cm to 10\u22123\u00a0cm.\nThe phonon mean free path has been associated directly with the effective relaxation length for processes without directional correlation. If Vg is the group velocity of a phonon wave packet, then the relaxation length formula_103 is defined as:\nformula_104\nwhere \"t\" is the characteristic relaxation time. Since longitudinal waves have a much greater phase velocity than transverse waves, \"V\"long is much greater than \"V\"trans, and the relaxation length or mean free path of longitudinal phonons will be much greater. Thus, thermal conductivity will be largely determined by the speed of longitudinal phonons.\nRegarding the dependence of wave velocity on wavelength or frequency (dispersion), low-frequency phonons of long wavelength will be limited in relaxation length by elastic Rayleigh scattering. This type of light scattering from small particles is proportional to the fourth power of the frequency. For higher frequencies, the power of the frequency will decrease until at highest frequencies scattering is almost frequency independent. Similar arguments were subsequently generalized to many glass forming substances using Brillouin scattering.\nPhonons in the acoustical branch dominate the phonon heat conduction as they have greater energy dispersion and therefore a greater distribution of phonon velocities. Additional optical modes could also be caused by the presence of internal structure (i.e., charge or mass) at a lattice point; it is implied that the group velocity of these modes is low and therefore their contribution to the lattice thermal conductivity \"\u03bb\"L (formula_105L) is small.\nEach phonon mode can be split into one longitudinal and two transverse polarization branches. By extrapolating the phenomenology of lattice points to the unit cells it is seen that the total number of degrees of freedom is 3\"pq\" when \"p\" is the number of primitive cells with \"q\" atoms/unit cell. From these only 3p are associated with the acoustic modes, the remaining 3\"p\"(\"q\" \u2212 1) are accommodated through the optical branches. This implies that structures with larger \"p\" and \"q\" contain a greater number of optical modes and a reduced \"\u03bb\"L.\nFrom these ideas, it can be concluded that increasing crystal complexity, which is described by a complexity factor CF (defined as the number of atoms/primitive unit cell), decreases \u03bbL. This was done by assuming that the relaxation time \"\u03c4\" decreases with increasing number of atoms in the unit cell and then scaling the parameters of the expression for thermal conductivity in high temperatures accordingly.\nDescribing anharmonic effects is complicated because an exact treatment as in the harmonic case is not possible, and phonons are no longer exact eigensolutions to the equations of motion. Even if the state of motion of the crystal could be described with a plane wave at a particular time, its accuracy would deteriorate progressively with time. Time development would have to be described by introducing a spectrum of other phonons, which is known as the phonon decay. The two most important anharmonic effects are the thermal expansion and the phonon thermal conductivity.\nOnly when the phonon number \u2039n\u203a deviates from the equilibrium value \u2039n\u203a0, can a thermal current arise as stated in the following expression\nformula_106\nwhere \"v\" is the energy transport velocity of phonons. Only two mechanisms exist that can cause time variation of \u2039\"n\"\u203a in a particular region. The number of phonons that diffuse into the region from neighboring regions differs from those that diffuse out, or phonons decay inside the same region into other phonons. A special form of the Boltzmann equation\nformula_107\nstates this. When steady state conditions are assumed the total time derivate of phonon number is zero, because the temperature is constant in time and therefore the phonon number stays also constant. Time variation due to phonon decay is described with a relaxation time (\"\u03c4\") approximation\nformula_108\nwhich states that the more the phonon number deviates from its equilibrium value, the more its time variation increases. At steady state conditions and local thermal equilibrium are assumed we get the following equation\nformula_109\nUsing the relaxation time approximation for the Boltzmann equation and assuming steady-state conditions, the phonon thermal conductivity \"\u03bb\"L can be determined. The temperature dependence for \"\u03bb\"L originates from the variety of processes, whose significance for \"\u03bb\"L depends on the temperature range of interest. Mean free path is one factor that determines the temperature dependence for \"\u03bb\"L, as stated in the following equation\nformula_110\nwhere \u039b is the mean free path for phonon and formula_111 denotes the heat capacity. This equation is a result of combining the four previous equations with each other and knowing that formula_112 for cubic or isotropic systems and formula_113.\nAt low temperatures (&lt; 10\u00a0K) the anharmonic interaction does not influence the mean free path and therefore, the thermal resistivity is determined only from processes for which q-conservation does not hold. These processes include the scattering of phonons by crystal defects, or the scattering from the surface of the crystal in case of high quality single crystal. Therefore, thermal conductance depends on the external dimensions of the crystal and the quality of the surface. Thus, temperature dependence of \u03bbL is determined by the specific heat and is therefore proportional to T3.\nPhonon quasimomentum is defined as \u210fq and differs from normal momentum because it is only defined within an arbitrary reciprocal lattice vector. At higher temperatures (10\u00a0K &lt; \"T\" &lt; \"\u0398\"), the conservation of energy formula_114 and quasimomentum formula_115, where q1 is wave vector of the incident phonon and q2, q3 are wave vectors of the resultant phonons, may also involve a reciprocal lattice vector G complicating the energy transport process. These processes can also reverse the direction of energy transport.\nTherefore, these processes are also known as Umklapp (U) processes and can only occur when phonons with sufficiently large \"q\"-vectors are excited, because unless the sum of q2 and q3 points outside of the Brillouin zone the momentum is conserved and the process is normal scattering (N-process). The probability of a phonon to have energy \"E\" is given by the Boltzmann distribution formula_116. To U-process to occur the decaying phonon to have a wave vector q1 that is roughly half of the diameter of the Brillouin zone, because otherwise quasimomentum would not be conserved.\nTherefore, these phonons have to possess energy of formula_117, which is a significant fraction of Debye energy that is needed to generate new phonons. The probability for this is proportional to formula_118, with formula_119. Temperature dependence of the mean free path has an exponential form formula_120. The presence of the reciprocal lattice wave vector implies a net phonon backscattering and a resistance to phonon and thermal transport resulting finite \"\u03bb\"L, as it means that momentum is not conserved. Only momentum non-conserving processes can cause thermal resistance.\nAt high temperatures (\"T\" &gt; \u0398), the mean free path and therefore \"\u03bb\"L has a temperature dependence \"T\"\u22121, to which one arrives from formula formula_120 by making the following approximation formula_122 and writing formula_123. This dependency is known as Eucken's law and originates from the temperature dependency of the probability for the U-process to occur.\nThermal conductivity is usually described by the Boltzmann equation with the relaxation time approximation in which phonon scattering is a limiting factor. Another approach is to use analytic models or molecular dynamics or Monte Carlo based methods to describe thermal conductivity in solids.\nShort wavelength phonons are strongly scattered by impurity atoms if an alloyed phase is present, but mid and long wavelength phonons are less affected. Mid and long wavelength phonons carry significant fraction of heat, so to further reduce lattice thermal conductivity one has to introduce structures to scatter these phonons. This is achieved by introducing interface scattering mechanism, which requires structures whose characteristic length is longer than that of impurity atom. Some possible ways to realize these interfaces are nanocomposites and embedded nanoparticles or structures.\nPrediction.\nBecause thermal conductivity depends continuously on quantities like temperature and material composition, it cannot be fully characterized by a finite number of experimental measurements. Predictive formulas become necessary if experimental values are not available under the physical conditions of interest. This capability is important in thermophysical simulations, where quantities like temperature and pressure vary continuously with space and time, and may encompass extreme conditions inaccessible to direct measurement.\nIn fluids.\nFor the simplest fluids, such as monatomic gases and their mixtures at low to moderate densities, \"ab initio\" quantum mechanical computations can accurately predict thermal conductivity in terms of fundamental atomic properties\u2014that is, without reference to existing measurements of thermal conductivity or other transport properties. This method uses Chapman-Enskog theory or Revised Enskog Theory to evaluate the thermal conductivity, taking fundamental intermolecular potentials as input, which are computed \"ab initio\" from a quantum mechanical description.\nFor most fluids, such high-accuracy, first-principles computations are not feasible. Rather, theoretical or empirical expressions must be fit to existing thermal conductivity measurements. If such an expression is fit to high-fidelity data over a large range of temperatures\nand pressures, then it is called a \"reference correlation\" for that material. Reference correlations have been published for many pure materials; examples are carbon dioxide, ammonia, and benzene. Many of these cover temperature and pressure ranges that encompass gas, liquid, and supercritical phases.\nThermophysical modeling software often relies on reference correlations for predicting thermal conductivity at user-specified temperature and pressure. These correlations may be proprietary. Examples are REFPROP (proprietary) and CoolProp (open-source).\nThermal conductivity can also be computed using the Green-Kubo relations, which express transport coefficients in terms of the statistics of molecular trajectories. The advantage of these expressions is that they are formally exact and valid for general systems. The disadvantage is that they require detailed knowledge of particle trajectories, available only in computationally expensive simulations such as molecular dynamics. An accurate model for interparticle interactions is also required, which may be difficult to obtain for complex molecules.\nHistory.\nJan Ingenhousz and the thermal conductivity of different metals.\nIn a 1780 letter to Benjamin Franklin, Dutch-born British scientist Jan Ingenhousz relates an experiment which enabled him to rank seven different metals according to their thermal conductivities:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;You remembre you gave me a wire of five metals all drawn thro the same hole Viz. one, of gould, one of silver, copper steel and iron. I supplyed here the two others Viz. the one of tin the other of lead. I fixed these seven wires into a wooden frame at an equal distance of one an other ... I dipt the seven wires into this melted wax as deep as the wooden frame ... By taking them out they were cov[e]red with a coat of wax ... When I found that this crust was there about of an equal thikness upon all the wires, I placed them all in a glased earthen vessel full of olive oil heated to some degrees under boiling, taking care that each wire was dipt just as far in the oil as the other ... Now, as they had been all dipt alike at the same time in the same oil, it must follow, that the wire, upon which the wax had been melted the highest, had been the best conductor of heat. ... Silver conducted heat far the best of all other metals, next to this was copper, then gold, tin, iron, steel, Lead.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\nUndergraduate-level texts (engineering).\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nUndergraduate-level texts (physics).\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nGraduate-level texts.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59440", "revid": "62", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59440", "title": "Karl Scheele", "text": ""}
{"id": "59441", "revid": "49941710", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59441", "title": "DLL hell", "text": "Computing slang\nDLL hell is an umbrella term for the complications that arise when one works with dynamic-link libraries (DLLs) used with older Microsoft Windows operating systems, particularly legacy 16-bit editions, which all run in a single memory space. DLL hell can appear in many different ways, wherein affected programs may fail to run correctly, if at all. It is the Windows ecosystem-specific form of the general concept dependency hell.\nProblems.\nDLLs are Microsoft's implementation of shared libraries. Shared libraries allow common code to be bundled into a wrapper, the DLL, which is used by any application software on the system without loading multiple copies into memory. A simple example might be the GUI text editor, which is widely used by many programs. By placing this code in a DLL, all the applications on the system can use it without using more memory. This contrasts with static libraries, which are functionally similar but copy the code directly into the application. In this case, every application grows by the size of all the libraries it uses, and this can be quite large for modern programs.\nThe problem arises when the version of the DLL on the computer is different than the version that was used when the program was being created. DLLs have no built-in mechanism for backward compatibility, and even minor changes to the DLL can render its internal structure so different from previous versions that attempting to use them will generally cause the application to crash. Static libraries avoid this problem because the version that was used to build the application is included inside it, so even if a newer version exists elsewhere on the system, this does not affect the application.\nA key reason for the version incompatibility is the structure of the DLL file. The file contains a directory of the individual methods (procedures, routines, etc.) contained within the DLL and the types of data they take and return. Even minor changes to the DLL code can cause this directory to be re-arranged, in which case an application that calls a particular method believing it to be the 4th item in the directory might end up calling an entirely different and incompatible routine, which would normally cause the application to crash.\nThere are several problems commonly encountered with DLLs, especially after numerous applications have been installed and uninstalled on a system. The difficulties include conflicts between DLL versions, difficulty in obtaining required DLLs, and having many unnecessary DLL copies.\nSolutions to these problems were known even while Microsoft was writing the DLL system. These have been incorporated into the .NET replacement, \"Assemblies\".\nIncompatible versions.\nA particular version of a library can be compatible with some programs that use it and incompatible with others. Windows has been particularly vulnerable to this because of its emphasis on dynamic linking of C++ libraries and Object Linking and Embedding (OLE) objects. C++ classes export many methods, and a single change to the class, such as a new virtual method, can make it incompatible with programs that were built against an earlier version. Object Linking and Embedding has very strict rules to prevent this: interfaces are required to be stable, and memory managers are not shared. This is insufficient, however, because the semantics of a class can change. A bug fix for one application may result in the removal of a feature from another. Before Windows 2000, Windows was vulnerable to this because the COM class table was shared across all users and processes. Only one COM object in one DLL/EXE could be declared as having a specific global COM Class ID on a system. If any program needed to create an instance of that class, it got whatever was the current centrally registered implementation. As a result, an installation of a program that installed a new version of a common object might inadvertently break other programs that were previously installed.\nDLL stomping.\nA common and troublesome problem occurs when a newly installed program overwrites a working system DLL with an earlier, incompatible version. Early examples of this were the codice_1 and codice_2 libraries for Windows 3.1: Microsoft-created libraries that third-party publishers would distribute with their software, but each distributing the version they developed with rather than the most recent version. DLL stomping occurs because:\nIncorrect COM registration.\nIn COM and other parts of Windows, prior to the introduction of side-by-side registry-free assemblies, the Registry was used for determining which underlying DLL to use. If a different version of a module was registered, this DLL would be loaded instead of the expected one. This scenario could be caused by conflicting installations that register different versions of the same libraries, in which case the last installation would prevail.\nShared in-memory modules.\n16-bit versions of Windows (and Windows on Windows) load only one instance of any given DLL; all applications reference the same in-memory copy, until no applications are using it and it is unloaded from memory. (For 32-bit and 64-bit versions of Windows, inter-process sharing occurs only where different executables load a module from exactly the same directory; the code but not the stack is shared between processes through a process called \"memory mapping\".) Thus, even when the desired DLL is located in a directory where it can be expected to be found, such as in the system directory or the application directory, neither of these instances will be used if another application has started with an incompatible version from a third directory. This issue can manifest itself as a 16-bit application error that occurs only when applications are started in a specific order.\nLack of serviceability.\nIn direct conflict with the DLL stomping problem: If updates to a DLL do not affect all applications that use it, then it becomes \"much\" harder to \"service\" the DLL \u2013 that is, to eliminate problems that exist in the current versions of the DLL. (Security fixes are a particularly compelling and painful case.) Instead of fixing just the latest version of the DLL, the implementor must ideally make their fixes and test them for compatibility on every released version of the DLL.\nCauses.\nDLL incompatibility has been caused by:\nDLL hell was a very common phenomenon on pre-Windows NT versions of Microsoft operating systems, the primary cause being that the 16-bit operating systems did not restrict processes to their own memory space, thereby not allowing them to load their own version of a shared module that they were compatible with. Application installers were expected to be good citizens and verify DLL version information before overwriting the existing system DLLs. Standard tools to simplify application deployment (which always involves shipping the dependent operating-system DLLs) were provided by Microsoft and other 3rd-party tools vendors. Microsoft even required application vendors to use a standard installer and have their installation program certified to work correctly, before being granted use of the Microsoft logo. The good-citizen installer approach did not mitigate the problem, as the rise in popularity of the Internet provided more opportunities to obtain non-conforming applications.\nUse by malware.\nWindows searches several locations for ambiguous DLLs, i.e. ones not fully qualified. Malwares can exploit this behavior in several ways collectively known as \"DLL search order hijacking\". One method is \"DLL preloading\" or a \"binary planting attack\". It places DLL files with the same name in a location that is searched earlier, such as the current working directory. When the vulnerable program tries to load the DLL, the malicious version is executed, possibly at high privilege levels if the program runs at that level.\nAnother method is \"relative path DLL hijacking\", which moves the vulnerable program to a location together with the malicious DLL. The DLL is loaded because the application's directory is searched early. According to CrowdStrike, this method is the most common. \"DLL sideloading\" delivers both the legitimate program and malicious library. It may avoid detection because the execution seems as running a reputable program.\nOther methods include \"phantom DLL hijacking\", where a malicious DLL file is created against references to a non-existent library, and changing registry values to abuse \"DLL redirection\", which changes the DLL search order.\nDLL hijacking was used by state-sponsored groups including Lazarus Group and Tropic Trooper.\nSolutions.\nVarious forms of DLL hell have been solved or mitigated over the years.\nStatic linking.\nA simple solution to DLL hell in an application is to statically link all the libraries, i.e. to include the library version required in the program, instead of picking up a system library with a specified name. This is common in C/C++ applications, where, instead of having to worry about which version of codice_4 is installed, the application is compiled to be statically linked against the same libraries. This eliminates the DLLs entirely and is possible in standalone applications using only libraries that offer a static option, as Microsoft Foundation Class Library does. However, the main purpose of DLLs \u2013 runtime library sharing between programs to reduce memory overhead \u2013 is sacrificed; duplicating library code in several programs creates software bloat and complicates the deployment of security fixes or newer versions of dependent software.\nWindows File Protection.\nThe DLL overwriting problem (referred to as \"DLL Stomping\" by Microsoft) was somewhat reduced with Windows File Protection (WFP), which was introduced in Windows 2000. This prevents unauthorized applications from overwriting system DLLs, unless they use the specific Windows APIs that permit this. There may still be a risk that updates from Microsoft are incompatible with existing applications, but this risk is typically reduced in current versions of Windows through the use of side-by-side assemblies.\nThird-party applications cannot stomp on OS files unless they bundle legitimate Windows updates with their installer, or if they disable the Windows File Protection service during installation, and on Windows Vista or later also take ownership of system files and grant themselves access. The SFC utility could revert these changes at any time.\nRunning conflicting DLLs simultaneously.\nThe solutions here consist of having different copies of the same DLLs for each application, both on disk and in memory.\nAn easy manual solution to conflicts was placing the different versions of the problem DLL into the applications' folders, rather than a common system-wide folder. This works in general as long as the application is 32-bit or 64-bit, and that the DLL does not use shared memory. In the case of 16-bit applications, the two applications cannot be executed simultaneously on a 16-bit platform, or in the same 16-bit virtual machine under a 32-bit operating system. OLE prevented this before Windows 98 SE/2000, because earlier versions of Windows had a single registry of COM objects for all applications.\nWindows 98 SE/2000 introduced a solution called \"side-by-side assembly\", which loads separate copies of DLLs for each application that requires them (and thus allows applications that require conflicting DLLs to run simultaneously). This approach eliminates conflicts by allowing applications to load unique versions of a module into their address space, while preserving the primary benefit of sharing DLLs between applications (i.e. reducing memory use) by using memory mapping techniques to share common code between different processes that do still use the same module. Yet DLLs using shared data between multiple processes cannot take this approach. One negative side effect is that orphaned instances of DLLs may not be updated during automated processes.\nPortable applications.\nDepending on the application architecture and runtime environment, portable applications may be an effective way to reduce some DLL problems, since every program bundles its own private copies of any DLLs it requires. The mechanism relies on applications not fully qualifying the paths to dependent DLLs when loading them, and the operating system searching the executable directory before any shared location. However this technique can also be exploited by malware, and the increased flexibility may also come at the expense of security if the private DLLs are not kept up to date with security patches in the same way that the shared ones are.\nApplication virtualization can also allow applications to run in a \"bubble\", which avoids installing DLL files directly into the operating system.\nOther countermeasures.\nThere are other countermeasures to avoid DLL hell, some of which may have to be used simultaneously;\nsome other features that help to mitigate the problem are:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59442", "revid": "28903366", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59442", "title": "Baryte", "text": "Barium sulfate mineral\nBaryte or barite ( ), also called barytes ( ), is a mineral consisting of barium sulfate (BaSO4). Baryte is generally white or colorless, and is the main source of the element barium. The \"baryte group\" consists of baryte, celestine (strontium sulfate), anglesite (lead sulfate), and anhydrite (calcium sulfate). Baryte and celestine form a solid solution .\nNames and history.\nThe radiating form, sometimes referred to as \"Bologna Stone\", attained some notoriety among alchemists for specimens found in the 17th century near Bologna by Vincenzo Casciarolo. These became phosphorescent upon being calcined.\nCarl Scheele determined that baryte contained a new element in 1774, but could not isolate barium, only barium oxide. Johan Gottlieb Gahn also isolated barium oxide two years later in similar studies. Barium was first isolated by electrolysis of molten barium salts in 1808 by Sir Humphry Davy in England.\nThe American Petroleum Institute specification API 13/ISO 13500, which governs \"baryte\" for drilling purposes, does not refer to any specific mineral, but rather a material that meets that specification. In practice, however, this is usually the mineral baryte.\nThe term \"primary barytes\" refers to the first marketable product, which includes crude baryte (run of mine) and the products of simple beneficiation methods, such as washing, jigging, heavy media separation, tabling, and flotation. Most crude baryte requires some upgrading to minimum purity or density. Baryte that is used as an aggregate in a \"heavy\" cement is crushed and screened to a uniform size. Most baryte is ground to a small, uniform size before it is used as a filler or extender, an addition to industrial products, in the production of barium chemicals, or as a weighting agent in petroleum well drilling mud.\nName.\nThe name baryte is derived from the , 'heavy'. The American spelling is \"barite\". The International Mineralogical Association initially adopted \"barite\" as the official spelling, but recommended adopting the older \"baryte\" spelling later. This move was controversial and was notably ignored by American mineralogists.\nOther names have been used for baryte, including \"barytine\", \"barytite\", \"barytes\", \"heavy spar\", \"tiff\", and \"blanc fixe\".\nMineral associations and locations.\nBaryte occurs in many depositional environments, and is deposited through many processes including biogenic, hydrothermal, and evaporative ones, among others. Baryte commonly occurs in lead-zinc veins in limestones, in hot spring deposits, and with hematite ore. It is often associated with the minerals anglesite and celestine. It has also been identified in meteorites.\nBaryte has been found at locations in Australia, Brazil, Nigeria, Canada, Chile, China, India, Pakistan, Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Iran, Ireland (where it was mined on Benbulben), Liberia, Mexico, Morocco, Peru, Romania (Baia Sprie), Turkey, South Africa (Barberton Mountain Land), Thailand, the United Kingdom (Cornwall, Cumbria, Dartmoor/Devon, Derbyshire, Durham, Shropshire, Perthshire, Argyllshire, and Surrey), and the US (Cheshire, Connecticut, De Kalb, New York, and Fort Wallace, New Mexico). It is mined in Arkansas, Connecticut, Virginia, North Carolina, Georgia, Tennessee, Kentucky, Nevada, and Missouri.\nThe global production of baryte in 2019 was estimated to be around 9.5\u00a0million metric tons, down from 9.8\u00a0million metric tons in 2012. The major baryte producers (in thousand tonnes, data for 2017) are as follows: China (3,600), India (1,600), Morocco (1,000), Mexico (400), United States (330), Iran (280), Turkey (250), Russia (210), Kazakhstan (160), Thailand (130), and Laos (120).\nThe main users of baryte in 2017 were (in million tonnes) US (2.35), China (1.60), Middle East (1.55), the European Union and Norway (0.60), Russia and CIS (0.5), South America (0.35), Africa (0.25), and Canada (0.20). 70% of baryte was destined for oil and gas well drilling muds, 15% for barium chemicals, 14% for filler applications in automotive, construction, and paint industries, and 1% other applications.\nNatural baryte formed under hydrothermal conditions may be associated with quartz or silica. In hydrothermal vents, the baryte-silica mineralisation can also be accompanied by precious metals.\nInformation about the mineral resource base of baryte ores is presented in some scientific articles.\nUses.\nIn oil and gas drilling.\nWorldwide, 69\u201377% of baryte is used as a weighting agent for drilling fluids in oil and gas exploration to suppress high formation pressures and prevent blowouts. As a well is drilled, the bit passes through various formations, each with different characteristics. The deeper the hole, the more baryte is needed as a percentage of the total mud mix. An additional benefit of baryte is that it is non-magnetic and thus does not interfere with magnetic measurements taken in the borehole, either during logging-while-drilling or in separate drill-hole logging. Baryte used for drilling petroleum wells can be black, blue, brown, or gray depending on the ore body. The baryte is finely ground so that at least 97% of the material, by weight, can pass through a 200-mesh (75\u00a0\u03bcm) screen, and no more than 30%, by weight, can be less than 6\u00a0\u03bcm diameter. The ground baryte also must be dense enough so that it has a specific gravity of 4.2 or greater, is soft enough to not damage the bearings of a tricone drill bit, is chemically inert, and contains no more than 250 milligrams per kilogram of soluble alkaline salts. In August 2010, the American Petroleum Institute published specifications to modify the 4.2 drilling grade standards for baryte to include 4.1 SG materials.\nIn oxygen and sulfur isotopic analysis.\nIn the deep ocean, away from continental sources of sediment, pelagic baryte precipitates and forms a significant amount of the sediments. Since baryte has oxygen, systematics in the \u03b418O of these sediments have been used to help constrain paleotemperatures for oceanic crust.\nThe variations in sulfur isotopes (34S/32S) are being examined in evaporite minerals containing sulfur (e.g. baryte) and carbonate-associated sulfates to determine past seawater sulfur concentrations, which can help identify specific depositional periods such as anoxic or oxic conditions. The use of sulfur isotope reconstruction is often paired with oxygen when a molecule contains both elements.\nGeochronological dating.\nDating the baryte in hydrothermal vents has been one of the major methods to determine their ages. Common methods to date hydrothermal baryte include radiometric dating and electron spin resonance dating.\nOther uses.\nBaryte is used in added-value applications which include filler in paint and plastics, sound reduction in engine compartments, coat of automobile finishes for smoothness and corrosion resistance, friction products for automobiles and trucks, radiation-shielding concrete, glass ceramics, and medical applications (for example, a barium meal before a contrast CT scan). Baryte is supplied in a variety of forms, and the price depends on the amount of processing; filler applications command higher prices following intense physical processing by grinding and micronising, and there are further premiums for whiteness and brightness and color. It is also used to produce other barium chemicals, notably barium carbonate which is used for the manufacture of LED glass for television and computer screens (historically in cathode-ray tubes) and for dielectrics.\nHistorically, baryte was used for the production of barium hydroxide for sugar refining, and as a white pigment for textiles, paper, and paint.\nAlthough baryte contains the toxic alkaline earth metal barium, it is not detrimental for human health, animals, plants, and the environment because barium sulfate is extremely insoluble in water.\nIt is also sometimes used as a gemstone.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59443", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59443", "title": "Barium sulphate", "text": ""}
{"id": "59444", "revid": "18426370", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59444", "title": "Energy level", "text": "Different states of quantum systems\nA quantum mechanical system or particle that is bound\u2014that is, confined spatially\u2014can only take on certain discrete values of energy, called energy levels. This contrasts with classical particles, which can have any amount of energy. The term is commonly used for the energy levels of the electrons in atoms, ions, or molecules, which are bound by the electric field of the nucleus, but can also refer to energy levels of nuclei or vibrational or rotational energy levels in molecules. The energy spectrum of a system with such discrete energy levels is said to be quantized.\nIn chemistry and atomic physics, an electron shell, or principal energy level, may be thought of as the orbit of one or more electrons around an atom's nucleus. The closest shell to the nucleus is called the \"1 shell\" (also called \"K shell\"), followed by the \"2 shell\" (or \"L shell\"), then the \"3 shell\" (or \"M shell\"), and so on further and further from the nucleus. The shells correspond with the principal quantum numbers (\"n\" = 1, 2, 3, 4,\u00a0...) or are labeled alphabetically with letters used in the X-ray notation (K, L, M, N,\u00a0...).\nEach shell can contain only a fixed number of electrons: The first shell can hold up to two electrons, the second shell can hold up to eight (2 + 6) electrons, the third shell can hold up to 18 (2 + 6 + 10) and so on. The general formula is that the \"n\"th shell can in principle hold up to 2\"n\"2 electrons. Since electrons are electrically attracted to the nucleus, an atom's electrons will generally occupy outer shells only if the more inner shells have already been completely filled by other electrons. However, this is not a strict requirement: atoms may have two or even three incomplete outer shells. (See Madelung rule for more details.) For an explanation of why electrons exist in these shells see electron configuration.\nIf the potential energy is set to zero at infinite distance from the atomic nucleus or molecule, the usual convention, then bound electron states have negative potential energy.\nIf an atom, ion, or molecule is at the lowest possible energy level, it and its electrons are said to be in the \"ground state\". If it is at a higher energy level, it is said to be \"excited\", or any electrons that have higher energy than the ground state are \"excited\". An energy level is regarded as degenerate if there is more than one measurable quantum mechanical state associated with it.\nExplanation.\nQuantized energy levels result from the wave behavior of particles, which gives a relationship between a particle's energy and its wavelength. For a confined particle such as an electron in an atom, the wave functions that have well defined energies have the form of a standing wave. States having well-defined energies are called stationary states because they are the states that do not change in time. Informally, these states correspond to a whole number of wavelengths of the wavefunction along a closed path (a path that ends where it started), such as a circular orbit around an atom, where the number of wavelengths gives the type of atomic orbital (0 for s-orbitals, 1 for p-orbitals and so on). Elementary examples that show mathematically how energy levels come about are the particle in a box and the quantum harmonic oscillator.\nAny superposition (linear combination) of energy states is also a quantum state, but such states change with time and do not have well-defined energies. A measurement of the energy results in the collapse of the wavefunction, which results in a new state that consists of just a single energy state. Measurement of the possible energy levels of an object is called spectroscopy.\nHistory.\nThe first evidence of quantization in atoms was the observation of spectral lines in light from the sun in the early 1800s by Joseph von Fraunhofer and William Hyde Wollaston. The notion of energy levels was proposed in 1913 by Danish physicist Niels Bohr in the Bohr theory of the atom. The modern quantum mechanical theory giving an explanation of these energy levels in terms of the Schr\u00f6dinger equation was advanced by Erwin Schr\u00f6dinger and Werner Heisenberg in 1926.\nAtoms.\nIntrinsic energy levels.\nIn the formulas for energy of electrons at various levels given below in an atom, the zero point for energy is set when the electron in question has completely left the atom; i.e. when the electron's principal quantum number \"n\" = \u221e. When the electron is bound to the atom in any closer value of n, the electron's energy is lower and is considered negative.\nOrbital state energy level: atom/ion with nucleus + one electron.\nAssume there is one electron in a given atomic orbital in a hydrogen-like atom (ion). The energy of its state is mainly determined by the electrostatic interaction of the (negative) electron with the (positive) nucleus. The energy levels of an electron around a nucleus are given by: \n formula_1\n(typically between 1\u00a0eV and 103\u00a0eV), where \"R\"\u221e is the Rydberg constant, Z is the atomic number, n is the principal quantum number, \"h\" is the Planck constant, and \"c\" is the speed of light. For hydrogen-like atoms (ions) only, the Rydberg levels depend only on the principal quantum number n.\nThis equation is obtained from combining the Rydberg formula for any hydrogen-like element (shown below) with \"E\" = \"h\u03bd\" = \"hc\"\u2009/\u2009\"\u03bb\" assuming that the principal quantum number n above = \"n\"1 in the Rydberg formula and \"n\"2 = \u221e (principal quantum number of the energy level the electron descends from, when emitting a photon). The Rydberg formula was derived from empirical spectroscopic emission data.\n formula_2\nAn equivalent formula can be derived quantum mechanically from the time-independent Schr\u00f6dinger equation with a kinetic energy Hamiltonian operator using a wave function as an eigenfunction to obtain the energy levels as eigenvalues, but the Rydberg constant would be replaced by other fundamental physics constants.\nElectron\u2013electron interactions in atoms.\nIf there is more than one electron around the atom, electron\u2013electron interactions raise the energy level. These interactions are often neglected if the spatial overlap of the electron wavefunctions is low.\nFor multi-electron atoms, interactions between electrons cause the preceding equation to be no longer accurate as stated simply with Z as the atomic number. A simple (though not complete) way to understand this is as a shielding effect, where the outer electrons see an effective nucleus of reduced charge, since the inner electrons are bound tightly to the nucleus and partially cancel its charge. This leads to an approximate correction where Z is substituted with an effective nuclear charge symbolized as \"Z\"eff that depends strongly on the principal quantum number.\nformula_3\nIn such cases, the orbital types (determined by the azimuthal quantum number \u2113) as well as their levels within the molecule affect \"Z\"eff and therefore also affect the various atomic electron energy levels. The Aufbau principle of filling an atom with electrons for an electron configuration takes these differing energy levels into account. For filling an atom with electrons in the ground state, the lowest energy levels are filled first and consistent with the Pauli exclusion principle, the Aufbau principle, and Hund's rule.\nFine structure splitting.\nFine structure arises from relativistic kinetic energy corrections, spin\u2013orbit coupling (an electrodynamic interaction between the electron's spin and motion and the nucleus's electric field) and the Darwin term (contact term interaction of s shell electrons inside the nucleus). These affect the levels by a typical order of magnitude of 10\u22123\u00a0eV.\nHyperfine structure.\nThis even finer structure is due to electron\u2013nucleus spin\u2013spin interaction, resulting in a typical change in the energy levels by a typical order of magnitude of 10\u22124\u00a0eV.\nEnergy levels due to external fields.\nZeeman effect.\nThere is an interaction energy associated with the magnetic dipole moment, \u03bc\"L\", arising from the electronic orbital angular momentum, \"L\", given by\n formula_4\nwith\n formula_5.\nAdditionally taking into account the magnetic momentum arising from the electron spin.\nDue to relativistic effects (Dirac equation), there is a magnetic momentum, \u03bc\"S\", arising from the electron spin\n formula_6,\nwith \"g\"\"S\" the electron-spin g-factor (about 2), resulting in a total magnetic moment, \u03bc,\n formula_7.\nThe interaction energy therefore becomes\n formula_8.\nMolecules.\nChemical bonds between atoms in a molecule form because they make the situation more stable for the involved atoms, which generally means the sum energy level for the involved atoms in the molecule is lower than if the atoms were not so bonded. As separate atoms approach each other to covalently bond, their orbitals affect each other's energy levels to form bonding and antibonding molecular orbitals. The energy level of the bonding orbitals is lower, and the energy level of the antibonding orbitals is higher. For the bond in the molecule to be stable, the covalent bonding electrons occupy the lower energy bonding orbital, which may be signified by such symbols as \u03c3 or \u03c0 depending on the situation. Corresponding anti-bonding orbitals can be signified by adding an asterisk to get \u03c3* or \u03c0* orbitals. A non-bonding orbital in a molecule is an orbital with electrons in outer shells which do not participate in bonding and its energy level is the same as that of the constituent atom. Such orbitals can be designated as n orbitals. The electrons in an n orbital are typically lone pairs.\n In polyatomic molecules, different vibrational and rotational energy levels are also involved.\nRoughly speaking, a molecular energy state (i.e., an eigenstate of the molecular Hamiltonian) is the sum of the electronic, vibrational, rotational, nuclear, and translational components, such that:\nformula_9\nwhere \"E\"electronic is an eigenvalue of the electronic molecular Hamiltonian (the value of the potential energy surface) at the equilibrium geometry of the molecule.\nThe molecular energy levels are labelled by the molecular term symbols. The specific energies of these components vary with the specific energy state and the substance.\nEnergy level diagrams.\nThere are various types of energy level diagrams for bonds between atoms in a molecule.\nEnergy level transitions.\nElectrons in atoms and molecules can change (make \"transitions\" in) energy levels by emitting or absorbing a photon (of electromagnetic radiation), whose energy must be exactly equal to the energy difference between the two levels.\nElectrons can also be completely removed from a chemical species such as an atom, molecule, or ion. Complete removal of an electron from an atom can be a form of ionization, which is effectively moving the electron out to an orbital with an infinite principal quantum number, in effect so far away so as to have practically no more effect on the remaining atom (ion). For various types of atoms, there are 1st, 2nd, 3rd, etc. ionization energies for removing the 1st, then the 2nd, then the 3rd, etc. of the highest energy electrons, respectively, from the atom originally in the ground state. Energy in corresponding opposite quantities can also be released, sometimes in the form of photon energy, when electrons are added to positively charged ions or sometimes atoms. Molecules can also undergo transitions in their vibrational or rotational energy levels. Energy level transitions can also be nonradiative, meaning emission or absorption of a photon is not involved.\nIf an atom, ion, or molecule is at the lowest possible energy level, it and its electrons are said to be in the \"ground state\". If it is at a higher energy level, it is said to be \"excited\", or any electrons that have higher energy than the ground state are \"excited\". Such a species can be excited to a higher energy level by absorbing a photon whose energy is equal to the energy difference between the levels. Conversely, an excited species can go to a lower energy level by spontaneously emitting a photon equal to the energy difference. A photon's energy is equal to the Planck constant (\"h\") times its frequency (f) and thus is proportional to its frequency, or inversely to its wavelength (\u03bb).\n \u0394\"E\" = \"hf\" = \"hc\"\u2009/\u2009\"\u03bb\",\nsince \"c\", the speed of light, equals to \"f\u03bb\"\nCorrespondingly, many kinds of spectroscopy are based on detecting the frequency or wavelength of the emitted or absorbed photons to provide information on the material analyzed, including information on the energy levels and electronic structure of materials obtained by analyzing the spectrum.\nAn asterisk is commonly used to designate an excited state. An electron transition in a molecule's bond from a ground state to an excited state may have a designation such as \u03c3\u00a0\u2192\u00a0\u03c3*, \u03c0\u00a0\u2192\u00a0\u03c0*, or n\u00a0\u2192\u00a0\u03c0* meaning excitation of an electron from a \u03c3\u00a0bonding to a \u03c3\u00a0antibonding orbital, from a \u03c0\u00a0bonding to a \u03c0\u00a0antibonding orbital, or from an n non-bonding to a \u03c0\u00a0antibonding orbital. Reverse electron transitions for all these types of excited molecules are also possible to return to their ground states, which can be designated as \u03c3*\u00a0\u2192\u00a0\u03c3, \u03c0*\u00a0\u2192\u00a0\u03c0, or \u03c0*\u00a0\u2192\u00a0n.\nA transition in an energy level of an electron in a molecule may be combined with a vibrational transition and called a vibronic transition. A vibrational and rotational transition may be combined by rovibrational coupling. In rovibronic coupling, electron transitions are simultaneously combined with both vibrational and rotational transitions. Photons involved in transitions may have energy of various ranges in the electromagnetic spectrum, such as X-ray, ultraviolet, visible light, infrared, or microwave radiation, depending on the type of transition. In a very general way, energy level differences between electronic states are larger, differences between vibrational levels are intermediate, and differences between rotational levels are smaller, although there can be overlap. Translational energy levels are practically continuous and can be calculated as kinetic energy using classical mechanics.\nHigher temperature causes fluid atoms and molecules to move faster increasing their translational energy, and thermally excites molecules to higher average amplitudes of vibrational and rotational modes (excites the molecules to higher internal energy levels). This means that as temperature rises, translational, vibrational, and rotational contributions to molecular heat capacity let molecules absorb heat and hold more internal energy. Conduction of heat typically occurs as molecules or atoms collide transferring the heat between each other. At even higher temperatures, electrons can be thermally excited to higher energy orbitals in atoms or molecules. A subsequent drop of an electron to a lower energy level can release a photon, causing a possibly coloured glow.\nAn electron further from the nucleus has higher potential energy than an electron closer to the nucleus, thus it becomes less bound to the nucleus, since its potential energy is negative and inversely dependent on its distance from the nucleus.\nCrystalline materials.\nCrystalline solids are found to have energy bands, instead of or in addition to energy levels. Electrons can take on any energy within an unfilled band. At first this appears to be an exception to the requirement for energy levels. However, as shown in band theory, energy bands are actually made up of many discrete energy levels which are too close together to resolve. Within a band the number of levels is of the order of the number of atoms in the crystal, so although electrons are actually restricted to these energies, they appear to be able to take on a continuum of values. The important energy levels in a crystal are the top of the valence band, the bottom of the conduction band, the Fermi level, the vacuum level, and the energy levels of any defect states in the crystal.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59446", "revid": "32900954", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59446", "title": "Celestine (mineral)", "text": "Sulfate mineral\nCelestine (the IMA-accepted name) or celestite is a mineral consisting of strontium sulfate (SrSO4). The mineral is named after its occasional delicate blue color. Celestine and the carbonate mineral strontianite are the principal sources of the element strontium, commonly used in fireworks and in various metal alloys.\nEtymology.\nCelestine derives its name from the Latin word \"caelestis\" meaning celestial which in turn is derived from the Latin word \"caelum\" meaning sky, air, weather, atmosphere and heaven.\nOccurrence.\nCelestine occurs as crystals, and also in compact massive and fibrous forms. It is mostly found in sedimentary rocks, often associated with the minerals gypsum, anhydrite, and halite. On occasion in some localities, it may also be found with sulfur inclusions.\nThe mineral is found worldwide, usually in small quantities. Pale blue crystal specimens are found in Madagascar. White and orange variants also occurred at Yate, Bristol, UK, where it was extracted for commercial purposes until April\u00a01991.\nThe skeletons of the protozoan \"Acantharea\" are made of celestine, unlike those of other radiolarians which are made of silica.\nIn carbonate marine sediments, burial dissolution is a recognized mechanism of celestine precipitation. It is sometimes used as a gemstone.\nGeodes.\nCelestine crystals are found in some geodes. The world's largest known geode, a celestine geode in diameter at its widest point, is located near the village of Put-in-Bay, Ohio, on South Bass Island in Lake Erie. The geode has been converted into a viewing cave, Crystal Cave, with the crystals which once composed the floor of the geode removed. The geode has celestine crystals as wide as across, estimated to weigh up to each.\nCelestine geodes are understood to form by replacement of alabaster nodules consisting of the calcium sulfates gypsum or anhydrite. Calcium sulfate is sparingly soluble, but strontium sulfate is mostly insoluble. Strontium-bearing solutions that come into contact with calcium sulfate nodules dissolve the calcium away, leaving a cavity. The strontium is immediately precipitated as celestine, with the crystals growing into the newly formed cavity.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59447", "revid": "39982612", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59447", "title": "Strontium sulphate", "text": ""}
{"id": "59449", "revid": "254297", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59449", "title": "The West Wing", "text": "American political drama television series (1999\u20132006)\nThe West Wing is an American political drama television series created by Aaron Sorkin that was originally broadcast on NBC from September 22, 1999, to May 14, 2006. The series is set primarily in the West Wing of the White House, where the Oval Office and offices of presidential senior personnel are located, during the fictional two-term Democratic administration of President Josiah Bartlet.\n\"The West Wing\" was produced by Warner Bros. Television and features an ensemble cast, including Rob Lowe, Dul\u00e9 Hill, Allison Janney, Richard Schiff, John Spencer, Bradley Whitford, Martin Sheen, Janel Moloney, and Stockard Channing. For the first four seasons, there were three executive producers: Sorkin (lead writer of the first four seasons), Thomas Schlamme (primary director), and John Wells. After Sorkin left the series at the end of the fourth season, Wells assumed the role of head writer, with later executive producers being directors Alex Graves and Christopher Misiano (seasons 6\u20137), and writers Lawrence O'Donnell and Peter Noah (season 7).\n\"The West Wing\" has been regarded by many publications as one of the greatest television shows of all time. It has received praise from critics, political science professors, and former White House staffers and has been the subject of critical analysis. \"The West Wing\" received a multitude of accolades, including two Peabody Awards, three Golden Globe Awards, and 26 Primetime Emmy Awards, including the award for Outstanding Drama Series, which it won four consecutive times from 2000 to 2003. The show's ratings waned in later years following the departure of series creator Sorkin after the fourth season (with him having been the writer or co-writer of 85 of the first 88 episodes), yet it remained popular among high-income viewers, a key demographic for the show and its advertisers, with around 16\u00a0million viewers.\nCast and characters.\n\"The West Wing\" employed a broad ensemble cast to portray the many positions involved in the daily work of the Executive Branch of the federal government. The president, the first lady, and the president's senior staff and advisers form the core cast. Numerous secondary characters, appearing intermittently, complement storylines that generally revolve around this core group.\nBackground.\nNBC originally ordered the pilot episode in March 1998 for a midseason premiere the following year, and the casting of Martin Sheen, Rob Lowe, Bradley Whitford, Allison Janney and Richard Schiff was officially reported in March 1999. NBC officially picked up the series in May 1999 for its fall schedule.\nIn an interview on the first season DVD, Bradley Whitford said that he was originally cast as Sam, even though Aaron Sorkin had created the Josh character specifically for him. In the same interview, Janel Moloney stated she had originally auditioned for the role of C.J. and that Donna, the role for which she was eventually cast, was not meant to be a recurring character. Other actors were seriously considered for other roles, including Alan Alda and Sidney Poitier for the President, Judd Hirsch for Leo, Eugene Levy for Toby, and CCH Pounder for C.J.\nMoloney became a recurring character in Season 1 and then a regular in Season 2 due to her chemistry with Whitford's character beginning in the pilot episode, and their possible romantic relationship became an ongoing plot thread throughout the series.\nEach of the principal actors made approximately $75,000 per episode, with the established Sheen receiving a confirmed salary of $300,000. Disparities in cast salaries led to very public contract disputes, particularly by Janney, Schiff, Spencer, and Whitford. During contract negotiations in 2001, the four were threatened with breach of contract suits by Warner Bros. However, by banding together, they were able to persuade the studio to more than double their salaries. Two years later, the four again demanded a doubling of their salaries, a few months after Warner Bros had signed new licensing deals with NBC and Bravo.\nSorkin's hectic writing schedule often led to cost overruns and schedule slips, and he made headlines in April 2001 with an arrest for possession of hallucinogenic mushrooms.\nThe New York Times reported in June 2001 that the show cost at least $2 million an episode, and that some writers would not receive planned raises in the third season.\nIn July 2002, it became public that Rob Lowe, who had a separate salary deal from the other main cast members, intended to leave the series during the toward the end of the fourth season, saying in a statement \"it has been increasingly clear, for quite a while, that there was no longer a place for Sam Seaborn on 'The West Wing.\" \"Variety\" attributed his exit to salary dissatisfaction and the evolution of Martin Sheen's character to have a more primary regular role. In August 2002, Lowe suggested he could still stay if a deal could be worked out. Sorkin said in September 2002 that the exit would be written in a way that the door would always be open for Lowe's return. Lowe would later return for guest appearance roles at the end of the final season in 2006 and the \"Hartsfields Landing\" special in 2020.\nJoshua Malina's role as a series regular following Lowe's exit was first reported in December 2002. The teaser of the season 4 Christmas episode \"Holy Night\" is almost entirely in Yiddish, in part inspired by Richard Schiff's own family history.\nThe show was renewed for seasons 5 and 6 in January 2003 despite falling ratings.\nThe news of Aaron Sorkin's and Tommy Schlamme's departures at the end of season 4 was first reported at the beginning of May 2003 ahead of that year's season finale. Many sources referred to growing tensions over budgets, delayed scripts and ratings, given the fact that Sorkin wrote nearly every episode himself. Production company Warner Brothers and NBC executive Jeff Zucker stated that executive producer John Wells was set to take a \"more active\" role in the coming season, essentially taking over as showrunner. At the time Wells suggested that Sorkin had been convinced to stay on for previous seasons, that ratings were not a factor, and that he planned to bring in additional writing staff . Wells also stated later that conflict involving the network and the role of an actor on the series were a factor, that the timing of the exit and his takeover was the unplanned result of an end of season meeting involving the production company and the network and that he and the writing staff had to do the best they could to come up with a way to continue from the Season 4 cliffhanger finale Sorkin had written. \nJimmy Smits was cast in the show's sixth season as the congressman and future presidential candidate Matt Santos after John Wells saw his performance in the summer 2004 Central Park Shakespeare in the Park production. \nThe show was renewed for a seventh season in March 2005. \nIn the seventh and final season, many of the actors appeared in fewer episodes as the show faced budget constraints, but were still paid the same amount for the episodes they were in, according to Richard Schiff. Schiff, who has been very vocal about his unhappiness with his character's final storyline, was contracted for 11 episodes after initially being offered four episodes.\nJohn Spencer died of a heart attack on December 16, 2005, about a year after his character experienced a nearly fatal heart attack on the show. Martin Sheen gave a brief memorial message before \"Running Mates\", the first new episode that aired after Spencer's death. The loss of Spencer's character was addressed beginning with the episode \"Election Day\", which aired on April 2, 2006.\nThe ending of the series was announced in January 2006, with NBC Entertainment President Kevin Reilly saying the decision had been made before John Spencer's death, citing lower ratings. The entire cast appeared on \"The Ellen DeGeneres Show\" ahead of the finale in May 2006.\nHigh profile real life guest appearances over the course of the show included Yo-Yo Ma, Jon Bon Jovi, Foo Fighters, The Whiffenpoofs, Penn &amp; Teller, and characters from \"Sesame Street\".\nInterior scenes were filmed on soundstages at Warner Bros. Studios Burbank in California. The production also filmed exterior scenes on trips to the Washington, D.C. area, including at what was then the Newseum building in Rosslyn, Maryland, New York City, Pennsylvania, and in Ontario, Canada.\nCrew.\nThe series was created by Aaron Sorkin, who served as executive producer for the pilot episode alongside director Thomas Schlamme and John Wells. Kristin Harms and Llewellyn Wells were producers for the pilot. Michael Hissrich acted as a co-producer.\nThe first season proper saw the return of all of the pilot production team along with the addition of Ron Osborn and Jeff Reno as consulting producers and Rick Cleveland as a second co-producer with Robert W. Glass as an associate producer. Glass left the production team after only five episodes. Julie Herlocker joined as Associate Producer beginning with episode six. Osborn and Reno departed after nine episodes. Paul Redford served as a story editor throughout the first season. Lawrence O'Donnell worked as executive story editor for the second half of the season.\nWith the second season, Kevin Falls became a co-executive producer. Cleveland left the production team and Redford and O'Donnell were promoted to co-producer. Peter Parnell and Patrick Caddell became co-producers and Julie Herlocker and Mindy Kanaskie became associate producers. O'Donnell was promoted again to producer five episodes into the season and Hissrich joined him twelve episodes into the season.\nThe third season saw the departure of Parnell, Caddell, and Herlocker and the temporary absence of O'Donnell. Director Christopher Misiano became a supervising producer, Patrick Ward joined the series as an associate producer, and Eli Attie joined the writing staff as a staff writer. Redford was promoted to producer. With the thirteenth episode of the third season director Alex Graves became an additional supervising producer and Attie became a story editor.\nThe fourth season marked the temporary departure of Hissrich. Misiano and Graves became co-executive producers alongside Falls. Attie was promoted to executive story editor and Debora Cahn became a staff writer. The fourteenth episode of the season saw Redford promoted to supervising producer and Kanaskie, Ward and Attie promoted to co-producers.\nThe fifth season saw the departure of both Sorkin and Schlamme as executive producers. Schlamme remained attached to the series as an executive consultant. John Wells remained the sole executive producer and showrunner. Co-executive producer Kevin Falls also left the show. O'Donnell rejoined the production team as a consulting producer. Wells also added Carol Flint, Alexa Junge, Peter Noah, and John Sacret Young as consulting producers. Andrew Stearn came aboard as a producer and Attie was promoted to producer. Cahn became story editor and Josh Singer replaced her as staff writer. With the tenth episode Flint, Junge, Noah and Sacret Young became supervising producers.\nWith the sixth season Misiano and Graves were promoted to executive producers. Redford and Junge left the production team and Dylan K. Massin became a co-producer. Cahn was promoted to executive story editor and Singer replaced her as story editor. Lauren Schmidt filled the staff writer role. The fourth episode saw the departure of original crew member Llewellyn Wells. Debora Cahn was promoted to co-producer with the fourteenth episode.\nThe seventh season saw Noah and O'Donnell promoted again, this time becoming additional executive producers. Attie became a supervising producer. Hissrich returned to his role as producer for the final season.\nEpisodes.\nMultiple story arcs on \"The West Wing\" span several episodes and entire seasons. In addition to these long-running narratives, each episode contains smaller storylines that usually begin and end within a single episode.\nMost episodes follow President Bartlet and his staff through particular legislative or political issues. Plots can range from behind-closed-doors negotiating with Congress to personal problems like post-traumatic stress disorder, from which Josh suffers during the second season. The typical episode loosely follows the President and his staff through their day, generally following several plots connected by some idea or theme. A large, fully connected set of the White House allowed the producers to create shots with very few cuts and long, continuous master shots of staff members conversing as they walk through the hallways. These \"walk and talks\" became a trademark of the show. The final two seasons presented a narrative change, with the focus of the show divided between plots in the West Wing with President Bartlet and his remaining senior staffers and plots revolving around the rest of the main cast on the campaign trail for the 2006 election.\nDevelopment.\nThe series was developed following the success of the 1995 theatrical film \"The American President\", for which Aaron Sorkin wrote the screenplay, and in which Martin Sheen played the White House Chief of Staff. Unused plot elements from the film and a suggestion from Akiva Goldsman inspired Sorkin to create \"The West Wing\". Sorkin said that the airing of the show was delayed for about a year due to the Clinton\u2013Lewinsky scandal. Around the same time, a completely separate series called \"West Wing\" was under development for Lifetime by a former White House staffer about a White House press secretary with a college friend working as a TV news correspondent, with future \"The West Wing\" guest star Annabeth Gish attached to star, but it was not picked up to series.\nAccording to the DVD commentary, Sorkin intended to center the show on Sam Seaborn and the other senior staff with the President in an unseen or a secondary role. However, Bartlet's screen time gradually increased, and his role expanded as the series progressed. Positive critical and public reaction to Sheen's performance raised his character's profile, decreasing Lowe's perceived significance. In addition, the storylines began to focus less on Sam and more on Josh Lyman, the Deputy Chief of Staff. This shift was one of the reasons for Lowe's eventual departure from the show in the fourth season.\nFor the first four seasons, drawing on research materials, scene drafts, and occasionally entire draft scripts from his writing staff, Sorkin wrote almost every episode of the series, occasionally reusing plot elements, episode titles, character names, and actors from his previous work, \"Sports Night\", a sitcom on which he began to develop his signature dialogue style of rhythmic, snappy, and intellectual banter. Fellow executive producer and director Thomas Schlamme championed the walk and talk, a continuous shot tracking in front of the characters as they walk from one place to another that became part of \"The West Wing\"'s signature visual style. \n\"The West Wing\" aired on Wednesdays at 9:00 pm ET from its debut until the end of its sixth season. NBC elected to move the series to Sundays at 8:00 pm for its seventh season, a move universally regarded as the beginning of the series' end (since NBC and the NFL had reached a deal for \"Sunday Night Football\" to return to the network in the fall of 2006), and the series finale aired on May 14, 2006. \"The West Wing\" took a large ratings hit with the move, which put it up against ABC's Top 20 hit \"\", and CBS' Top 30 hit \"Cold Case\" in its timeslot.\nLegacy and influence.\nThe show's legitimacy, political slant, and idealist representations of Washington, as well as its notable writing and film merits, have generated considerable discussion.\nIn 2011, \"The New York Times\" reported the then-fledgling government of Myanmar used DVDs of \"The West Wing\" episodes to study democracy. This was corroborated by Secretary of State Hillary Clinton the following year.\nIn March 2014, cast members Bradley Whitford, Janel Moloney and Richard Schiff participated in a Harvard Institute of Politics event with show writer and MSNBC host Lawrence O'Donnell to discuss the impact of the show. The following month, Whitford and Schiff also participated in a discussion with writer Eli Attie at the University of Chicago Institute of Politics.\nLin-Manuel Miranda has cited the series as a significant influence on the creation of his musical \"Hamilton\".\nIn 2016, Sorkin and the cast reunited to mark the 10th anniversary of the show's finale at the ATX Festival. In 2021, cast members reunited virtually as part of the \"Stars in the House\" series.\nIn 2022, several cast members participated in a virtual roundtable on mental health organized by the United States Department of Health and Human Services during the Biden administration.\nIn 2024, the Paley Center for Media in New York hosted an exhibition marking the 25th anniversary of the show's premiere, which cast member Janel Moloney wrote about attending. Sorkin had previously marked the show's 20th anniversary at a Paley panel in New York in 2019 following a screening of episode \"Two Cathedrals\", while both Sorkin and cast members had previously participated in a Paley panel in Los Angeles in 2000 with a screening of the episode \"In Excelsis Deo\".\nIn September 2024, cast members also reunited to mark the 25th anniversary in an appearance at the 76th Primetime Emmy Awards to stress the importance of voting and announce the winner for Outstanding Drama Series. Later that week, cast members and producers were invited to the White House where they met President Joe Biden before participating in an outdoor anniversary celebration with First Lady Jill Biden. In his remarks, Sorkin referred to Biden's decision not to run for reelection on July 21, 2024, as a \"\"West Wing\" moment.\" Before the news about Biden had broken that day, Sorkin had written an op-ed in \"The New York Times\" comparing Bartlet's decision to run for reelection to Biden's dilemma, and suggested the Democrats could nominate Mitt Romney. But after the news about Biden's decision and endorsement of Kamala Harris became public later that day, he communicated via cast member Joshua Malina's social media profiles: \"I take it all back. Harris for America!\"\nAfterwards Sorkin said the White House visit had given him ideas for new episodes in a hypothetical revival of the series. In 2025, John Wells said he had discussed revivals with Sorkin, but that he wasn't sure it would work as a \"centrist\" show in the modern political climate.\nIn December 2024, cast members Richard Schiff, Dul\u00e9 Hill and Melissa Fitzgerald attended an event marking the 20th anniversary of the Clinton Presidential Center.\nCast members have individually become active and jointly reunited in person and virtually to support several candidates and organizations associated with the Democratic Party, in some cases through fundraising emails or as part of campaign ads and fundraisers, including Joe Biden's 2008 primary campaign, the 2008 Barack Obama campaign, the 2012 Barack Obama campaign, Ohio Senator Sherrod Brown's 2012 campaign, the 2014 Democratic Party of Wisconsin campaign in support of Mary Burke, the 2016 Hillary Clinton campaign, the 2020 Joe Biden campaign, and the Wisconsin Democrats 2022 Midterms campaign. In 2024, they supported the organization Red Wine &amp; Blue, Pennsylvania senator Bob Casey Jr., Ohio Senator Sherrod Brown, and the 2024 Kamala Harris campaign.\nRealism.\nWhile \"The West Wing\" is not completely accurate in its portrayal of the actual West Wing, former White House staffers and journalists have described the show as capturing its feel. President Gerald Ford's daughter Susan made the comment \"I can't watch [the show]. They turn left and right where you are not supposed to.\" Some West Wing veterans have said it exaggerates the formality and volume of chatter in the West Wing, under-represents the number of people involved in a decision, and over-idealizes its occupants.\nFormer Senate aide Lawrence O'Donnell and former White House aide and presidential campaign speechwriter Eli Attie were both longtime writers on the show (O'Donnell for seasons 1\u20132 and 5\u20137, Attie for seasons 3\u20137). Former White House Press Secretaries Dee Dee Myers and Marlin Fitzwater and pollsters Patrick Caddell and Frank Luntz also served as consultants, advising the writing staff for part of the show's run. Other former White House staffers, such as Peggy Noonan and Gene Sperling, served as consultants for brief periods.\nA documentary special in the third season compared the show's depiction of the West Wing to the real thing. Many former West Wing denizens applauded the show's depiction of the West Wing, including advisor David Gergen, Secretary of State Henry Kissinger, Chief of Staff Leon Panetta, Deputy Chief of Staff Karl Rove, and former Presidents Gerald Ford, Jimmy Carter, and Bill Clinton.\nWhile critics often praised \"The West Wing\" for its writing, others faulted the show as unrealistically optimistic and sentimental. A large part of this criticism came from the perceived naivet\u00e9 of the characters. Television critic Heather Havrilesky asked, \"What rock did these morally pure creatures crawl out from under and, more important, how do you go from innocent millipede to White House staffer without becoming soiled or disillusioned by the dirty realities of politics along the way?\"\nSocial influence.\nDespite acclaim for the veracity of the series, Sorkin said, \"our responsibility is to captivate you for however long we've asked for your attention.\" Former White House aide Matthew Miller noted that Sorkin \"captivates viewers by making the human side of politics more real than life\u2014or at least more real than the picture we get from the news.\" Miller also noted that by portraying politicians with empathy, the show created a \"subversive competitor\" to the cynical views of politics in media. In the essay \"\"The West Wing\" and the West Wing\", author Myron Levine agreed, stating that the series \"presents an essentially positive view of public service and a healthy corrective to anti-Washington stereotypes and public cynicism.\"\nDr. Staci L. Beavers, associate professor of political science at California State University, San Marcos, wrote a short essay, \"\"The West Wing\" as a Pedagogical Tool\". She concluded, \"While the series' purpose is for-profit entertainment, \"The West Wing\" presents great pedagogical potential.\" \"The West Wing\", in her opinion, gave greater depth to the political process usually espoused only in stilted talking points on shows like \"Face the Nation\" and \"Meet the Press\". However, she noted that the merits of a particular argument may be obscured by the viewer's opinion of the character. Beavers also noted that characters with opposing viewpoints were often set up to be \"bad people\" in the viewer's eyes. These characters were assigned undesirable characteristics having nothing to do with their political opinions, such as being romantically involved with a main character's love interest. In Beavers' opinion, a critical analysis of the show's political views can present a worthwhile learning experience to the viewer.\nWhile it aired, \"The West Wing\" offered viewers an idealist liberal administration that provided a sort of catharsis to those on the left who felt that their political beliefs were largely forgotten or ignored in the era of the Bush administration. Writer H\u00e9di Kaddour remarked that \"The West Wing\" \"show[ed] what [liberals] would have liked to have seen and had: a different American administration, closer to our desires as people more or less on the left.\"\nOne of the stranger effects of the show occurred on January 31, 2006, when \"The West Wing\" was said to have played a hand in defeating a proposal backed by Tony Blair's government in the British House of Commons, during the so-called \"\"West Wing\" Plot\". The plan was allegedly hatched after a Conservative Member of Parliament watched the episode \"A Good Day\", in which Democrats block a bill aimed at limiting stem cell research, by appearing to have left Washington D.C. but actually hiding in a congressional office until the Republican Speaker calls the vote.\nA number of episodes referred to a practice of the administration having one day each year on which they accepted meetings with people or groups who would not normally receive an audience with high-level White House staffers, referring to the event as \"Big Block of Cheese Day\". The name came from the fact that President Andrew Jackson had a large wheel of cheese placed in the White House from which the public were invited to eat during a reception, while discussing issues of the day with politicians. In 2014, the White House announced that it was to host an online Q&amp;A with Obama administration officials and staff, called a Virtual \"Big Block of Cheese day\", on January 29, 2014. The event was promoted with a video featuring stars from \"The West Wing\". The event was repeated on January 21, 2015, again promoted by stars from the show. On April 29, 2016, Allison Janney appeared in character as C.J. Cregg during a White House press briefing to call attention to the issue of substance abuse.\nPartisan criticism.\nDespite its commercial and critical success, \"The West Wing\" has also received criticism from the right. \"Jewish Journal\" columnist Naomi Pfefferman once referred to \"The West Wing\" as \"The Left Wing\" because of its portrayal of an ideal liberal administration, and the moniker has also been used by Republican critics of the show. Chris Lehmann, former deputy editor and regular reviewer for \"The Washington Post\"'s Book World section, characterized the show as a revisionist look at the Clinton presidency.\nHowever, criticism of the show has been made from the left as well. Cultural critic and \"Jacobin\" columnist Luke Savage has taken issue with the show's portrayal of \"technocratic governance\" as \"exciting, intellectually stimulating, and, above all, honorable\", and its attendant liberal elitism, saying, \"there is a general tenor to \"The West Wing\" universe that cannot be called anything other than smug.\" The hosts of socialist podcast \"Chapo Trap House\" are frequent critics of Sorkin and have called \"The West Wing\" an \"expression of the patronizing self-entitlement of liberals.\"\nOn the other hand, some Republicans have admired the show since its inception, even before the departure of Sorkin and the show's resulting shift toward the center. In his 2001 article \"Real Liberals versus \"The West Wing\",\" Mackubin Thomas Owens wrote, \u2033Although his administration is reliably liberal, President Bartlet possesses virtues even a conservative could admire. He obeys the Constitution and the law. He is devoted to his wife and daughters. Being unfaithful to his wife would never cross his mind. He is no wimp when it comes to foreign policy\u2014no \"quid pro quo\" for him.\"\nJournalist Matthew Miller wrote, \"Although the show indeed has a liberal bias on issues, it presents a truer, more human picture of the people behind the headlines than most of today's Washington journalists.\"\nFilming techniques and reactions.\nIn its first season, \"The West Wing\" attracted critical attention in the television community with a record nine Emmy wins. The show has been praised for its high production values and repeatedly recognized for its cinematic achievements. The series has also been praised for Sorkin's rapid-fire and witty scripts. The series had a budget of $2.7\u00a0million per episode.\n\"The West Wing\" is noted for developing the \"walk-and-talk\"\u2014long Steadicam tracking shots showing characters walking down hallways while involved in long conversations. In a typical \"walk-and-talk\" shot, the camera leads two characters down a hallway as they speak to each other. One of these characters generally breaks off and the remaining character is then joined by another character, who initiates another conversation as they continue walking. These \"walk-and-talks\" create a dynamic feel for what would otherwise be long expository dialogue, and have become a staple for dialogue-intensive television show scenes.\nAwards.\nIn its first season, \"The West Wing\" garnered nine Emmys, a record for most won by a series in its first season. In addition, the series received the Emmy Award for Outstanding Drama Series in 2000, 2001, 2002, and 2003, tying \"Hill Street Blues\", \"L.A. Law,\" \"Mad Men\" and \"Game of Thrones\" for most won in this category. Each of its seven seasons earned a nomination for the award. With its 26 total awards, \"The West Wing\" tied with \"Hill Street Blues\" as the drama with the most Emmy wins until \"Game of Thrones\" broke the record for most wins in 2016, with 38 total awards.\nThe series shares the Emmy Award record for most acting nominations by regular cast members (excluding the guest performer category) for a single series in one year. (\"Hill Street Blues,\" \"L.A. Law\", \"Game of Thrones\", \"Succession\" and \"The White Lotus\" also hold that record). For the 2001\u20132002 season, nine cast members were nominated for Emmys. Allison Janney, John Spencer and Stockard Channing each won an Emmy (for Lead Actress, Supporting Actor and Supporting Actress respectively). The others nominated were Martin Sheen (for Lead Actor), Richard Schiff, Dul\u00e9 Hill and Bradley Whitford (for Supporting Actor), and Janel Moloney and Mary-Louise Parker (for Supporting Actress). In addition, that same year Mark Harmon, Tim Matheson and Ron Silver were each nominated in the Guest Actor category (although none won the award). This gave the series an Emmy Award record for most acting nominations overall (including guest performer category) in a single year, with 12 acting nominations. Twenty individual Emmys were awarded to writers, actors, and crew members. Allison Janney is the record holder for most wins by a cast member, with a total of four Emmys. \"The West Wing\" won at least one Emmy in each of its seasons except the sixth.\nIn addition to its Emmys, the show won two Screen Actors Guild (SAG) Awards, in 2000 and 2001, Outstanding Performance by an Ensemble in a Drama Series. Martin Sheen was the only cast member to win a Golden Globe Award, and he and Allison Janney were the only cast members to win SAG Awards. In both 1999 and 2000, \"The West Wing\" was awarded the Peabody Award for excellence in broadcasting.\nThe following table summarizes award wins by cast members:\nMany cast members were Emmy-nominated for their work on \"The West Wing\" but did not win, including Martin Sheen\u2014who was nominated for six of the seven seasons of the series without receiving the award\u2014as well as Janel Moloney, who was nominated twice, and Dul\u00e9 Hill, Rob Lowe, and Mary-Louise Parker, who were all nominated once. Matthew Perry, Oliver Platt, Ron Silver, Tim Matheson, and Mark Harmon also received Emmy nominations for guest starring on the show.\nThomas Schlamme won two Emmys for Outstanding Directing for a Drama Series (in 2000 and 2001), and Christopher Misiano won an Emmy for Outstanding Directing for a Drama Series in 2003. \"The West Wing\"'s only Emmy for Outstanding Writing for a Drama Series was in its first season, when Rick Cleveland and Aaron Sorkin shared the award for \"In Excelsis Deo\".\nW. G. Snuffy Walden received an Emmy Award for Outstanding Main Title Theme Music in 2000 for \"The West Wing Opening Theme\".\n\"The West Wing Documentary Special\" won an Emmy Award for Outstanding Special Class Program in 2002, with the award shared by Aaron Sorkin, Tommy Schlamme, documentarian Bill Couturie, show writers Eli Attie and Felicia Willson, and others.\nReaders of \"TV Guide\" voted the cast of \"The West Wing\" their Best Drama cast of all time, receiving 37% of the votes, beating \"Lost\", which received 23%.\nA \"Wall Street Journal\" poll in 2016 named Martin Sheen's Josiah Bartlet as the second greatest fictional president, behind Harrison Ford's President James Marshall in \"Air Force One\".\nCritical reception.\nOn review aggregator website Metacritic, the first season has a score of 79 out of 100, based on 23 critics indicating \"generally favorable\" reviews. On review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes, the first season has a 96% approval rating with an average score of 8.4/10 based on 47 reviews, with a critics consensus of: \"Practically a screwball comedy with Aaron Sorkin's rat-a-tat dialogue and the ensemble's wonderful chemistry, \"The West Wing\" resplendently renders every voter's dearest fantasy: competent politicians with good intentions.\"\nThe second season has an 88% approval rating with an average score of 10/10 based on 24 reviews, with a critics consensus of: \"\"The West Wing\"'s approval rating remains high and the state of its union strong in a sophomore season that puts President Bartlet to the test and brings out the very best in Martin Sheen's performance.\" I\nIn 2001, Aaron Sorkin began responding in online posts to critical recaps and fan posts on the precursor to the website Television Without Pity under the username \"Benjamin\" and also addressed a dispute with former writer Rick Cleveland about the writing of the episode \"In Excelsis Deo\". Critics later saw the experience as inspiration for the storyline with a negative portrayal of an online forum called \"LemonLyman.com\" in the 2002 third season episode \"The U.S. Poet Laureate.\"\nThe third season has a 73% approval rating with an average score of 10/10 based on 15 reviews, with a critics consensus of: \"\"The West Wing\" still fires off repartee as if sparkling dialogue were mandated by executive order, but this underwhelming third season finds the series' idealism curdling a bit into smug self-satisfaction. \nThe fourth season has a 92% approval rating with an average score of 8/10 based on 13 reviews, with a critics consensus of: \"The pressure of re-election reinvigorates both the Bartlet administration and \"The West Wing\" itself in a comeback season that'll leave viewers rooting for four more years.\"\nThe fifth season has a 65% approval rating with an average score of 7.9/10 based on 23 reviews, with a critics consensus of: \"John Wells admirably tries to maintain the spirit of Aaron Sorkin's vision after succeeding him, but \"The West Wing\"'s fifth season is a decidedly rocky changing of the guard.\" The sixth season has a 64% approval rating with an average score of 9.4/10 based on 14 reviews, with a critics consensus of: \"\"The West Wing\" is firmly in its lame duck session, a little more cynical and rudderless than before, but the introduction of new presidential hopefuls brings a much-needed promise of fresh blood.\" The seventh season has a 95% approval rating with an average score of 8.5/10 based on 20 reviews, with a critics consensus of: \"Bidding a fond farewell to the Bartlet administration, \"The West Wing\" regains its idealistic thrill with a sweetly amicable presidential election in this strong final season.\"\nIn 2023, Rotten Tomatoes critics ranked it at number 20 in a ranking of the \"Best TV Shows of the Last 25 Years.\"\nIn marking the show's anniversary in 2024, \"Vulture\" ranked all episodes of the series, with the season 2 finale \"Two Cathedrals\" taking the top spot of 150 episodes. The same episode was also ranked as the best episode of the series by \"The Daily Beast\", \"TV Insider\", \"Screen Rant\" and \"Paste\". \"The Ringer\" also named the episode at number 12 in a ranking of the \"100 Best TV Episodes of the Century.\" \"Variety\" ranked the same episode as number one of the top 25 episodes, and ranked the show as number 25 in a ranking of the \"100 Best TV Shows of All Time.\" \"Gold Derby\" ranked season 2 episode \"No\u00ebl\" as the top episode in its ranking of the show's 20 greatest episodes. The show was ranked at number eleven in a listing of Hollywood's 100 favorite TV shows from \"The Hollywood Reporter\" and a listing of the 50 top TV dramas from \"The Guardian,\" and at number 46 in a \"Rolling Stone\" ranking of the \"Best TV Shows of all Time.\" The evolution of the relationship between Josh and Donna has been noted as a typical long-running TV \"will they/won't they\" romantic relationship, though was also viewed more critically by some in retrospect.\nExploration of real world issues.\n\"The West Wing\" often featured extensive discussion of current or recent political issues. After the real-world election of Republican President George W. Bush in 2000, many wondered whether the liberal show could retain its relevance and topicality. However, by exploring many of the same issues facing the Bush administration from a Democratic point of view, the show continued to appeal to a broad audience of both Democrats and Republicans.\nIn the second-season episode \"The Midterms\", President Bartlet admonishes fictional radio host Dr. Jenna Jacobs for her views regarding homosexuality at a private gathering at the White House. Dr. Jacobs is a caricature of radio personality Dr. Laura Schlessinger, who strongly disapproves of homosexuality. Many of the President's biblical references in his comments to Dr. Jacobs appear to have come from an open letter to Dr. Schlessinger, circulated online in early May 2000. A few episodes later in that season, a blackboard in Josh Lyman's office had a reference to Bill de Blasio, known at the time as the campaign manager for Hillary Clinton's senatorial candidacy.\nThe Bartlet administration experiences a scandal during the second and third seasons that has been compared to the Monica Lewinsky affair. President Bartlet has known that he has relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis (MS) since 1992. The scandal centers on President Bartlet's nondisclosure of his illness to the electorate during the election. He is investigated by an opposition Congress for defrauding the public and eventually accepts congressional censure. Multiple sclerosis advocacy groups praised the show for its accurate portrayal of the symptoms of MS and stressing that it is not fatal. The National MS Society commented:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;For the first time on national television or even in film, the public encountered a lead character with both an MS diagnosis and the hope for a continued productive life. Because \"[The] West Wing\" is a fictional drama and not a medical documentary, writers could have greatly distorted MS facts to further their storyline [but did not].\u2014\u200a\nFollowing the September 11, 2001, attacks, the start of the third season was postponed for a week, as were most American television premieres that year. A script for a special episode was quickly written and began filming on September 21. The episode \"Isaac and Ishmael\" aired on October 3 and addresses the sobering reality of terrorism in America and the wider world, albeit with no specific reference to September 11. While \"Isaac and Ishmael\" received mixed critical reviews, it illustrated the show's flexibility in addressing current events. The cast of the show state during the opening of the episode that it is not part of \"The West Wing\" continuity.\nWhile the September 11 attacks are not referred to in \"The West Wing\" continuity, the country enters into a variation of the war on terrorism. Al Qaeda, mentioned briefly by Nancy McNally in the beginning of season 2, plays no role in the longer terrorism story arcs of seasons 3, 4 and 5. It is only mentioned again in seasons 6 and 7. The stand-in used instead is the fictional Bahji terror group who first plots to blow up the Golden Gate Bridge. In response, the President orders the assassination of foreign leader Abdul ibn Shareef, one of Bahji's primary backers. This storyline has similarities to the real-world US invasion of Afghanistan as well as US relations with Saudi Arabia since it brings the Middle East to the forefront of US foreign relations and elevates terrorism as a serious threat.\nIn a 2001 episode, Sam Seaborn discusses arguments in favor of abolishing the penny.\nIn the middle of the fourth season, Bartlet's White House is confronted with genocide in the fictional African country of Equatorial Kundu, which was compared to the Rwandan genocide of 1994. The result is new foreign policy doctrine for the Bartlet administration and military intervention to stop the violence, which come after much hesitation and reluctance to call the conflict a genocide. In reality, the Clinton administration did not intervene in Rwanda.\nIn 2004, then New York Senator Hillary Clinton and then New York Rep. John M. McHugh wrote a letter addressed to Josh Lyman criticizing him after he had suggested the closure of a Fort Drum base in upstate New York on the fifth season episode \"Full Disclosure\", but also thanking his colleague for trying to \"save Social Security\" in a previous episode. Richard Schiff also recalled receiving a letter from Hillary Clinton after that earlier episode outlining all the ways the Social Security plan Toby Ziegler was advocating for in the episode would not work.\nIn the sixth and seventh seasons, \"The West Wing\" explores a leak of top-secret information by a senior staffer at the White House. This leak has been compared to events surrounding the Valerie Plame affair. In the storyline, the International Space Station is damaged and can no longer produce oxygen for the astronauts to breathe. With no other methods of rescue available, the President is reminded of the existence of a top-secret military space shuttle. Following the President's inaction, the shuttle story is leaked to a White House reporter, Greg Brock (analogous to Judith Miller), who prints the story in \"The New York Times\". Brock will not reveal his source and goes to jail for failing to do so, as did Miller. In order to stop the investigation, in which authorities suspect Chief of Staff C.J. Cregg, Toby Ziegler admits to leaking the information, and the President is forced to dismiss him. In comparison, the Plame affair resulted in the arrest and conviction of \"Scooter\" Libby, the Vice President's chief of staff. However, Libby was convicted of perjury in testimony to a grand jury. No one was convicted for \"blowing the cover\" of Plame. (Richard Armitage, an official in the Bush State Department, acknowledged leaking information about Plame to reporters but was never charged with a crime.) Libby's two-and-a-half-year prison sentence was later commuted by President Bush, though the other facet of his sentence ($250,000 fine) stood until his 2018 pardon by President Donald Trump and was duly paid. In the series finale, President Bartlet, as his last official act, pardons Ziegler.\nOther issues explored in \"The West Wing\" include:\n\"The West Wing\" universe.\nDomestic.\nAll contemporary domestic government officials in \"The West Wing\" universe are fictional. President Bartlet has made three appointments to the fictional Supreme Court and maintains a full cabinet, although not all names and terms of the members are revealed. Some cabinet members, such as the Secretary of Defense, appear more often than others. Many other government officials, such as mayors, governors, judges, representatives, and senators, are mentioned and seen as well.\nFictional locations inside the United States are created to loosely represent certain places:\nSan Andreo.\nSan Andreo is a fictional California city. It is located near San Diego, has a population of 42,000 and is the location of the San Andreo Nuclear Generating Station. The fictional station was based on the real-life San Onofre Nuclear Generating Station in San Diego County.\nA near meltdown at the nuclear plant becomes the focus of an October surprise for Republican nominee Senator Arnold Vinick during the 2006 presidential election, due to Vinick's strong pro-nuclear stance and revelations of his active lobbying for the construction of the plant. This is seen to be a key factor in Vinick's narrow defeat in the election by Democratic nominee Congressman Matt Santos.\nHartsfield's Landing.\nHartsfield's Landing is a fictional town in New Hampshire. It is stated to be a very small community of only 63 people, of whom 42 are registered voters, that votes at one minute past midnight on the day of the New Hampshire primary, hours before the rest of the state, and has accurately predicted the winner of every presidential election since William Howard Taft in 1908. It is based on three real-life New Hampshire communities, one of which is Hart's Location, which indeed vote before the rest of the state during the primaries.\nKennison State University.\nKennison State is a fictional university in Cedar Rapids, Iowa, used as the setting of a bombing in the beginning of the fourth season.\nForeign.\nWhile several real-world leaders exist in the show's universe, most foreign countries depicted or referred to on the show have fictional rulers. Real people mentioned on \"The West Wing\" include Muammar Gaddafi, Yasser Arafat, Fidel Castro, Queen Elizabeth II, King Bhumibol Adulyadej, King Carl XVI Gustaf, Thabo Mbeki, and Osama bin Laden.\nEntire countries are invented as composite pictures that epitomize many of the problems that plague real nations in certain areas of the world:\nFictional timeline.\nThe \"West Wing\" universe diverges from history after Richard Nixon's presidency, although there is occasional overlap; for instance, in the second episode of the series' second season \"In the Shadow of Two Gunmen\" Toby Ziegler speaks to a Secret Service agent outside a building named for Ronald Reagan, although this may have just been a production oversight. Fictional Presidents who are shown to have served between Nixon and Bartlet include one-term Democrat D. Wire Newman (James Cromwell) and two-term Republican Owen Lassiter.\nLeo McGarry is mentioned as being Labor Secretary in the administration that was in office in 1993 and 1995. In the first season, an outgoing Supreme Court Justice tells Bartlet that he had been wanting to retire for five years but waited \"for a Democrat\" because he did not want a Republican president to replace him with a conservative justice (the Justice then snidely tells President Bartlet, \"Instead, I got you.\"). The season 4 episode \"Debate Camp\" features a flashback to the days just before Bartlet's inauguration, as Donna Moss meets with her Republican predecessor, Jeff Johnson. In season six Leo says that the Republicans have been \"out of power for eight years\", and Republicans at their convention say \"eight (years) is enough\".\nThe passage of time on the show relative to that of the real world is somewhat ambiguous when marked by events of shorter duration (such as votes and campaigns). Sorkin noted in a DVD commentary track for the second-season episode \"18th and Potomac\" that he tried to avoid tying \"The West Wing\" to a specific period of time. Despite this, real years are occasionally mentioned, usually in the context of elections and President Bartlet's two-term administration.\nThe show's presidential elections are held in 2002 and 2006, which are the years of the midterm elections in reality (these dates come from the fact that in the season 2 episode \"17 People\", Toby mentions 2002 as the year of the President's reelection campaign). The election time line on \"The West Wing\" matches up with that of the real world until early in the sixth season, when it appears that a year is lost. For example, the filing deadline for the New Hampshire primary, which would normally fall in January 2006, appears in an episode airing in January 2005.\nIn an interview, John Wells stated that the series began one and a half years into Bartlet's first term and that the election to replace Bartlet was being held at the correct time. However, the season 1 episode \"He Shall from Time to Time\" shows the preparations for Bartlet's first regular State of the Union address, which would occur one year into his presidency. In the season 1 episode \"Let Bartlet Be Bartlet\", Josh Lyman asks Toby Ziegler, \"Our second year isn't going much better than our first year, is it?\"\nIn the season 5 episode \"Access\", it is mentioned that the Casey Creek crisis occurred during Bartlet's first term and got his presidency off to a calamitous start, and network footage of the crisis carries the date of November 2001.\n1998 presidential election.\nBartlet's first campaign for president is never significantly explored in the series. Bartlet is stated to have won the election with 48% of the popular vote, 48 million votes, and a 303\u2013235 margin in the Electoral College. Of three debates between Bartlet and his Republican opponent, it is mentioned that Bartlet won the third and final debate, held eight days before election day in St. Louis, Missouri. Josh Lyman says that in the days prior to the election, \"Bartlet punched through a few walls\" since the result seemed too close to call before the result broke his way. Leo McGarry says the same thing in \"Bartlet for America\" when he says, \"It was eight days to go, and we were too close to call\".\nThe campaign for the Democratic nomination is extensively addressed. In the episodes \"In the Shadow of Two Gunmen, Part I\", \"In the Shadow of Two Gunmen, Part II\", and \"Bartlet for America\", flashbacks are used to show Bartlet defeating Texas Senator John Hoynes (Tim Matheson) and Washington Senator William Wiley for the Democratic nomination and later choosing Hoynes as his running mate. The flashbacks also show Leo McGarry persuading Bartlet, then Governor of New Hampshire, to run for president.\n2002 presidential election.\n\"The West Wing\"'s 2002 presidential election pits Bartlet and Vice President John Hoynes against Florida Governor Robert Ritchie (James Brolin) and his running mate, Jeff Heston. Bartlet faces no known opposition for renomination, though Minnesota Democratic Senator Howard Stackhouse launches a brief independent campaign for the presidency. Ritchie, not originally expected to contend for the nomination, emerges from a field of seven other Republican candidates by appealing to the party's conservative base with simple, \"homey\" sound bites.\nBartlet's staff contemplates replacing Vice President John Hoynes on the ticket with Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Admiral Percy Fitzwallace (John Amos), among others. After it is clear that Ritchie will be the Republican nominee, Bartlet dismisses the idea, declaring that he wants Hoynes in the number two spot because of \"four words,\" which he writes down and hands to Hoynes and McGarry to read: \"Because I could die.\"\nThroughout the season, it is anticipated that the race will be close, but a stellar performance by Bartlet in the sole debate between the candidates helps give him a landslide victory in both the popular vote and the electoral vote.\n2006 presidential election.\nA speed-up in \"The West Wing\"'s timeline, in part due to the expiration of many cast members' contracts and a desire to continue the program with lower production costs, resulted in the omission of the 2004 midterm elections and an election during the seventh season. The sixth season extensively details the Democratic and Republican primaries. The seventh season covers the lead-up to the general election, the election, and the transition to a new administration. The timeline slows down to concentrate on the general election race. The election, normally held in November, takes place across two episodes originally broadcast on April 2 and 9, 2006.\nCongressman Matt Santos (D-TX) (Jimmy Smits) is nominated on the fourth ballot at the Democratic National Convention, during the sixth-season finale. Santos, having planned to leave Congress before being recruited to run for the presidency by Josh Lyman, polls in the low single digits in the Iowa caucus. He is virtually out of the running in the New Hampshire primary before a last-ditch live television commercial vaults him to a third-place finish with 19% of the vote. Josh Lyman, Santos's campaign manager, convinces Leo McGarry to become Santos's running mate.\nSenator Arnold Vinick (R-CA) (Alan Alda) secures the Republican nomination, defeating Rep. Glen Allen Walken (R-MO) (John Goodman) (who had served briefly as Acting President during Bartlet's recusal during the Zoey Bartlet kidnapping crisis in season 4) and the Reverend Don Butler (Don S. Davis), among others. Initially, Vinick wants Butler to become his running mate. However, Butler does not want to be considered because of Vinick's stance on abortion. Instead, West Virginia Governor Ray Sullivan (Brett Cullen) is chosen as Vinick's running mate. Vinick is portrayed throughout the sixth season as virtually unbeatable because of his popularity in California, a typically Democratic state, his moderate views, and his wide crossover appeal. Vinick, however, faces difficulty with the anti-abortion members of his party as an abortion rights candidate, and criticism for his support of nuclear power following a serious accident at a Californian nuclear power station.\nOn the evening of the election, Leo McGarry suffers a massive heart attack and is pronounced dead at the hospital, with the polls still open on the West Coast. The Santos campaign releases the information immediately, while Arnold Vinick refuses to use Leo's death as a \"stepstool\" to the presidency. Santos emerges as the winner in his home state of Texas, while Vinick wins his home state of California. The election comes down to Nevada, where both candidates need a victory to secure the presidency. Vinick tells his staff repeatedly that he will not allow his campaign to demand a recount of the votes if Santos is declared the winner. Josh Lyman gives Santos the same advice, although the Santos campaign sends a team of lawyers down to Nevada. Santos is pronounced the winner of the election, having won Nevada by 30,000 votes, with an electoral vote margin of 272\u2013266.\nAccording to executive producer Lawrence O'Donnell, Jr., the writers originally intended for Vinick to win the election. However, the death of Spencer forced him and his colleagues to consider the emotional strain that would result from having Santos lose both his running mate and the election. It was eventually decided by John Wells that the last episodes would be rescripted. Other statements from John Wells, however, have contradicted O'Donnell's claims about a previously planned Vinick victory. The script showing Santos winning was written long before the death of John Spencer. In 2008, O'Donnell stated to camera, \"We actually planned at the outset for Jimmy Smits to win, that was our .. just .. plan of how this was all going to work, but the Vinick character came on so strong in the show, and was so effective, it became a real contest ... and it became a real contest in the West Wing writer's room.\"\nSimilarities to 2008 United States presidential election.\nSimilarities between the fictional 2006 election and the real-life 2008 United States presidential election have been noted in the media: \nAccording to David Remnick's biography of Obama, \"The Bridge\", when writer and former White House aide Eli Attie was tasked with fleshing out the first major Santos storylines, he looked to then-U.S. Senator Obama as a model. Attie called David Axelrod, with whom he had worked in politics, \"and grilled him about Obama.\" While Attie says that he \"drew inspiration from [Obama] in drawing [the Santos] character,\" actor Jimmy Smits also says that Obama \"was one of the people that I looked to draw upon\" for his portrayal of the character. Writer and producer Lawrence O'Donnell says that he partly modeled Vinick after McCain. Obama's former Chief of Staff, Rahm Emanuel, is said to be the basis of the Josh Lyman character, who becomes Santos's Chief of Staff. However, O'Donnell denied this claim. Ahead of the inauguration, a fan posted a video mash-up of \"The West Wing\" opening credits with Obama administration officials on YouTube that was featured on HLN's program \"Showbiz Tonight\".\nSantos transition.\nAs the series sunsets with Bartlet's final year in office, little is revealed about Matt Santos's presidency, with the last few episodes mainly focusing on the Santos team's transition into the White House. Santos chooses Josh Lyman as Chief of Staff, who in turn calls on former colleague Sam Seaborn to be Deputy Chief of Staff. Seeking experienced cabinet members, Santos taps Arnold Vinick as Secretary of State, believing the senior statesman to be one of the best strategists available and respected by foreign leaders.\nVinick is at first highly skeptical of Santos' offer, and initially rejects it, but is convinced to accept after a more extensive discussion with Santos leaves him satisfied their foreign policy philosophies will be compatible.\nSantos eventually decides on Eric Baker, the Democratic Governor of Pennsylvania and at one point the frontrunner for the Democratic nomination, as his choice to replace Leo McGarry for vice president, and submits his name to Congress under the terms of the Twenty-fifth Amendment to the United States Constitution. While the show ends before he can be confirmed, it is implied he will likely face little opposition from Republicans.\nPresident Bartlet's final act as President of the United States is pardoning Toby Ziegler, who had violated federal law by leaking classified information about a military Space Shuttle. The series ends with Bartlet returning to New Hampshire. Having said his goodbyes to his closest staff, former President Bartlet tells President Santos, \"Make me proud, Mr. President,\" to which Santos responds, \"I'll do my best, Mr. President.\"\nOther broadcasts.\nThe show previously reaired on Bravo in the US beginning in 2003 and was previously available on Netflix beginning in 2013. Cable channel TNT reaired episodes of the show in 2020 ahead of the US election and the show's launch on HBO Max in December 2020. In 2022, HLN aired a marathon of the show over the Thanksgiving holiday. After the show was removed from the Max streaming service in the US in December 2024, the series appeared on the top of the rankings for show purchases on iTunes in January 2025. It later returned to streaming on Max a week later on January 8, 2025, after leadership at the platform reportedly had been unaware that it had been flagged for removal. Journalist Oliver Darcy had attributed the removal to an \"ROI evaluation\" in his newsletter and had written that \"it\u2019s a little embarrassing that Warner Bros. Discovery can\u2019t apparently afford to keep its own show (Warner Bros. Television produced the program) on its own streamer.\" Fans of the show also took credit on social media for its restoration after having expressed their dissatisfaction. The show reached the top 10 most viewed TV series list on Max the week it was restored and the following days.\nIn the UK, the show originally aired on Sky One in 2000 before subsequently airing on Channel 4, E4 and More4. The show has also been made available on Channel 4's streaming service and on Amazon Prime Video's Freevee platform in the UK.\nThe 2005 German series \"Kanzleramt\" on public broadcaster ZDF drew comparisons with \"The West Wing\". The original did not air in Germany until 2008 to 2012 on the pay television channel Fox.\nHome media.\nThe series is available on DVD, with a complete series set released in 2006. Season 1 is in the original 4:3 format while Season 2 onward are presented as anamorphic widescreen. The Season 1 through 6 DVD releases include episode audio commentaries from cast members, writers and directors.\nIn 2010, the series was released in high-definition for the first time on streaming platforms Amazon Video and iTunes, with the first two seasons remastered in to match the aspect ratio and resolution change in the third season. The complete series was released on Blu-ray on October 1, 2024.\nOther media.\nWritten works.\nSeveral books have been published about \"The West Wing\". One of the first, in 2001, was Paul C. Challe's \"Inside the West Wing: An Unauthorized Look at Television's Smartest Show\". In 2002, Newmarket Press published \"The West Wing Script Book\", which included episode scripts from Aaron Sorkin from the first two seasons, and in 2003 released a second book featuring shooting scripts from seasons 3 and 4. Also in 2002, Ian Jackman wrote \"The West Wing (The Official Companion)\". Analytical books about the series include Peter Rollins' \"The West Wing: The American Presidency as Television Drama\" (2003), \"The Prime-Time Presidency: The West Wing and U.S. Nationalism\" by Trevor Parry-Giles and Shawn J. Parry-Giles (2006), \"The West Wing (TV Milestones Series)\" by Janet McCabe (2012), Claire Handscombe's \"Walk with Us: How the West Wing Changed Our Lives\" (2016), and David W. Greybeal's \"Faith in The West Wing: The Portrayal of Religion in a Primetime Presidency\" (2023).\nMelissa Fitzgerald and Mary McCormack, who portrayed Carol Fitzpatrick and Kate Harper, respectively, co-wrote \"What's Next: A Backstage Pass to The West Wing, Its Cast and Crew, and Its Enduring Legacy of Service.\" It was released on August 13, 2024. The book includes behind-the-scenes stories, photos, anecdotes from episodes of the show, and analysis of the show's legacy. They were interviewed together by their colleague when they appeared with Martin Sheen on MSNBC's \"The Last Word with Lawrence O'Donnell\" in August 2024 and on \"The View\" in September 2024. Fitzgerald and McCormack also participated with Sorkin and various cast members in several events tied to the book's release and the show's 25th anniversary hosted by the Skirball Cultural Center, Warner Bros., and Sixth &amp; I Historic Synagogue. While in Washington, D.C. as part of the promotional events, McCormack, Fitzgerald and Sheen visited the White House, where Sheen had the opportunity to briefly greet President Joe Biden.\nIn 2025, Janel Moloney started a newsletter about her memories of being on the show.\nTwitter accounts.\nIn 2010, Twitter accounts for many of the primary characters on \"The West Wing\" began to appear, including accounts for President Bartlet, Josh Lyman, Leo McGarry, Matt Santos and Mrs. Landingham. Tweets from the fictional characters have been featured on \"The Rachel Maddow Show\", CNN and questions from the fictional accounts have been answered by Press Secretary Robert Gibbs during a White House Press Conference and from Vice President Joe Biden during a Twitter Town Hall. The success of \"The West Wing\" accounts has resulted in several copycats, including accounts from several minor or obscure \"West Wing\" characters, including Gail, the fish in C.J.'s office.\nPodcasts.\nIn March 2016, \"The West Wing Weekly\" podcast hosted by Hrishikesh Hirway and Joshua Malina began. Each episode of the podcast discusses an episode of \"The West Wing\" and has featured various cast and crew members from the series, including several live tapings with an audience.\nOn March 25, 2019, screenwriters Josh Olson (Oscar-nominated for \"A History of Violence\") and Dave Anthony launched \"The West Wing Thing\", on which the hosts \"watch and then discuss\" an episode of the series, analyzing and critiquing the show itself as well as its relationship to real-life American politics, both at the time it originally aired and in the present day.\nFan conventions.\nA major fan convention, \"West Wing Weekend\" took place in September 28\u201330, 2018, at the Marriott Hotel in Bethesda, Maryland. The convention featured guest appearances from some members of the series' cast, as well as a number of panels, fan-based programming, and special events. A Kickstarter campaign for the convention was started on January 4, 2018, to raise $10,000, and it was fully funded within two days.\nParodies.\nMany venues, including Funny or Die, \"Mad TV\", \"30 Rock\", and the \"Late Night with Seth Meyers\" have parodied the walk-and-talk cliche of the show, including the \"ping-pong\" dialogue, in which one character would speak barely a word before the other said another, and then repeated back and forth. In 2000, West Wing cast members participated in a parody as part of the White House Correspondents' dinner as is recorded in archive footage from the Clinton Presidential Library.\nAllison Janney performed in a parody of \"The West Wing\" in a 2016 episode of her sitcom \"Mom\", titled \"Pure Evil and a Free Piece of Cheesecake\".\u00a0Janney's character, Bonnie Plunkett fantasizes about becoming the President of the United States while doing a walk-and-talk scene with her White House chief of staff played by Richard Schiff.\nCampaign video.\nDuring the 2012 campaign season, most of the cast\u2014including Mary McCormack as Kate Harper\u2014appeared in a video paid for by the campaign to elect McCormack's sister Bridget Mary McCormack to a seat on the Michigan Supreme Court. Gently parodying the television series, the characters earnestly discuss the fact that voters often fail to vote in the non-partisan section of their ballots, which in this case would include court candidates such as Bridget McCormack, whose qualifications they praise. Although she is referred to as the sister of actress Mary McCormack, the characters do not recognize the name, except for Harper who finds it vaguely familiar. Bridget McCormack was subsequently elected.\n\"A West Wing Special to Benefit When We All Vote\".\nIn August 2020, it was announced that cast members Martin Sheen, Rob Lowe, Dul\u00e9 Hill, Allison Janney, Richard Schiff, Bradley Whitford and Janel Moloney would reprise their roles for a stage version of the episode \"Hartsfield's Landing\". The episode was intended to raise awareness and support for \"When We All Vote\", a nonprofit organization founded to increase participation in United States elections by Michelle Obama, Lin-Manuel Miranda and others. Production began in early October 2020 at Los Angeles' Orpheum Theatre and premiered on October 15 on HBO Max. In connection with the special, the cast were featured on the cover of \"Entertainment Weekly\", which also released a separate election year collector's edition looking back at the show. They also appeared together on the \"Late Show with Stephen Colbert\".\nExplanatory notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59450", "revid": "37625882", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59450", "title": "Strontianite", "text": "Rare carbonate mineral and raw material for the extraction of strontium\nStrontianite (SrCO3) is an important raw material for the extraction of strontium. It is a rare carbonate mineral and one of only a few strontium minerals. It is a member of the aragonite group.\nAragonite group members: aragonite (CaCO3), witherite (BaCO3), strontianite (SrCO3), cerussite (PbCO3)\nThe ideal formula of strontianite is SrCO3, with molar mass 147.63 g, but calcium (Ca) can substitute for up to 27% of the strontium (Sr) cations, and barium (Ba) up to 3.3%.\nThe mineral was named in 1791 for the locality, Strontian, Argyllshire, Scotland, where the element strontium had been discovered the previous year. Although good mineral specimens of strontianite are rare, strontium is a fairly common element, with abundance in the Earth's crust of 370 parts per million by weight, 87 parts per million by moles, much more common than copper with only 60 parts per million by weight, 19 by moles. \nStrontium is never found free in nature. The principal strontium ores are celestine SrSO4 and strontianite SrCO3. The main commercial process for strontium metal production is reduction of strontium oxide with aluminium.\nUnit cell.\nStrontianite is an orthorhombic mineral, belonging to the most symmetrical class in this system, 2/m 2/m 2/m, whose general form is a rhombic dipyramid. The space group is Pmcn. There are four formula units per unit cell (Z = 4) and the unit cell parameters are a = 5.1 \u00c5, b = 8.4 \u00c5, c = 6.0 \u00c5.\nStructure.\nStrontianite is isostructural with aragonite. When the CO3 group is combined with large divalent cations with ionic radii greater than 1.0\u00a0\u00c5, the radius ratios generally do not permit stable 6-fold coordination. For small cations the structure is rhombohedral, but for large cations it is orthorhombic. This is the aragonite structure type with space group Pmcn. In this structure the CO3 groups lie perpendicular to the c axis, in two structural planes, with the CO3 triangular groups of one plane pointing in opposite directions to those of the other. These layers are separated by layers of cations.\nThe CO3 group is slightly non-planar; the carbon atom lies 0.007 \u00c5 out of the plane of the oxygen atoms. The groups are tilted such that the angle between a plane drawn through the oxygen atoms and a plane parallel to the a-b unit cell plane is 2\u00b040\u2019.\nCrystal form.\nStrontianite occurs in several different habits. Crystals are short prismatic parallel to the c axis and often acicular. Calcium-rich varieties often show steep pyramidal forms. Crystals may be pseudo hexagonal due to equal development of different forms. Prism faces are striated horizontally. The mineral also occurs as columnar to fibrous, granular or rounded masses.\nOptical properties.\nStrontianite is colourless, white, gray, light yellow, green or brown, colourless in transmitted light. It may be longitudinally zoned. It is transparent to translucent, with a vitreous (glassy) lustre, resinous on broken surfaces, and a white streak.\nIt is a biaxial(\u2212) mineral. The direction perpendicular to the plane containing the two optic axes is called the optical direction Y. In strontianite Y is parallel to the b crystal axis. The optical direction Z lies in the plane containing the two optic axes and bisects the acute angle between them. In strontianite Z is parallel to the a crystal axis. The third direction X, perpendicular both to Y and to Z, is parallel to the c crystal axis. The refractive indices are close to n\u03b1 = 1.52, n\u03b2 = 1.66, n\u03b3 = 1.67, with different sources quoting slightly different values: \nThe maximum birefringence \u03b4 is 0.15 and the measured value of 2V is 7\u00b0, calculated 12\u00b0 to 8\u00b0.\nIf the colour of the incident light is changed, then the refractive indices are modified, and the value of 2V changes. This is known as dispersion of the optic axes. For strontianite the effect is weak, with 2V larger for violet light than for red light r &lt; v.\nLuminescence.\nStrontianite is almost always fluorescent. It fluoresces bright yellowish white under shortwave, mediumwave and longwave ultraviolet radiation. If the luminescence persists after the ultraviolet source is switched off the sample is said to be phosphorescent. Most strontianite phosphoresces a strong, medium duration, yellowish white after exposure to all three wavelengths. It is also fluorescent and phosphorescent in X-rays and electron beams. All materials will glow red hot if they are heated to a high enough temperature (provided they do not decompose first); some materials become luminescent at much lower temperatures, and this is known as thermoluminescence. Strontianite is sometimes thermoluminescent.\nPhysical properties.\nCleavage is nearly perfect parallel to one set of prism faces, {110}, and poor on {021}. Traces of cleavage have been observed on {010}.\nTwinning is very common, with twin plane {110}. The twins are usually contact twins; in a contact twin the two individuals appear to be reflections of each other in the twin plane. Penetration twins of strontainite are rarer; penetration twins are made up of interpenetrating individuals that are related to each other by rotation about a twin axis. Repeated twins are made up of three or more individuals twinned according to the same law. If all the twin planes are parallel then the twin is polysynthetic, otherwise it is cyclic. In strontianite repeated twinning forms cyclic twins with three or four individuals, or polysynthetic twins.\nThe mineral is brittle, and breaks with a subconchoidal to uneven fracture. It is quite soft, with a Mohs hardness of &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;3+1\u20442, between calcite and fluorite. The specific gravity of the pure endmember with no calcium substituting for strontium is 3.78, but most samples contain some calcium, which is lighter than strontium, giving a lower specific gravity, in the range 3.74 to 3.78. Substitutions of the heavier ions barium and/or lead increase the specific gravity, although such substitutions are never very abundant. Strontianite is soluble in dilute hydrochloric acid HCl and it is not radioactive.\nEnvironment and associations.\nStrontianite is an uncommon low-temperature hydrothermal mineral formed in veins in limestone, marl, and chalk, and in geodes and concretions. It occurs rarely in hydrothermal metallic veins but is common in carbonatites. It most likely crystallises at or near 100\u00a0\u00b0C. Its occurrence in open vugs and veins suggests crystallisation at very low pressures, probably at most equal to the hydrostatic pressure of the ground water. Under appropriate conditions it alters to celestine SrSO4, and it is itself found as an alteration from celestine. These two minerals are often found in association, together with baryte, calcite, harmotome and sulfur.\nOccurrences.\nType locality.\nThe type locality is Strontian, North West Highlands (Argyllshire), Scotland, UK. The type material occurred in veins in gneiss.\nOther UK localities include Brownley Hill Mine (Bloomsberry Horse Level), Nenthead, Alston Moor District, North Pennines, North and Western Region (Cumberland), Cumbria, England, associated with a suite of primary minerals (bournonite, millerite and ullmannite) which are not common in other Mississippi Valley-type deposits.\nCanada.\nThe Francon quarry, Montr\u00e9al, Qu\u00e9bec. \nStrontianite is very common at the Francon Quarry, in a great variety of habits. It is a late stage mineral, sometimes found as multiple generations. It is found as translucent to opaque, white to pale yellow or beige generally smooth surfaced spheroids, hemispheres and compact spherical and botryoidal aggregates to 10\u00a0cm in diameter, and as spheres consisting of numerous radiating acicular crystals, up to 1\u00a0cm across. Also as tufts, parallel bundles, and sheaf-like clusters of fibrous to acicular crystals, and as white, finely granular porcelaneous and waxy globular aggregates. Transparent, pale pink, columnar to tabular sixling twins up to 1\u00a0cm in diameter have been found, and aggregates of stacked stellate sixling twins consisting of transparent, pale yellow tabular crystals.\nAnother Canadian occurrence is at Nepean, Ontario, in vein deposits in limestone.\nGermany.\nCommercially important deposits occur in marls in Westphalia, and it is also found with zeolites at Oberschaffhausen, B\u00f6tzingen, Kaiserstuhl, Baden-W\u00fcrttemberg.\nIndia.\nIn Trichy (Tiruchirappalli; Tiruchi), Tiruchirapalli District, Tamil Nadu, it occurs with celestine SrSO4, gypsum and phosphate nodules in clay.\nMexico.\nIt occurs in the Sierra Mojada District, with celestine in a lead-silver deposit.\nRussia.\nIt occurs in the Kirovskii apatite mine, Kukisvumchorr Mt, Khibiny Massif, Kola Peninsula, Murmanskaja Oblast', Northern Region, in late hydrothermal assemblages in cavities in pegmatites, associated with kukharenkoite-(La), microcline, albite, calcite, nenadkevichite, hilairite, catapleiite, donnayite-(Y), synchysite-(Ce), pyrite and others.\nIt also occurs at Yukspor Mountain, Khibiny Massif, Kola Peninsula, Murmanskaja Oblast', Northern Region, in an aegerine-natrolite-microcline vein in foyaite, associated with aegirine, anatase, ancylite-(Ce), barylite, catapleiite, cerite-(Ce), cerite-(La), chabazite-(Ca), edingtonite, fluorapatite, galena, ilmenite, microcline, natrolite, sphalerite and vanadinite. At the same locality it was found in alkaline pegmatite veins associated with clinobarylite, natrolite, aegirine, microcline, catapleiite, fluorapatite, titanite, fluorite, galena, sphalerite, annite, astrophyllite, lorenzenite, labuntsovite-Mn, kuzmenkoite-Mn, cerite-(Ce), edingtonite, ilmenite and calcite.\nUnited States.\nIn the Gulf coast of Louisiana and Texas, strontianite occurs with celestine in calcite cap rock of salt domes.\nAt the Minerva Number 1 Mine (Ozark-Mahoning Number 1 Mine) Ozark-Mahoning Group, Cave-in-Rock, Illinois, in the Kentucky Fluorspar District, Hardin County strontanite occurs as white, brown or rarely pink tufts and bowties of acicular crystals with slightly curved terminations.\nIn the Silurian Lockport Group, Central and Western New York strontianite is observed in cavities in eastern Lockport, where it occurs as small white radiating sprays of acicular crystals.\nIn Schoharie County, New York, it occurs in geodes and veins with celestine and calcite in limestone, and in Mifflin County, Pennsylvania, it occurs with aragonite, again in limestone.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Sister-inline/styles.css\"/&gt; Media related to at Wikimedia Commons"}
{"id": "59452", "revid": "40722555", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59452", "title": "List of California missions", "text": ""}
{"id": "59453", "revid": "10863197", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59453", "title": "Spanish missions in California", "text": "18th to 19th-century Catholic religious outposts in California\nThe Spanish missions in California () formed a series of 21 religious outposts or missions established between 1769 and 1833 in what is now the U.S. state of California. The missions were established by Catholic priests of the Franciscan order to evangelize indigenous peoples backed by the military force of the Spanish Empire. The missions were part of the expansion and settlement of New Spain through the formation of Alta California, expanding the empire into the most northern and western parts of Spanish North America. Civilian settlers and soldiers accompanied missionaries and formed settlements like the Pueblo de Los \u00c1ngeles.\nIndigenous peoples were forced into settlements called reductions, disrupting their traditional way of life and negatively affecting as many as one thousand villages. European diseases spread in the close quarters of the missions, causing mass death. Abuse, malnourishment, and overworking were common. At least 87,787 baptisms and 63,789 deaths occurred. Indigenous peoples often resisted and rejected conversion to Christianity. Some fled the missions while others formed rebellions. Missionaries recorded frustrations with getting indigenous people to internalize Catholic scripture and practice. Indigenous girls were taken away from their parents and housed at \"monjer\u00edos\". The missions' role in destroying Indigenous culture has been described as cultural genocide.\nBy 1810, Spain's king had been imprisoned by the French, and financing for military payroll and missions in California ceased. In 1821, Mexico achieved independence from Spain, yet did not send a governor to California until 1824. The missions maintained authority over indigenous peoples and land holdings until the 1830s. At the peak of their influence in 1832, the coastal mission system controlled approximately one-sixth of Alta California. The First Mexican Republic secularized the missions with the Mexican Secularization Act of 1833, which emancipated indigenous peoples from the missions. The missions were closed down, their priests mostly returned to Mexico. The churches ended religious services and fell into disrepair. The farmlands were seized and were largely given to settlers and soldiers, along with a minority of indigenous people.\nThe surviving mission buildings are the state of California's oldest structures and most-visited historic monuments, many of which were restored after falling into near disrepair in the early 20th century. They have become a symbol of California, appearing in many movies and television shows, and are an inspiration for Mission Revival architecture. Concerns have been raised by historians and Indigenous peoples of California about the way the mission period in California is taught in educational institutions and memorialized. The oldest European settlements of California were formed around or near Spanish missions, including the four largest: Los Angeles, San Diego, San Jose, and San Francisco. Santa Barbara, and Santa Cruz were also formed near missions, and the historical imprint reached as far north as Sonoma in what became the wine country.\nAlta California mission planning, structure, and culture.\nCoastal mission chain, planning and overview.\nPrior to 1754, grants of mission lands were made directly by the Spanish Crown. But, given the remote locations and the inherent difficulties in communicating with the territorial governments, he delegated authority to make grants to the viceroys of New Spain. During the reign of King Charles III, they granted lands to allow establishing the Alta California missions. They were motivated in part by presence of Russian fur traders along the California coast in the mid-1700s.\nThe missions were to be interconnected by an overland route which later became known as the Camino Real (Royal Road). The detailed planning and direction of the missions was to be carried out by Friar Jun\u00edpero Serra, O.F.M. (who, in 1767, along with his fellow priests, had taken control over a group of missions in Baja California Peninsula previously administered by the Jesuits). After Serra's death, Rev. Ferm\u00edn Francisco de Lasu\u00e9n established nine more mission sites, from 1786 through 1798; others established the last three compounds, along with at least five \"asistencias\" (mission assistance outposts).\nShelved plans for additional mission chains.\nWork on the coastal mission chain was concluded in 1823, completed after Serra's death in 1784. Plans to build a twenty-second mission in Santa Rosa in 1827 were canceled.\nThe Rev. Pedro Est\u00e9van T\u00e1pis proposed establishing a mission on one of the Channel Islands in the Pacific Ocean off San Pedro Harbor in 1784, with either Santa Catalina or Santa Cruz (known as \"Lim\u00fa\" to the Tongva residents) being the most likely locations, the reasoning being that an offshore mission might have attracted potential people to convert who were not living on the mainland, and could have been an effective measure to restrict smuggling operations. Governor Jos\u00e9 Joaqu\u00edn de Arrillaga approved the plan the following year; however, an outbreak of \"sarampi\u00f3n\" (measles) killing some 200 Tongva people coupled with a scarcity of land for agriculture and potable water left the success of such a venture in doubt, so no effort to found an island mission was ever made.\nIn September 1821, the Rev. Mariano Payeras, \"Comisario Prefecto\" of the California missions, visited Ca\u00f1ada de Santa Ysabel east of Mission San Diego de Alcal\u00e1 as part of a plan to establish an entire chain of inland missions. The Santa Ysabel Asistencia had been founded in 1818 as a \"mother\" mission. However, the plan's expansion never came to fruition.\nMission sites, selection and layout.\n \nIn addition to the \"presidio\" (royal fort) and \"pueblo\" (town), the \"misi\u00f3n\" was one of the three major agencies employed by the Spanish sovereign to extend its borders and consolidate its colonial territories. \"Asistencias\" (\"satellite\" or \"sub\" missions, sometimes referred to as \"contributing chapels\") were small-scale missions that regularly conducted Mass on days of obligation but lacked a resident priest; as with the missions, these settlements were typically established in areas with high concentrations of potential native converts. The Spanish Californians had never strayed from the coast when establishing their settlements; Mission Nuestra Se\u00f1ora de la Soledad was located farthest inland, being only some thirty miles (48 kilometers) from the shore. Each frontier station was forced to be self-supporting, as existing means of supply were inadequate to maintain a colony of any size. California was months away from the nearest base in colonized Mexico, and the cargo ships of the day were too small to carry more than a few months' rations in their holds. To sustain a mission, the \"padres\" required converted Native Americans, called \"neophytes\", to cultivate crops and tend livestock in the volume needed to support a fair-sized establishment. The scarcity of imported materials, together with a lack of skilled laborers, compelled the missionaries to employ simple building materials and methods in the construction of mission structures.\nAlthough the missions were considered temporary ventures by the Spanish hierarchy, the development of an individual settlement was not simply a matter of \"priestly whim\". The founding of a mission followed longstanding rules and procedures; the paperwork involved required months, sometimes years of correspondence, and demanded the attention of virtually every level of the bureaucracy. Once empowered to erect a mission in a given area, the men assigned to it chose a specific site that featured a good water supply, plenty of wood for fires and building materials, and ample fields for grazing herds and raising crops. The padres blessed the site, and with the aid of their military escort fashioned temporary shelters out of tree limbs or driven stakes, roofed with thatch or reeds (\"ca\u00f1as\"). It was these simple huts that ultimately gave way to the stone and adobe buildings that exist to the present.\nThe first priority when beginning a settlement was the location and construction of the church (\"iglesia\"). The majority of mission sanctuaries were oriented on a roughly east\u2013west axis to take the best advantage of the sun's position for interior illumination; the exact alignment depended on the geographic features of the particular site. Once the spot for the church had been selected, its position was marked and the remainder of the mission complex was laid out. The workshops, kitchens, living quarters, storerooms, and other ancillary chambers were usually grouped in the form of a quadrangle, inside which religious celebrations and other festive events often took place. The \"cuadr\u00e1ngulo\" was rarely a perfect square because the missionaries had no surveying instruments at their disposal and simply measured off all dimensions by foot. Some fanciful accounts regarding the construction of the missions claimed that tunnels were incorporated in the design, to be used as a means of emergency egress in the event of attack; however, no historical evidence (written or physical) has ever been uncovered to support these assertions.\nFranciscans and native conscription.\nThe Alta California missions, known as reductions (\"reducciones\") or congregations (\"congregaciones\"), were settlements founded by the Spanish colonizers of the New World with the purpose of totally assimilating indigenous populations into European culture and the Catholic religion. It was a doctrine established in 1531, which based the Spanish state's right over the land and persons of the Indies on the Papal charge to evangelize them. It was employed wherever the indigenous populations were not already concentrated in native \"pueblos\". Indians were congregated around the mission proper through forced resettlement, in which the Spanish \"reduced\" them from what they perceived to be a free \"undisciplined'\" state with the ambition of converting them into \"civilized\" members of colonial society. The civilized and disciplined culture of the natives, developed over 8,000 years, was not considered. A total of 146 Friars Minor, mostly Spaniards by birth, were ordained as priests and served in California between 1769 and 1845. Sixty-seven missionaries died at their posts (two as \"martyrs\": \"Padres\" Luis Jayme and Andr\u00e9s Quintana), while the remainder returned to Europe due to illness, or upon completing their ten-year service commitment. As the rules of the Franciscan Order forbade friars to live alone, two missionaries were assigned to each settlement, sequestered in the mission's \"convento\". To these the governor assigned a guard of five or six soldiers under the command of a corporal, who generally acted as steward of the mission's temporal affairs, subject to the priests' direction.\nIndians were initially attracted into the mission compounds by gifts of food, colored beads, bits of bright cloth, and trinkets. Once a Native American \"gentile\" was baptized, they were labeled a \"neophyte\", or new believer. This happened only after a brief period during which the initiates were instructed in the most basic aspects of the Catholic faith. But, while many natives were lured to join the missions out of curiosity and sincere desire to participate and engage in trade, many found themselves trapped once they were baptized. On the other hand, Indians staffed the militias at each mission and had a role in mission governance.\nTo the \"padres\", a baptized Indian person was no longer free to move about the country, but had to labor and worship at the mission under the strict observance of the priests and overseers, who herded them to daily masses and labors. If an Indian did not report for their duties for a period of a few days, they were searched for, and if it was discovered that they had left without permission, they were considered runaways. Large-scale military expeditions were organized to round up the escaped neophytes. Sometimes, the Franciscans allowed neophytes to escape the missions, or they would allow them to visit their home village. However, the Franciscans would only allow this so that they could secretly follow the neophytes. Upon arriving to the village and capturing the runaways, they would take back Indians to the missions, sometimes as many as 200 to 300 Indians.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nA total of 20,355 natives were \"attached\" to the California missions in 1806 (the highest figure recorded during the Mission Period); under Mexican rule the number rose to 21,066 (in 1824, the record year during the entire era of the Franciscan missions). During the entire period of Mission rule, from 1769 to 1834, the Franciscans baptized 53,600 adult Indians and buried 37,000. Dr. Cook estimates that 15,250 or 45% of the population decrease was caused by disease. Two epidemics of measles, one in 1806 and the other in 1828, caused many deaths. The mortality rates were so high that the missions were constantly dependent upon new conversions.\nYoung native women were required to reside in the \"monjer\u00edo\" (or \"nunnery\") under the supervision of a trusted Indian matron who bore the responsibility for their welfare and education. Women only left the convent after they had been \"won\" by an Indian suitor and were deemed ready for marriage. Following Spanish custom, courtship took place on either side of a barred window. After the marriage ceremony the woman moved out of the mission compound and into one of the family huts. These \"nunneries\" were considered a necessity by the priests, who felt the women needed to be protected from the men, both Indian and \"de raz\u00f3n\" (\"instructed men\", i.e. Europeans). The cramped and unsanitary conditions the girls lived in contributed to the fast spread of disease and population decline. So many died at times that many of the Indian residents of the missions urged the priests to raid new villages to supply them with more women.\nDeath rate at the missions.\nAs of December 31, 1832 (the peak of the mission system's development) the mission \"padres\" had performed a combined total of 87,787 baptisms and 24,529 marriages, and recorded 63,789 deaths. The death rate at the missions, particularly of children, was very high and the majority of children baptized did not survive childhood. At Mission San Gabriel, for instance, three of four children died before reaching the age of two.\nThe high rate of death at the missions have been attributed to several factors, including disease, torture, overworking, malnourishment, and cultural genocide. Forcing native people into close quarters at the missions spread disease quickly. While being kept at the missions, native people were transitioned to a Spanish diet that left them more unable to ward off diseases, the most common being dysentery, fevers with unknown causes, and venereal disease.\nThe death rate has been compared to that of other atrocities. American author and lawyer Carey McWilliams argued that \"the Franciscan padres eliminated Indians with the effectiveness of Nazis operating concentration camps.\" \nMission labor.\nAt least 90,000 Indigenous peoples were kept in well-guarded mission compounds throughout the state as \"de facto\" slaves. The policy of the Franciscans was to keep them constantly occupied. Bells were vitally important to daily life at any mission. The bells were rung at mealtimes, to call the Mission residents to work and to religious services, during births and funerals, to signal the approach of a ship or returning missionary, and at other times; novices were instructed in the intricate rituals associated with the ringing the mission bells. The daily routine began with sunrise Mass and morning prayers, followed by instruction of the natives in the teachings of the Roman Catholic faith. After a breakfast of \"atole\", the able-bodied men and women were assigned their tasks for the day. The women were committed to dressmaking, knitting, weaving, embroidering, laundering, and cooking, while some of the stronger girls ground flour or carried adobe bricks (weighing 55 lb, or 25\u00a0kg each) to the men engaged in building. The men worked a variety of jobs, having learned from the missionaries how to plow, sow, irrigate, cultivate, reap, thresh, and glean. They were taught to build adobe houses, tan leather hides, shear sheep, weave rugs and clothing from wool, make ropes, soap, paint, and other useful duties.\nThe work day was six hours, interrupted by dinner (lunch) around 11:00\u00a0a.m. and a two-hour \"siesta\", and ended with evening prayers and the rosary, supper, and social activities. About 90 days out of each year were designated as religious or civil holidays, free from manual labor. The labor organization of the missions resembled a slave plantation in many respects. Foreigners who visited the missions remarked at how the priests' control over the Indians appeared excessive, but necessary given the white men's isolation and numeric disadvantage. Subsequently, the Missions operated under strict and harsh conditions; A 'light' punishment would've been considered 25 lashings (azotes). Indians were not paid wages as they were not considered free laborers and, as a result, the missions were able to profit from the goods produced by the Mission Indians to the detriment of the other Spanish and Mexican settlers of the time who could not compete economically with the advantage of the mission system.\nThe Franciscans began to send neophytes to work as servants of Spanish soldiers in the presidios. Each presidio was provided with land, el rancho del rey, which served as a pasture for the presidio livestock and as a source of food for the soldiers. Theoretically the soldiers were supposed to work on this land themselves but within a few years the neophytes were doing all the work on the presidio farm and, in addition, were serving domestics for the soldiers. While the fiction prevailed that neophytes were to receive wages for their work, no attempt was made to collect the wages for these services after 1790. It is recorded that the neophytes performed the work \"under unmitigated compulsion.\"\nIn recent years, much debate has arisen about the priests' treatment of the Indians during the Mission period, and many believe that the California mission system is directly responsible for the decline of the native cultures. From the perspective of the Spanish priest, their efforts were a well-meaning attempt to improve the lives of the heathen natives.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The missionaries of California were by-and-large well-meaning, devoted men...[whose] attitudes toward the Indians ranged from genuine (if paternalistic) affection to wrathful disgust. They were ill-equipped\u2014nor did most truly desire\u2014to understand complex and radically different Native American customs. Using European standards, they condemned the Indians for living in a \"wilderness,\" for worshipping false gods or no God at all, and for having no written laws, standing armies, forts, or churches.\nFranciscan violence against the native population.\nThe Franciscan arrival to Alta California came with a wave of torture, rape, and murder towards the native population of California. Native Californians, attracted to the Missions by the promise of food and gifts, were forcibly prevented from leaving. Any who attempted to escape was usually given a severe beating and put in shackles. Any form of Native rebellion was met with force due to numerical disadvantage facing the Franciscans.\nWhen Native Women attempted to abort their unborn children \u2013 which they had conceived as a byproduct of rape, the Friars would have them beaten, chained in iron, shaved, and stipulated to stand in-front of the altar each mass with a decorated wooden newborn.\nThis trend of violence was due to the Franciscans' desire for a greater Hispanicized population in Alta California, both for protection against a foreign invasion and for a labor force to benefit the Spanish Empire. As a result, a higher emphasis of Native reproduction was a duty taken on by the Spanish Fransicans. Tejana born feminist historian Antonia Casta\u00f1eda wrote about the treatment that would occur in Mission Santa Cruz:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Father Olbes at Mission Santa Cruz ordered an infertile couple to have sexual intercourse in his presence because he did not believe they could not have children. The couple refused, but Olbes forcibly inspected the man's penis to learn 'whether or not it was in good order' and tried to inspect the woman's genitalia. She refused, fought with him, and tried to bite him. Olbes ordered that she be tied by the hands, and given fifty lashes, shackled, and locked up in the \"monjer\u00edo\" (women's dormitory). He then had a monigote made and commanded that she \"treat the doll as though it were a child and carry it in the presence of everyone for nine days.\" While the woman was beaten and her sexuality demeaned, the husband, who had been intimate with another woman, was ridiculed and humiliated. A set of cow horns was tied to his head with leather thongs, thereby converting him into a cuckold, and he was herded to daily Mass in cow horns and fetters.\nFranciscan Priests would also forbid any form of native culture in the Mission system. This would include but not be limited to, songs, dances, and ceremonies. They objectified the destruction of any form of morality, ideology or personality that characterized the Native life.\nWomen, in particular, would face a higher degree of punishment. Those who did not comply with the Missions demands would be labeled a witch, dehumanizing them for further violence.\nUniversity of Chicago Professor Ramon Guttiriez wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;One can interpret the whole history of the persecution of Indian women as witches ... as a struggle over [these] competing ways of defining the body and of regulating procreation as the church endeavored to constrain the expression of desire within boundaries that clerics defined proper and acceptable.\nMission industries.\nThe goal of the missions was, above all, to become self-sufficient in relatively short order. Farming, therefore, was the most important industry of any mission. Barley, maize, and wheat were among the most common crops grown. Cereal grains were dried and ground by stone into flour. Even today, California is well known for the abundance and many varieties of fruit trees that are cultivated throughout the state. The only fruits indigenous to the region, however, consisted of wild berries or grew on small bushes. Spanish missionaries brought fruit seeds over from Europe, many of which had been introduced from Asia following earlier expeditions to the continent; orange, grape, apple, peach, pear, and fig seeds were among the most prolific of the imports. Grapes were also grown and fermented into wine for sacramental use and again, for trading. The specific variety, called the \"Criolla\" or \"Mission grape\", was first planted at Mission San Juan Capistrano in 1779; in 1783, the first wine produced in Alta California emerged from the mission's winery. Ranching also became an important mission industry as cattle and sheep herds were raised.\nMission San Gabriel Arc\u00e1ngel unknowingly witnessed the origin of the California citrus industry with the planting of the region's first significant orchard in 1804, though the commercial potential of citrus was not realized until 1841. Olives (first cultivated at Mission San Diego de Alcal\u00e1) were grown, cured, and pressed under large stone wheels to extract their oil, both for use at the mission and to trade for other goods. The Rev. Serra set aside a portion of the Mission Carmel gardens in 1774 for tobacco plants, a practice that soon spread throughout the mission system.\nIt was also the missions' responsibility to provide the Spanish forts, or \"presidios\", with the necessary foodstuffs, and manufactured goods to sustain operations. It was a constant point of contention between missionaries and the soldiers as to how many \"fanegas\" of barley, or how many shirts or blankets the mission had to provide the garrisons on any given year. At times these requirements were hard to meet, especially during years of drought, or when the much anticipated shipments from the port of San Blas failed to arrive. The Spaniards kept meticulous records of mission activities, and each year reports submitted to the Father-Presidente summarizing both the material and spiritual status at each of the settlements.\nLivestock was raised, not only for the purpose of obtaining meat, but also for wool, leather, and tallow, and for cultivating the land. In 1832, at the height of their prosperity, the missions collectively owned:\nAll these grazing animals were originally brought up from Mexico. A great many Indians were required to guard the herds and flocks on the mission ranches, which created the need for \"...a class of horsemen scarcely surpassed anywhere.\" These animals multiplied beyond the settler's expectations, often overrunning pastures and extending well-beyond the domains of the missions. The giant herds of horses and cows took well to the climate and the extensive pastures of the Coastal California region, but at a heavy price for the California Native American people. The uncontrolled spread of these new herds, and associated invasive exotic plant species, quickly exhausted the native plants in the grasslands, and the chaparral and woodlands that the Indians depended on for their seed, foliage, and bulb harvests. The grazing-overgrazing problems were also recognized by the Spaniards, who periodically had extermination parties cull and kill thousands of excess livestock, when herd populations grew beyond their control or the land's capacity. Years with a severe drought did this also.\nMission kitchens and bakeries prepared and served thousands of meals each day. Candles, soap, grease, and ointments were all made from tallow (rendered animal fat) in large vats located just outside the west wing. Also situated in this general area were vats for dyeing wool and tanning leather, and primitive looms for weaving. Large \"bodegas\" (warehouses) provided long-term storage for preserved foodstuffs and other treated materials.\nEach mission had to fabricate virtually all of its construction materials from local materials. Workers in the \"carpinter\u00eda\" (carpentry shop) used crude methods to shape beams, lintels, and other structural elements; more skilled artisans carved doors, furniture, and wooden implements. For certain applications bricks (\"ladrillos\") were fired in ovens (kilns) to strengthen them and make them more resistant to the elements; when \"tejas\" (roof tiles) eventually replaced the conventional \"jacal\" roofing (densely packed reeds) they were placed in the kilns to harden them as well. Glazed ceramic pots, dishes, and canisters were also made in mission kilns.\nPrior to the establishment of the missions, the native peoples knew only how to use bone, seashells, stone, and wood for building, tool making, weapons, and so forth. The missionaries established manual training in European skills and methods; in agriculture, mechanical arts, and the raising and care of livestock. Everything consumed and otherwise used by the natives was produced at the missions under the supervision of the padres; thus, the neophytes not only supported themselves, but after 1811 sustained the entire military and civil government of California. The foundry at Mission San Juan Capistrano was the first to introduce the Indians to the Iron Age. The blacksmith used the mission's forges (California's first) to smelt and fashion iron into everything from basic tools and hardware (such as nails) to crosses, gates, hinges, even cannon for mission defense. Iron in particular was a commodity that the mission acquired solely through trade, as there was no mining infrastructure or industry in the region.\nNo study of the missions is complete without mention of their extensive water supply systems. Stone \"zanjas\" (aqueducts, sometimes spanning miles, brought fresh water from a nearby river or spring to the mission site. Open or covered lined ditches and/or baked clay pipes, joined with lime mortar or bitumen, gravity-fed the water into large cisterns and fountains, and emptied into waterways where the force of the water was used to turn grinding wheels and other simple machinery, or dispensed for use in cleaning. Water used for drinking and cooking was allowed to trickle through alternate layers of sand and charcoal to remove the impurities. One of the best-preserved mission water systems is at Mission Santa Barbara.\nHistory.\nBeginning in 1492 with the voyages of Christopher Columbus, the Kingdom of Spain sought to establish missions to convert indigenous people in \"Nueva Espa\u00f1a\" (\"New Spain\"), which consisted of the Caribbean, Mexico, and most of what is now the Southwestern United States) to Catholicism. This would facilitate colonization of these lands awarded to Spain by the Catholic Church, including that region later known as \"Alta California\".\nEarly Spanish exploration.\nOnly 48 years after Columbus discovered the Americas for Europe, Francisco V\u00e1zquez de Coronado set out from Compostela, New Spain on February 23, 1540, at the head of a large expedition. Accompanied by 400 European men-at-arms (mostly Spaniards), 1,300 to 2,000 Mexican Indian allies, several Indian and African slaves, and four Franciscan friars, he traveled from Mexico through parts of the southwestern United States to present-day Kansas between 1540 and 1542. Two years later on 27 June 1542, Juan Rodriguez Cabrillo set out from Navidad, Mexico and sailed up the coast of Baja California and into the region of Alta California.\nSecret English claims.\nUnknown to Spain, Sir Francis Drake, an English privateer who raided Spanish treasure ships and colonial settlements, claimed the Alta California region as Nova Albion for the English Crown in 1579, a full generation before the first English landing in Jamestown in 1607. During his circumnavigation of the world, Drake anchored in a harbor just north of present-day San Francisco, California, establishing friendly relations with the Coastal Miwok and claiming the territory for Queen Elizabeth I. However, Drake sailed back to England and England (and later Britain) never pressed for any sort of claim regarding the region.\nRussian exploration.\nHowever, it was not until 1741 that the Spanish monarchy of King Philip V was stimulated to consider how to protect his claims to Alta California. Philip was spurred on when the territorial ambitions of the Russian Empire were expressed in the Vitus Bering expedition along the western coast on the North American continent.\nSpanish expansion.\nCalifornia represents the \"high-water mark\" of Spanish expansion in North America as the last and northernmost colony on the continent. The mission system arose in part from the need to control Spain's ever-expanding holdings in the New World. Realizing that the colonies required a literate population base that the mother country could not supply, the Spanish government (with the cooperation of the Church) established a network of missions to convert the indigenous population to Christianity. They aimed to make converts and tax-paying citizens of those they conquered. To make them into Spanish citizens and productive inhabitants, the Spanish government and the Church required the indigenous people to learn Spanish language and vocational skills along with Christian teachings.\nEstimates for the pre-contact indigenous population in California are based on a number of different sources and vary substantially, from as few as 133,000, to 225,000, to as many as 705,000 representing more than 100 separate tribes or nations.\nOn January 29, 1767, Spain's King Charles III ordered the new governor Gaspar de Portol\u00e1 to forcibly expel the Jesuits, who operated under the authority of the Pope and had established a chain of fifteen missions on the Baja California Peninsula. \"Visitador General\" Jos\u00e9 de G\u00e1lvez engaged the Franciscans, under the leadership of Friar Jun\u00edpero Serra, to take charge of those outposts on March 12, 1768. The \"padres\" closed or consolidated several of the existing settlements, and also founded Misi\u00f3n San Fernando Rey de Espa\u00f1a de Velicat\u00e1 (the only Franciscan mission in all of Baja California) and the nearby Visita de la Presentaci\u00f3n in 1769. This plan, however, changed within a few months after G\u00e1lvez received the following orders: \"Occupy and fortify San Diego and Monterey for God and the King of Spain.\" The Church ordered the priests of the Dominican Order to take charge of the Baja California missions so the Franciscans could concentrate on founding new missions in Alta California.\nMission period (1769\u20131833).\nOn July 14, 1769, G\u00e1lvez sent the Portol\u00e1 expedition out from Loreto to explore lands to the north. Leader Gaspar de Portol\u00e1 was accompanied by a group of Franciscans led by Jun\u00edpero Serra. Serra's plan was to extend the string of missions north from the Baja California peninsula, connected by an established road and spaced a day's travel apart. The first Alta California mission and presidio were founded at San Diego, the second at Monterey.\nEn route to Monterey, the Rev. Francisco G\u00f3mez and the Rev. Juan Cresp\u00ed came across a Native settlement wherein two young girls were dying: one, a baby, said to be \"dying at its mother's breast,\" the other a small girl suffering of burns. On July 22, G\u00f3mez baptized the baby, naming her \"Maria Magdalena\", while Cresp\u00ed baptized the older child, naming her \"Margarita\". These were the first recorded baptisms in Alta California. Crespi dubbed the spot \"Los Cristianos\". The group continued northward but missed Monterey Harbor and returned to San Diego on January 24, 1770. Near the end of 1769 the Portol\u00e1 expedition had reached its most northerly point at present-day San Francisco. In following years, the Spanish Crown sent a number of follow-up expeditions to explore more of Alta California.\nSpain also settled the California region with a number of African and mulatto Catholics, including at least ten of the recently re-discovered Los Pobladores, the founders of Los Angeles in 1781.\nOrganization.\nThe original intent was for each mission to be turned over to a secular clergy and all the common mission lands distributed amongst the native population within ten years after its founding. This policy was based upon Spain's experience with the more advanced tribes in Mexico, Central America, and Peru.\nIn time, it became apparent to the Rev. Serra and his associates that the natives on the northern frontier in Alta California required a much longer period of acclimatization. None of the California missions ever attained complete self-sufficiency, and required continued (albeit modest) financial support from mother Spain.\nFinancial support.\nMission development was financed out of \"El Fondo Piadoso de las Californias\" (\"The Pious Fund of the Californias\" to enable the missionaries to propagate the Catholic faith in the area then known as California. The fund originated in 1697 and consisted of voluntary donations from individuals and religious bodies in Mexico to members of the Society of Jesus.\nWith the onset of the Mexican War of Independence in 1810, support from the Pious Fund largely disappeared. Missions and converts were left on their own.\nIndigenous labor.\nIn 1800, native labor comprised the backbone of the colonial economy. Possibly \"the worst epidemic of the Spanish Era in California\" occurred between March and May 1806 when a measles epidemic and related complications killed one-quarter of the mission native population in the San Francisco Bay Area.\nIn 1811, the Spanish Viceroy in Mexico sent an \"interrogatorio\" (questionnaire) to all of the missions in Alta California regarding the customs, disposition, and condition of the Mission Indians. The replies varied greatly in the length, spirit, and even the value of the information provided. They were collected and prefaced by the Father-Presidente with a short general statement or abstract; the compilation was thereupon forwarded to the viceregal government. The contemporary nature of the responses, no matter how incomplete or biased some may be, are nonetheless of considerable value to modern ethnologists.\nRussian settlements.\nRussian colonization of the Americas extended as far south as present-day Graton, Point Arena, and Tomales Bay. Chernyk, the farming community near Graton, was about from present-day Sonoma, California. It had a barracks, agricultural buildings, fields of grain and vegetables, an orchard and a vineyard. Their primary location was at Fort Ross (\"krepost' rus\"), an agricultural, scientific, and fur trading settlement located on the coast. When they exterminated the sea otter and seal populations, they failed in the ambition to supply Russia's Alaskan settlements from California and left the area.\nPirate attacks.\nIn November and December 1818, several of the missions were attacked by Hip\u00f3lito Bouchard, \"California's only pirate.\" A French privateer sailing under the flag of Argentina, \"Pirata Buchar\" (as Bouchard was known to the locals) worked his way down the California coast, conducting raids on the installations at Monterey, Santa Barbara, and San Juan Capistrano, with limited success. Upon hearing of the attacks, many mission priests (along with a few government officials) sought refuge at Mission Nuestra Se\u00f1ora de la Soledad, the mission chain's most isolated outpost. Ironically, Mission Santa Cruz (though ultimately ignored by the marauders) was ignominiously sacked and vandalized by local residents who were entrusted with securing the church's valuables.\nExpansion stopped.\nBy 1819, Spain decided to limit its \"reach\" in the New World to Northern California due to the costs involved in sustaining these remote outposts; the northernmost settlement therefore is Mission San Francisco Solano, founded in Sonoma in 1823.\nAn attempt to found a twenty-second mission in Santa Rosa in 1827 was aborted. In 1833, the final group of missionaries arrived in Alta California. These were Mexican-born (rather than Spaniards), and had been trained at the Apostolic College of Our Lady of Guadalupe in Zacatecas. Among these friars was Francisco Garc\u00eda Diego y Moreno, who would become the first bishop of the Diocese of Both Californias. These friars would bear the brunt of the changes brought on by secularization and the U.S. occupation, and many would be marked by allegations of corruption.\nChumash revolt.\nThe Chumash people revolted against the Spanish presence in 1824. The Chumash planned a coordinated rebellion at three missions. Due to an incident with a soldier at Mission Santa In\u00e9s, the rebellion began on Saturday, February 21. The Chumash withdrew from Mission Santa In\u00e9s upon the arrival of military reinforcements, then attacked Mission La Purisima from inside, forced the garrison to surrender, and allowed the garrison, their families, and the mission priest to depart for Santa In\u00e9s. The next day, the Chumash of Mission Santa Barbara captured the mission from within without bloodshed, repelled a military attack on the mission, and then retreated from the mission to the hills. The Chumash continued to occupy Mission La Purisima until a Mexican military unit attacked people on March 16 and forced them to surrender. Two military expeditions were sent after the Chumash in the hills; the first did not find them and the second negotiated with the Chumash and convinced a majority to return to the missions by June 28.\nSecularization.\nAs the Mexican republic matured, calls for the secularization (\"disestablishment\") of the missions increased. They were finally closed down in 1834, their priests mostly returned to Mexico. The churches ended religious services and fell into disrepair. The farmlands were seized.\nJos\u00e9 Mar\u00eda de Echeand\u00eda, the first native Mexican elected Governor of Alta California issued a \"Proclamation of Emancipation\" (or \"Prevenci\u00f3nes de Emancipacion\") on July 25, 1826. All Indians within the military districts of San Diego, Santa Barbara, and Monterey who were found qualified were freed from missionary rule and made eligible to become Mexican citizens. Those who wished to remain under mission tutelage were exempted from most forms of corporal punishment. By 1830, even the neophyte populations themselves appeared confident in their own abilities to operate the mission ranches and farms independently; the \"padres\", however, doubted the capabilities of their charges in this regard.\nAccelerating immigration, both Mexican and foreign, increased pressure on the Alta California government to seize the mission properties and dispossess the natives in accordance with Echeand\u00eda's directive. Despite the fact that Echeand\u00eda's emancipation plan was met with little encouragement from the novices who populated the southern missions, he was nonetheless determined to test the scheme on a large scale at Mission San Juan Capistrano. To that end, he appointed a number of \"comisionados\" (commissioners) to oversee the emancipation of the Indians. The Mexican government passed legislation on December 20, 1827, that mandated the expulsion of all Spaniards younger than sixty years of age from Mexican territories; Governor Echeand\u00eda nevertheless intervened on behalf of some of the missionaries to prevent their deportation once the law took effect in California.\nUpon arriving in Monterey, California in April 1832, Thomas O. Larkin found the economics of land and commerce were controlled by the Spanish missions, presidios, pueblos, and a few ranchos.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The lands of each mission joined those of other missions on either side, so that all were connected, or, in other words, the missionaries occupied all the land along the coast, except the presidios, the three pueblos and their lands, and a few ranchos which were held by virtue of grants from the King of Spain... The missionaries objected to any settlements in the country but the missions; the presidios they regarded as a necessary evil.\nGovernor Jos\u00e9 Figueroa (who took office in 1833) initially attempted to keep the mission system intact, but the Mexican Congress passed \"An Act for the Secularization of the Missions of California\" on August 17, 1833, when liberal Valent\u00edn G\u00f3mez Far\u00edas was in office.\nThe Act also provided for the colonization of both Alta and Baja California, the expenses of this latter move to be borne by the proceeds gained from the sale of the mission property to private interests.\nFor instance, after Mexican independence, the Mexican government confiscated Franciscan lands and decommissioned them. This, however, did not see the end of Native plight since further dislocation and abuse occurred under Mexican control. Most of the confiscated Franciscan lands were given out as grants to white settlers or well connected Mexicans, while Native Californians continued to occupy the land as a labor force.\nMission San Juan Capistrano was the very first to feel the effects of secularization when, on August 9, 1834, Governor Figueroa issued his \"Decree of Confiscation\". Nine other settlements quickly followed, with six more in 1835; San Buenaventura and San Francisco de As\u00eds were among the last to succumb, in June and December 1836, respectively. The Franciscans soon thereafter abandoned most of the missions, taking with them almost everything of value, after which the locals typically plundered the mission buildings for construction materials. Former mission pasture lands were divided into large land grants called \"ranchos\", greatly increasing the number of private land holdings in Alta California.\nRancho period (1834\u20131849).\nThe Indian towns at San Juan Capistrano, San Dieguito, and Las Flores continued for some time under a provision in \"Gobernador\" Echeand\u00eda's 1826 Proclamation that allowed for the partial conversion of missions to \"pueblos\".\nAccording to one estimate, the native population in and around the missions proper was approximately 80,000 at the time of the confiscation; others claim that the statewide population had dwindled to approximately 100,000 by the early 1840s, due in no small part to the natives' exposure to European diseases, and from the Franciscan practice of cloistering women in the \"convento\" and controlling sexuality during the child-bearing age. (Baja California Territory experienced a similar reduction in native population resulting from Spanish colonization efforts there).\nP\u00edo de Jes\u00fas Pico, the last Mexican Governor of Alta California, found upon taking office that there were few funds available to carry on the affairs of the province. He prevailed upon the assembly to pass a decree authorizing the renting or the sale of all mission property, reserving only the church, a curate's house, and a building for a courthouse. The expenses of conducting the services of the church were to be provided from the proceeds, but there was no disposition made as to what should be done to secure the funds for that purpose.\nAfter secularization, Father-Presidente Narciso Dur\u00e1n transferred the missions' headquarters to Santa B\u00e1rbara, thereby making Mission Santa B\u00e1rbara the repository of some 3,000 original documents that had been scattered through the California missions. The Mission archive is the oldest library in the State of California that still remains in the hands of its founders, the Franciscans (it is the only mission where they have maintained an uninterrupted presence). Beginning with the writings of Hubert Howe Bancroft, the library has served as a center for historical study of the missions for more than a century. In 1895, journalist and historian Charles Fletcher Lummis criticized the Act and its results, saying:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Disestablishment\u2014a polite term for robbery\u2014by Mexico (rather than by native Californians misrepresenting the Mexican government) in 1834, was the death blow of the mission system. The lands were confiscated; the buildings were sold for beggarly sums, and often for beggarly purposes. The Indian converts were scattered and starved out; the noble buildings were pillaged for their tiles and adobes...\nCalifornia statehood (1850 and beyond).\nPrecise figures relating to the population decline of California indigenes are not available. One writer, Gregory Orfalea, estimates that pre-contact population was reduced by 33 percent during Spanish and Mexican rule, mostly through introduction of European diseases, but much more after the United States takeover in 1848. By 1870, the loss of indigenous lives had become catastrophic. Up to 80 percent died, leaving a population of about 30,000 in 1870. Orfalea claims that nearly half of the native deaths after 1848 were murder.\nIn 1837\u201338, a major smallpox epidemic devastated native tribes north of San Francisco Bay, in the jurisdiction of Mission San Francisco Solano. General Mariano Vallejo estimated that 70,000 died from the disease. Vallejo's ally, chief Sem-Yeto, was one of the few natives to be vaccinated, and one of the few to survive.\nWhen the mission properties were secularized between 1834 and 1838, the approximately 15,000 resident \"neophytes\" lost whatever protection the mission system afforded them. While under the secularization laws the natives were to receive up to one-half of the mission properties, this never happened. The natives lost whatever stock and movable property they may have accumulated. When California became a U.S. state, California law stripped them of legal title to the land. In the Act of September 30, 1850, Congress appropriated funds to allow the President to appoint three Commissioners, O. M. Wozencraft, Redick McKee and George W. Barbour, to study the California situation and \"...negotiate treaties with the various Indian tribes of California.\" Treaty negotiations ensued during the period between March 19, 1851, and January 7, 1852, during which the Commission interacted with 402 Indian chiefs and headmen (representing approximately one-third to one-half of the California tribes) and entered into eighteen treaties.\nCalifornia Senator William M. Gwin's Act of March 3, 1851 created the Public Land Commission, whose purpose was to determine the validity of Spanish and Mexican land grants in California. On February 19, 1853 Archbishop Joseph Sadoc Alemany filed petitions for the return of all former mission lands in the state. Ownership of (essentially exact area of land occupied by the original mission buildings, cemeteries, and gardens) was subsequently conveyed to the Church, along with the \"Ca\u00f1ada de los Pinos\" (or College Rancho) in Santa Barbara County comprising , and \"La Laguna\" in San Luis Obispo County, consisting of . As the result of a U.S. government investigation in 1873, a number of Indian reservations were assigned by executive proclamation in 1875. The commissioner of Indian affairs reported in 1879 that the number of Mission Indians in the state was down to around 3,000.\nLegacy and Native American controversy.\nSome modern anthropologists cite a cultural bias on the part of the missionaries that blinded them to the natives' plight and caused them to develop strong negative opinions of the California Indians.\nThe mission project was a popular teaching tool used in California to teach school children about the Spanish missions, but became controversial. Its popularity began decreasing in the mid-2010s as educators questioned whether the assignment effectively teaches students about the Spanish missions' impact on indigenous Californians.\nEuropean diseases like influenza, measles, tuberculosis, gonorrhea, and dysentery killed a significant number of natives as a result of their contact with the Europeans, as the California Native Americans had no immunity to these diseases. Miners and settlers contributed to the high death rate.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Between 1846 and 1870, California's Indian population plunged from perhaps 150,000 to 30,000. Diseases, dislocation, and starvation caused many of these deaths. However, abduction, unfree labor, mass death on reservations, individual homicides, battles, and massacres also took thousands of lives and hindered reproduction.\nThe close relationship between church and government found in the original California mission system was a foundation for later forms of government. The early missions and their sub-missions formed the nuclei of what would later become the major metropolitan areas of San Francisco and Los Angeles, as well as many other smaller municipalities.\nBy eliminating the native population, the Spanish, Mexican, and later American settlers could take over the land without opposition. The early Spanish mission system established the basis for the cattle and agriculture economies that flourish in the state today.\nMission administration.\nThe \"Father-Presidente\" was the head of the Catholic missions in Alta and Baja California.\nSystem Father-Presidentes.\nHe was appointed by the College of San Fernando de Mexico until 1812. Then the position became known as the \"Commissary Prefect\" who was appointed by the Commissary General of the Indies, a Franciscan residing in Spain. Beginning in 1831, separate individuals were elected to oversee Upper and Lower California.\nMission headquarters.\n\u2020 The Rev. Payeras and the Rev. Dur\u00e1n remained at their resident missions during their terms as \"Father-Presidente\", therefore those settlements became the de facto headquarters (until 1833, when all mission records were permanently relocated to Santa Barbara).\nMission locations.\nThere were 21 missions accompanied by military outposts in Alta California from San Diego to Sonoma, California. To facilitate travel between them on horse and foot, the mission settlements were situated approximately 30 miles (48 kilometers) apart, about one day's journey on horseback, or three days on foot. The entire trail eventually became a 600-mile (966-kilometer) long \"California Mission Trail\". Heavy freight movement was practical only via water. Tradition has it that the padres sprinkled mustard seeds along the trail to mark it with bright yellow flowers.\nFollowing the old Camino Real northwards, from San Diego through to the northernmost mission in Sonoma, California, north of San Francisco Bay, the missions were:\nPresidios and military districts.\nDuring the Mission Period Alta California was divided into four military districts. Each was garrisoned (\"comandancias\") by a presidio strategically placed along the California coast to protect the missions and other Spanish settlements in Upper California. Each of these functioned as a base of military operations for a specific region. They were independent of one another and were organized from south to north as follows:\nAn ongoing power struggle between church and state grew increasingly heated and lasted for decades. Originating as a feud between the Rev. Serra and Pedro Fages (the military governor of Alta California from 1770 to 1774, who regarded the Spanish installations in California as military institutions first and religious outposts second), the uneasy relationship persisted for more than sixty years. Dependent upon one another for their very survival, military leaders and mission \"padres\" nevertheless adopted conflicting stances regarding everything from land rights, the allocation of supplies, protection of the missions, the criminal propensities of the soldiers, and (in particular) the status of the native populations.\nPresent-day California missions.\nBuilding restoration.\nCalifornia is home to the greatest number of well-preserved missions found in any U.S. state. The missions are collectively the best-known historic element of the coastal regions of California:\nBecause virtually all of the artwork at the missions served either a devotional or didactic purpose, there was no underlying reason for the mission residents to record their surroundings graphically; visitors, however, found them to be objects of curiosity. During the 1850s a number of artists found gainful employment as draftsmen attached to expeditions sent to map the Pacific coastline and the border between California and Mexico (as well as plot practical railroad routes); many of the drawings were reproduced as lithographs in the expedition reports.\nIn 1875 American illustrator Henry Chapman Ford began visiting each of the twenty-one mission sites, where he created a historically important portfolio of watercolors, oils, and etchings. His depictions of the missions were (in part) responsible for the revival of interest in the state's Spanish heritage, and indirectly for the restoration of the missions. The 1880s saw the appearance of a number of articles on the missions in national publications and the first books on the subject; as a result, a large number of artists did one or more mission paintings, though few attempted a series.\nThe popularity of the missions also stemmed largely from Helen Hunt Jackson's 1884 novel \"Ramona\" and the subsequent efforts of Charles Fletcher Lummis, William Randolph Hearst, and other members of the \"Landmarks Club of Southern California\" to restore three of the southern missions in the early 20th century (San Juan Capistrano, San Diego de Alcal\u00e1, and San Fernando; the Pala \"Asistencia\" was also restored by this effort). Lummis wrote in 1895,\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In ten years from now\u2014unless our intelligence shall awaken at once\u2014there will remain of these noble piles nothing but a few indeterminable heaps of adobe. We shall deserve and shall have the contempt of all thoughtful people if we suffer our noble missions to fall.\nIn acknowledgement of the magnitude of the restoration efforts required and the urgent need to have acted quickly to prevent further or even total degradation, Lummis went on to state, It is no exaggeration to say that human power could not have restored these four missions had there been a five-year delay in the attempt.\nIn 1911 author John Steven McGroarty penned \"The Mission Play\", a three-hour pageant describing the California missions from their founding in 1769 through secularization in 1834, and ending with their \"final ruin\" in 1847.\nToday, the missions exist in varying degrees of architectural integrity and structural soundness. The most common extant features at the mission grounds include the church building and an ancillary \"convento\" (convent) wing. In some cases (in San Rafael, Santa Cruz, and Soledad, for example), the current buildings are replicas constructed on or near the original site. Other mission compounds remain relatively intact and true to their original, Mission Era construction.\nA notable example of an intact complex is the now-threatened Mission San Miguel Arc\u00e1ngel: its chapel retains the original interior murals created by Salinan Indians under the direction of Esteban Munras, a Spanish artist and last Spanish diplomat to California. This structure was closed to the public from 2003 to 2009 due to severe damage from the San Simeon earthquake. Many missions have preserved (or in some cases reconstructed) historic features in addition to chapel buildings.\nThe missions have earned a prominent place in California's historic consciousness, and a steady stream of tourists from all over the world visit them. In recognition of that fact, on November 30, 2004, President George W. Bush signed HR 1446, the \"California Mission Preservation Act\", into law. The measure provided $10\u00a0million over a five-year period to the California Missions Foundation for projects related to the physical preservation of the missions, including structural rehabilitation, stabilization, and conservation of mission art and artifacts. The California Missions Foundation, a volunteer, tax-exempt organization, was founded in 1998 by Richard Ameil, an eighth generation Californian. A change to the California Constitution has also been proposed that would allow the use of State funds in restoration efforts.\nSee also.\nOn California Missions:\nOn California history:\nOn general missionary history:\nOn colonial Spanish American history:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\nBooks.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59454", "revid": "1318121872", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59454", "title": "Mystery", "text": "Mystery, The Mystery, Mysteries or The Mysteries may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "59455", "revid": "25859633", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59455", "title": "Epsom salt", "text": ""}
{"id": "59456", "revid": "8570870", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59456", "title": "Hydrate", "text": "Substance containing water or its constituent elements\nIn chemistry, a hydrate is a substance that contains water or its constituent elements. The chemical state of the water varies widely between different classes of hydrates, some of which were so labeled before their chemical structure was understood.\nChemical nature.\nInorganic chemistry.\nHydrates are inorganic salts \"containing water molecules combined in a definite ratio as an integral part of the crystal\" that are either bound to a metal center or that have crystallized with the metal complex. Such hydrates are also said to contain \"water of crystallization\" or \"water of hydration\". If the water is heavy water in which the constituent hydrogen is the isotope deuterium, then the term \"deuterate\" may be used in place of \"hydrate\".\nA colorful example is cobalt(II) chloride, which turns from blue to red upon hydration, and can therefore be used as a water indicator.\nThe notation \"\"hydrated compound\u22c5\"n\", where \"n\" is the number of water molecules per formula unit of the salt, is commonly used to show that a salt is hydrated. The \"n\" is usually a low integer, though it is possible for fractional values to occur. For example, in a monohydrate \"n\"\u00a0=\u00a01, and in a hexahydrate \"n\"\u00a0=\u00a06. Numerical prefixes mostly of Greek origin are:\nA hydrate that has lost water is referred to as an anhydride; the remaining water, if any exists, can only be removed with very strong heating. A substance that does not contain any water is referred to as anhydrous. Some anhydrous compounds are hydrated so easily that they are said to be hygroscopic and are used as drying agents or desiccants.\nOrganic chemistry.\nIn organic chemistry, a hydrate is a compound formed by the hydration, i.e. \"Addition of water or of the elements of water (i.e. H and OH) to a molecular entity\". For example: ethanol, , is the product of the hydration reaction of ethene, , formed by the addition of H to one C and OH to the other C, and so can be considered as the hydrate of ethene. A molecule of water may be eliminated, for example, by the action of sulfuric acid. Another example is chloral hydrate, , which can be formed by reaction of water with chloral, .\nMany organic molecules, as well as inorganic molecules, form crystals that incorporate water into the crystalline structure without chemical alteration of the organic molecule (water of crystallization). The sugar trehalose, for example, exists in both an anhydrous form (melting point 203\u00a0\u00b0C) and as a dihydrate (melting point 97\u00a0\u00b0C). Protein crystals commonly have as much as 50% water content.\nMolecules are also labeled as hydrates for historical reasons not covered above. Glucose, , was originally thought of as and described as a carbohydrate.\nHydrate formation is common for active ingredients. Many manufacturing processes provide an opportunity for hydrates to form and the state of hydration can be changed with environmental humidity and time. The state of hydration of an active pharmaceutical ingredient can significantly affect the solubility and dissolution rate and therefore its bioavailability.\nClathrate hydrates.\nClathrate hydrates (also known as gas hydrates, gas clathrates, etc.) are water ice with gas molecules trapped within; they are a form of clathrate. An important example is methane hydrate (also known as gas hydrate, methane clathrate, etc.).\nNonpolar molecules, such as methane, can form clathrate hydrates with water, especially under high pressure. Although there is no hydrogen bonding between water and guest molecules when methane is the guest molecule of the clathrate, guest\u2013host hydrogen bonding often forms when the guest is a larger organic molecule such as tetrahydrofuran. In such cases, the guest\u2013host hydrogen bonds result in the formation of L-type Bjerrum defects in the clathrate lattice.\nStability.\nThe stability of hydrates is generally determined by the nature of the compounds, their temperature, and the relative humidity (if they are exposed to air).\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59458", "revid": "31697869", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59458", "title": "ElGamal encryption", "text": "Public-key cryptosystem\nIn cryptography, the ElGamal encryption system is a public-key encryption algorithm based on the Diffie\u2013Hellman key exchange. It was described by Taher Elgamal in 1985. ElGamal encryption is used in the free GNU Privacy Guard software, recent versions of PGP, and other cryptosystems. The Digital Signature Algorithm (DSA) is a variant of the ElGamal signature scheme, which should not be confused with ElGamal encryption.\nElGamal encryption can be defined over any cyclic group formula_1, like multiplicative group of integers modulo\u00a0\"n\" if and only if \"n\" is 1, 2, 4, \"p\"\"k\" or 2\"p\"\"k\", where \"p\" is an odd prime and \"k\" &gt; 0. Its security depends upon the difficulty of the Decisional Diffie Hellman Problem in formula_1.\nThe algorithm.\nThe algorithm can be described as first performing a Diffie\u2013Hellman key exchange to establish a shared secret formula_3, then using this as a one-time pad for encrypting the message. ElGamal encryption is performed in three phases: the key generation, the encryption, and the decryption. The first is purely key exchange, whereas the latter two mix key exchange computations with message computations.\nKey generation.\nThe first party, Alice, generates a key pair as follows:\nEncryption.\nA second party, Bob, encrypts a message formula_14 to Alice under her public key formula_12 as follows:\nNote that if one knows both the ciphertext formula_24 and the plaintext formula_17, one can easily find the shared secret formula_3, since formula_28. Therefore, a new formula_19 and hence a new formula_3 is generated for every message to improve security. For this reason, formula_19 is also called an ephemeral key.\nDecryption.\nAlice decrypts a ciphertext formula_32 with her private key formula_9 as follows:\nPractical use.\nLike most public key systems, the ElGamal cryptosystem is usually used as part of a hybrid cryptosystem, where the message itself is encrypted using a symmetric cryptosystem, and ElGamal is then used to encrypt only the symmetric key. This is because asymmetric cryptosystems like ElGamal are usually slower than symmetric ones for the same level of security, so it is faster to encrypt the message, which can be arbitrarily large, with a symmetric cipher, and then use ElGamal only to encrypt the symmetric key, which usually is quite small compared to the size of the message.\nSecurity.\nThe security of the ElGamal scheme depends on the properties of the underlying group formula_1 as well as any padding scheme used on the messages. If the computational Diffie\u2013Hellman assumption (CDH) holds in the underlying cyclic group formula_1, then the encryption function is one-way.\nIf the decisional Diffie\u2013Hellman assumption (DDH) holds in formula_1, then\nElGamal achieves semantic security. Semantic security is not implied by the computational Diffie\u2013Hellman assumption alone. See Decisional Diffie\u2013Hellman assumption for a discussion of groups where the assumption is believed to hold.\nElGamal encryption is unconditionally malleable, and therefore is not secure under chosen ciphertext attack. For example, given an encryption formula_32 of some (possibly unknown) message formula_17, one can easily construct a valid encryption formula_58 of the message formula_59.\nTo achieve chosen-ciphertext security, the scheme must be further modified, or an appropriate padding scheme must be used. Depending on the modification, the DDH assumption may or may not be necessary.\nOther schemes related to ElGamal which achieve security against chosen ciphertext attacks have also been proposed. The Cramer\u2013Shoup cryptosystem is secure under chosen ciphertext attack assuming DDH holds for formula_1. Its proof does not use the random oracle model. Another proposed scheme is DHIES, whose proof requires an assumption that is stronger than the DDH assumption.\nEfficiency.\nElGamal encryption is probabilistic, meaning that a single plaintext can be encrypted to many possible ciphertexts, with the consequence that a general ElGamal encryption produces a 1:2 expansion in size from plaintext to ciphertext.\nEncryption under ElGamal requires two exponentiations; however, these exponentiations are independent of the message and can be computed ahead of time if needed. Decryption requires one exponentiation and one computation of a group inverse, which can, however, be easily combined into just one exponentiation.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59459", "revid": "47205554", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59459", "title": "Rabbinic literature", "text": "Jewish literature attributed to rabbis\nRabbinic literature, in its broadest sense, is the entire corpus of works authored by rabbis throughout Jewish history. The term typically refers to literature from the Talmudic era (70\u2013640 CE), as opposed to medieval and modern rabbinic writings. It aligns with the Hebrew term \"Sifrut Chazal\" (), which translates to \u201cliterature [of our] sages\u201d and generally pertains only to the sages (\"Chazal\") from the Talmudic period. This more specific sense of \"Rabbinic literature\"\u2014referring to the Talmud, Midrashim (), and related writings, but hardly ever to later texts\u2014is how the term is generally intended when used in contemporary academic writing. The terms \"mefareshim\" and \"parshanim\" (commentaries and commentators) almost always refer to later, post-Talmudic writers of rabbinic glosses on Biblical and Talmudic texts.\nMishnaic literature.\nThe Midr'she halakha, Mishnah, and Tosefta (compiled from materials pre-dating the year 200 CE) are the earliest extant works of rabbinic literature, expounding and developing Judaism's Oral Law, as well as ethical teachings. Following these came the two Talmuds:\nThe earliest extant material witness to rabbinic literature of any kind is the Tel Rehov inscription dating to the 6th\u20137th centuries, also the longest Jewish inscription from late antiquity. Meanwhile, the earliest extant Talmudic manuscripts are from the 8th century.\nThe Midrash.\nMidrash (; pl. \"Midrashim\") is a Hebrew word referring to a method of reading details into or out of a biblical text. The term \"midrash\" also can refer to a compilation of Midrashic teachings in the form of legal, exegetical, homiletical, or narrative writing, often configured as a commentary on the Bible or Mishnah. There are a large number of \"classical\" Midrashic works spanning a period from Mishnaic to Geonic times, often showing evidence of having been worked and reworked from earlier materials and frequently coming to us in multiple variants. A compact list of these works, drawing upon Barry Holtz's \"Back to the Sources\", is given below. The timeline below is approximate because many of the works were composed over a long period, borrowing and collating material from earlier versions; their histories are, therefore, somewhat uncertain and the subject of scholarly debate. In the table, \"n.e.\" designates that the work in question is not extant except in secondary references.\nLater works by historical period.\nWorks of the Geonim.\nThe Geonim are the rabbis of Sura and Pumbeditha in Babylon (650\u20131250 CE) :\nWorks of the \"Rishonim\" (the \"early\" rabbinical commentators).\nThe Rishonim are the rabbis of the early medieval period (1000\u20131550 CE)\nWorks of the \"Acharonim\" (the \"later\" rabbinical commentators).\nThe Acharonim are the rabbis from 1550 to the present day.\nMefareshim.\n\"Mefareshim\" is a Hebrew word meaning \"commentators\" (or roughly meaning \"exegetes\"), \"Perushim\" means \"commentaries\". In Judaism, these words refer to commentaries on the Torah (five books of Moses), Tanakh, Mishnah, Talmud, the responsa literature, or even the siddur (Jewish prayerbook), and more.\nClassic Torah and Talmud commentaries.\nClassic Torah and/or Talmud commentaries have been written by the following individuals:\nClassical Talmudic commentaries were written by Rashi. After Rashi, the Tosafot was written, which was an omnibus commentary on the Talmud by the disciples and descendants of Rashi; this commentary was based on discussions done in the rabbinic academies of Germany and France.\nModern Torah commentaries.\nModern Torah commentaries which have received wide acclaim in the Jewish community include:\nModern Siddur commentaries.\nModern Siddur commentaries have been written by:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59460", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59460", "title": "Lord Jeffrey Amherst", "text": ""}
{"id": "59461", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59461", "title": "Lord Geoffrey Amherst", "text": ""}
{"id": "59462", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59462", "title": "Geoffrey Amherst", "text": ""}
{"id": "59463", "revid": "47587808", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59463", "title": "DSA", "text": "DSA may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nOther.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "59464", "revid": "29210", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59464", "title": "Elgamal discrete logarithm cryptosystem", "text": ""}
{"id": "59465", "revid": "9856656", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59465", "title": "Jeffery Amherst, 1st Baron Amherst", "text": "British Army general (1717\u20131797)\nField Marshal Jeffery Amherst, 1st Baron Amherst, (29 January 1717 \u2013 3 August 1797) was a British Army officer and Commander-in-Chief of the Forces in the British Army. Amherst is credited as the architect of Britain's successful campaign to conquer the territory of New France during the Seven Years' War. Under his command, British forces captured the cities of Louisbourg, Quebec City and Montreal, as well as several major fortresses. He was also the first British governor general in the territories that eventually became Canada. Numerous places and streets are named after him, in both Canada and the United States.\nAmherst's legacy is controversial due to his expressed desire to spread smallpox among the disaffected tribes of Native Americans during Pontiac's War. This has led to a reconsideration of his legacy. In 2019, the city of Montreal removed his name from a street, renaming it Rue Atateken, from the Kanien'k\u00e9ha Mohawk language.\nEarly life.\nThe son of Jeffrey Amherst (d. 1750), a Kentish lawyer, and Elizabeth Amherst (n\u00e9e Kerrill), Jeffery Amherst was born in Sevenoaks, England, on 29 January 1717. At an early age, he became a page to the Duke of Dorset. Amherst became an ensign in the Grenadier Guards in 1735.\nAmherst served in the War of the Austrian Succession becoming an aide to General John Ligonier and participating in the Battle of Dettingen in June 1743 and the Battle of Fontenoy in May 1745. Promoted to lieutenant colonel on 25 December 1745, he also saw action at the Battle of Rocoux in October 1746. He then became an aide to the Duke of Cumberland, the commander of the British forces, and saw further action at the Battle of Lauffeld in July 1747.\nSeven Years' War.\nGermany.\nIn February 1756, Amherst was appointed commissar to the Hessian forces that had been assembled to defend Hanover as part of the Army of Observation: as it appeared likely a French invasion attempt against Britain itself was imminent, Amherst was ordered in April to arrange the transportation of thousands of the Germans to southern England to bolster Britain's defences. He was made colonel of the 15th Regiment of Foot on 12 June 1756. By 1757 as the immediate danger to Britain had passed the troops were moved back to Hanover to join a growing army under the Duke of Cumberland and Amherst fought with the Hessians under Cumberland's command at the Battle of Hastenbeck in July 1757: the Allied defeat there forced the army into a steady retreat northwards to Stade near the North Sea coast.\nAmherst was left dispirited by the retreat and by the Convention of Klosterzeven by which Hanover agreed to withdraw from the war: he began to prepare to disband the Hessian troops under his command, only to receive word that the Convention had been repudiated and the Allied force was being reformed.\nFrench and Indian War.\nAmherst gained fame during the Seven Years' War, particularly in the North American campaign known in the United States as the French and Indian War when he led the British attack on Louisbourg on Cape Breton Island in June 1758.\nIn the wake of this action, he was appointed commander-in-chief of the British army in North America and colonel-in-chief of the 60th (Royal American) Regiment in September 1758. Amherst then led an army against French troops on Lake Champlain, where he captured Fort Ticonderoga in July 1759, while another army under William Johnson took Niagara also in July 1759 and James Wolfe besieged and eventually captured Quebec with a third army in September 1759. Amherst served as the nominal Crown Governor of Virginia from 12 September 1759.\nFrom July 1760, Amherst led an army down the Saint Lawrence River from Fort Oswego, joined with Brigadier Murray from Quebec and Brigadier Haviland from Ile-aux-Noix in a three-way pincer, and captured Montreal, ending French rule in North America on 8 September. He infuriated the French commanders by refusing them the honours of war; the Chevalier de L\u00e9vis burned the colours rather than surrendering them, to highlight his differences with Vaudreuil for later political advantage back in France.\nThe British settlers were relieved and proclaimed a day of thanksgiving. Boston newspapers recount how the occasion was celebrated with a parade, a grand dinner in Faneuil Hall, music, bonfires, and firing of cannon. The Rev. Thomas Foxcroft of the First Church in Boston offered thus:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The Lord hath done great things for us, whereof we are glad... Long had it been the common opinion, \"Delenda est Carthago\", Canada must be conquered, or we could hope for no lasting quiet in these parts; and now, through the good hand of our God upon us, we see the happy day of its accomplishment. We behold His Majesty's victorious troops treading upon the high places of the enemy, their last fortress delivered up, and the whole country surrendered to the King of Britain in the person of his general, the intrepid, the serene, the successful Amherst.\nIn recognition of this victory, Amherst was appointed Governor-General of British North America in September 1760 and promoted to major-general on 29 November 1760. He was appointed Knight of the Order of the Bath on 11 April 1761.\nFrom his base at New York, Amherst oversaw the dispatch of troops under Monckton and Haviland to take part in British expeditions in the West Indies that led to the British capture of Dominica in 1761 and Martinique and Cuba in 1762.\nPontiac's War.\nThe uprising of many Native American tribes in the Ohio Valley and Great Lakes region, commonly referred to as Pontiac's War after one of its most notable leaders, began in early 1763. From 1753, when the French first invaded the territory, to February 1763, when peace was formally declared between the English and French, the Six Nations and tenant tribes always maintained that both the French and the British must remain east of the Allegheny Mountains. After the British failed to keep their word to withdraw from the Ohio and Allegheny valleys, a loose confederation of Native American tribes including the Delawares, the Shawnees, the Senecas, the Mingoes, the Mohicans, the Miamis, the Ottawas and the Wyandots, who were opposed to British post-war occupation of the region, banded together in an effort to drive the British out of their territory.\nOne of the most infamous and well-documented issues during Pontiac's War was the use of biological warfare against Native Americans and Amherst's role in supporting it. Colonel Henry Bouquet, the commander of Fort Pitt, ordered smallpox-infested blankets to be given Native Americans when a group of them laid siege to the fortification in June 1763. During a parley in midst of the siege on 24 June 1763, Captain Simeon Ecuyer gave representatives of the besieging Delawares two blankets and a handkerchief enclosed in small metal boxes that had been exposed to smallpox, in an attempt to spread the disease to the Natives in order to end the siege. William Trent, the trader turned militia commander who had come up with the plan, sent an invoice to the British colonial authorities in North America indicating that the purpose of giving the blankets was \"to Convey the Smallpox to the Indians.\" The invoice was approved by Thomas Gage, then serving as Commander-in-Chief, North America. Reporting on parleys with Delaware chiefs on 24 June, Trent wrote: '[We] gave them two Blankets and an Handkerchief out of the Small Pox Hospital. I hope it will have the desired effect.' The military hospital records confirm that two blankets and handkerchiefs were 'taken from people in the Hospital to Convey the Smallpox to the Indians.' The fort commander paid for these items, which he certified 'were had for the uses above mentioned.' A reported outbreak that began the spring before left as many as one hundred Native Americans dead in Ohio Country from 1763 to 1764. It is not clear, however, whether the smallpox was a result of the Fort Pitt incident or the virus was already present among the Delaware people as outbreaks happened on their own every dozen or so years and the delegates were met again later and they seemingly had not contracted smallpox.\nA month later the use of smallpox blankets was discussed by Amherst himself in letters to Bouquet. Amherst, having learned that smallpox had broken out among the garrison at Fort Pitt, and after learning of the loss of his forts at Venango, Le Boeuf and Presqu'Isle, wrote to Colonel Bouquet:\nCould it not be contrived to send the small pox among the disaffected tribes of Indians? We must on this occasion use every stratagem in our power to reduce them.\nBouquet, who was already marching to relieve Fort Pitt from the siege, agreed with this suggestion in a postscript when he responded to Amherst just days later on 13 July 1763:\nP.S. I will try to inocculate [\"sic\"] the Indians by means of Blankets that may fall in their hands, taking care however not to get the disease myself. As it is pity to oppose good men against them, I wish we could make use of the Spaniard's Method, and hunt them with English Dogs. Supported by Rangers, and some Light Horse, who would I think effectively extirpate or remove that Vermine.\nIn response, also in a postscript, Amherst replied:\nP.S. You will Do well to try to Innoculate [\"sic\"] the Indians by means of Blankets, as well as to try Every other method that can serve to Extirpate this Execrable Race. I should be very glad your Scheme for Hunting them Down by Dogs could take Effect, but England is at too great a Distance to think of that at present.\nAmherst was summoned home, ostensibly so that he could be consulted on future military plans in North America, and was replaced \"pro tem\" as Commander-in-Chief, North America by Thomas Gage. Amherst expected to be praised for his conquest of Canada, however, once in London, he was instead asked to account for the recent Native American rebellion. He was forced to defend his conduct, and faced complaints made by William Johnson and George Croghan, who lobbied the Board of Trade for his removal and permanent replacement by Gage. He was also severely criticised by military subordinates on both sides of the Atlantic. Nevertheless, Amherst was promoted to lieutenant-general on 26 March 1765, and became colonel of the 3rd Regiment of Foot in November 1768.\nOn 22 October 1772, Amherst was appointed Lieutenant-General of the Ordnance, and he soon gained the confidence of George III, who had initially hoped the position would go to a member of the Royal Family. On 6 November 1772, he became a member of the Privy Council.\nCommander-in-Chief.\nAmerican War of Independence.\nAmherst was raised to the peerage on 14 May 1776, as Baron Amherst, \"of Holmesdale in the County of Kent\". On 24 March 1778 he was promoted to full general and, in April 1778, he became Commander-in-Chief of the Forces, which gave him a seat in the Cabinet.\nIn 1778, when the British commander in North America, William Howe, requested to be relieved, Amherst was considered as a replacement by the government: however, his insistence that it would require 75,000 troops to fully defeat the rebellion was not acceptable to the government, and Henry Clinton was instead chosen to take over from Howe in America. Following the British setback at Saratoga, Amherst successfully argued for a limited war in North America, keeping footholds along the coast, defending Canada, East and West Florida, and the West Indies while putting more effort into the war at sea. On 7 November 1778 the King and Queen visited Amherst at his home, Montreal Park, in Kent and on 24 April 1779 he became colonel of the 2nd Troop of Horse Grenadier Guards.\nA long-standing plan of the French had been the concept of an invasion of Great Britain which they hoped would lead to a swift end to the war if it was successful: in 1779 Spain entered the war on the side of France, and the increasingly depleted state of British home forces made an invasion more appealing and Amherst organised Britain's land defences in anticipation of the invasion which never materialised.\nGordon Riots.\nIn June 1780, Amherst oversaw the British army as they suppressed the anti-Catholic Gordon Riots in London. After the outbreak of rioting Amherst deployed the small London garrison of Horse and Foot Guards as well as he could but was hindered by the reluctance of the civil magistrates to authorise decisive action against the rioters. \nLine troops and militia were brought in from surrounding counties, swelling the forces at Amherst's disposal to over 15,000, many of whom were quartered in tents in Hyde Park, and a form of martial law was declared, giving the troops the authority to fire on crowds if the Riot Act had first been read. Although order was eventually restored, Amherst was personally alarmed by the failure of the authorities to suppress the riots. \nIn the wake of the Gordon Riots, Amherst was forced to resign as Commander-in-Chief in February 1782 and was replaced by Henry Conway. On 23 March 1782 he became captain and colonel of the 2nd Troop of Horse Guards.\nLater life.\nFrench Revolutionary Wars.\nOn 8 July 1788, he became colonel of the 2nd Regiment of Life Guards and on 30 August 1788 he was created Baron Amherst (this time with the territorial designation \"of Montreal in the County of Kent\") with a special provision that would allow this title to pass to his nephew (as Amherst was childless, the Holmesdale title became extinct upon his death). \nWith the advent of the French Revolutionary Wars, Amherst was recalled as Commander-in-Chief of the Forces in January 1793: however is generally criticised for allowing the armed forces to slide into acute decline, a direct cause of the failure of the early campaigns in the Low Countries: Pitt the Younger said of him \"his age, and perhaps his natural temper, are little suited to the activity and the energy which the present moment calls for\". Horace Walpole called him \"that log of wood whose stupidity and incapacity are past belief\". \"He allowed innumerable abuses to grow up in the army\u2026 He kept his command, though almost in his dotage, with a tenacity that cannot be too much censured\".\nFamily and death.\nIn 1753 he married Jane Dalison (1723\u20131765). Following her death he married Elizabeth Cary (1740\u20131830), daughter of Lieutenant General George Cary (1712\u20131792), who later became Lady Amherst of Holmesdale, on 26 March 1767. There were no children by either marriage. He retired from that post in February 1795, to be replaced by the Duke of York, and was promoted to the rank of field marshal on 30 July 1796. He retired to his home at Montreal Park and died on 3 August 1797. He was buried in the Parish Church at Sevenoaks.\nLegacy.\nSeveral places are named for him: Amherst Island, Ontario, Amherstburg, Ontario (location of General Amherst High School), Amherst, Massachusetts (location of the University of Massachusetts Amherst, Hampshire College and Amherst College), Amherst, New Hampshire, Amherst, Nova Scotia, Amherst, New York, Amherst, Maine, and Amherst County, Virginia.\nAmherst's desire to exterminate the indigenous people is now viewed as a dark stain on his legacy and various agencies, municipalities and institutions have reconsidered the use of the name \"Amherst\". \"The Un-Canadians\", a 2007 article in \"The Beaver\", includes Amherst in a list of people in the history of Canada who are considered contemptible by the authors, because he \"supported plans of distributing smallpox-infested blankets to First Nations people\".\nIn 2008, Mi'kmaq spiritual leader John Joe Sark called the name of Fort Amherst Park of Prince Edward Island a \"terrible blotch on Canada\", and said: \"To have a place named after General Amherst would be like having a city in Jerusalem named after Adolf Hitler...it's disgusting.\" Sark raised his concerns again in a 29 January 2016 letter to the Canadian government. Mi'kmaq historian Daniel N. Paul, who referred to Amherst as motivated by white supremacist beliefs, also supports a name change, saying: \"in the future I don't think there should ever be anything named after people who committed what can be described as crimes against humanity.\" In February 2016, a spokesperson for Parks Canada said it would review the matter after a proper complaint is filed; \"Should there be a formal request from the public to change the name of the National Historic Site, Parks Canada would engage with the Historic Sites and Monuments Board of Canada for its recommendation.\" An online petition was launched by Sark to satisfy this formal request requirement on 20 February 2016. On 16 February 2018, the site was renamed Skmaqn\u2013Port-la-Joye\u2013Fort Amherst, adding a Mi'kmaq word alongside the French and English titles.\nIn 2009, Montreal City Councillor Nicolas Montmorency officially asked that Rue Amherst be renamed: \"it is totally unacceptable that a man who made comments supporting the extermination of Native Americans to be honoured in this way\". On 13 September 2017, the city of Montreal decided that the street bearing his name would be renamed. On 21 June 2019, the street was officially renamed \"Rue Atateken\", \"atateken\" being a Kanien'keh\u00e1 word describing \"those with whom one shares values,\" according to Kanehsatake historian Hilda Nicholas. Similarly, Rue Amherst in Gatineau was renamed Rue W\u00ecgw\u00e0s (Anishinaabemowin for white birch) in 2023.\nIn 2016, Amherst College dropped its \"Lord Jeffery\" mascot at the instigation of the students. It also renamed the Lord Jeffery Inn, a campus hotel owned by the college, to the Inn on Boltwood in early 2019.\nExplanatory notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59467", "revid": "1305708356", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59467", "title": "Cabaret", "text": "Venue for a variety show of music and theatrical revue\nCabaret is a form of theatrical entertainment featuring music song, dance, recitation, or drama. The performance venue might be a pub, casino, hotel, restaurant, or nightclub with a stage for performances. The audience, often dining or drinking, does not typically dance but usually sits at tables. Performances are usually introduced by a master of ceremonies (M.C.). The entertainment, as performed by an ensemble of actors and according to its European origins, is often (but not always) oriented towards adult audiences and of a clearly underground nature. In the United States, striptease, burlesque, drag shows, or a solo vocalist with a pianist, as well as the venues which offer this entertainment, are often advertised as cabarets.\nEtymology.\nThe term originally came from Picard language or Walloon language words \"camberete\" or \"cambret\" for a small room (12th century). The first printed use of the word \"kaberet\" is found in a document from 1275 in Tournai. The term was used from the 13th century in Middle Dutch to mean an inexpensive inn or restaurant (\"caberet\", \"cabret\").\nThe word \"cambret\" is itself probably derived from an earlier form of \"chambrette\" or \"little room\", or from the Norman French \"chamber\" meaning \"tavern\", itself derived from the Late Latin word \"camera\" meaning an arched roof.\nNational history.\nFrance (from 15th century).\nCabarets had appeared in Paris by at least the late 15th century. They were distinguished from taverns because they served food as well as wine, the table was covered with a cloth, and the price was charged by the plate, not the mug.\nThey were not particularly associated with entertainment even if musicians sometimes performed in both. Early on, cabarets were considered better than taverns; by the end of the sixteenth century, they were the preferred place to dine out. In the 17th century, a clearer distinction emerged when taverns were limited to selling wine, and later to serving roast meats.\nCabarets were frequently used as meeting places for writers, actors, friends and artists. Writers such as La Fontaine, Moliere and Jean Racine were known to frequent a cabaret called the \"Mouton Blanc\" on rue du Vieux-Colombier, and later the \"Croix de Lorraine\" on the modern rue Bourg-Tibourg. In 1773, French poets, painters, musicians and writers began to meet in a cabaret called \"Le Caveau\" on rue de Buci, where they composed and sang songs. The Caveau continued until 1816, when it was forced to close because its clients wrote songs mocking the royal government.\nEntertainment venues.\nIn the 18th century, the \"caf\u00e9-concert\" or \"caf\u00e9-chantant\" appeared, which offered food along with music, singers, or magicians. The most famous was the \"Cafe des Aveugles\" in the cellars of the Palais-Royal, which had a small orchestra of blind musicians. In the early 19th century, many caf\u00e9s-chantants appeared around the city; the most famous were the Caf\u00e9 des Ambassadeurs (1843) on the Champs-\u00c9lys\u00e9es and the Eldorado (1858) on boulevard Strasbourg. By 1900, there were more than 150 caf\u00e9s-chantants in Paris.\nThe first cabaret in the modern sense was in the bohemian neighborhood of Montmartre, created in 1881 by Rodolphe Salis, a theatrical agent and entrepreneur. It combined music and other entertainment with political commentary and satire. The brought together the wealthy and famous of Paris with the bohemians and artists of Montmartre and the Pigalle. Its clientele \"was a mixture of writers and painters, of journalists and students, of employees and high-livers, as well as models, prostitutes and true grand dames searching for exotic experiences.\" The host was Salis himself, calling himself a gentleman-\"cabaretier\"; he began each show with a monologue mocking the wealthy, ridiculing the deputies of the National Assembly, and making jokes about the events of the day. The cabaret was too small for the crowds trying to get in; at midnight on June 10, 1885, Salis and his customers moved down the street to a larger new club at 12 rue de Laval, which had a decor described as \"A sort of Beirut with Chinese influences.\" The composer Eric Satie, after finishing his studies at the Conservatory, earned his living playing the piano at the .\nBy 1896, there were 56 cabarets and cafes with music in Paris, along with a dozen music halls. The cabarets did not have a high reputation; one critic wrote in 1897 that \"they sell drinks which are worth fifteen centimes along with verses which, for the most part, are worth nothing.\" The traditional cabarets, with monologues and songs and little decor, were replaced by more specialized venues; some, like the \"Boite a Fursy\" (1899), specialized in current events, politics and satire. Some were purely theatrical, producing short scenes of plays. Some focused on the macabre or erotic. The \"Caberet de la fin du Monde\" had servers dressed as Greek and Roman gods and presented living tableaus that were between erotic and pornographic.\nBy the end of the century, there were only a few cabarets of the old style remaining where artists and bohemians gathered. They included the \"Cabaret des noctambules\" on Rue Champollion on the Left Bank; the Lapin Agile at Montmartre; and \"Le Soleil d'or\" at the corner of the quai Saint-Michel and boulevard Saint-Michel, where poets including Guillaume Apollinaire and Andr\u00e9 Salmon met to share their work.\nThe music hall, first invented in London, appeared in Paris in 1862. It offered more lavish musical and theatrical productions, with elaborate costumes, singing, and dancing. The theaters of Paris, fearing competition from the music halls, had a law passed by the National Assembly forbidding music hall performers to wear costumes, dance, wear wigs, or recite dialogue. The law was challenged by the owner of the music hall \"Eldorado\" in 1867, who put a former famous actress from the Com\u00e9die-Fran\u00e7aise on stage to recite verse from Corneille and Racine. The public took the side of the music halls, and the law was repealed.\nThe Moulin Rouge was opened in 1889 by the Catalan Joseph Oller. It was greatly prominent because of the large red imitation windmill on its roof, and became the birthplace of the dance known as the French Cancan. It helped make famous the singers Mistinguett and \u00c9dith Piaf and the painter Toulouse-Lautrec, who made posters for the venue. The \"Olympia\", also run by Oller, was the first to be called a music hall; it opened in 1893, followed by the Alhambra Music Hall in 1902, and the Printania in 1903. The Printania, open only in summer, had a large \"music garden\" which seated twelve thousand spectators, and produced dinner shows which presented twenty-three different acts, including singers, acrobats, horses, mimes, jugglers, lions, bears and elephants, with two shows a day.\nIn the 20th century, the competition from motion pictures forced the dance halls to put on shows that were more spectacular and more complex. In 1911, the producer Jacques Charles of the Olympia Paris created the grand staircase as a setting for his shows, competing with its great rival, the Folies Berg\u00e8re which had been founded in 1869. Its stars in the 1920s included the American singer and dancer Josephine Baker. The Casino de Paris, directed by Leon Volterra and then Henri Varna, presented many famous French singers, including Mistinguett, Maurice Chevalier, and Tino Rossi.\nLe Lido on the Champs-\u00c9lys\u00e9es opened in 1946, presenting \u00c9dith Piaf, Laurel and Hardy, Shirley MacLaine, Marlene Dietrich, Maurice Chevalier, and No\u00ebl Coward. The Crazy Horse Saloon, featuring striptease, dance, and magic, opened in 1951. The Olympia Paris went through a number of years as a movie theater before being revived as a music hall and concert stage in 1954. Performers there included Piaf, Dietrich, Miles Davis, Judy Garland, and the Grateful Dead. A handful of music halls exist today in Paris, attended mostly by visitors to the city; and a number of more traditional cabarets, with music and satire, can be found.\nNetherlands (from 1885).\nIn the Netherlands, cabaret or \"kleinkunst\" (literally: \"small art\") is a popular form of entertainment, usually performed in theatres. The birth date of Dutch cabaret is usually set at August 19, 1895. In Amsterdam, there is the Kleinkunstacademie (English: Cabaret Academy). It is often a mixture of (stand-up) comedy, theatre, and music and often includes social themes and political satire. In the mid twentieth century, \"the big three\" were Wim Sonneveld, Wim Kan, and Toon Hermans.\nNowadays, many cabaret performances by popular comedians are broadcast on national television, especially on New Year's Eve, when the oudejaarsconference is broadcast. The oudejaarsconference is a cabaret performance in which the comedian looks back on the events of the past year.\nGermany (from 1901).\nGerman \"Kabarett\" developed from 1901, with the creation of the \u00dcberbrettl (\"Superstage\") venue, and by the Weimar era in the mid-1920s, the \"Kabarett\" performances were characterized by political satire and gallows humor. It shared the characteristic atmosphere of intimacy with the French cabaret from which it was imported, but the gallows humor was a distinct German aspect.\nPoland (from 1905).\nThe Polish \"kabaret\" is a popular form of live (often televised) entertainment involving a comedy troupe, and consisting mostly of comedy sketches, monologues, stand up comedy, songs and political satire (often hidden behind double entendre to fool censors).\nIt traces its origins to Zielony Balonik, a famous literary cabaret founded in Krak\u00f3w by local poets, writers and artists during the final years of the Partitions of Poland.\nIn the interwar Poland there was a considerable number of Yiddish-language cabarets. This art form was called kleynkunst (literally \"small art\") in Yiddish.\nIn post-war Poland, it is almost always associated with the troupe (often on tour), not the venue; pre-war revue shows (with female dancers) were long gone.\nUnited States (from 1911).\nAmerican cabaret was imported from French cabaret by Jesse Louis Lasky in 1911. In the United States, cabaret diverged into several different styles of performance mostly due to the influence of jazz music. Chicago cabaret focused intensely on the larger band ensembles and reached its peak during Roaring Twenties, under the Prohibition Era, where it was featured in the speakeasies and steakhouses.\nNew York cabaret never developed to feature a great deal of social commentary. When New York cabarets featured jazz, they tended to focus on famous vocalists like Nina Simone, Bette Midler, Eartha Kitt, Peggy Lee, and Hildegarde rather than instrumental musicians. Julius Monk's annual revues established the standard for New York cabaret during the late 1950s and '60s.\nCabaret in the United States began to decline in the 1960s, due to the rising popularity of rock concert shows, television variety shows, and general comedy theaters. However, it remained in some Las Vegas-style dinner shows, such as the Tropicana, with fewer comedy segments. The art form still survives in various musical formats, as well as in the stand-up comedy format, and in popular drag show performances.\nThe late 20th and early 21st century saw a revival of American cabaret, particularly in New Orleans, Chicago, Seattle, Portland, Philadelphia, Orlando, Tulsa, Asheville, North Carolina, and Kansas City, Missouri, as new generations of performers reinterpret the old forms in both music and theater. Many contemporary cabaret groups in the United States and elsewhere feature a combination of original music, burlesque and political satire. In New York City, since 1985, successful, enduring or innovative cabaret acts have been honored by the annual Bistro Awards.\nUnited Kingdom (from 1912).\nThe Cabaret Theatre Club, later known as The Cave of the Golden Calf, was opened by Frida Strindberg (modelled on the Kaberett Fledermaus in Strindberg's native Vienna) in a basement at 9 Heddon Street, London, in 1912. She intended her club to be an avant-garde meeting place for bohemian writers and artists, with decorations by Jacob Epstein, Eric Gill, and Wyndham Lewis, but it rapidly came to be seen as an amusing place for high society and went bankrupt in 1914. The Cave was nevertheless an influential venture, which introduced the concept of cabaret to London. It provided a model for the generation of nightclubs that came after it.\n\"The clubs that started the present vogue for dance clubs were the Cabaret Club in Heddon Street . . . . The Cabaret Club was the first club where members were expected to appear in evening clothes. . . . The Cabaret Club began a system of vouchers which friends of members could use to obtain admission to the club. . . . the question of the legality of these vouchers led to a famous visitation of the police. That was the night a certain Duke was got out by way of the kitchen lift . . . The visitation was a well-mannered affair'\nIran (until 1979).\nOne of the main gathering centers of cabarets in Tehran (Iranian capital) was Laleh-Zar Street. Famous Persian cabarets were active in the city until 1979. They also introduced many domestic artists. In common language, \"cabaret\" sometimes called by Iranians \"home of dance\" (In Persian: \"\u0631\u0642\u0627\u0635\u200c\u062e\u0627\u0646\u0647\") or \"dancing place\".\nSweden (from 1970s).\nIn Stockholm, an underground show called \"Fattighuskabar\u00e9n\" (\"Poor House Cabaret\") opened in 1974 and ran for 10 years. Performers of later celebrity and fame (in Sweden) such as Ted \u00c5str\u00f6m, \u00d6rjan Ramberg, and Agneta Lind\u00e9n began their careers there. \"Wild Side Story\" also had several runs in Stockholm, at Alexandra's (1976 with Ulla Jones and Christer Lindarw), Camarillo (1997), Rosenlundsteatern/Teater Tre (2000), Wild Side Lounge at B\u00e4ckah\u00e4sten (2003 with Helena Mattsson) and Mango Bar (2004). Alexandra's had also hosted \"AlexCab\" in 1975, as had Compagniet in Gothenburg.\nSerbia (from 2010s).\nIn 2019 the first Serbian cabaret club Lafayette opened. Although Serbia and Belgrade had a rich nightlife and theater life there was no cabaret house until 2019.\nReferences.\nNotes and citations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59469", "revid": "41169606", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59469", "title": "Linear cryptanalysis", "text": "Form of cryptanalysis\nIn cryptography, linear cryptanalysis is a general form of cryptanalysis based on finding affine approximations to the action of a cipher. Attacks have been developed for block ciphers and stream ciphers. Linear cryptanalysis is one of the two most widely used attacks on block ciphers; the other being differential cryptanalysis.\nThe discovery is attributed to Mitsuru Matsui, who first applied the technique to the FEAL cipher (Matsui and Yamagishi, 1992). Subsequently, Matsui published an attack on the Data Encryption Standard (DES), eventually leading to the first experimental cryptanalysis of the cipher reported in the open community (Matsui, 1993; 1994). The attack on DES is not generally practical, requiring 247 known plaintexts.\nA variety of refinements to the attack have been suggested, including using multiple linear approximations or incorporating non-linear expressions, leading to a generalized partitioning cryptanalysis. Evidence of security against linear cryptanalysis is usually expected of new cipher designs.\nOverview.\nThere are two parts to linear cryptanalysis. The first is to construct linear equations relating plaintext, ciphertext and key bits that have a high bias; that is, whose probabilities of holding (over the space of all possible values of their variables) are as close as possible to 0 or 1. The second is to use these linear equations in conjunction with known plaintext-ciphertext pairs to derive key bits.\nConstructing linear equations.\nFor the purposes of linear cryptanalysis, a linear equation expresses the equality of two expressions which consist of binary variables combined with the exclusive-or (XOR) operation. For example, the following equation, from a hypothetical cipher, states the XOR sum of the first and third plaintext bits (as in a block cipher's block) and the first ciphertext bit is equal to the second bit of the key:\nformula_1\nIn an ideal cipher, any linear equation relating plaintext, ciphertext and key bits would hold with probability 1/2. Since the equations dealt with in linear cryptanalysis will vary in probability, they are more accurately referred to as linear \"approximations\".\nThe procedure for constructing approximations is different for each cipher. In the most basic type of block cipher, a substitution\u2013permutation network, analysis is concentrated primarily on the S-boxes, the only nonlinear part of the cipher (i.e. the operation of an S-box cannot be encoded in a linear equation). For small enough S-boxes, it is possible to enumerate every possible linear equation relating the S-box's input and output bits, calculate their biases and choose the best ones. Linear approximations for S-boxes then must be combined with the cipher's other actions, such as permutation and key mixing, to arrive at linear approximations for the entire cipher. The piling-up lemma is a useful tool for this combination step. There are also techniques for iteratively improving linear approximations (Matsui 1994).\nDeriving key bits.\nHaving obtained a linear approximation of the form:\nformula_2\nwe can then apply a straightforward algorithm (Matsui's Algorithm 2), using known plaintext-ciphertext pairs, to guess at the values of the key bits involved in the approximation.\nFor each set of values of the key bits on the right-hand side (referred to as a \"partial key\"), count how many times the approximation holds true over all the known plaintext-ciphertext pairs; call this count \"T\". The partial key whose \"T\" has the greatest absolute difference from half the number of plaintext-ciphertext pairs is designated as the most likely set of values for those key bits. This is because it is assumed that the correct partial key will cause the approximation to hold with a high bias. The magnitude of the bias is significant here, as opposed to the magnitude of the probability itself.\nThis procedure can be repeated with other linear approximations, obtaining guesses at values of key bits, until the number of unknown key bits is low enough that they can be attacked with brute force.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59470", "revid": "49365199", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59470", "title": "Digital Signature Algorithm", "text": "Digital verification standard\nThe Digital Signature Algorithm (DSA) is a public-key cryptosystem and Federal Information Processing Standard for digital signatures, based on the mathematical concept of modular exponentiation and the discrete logarithm problem. In a digital signature system, there is a keypair involved, consisting of a private and a public key. In this system a signing entity that declared their public key can generate a signature using their private key, and a verifier can assert the source if it verifies the signature correctly using the declared public key. DSA is a variant of the Schnorr and ElGamal signature schemes. \nThe National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) proposed DSA for use in their Digital Signature Standard (DSS) in 1991, and adopted it as FIPS 186 in 1994. Five revisions to the initial specification have been released. The newest specification is: https:// from February 2023. DSA is patented but NIST has made this patent available worldwide royalty-free. Specification https:// indicates DSA will no longer be approved for digital signature generation, but may be used to verify signatures generated prior to the implementation date of that standard.\nOverview.\nThe DSA works in the framework of public-key cryptosystems and is based on the algebraic properties of modular exponentiation, together with the discrete logarithm problem, which is considered to be computationally intractable. The algorithm uses a key pair consisting of a public key and a private key. The private key is used to generate a digital signature for a message, and such a signature can be verified by using the signer's corresponding public key. The digital signature provides message authentication (the receiver can verify the origin of the message), integrity (the receiver can verify that the message has not been modified since it was signed) and non-repudiation (the sender cannot falsely claim that they have not signed the message).\nHistory.\nIn 1982, the U.S government solicited proposals for a public key signature standard. In August 1991 the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) proposed DSA for use in their Digital Signature Standard (DSS). Initially there was significant criticism, especially from software companies that had already invested effort in developing digital signature software based on the RSA cryptosystem. Nevertheless, NIST adopted DSA as a Federal standard (FIPS 186) in 1994. Five revisions to the initial specification have been released: FIPS 186\u20131 in 1998, FIPS 186\u20132 in 2000, FIPS 186\u20133 in 2009, FIPS 186\u20134 in 2013, and FIPS 186\u20135 in 2023. Standard FIPS 186-5 forbids signing with DSA, while allowing verification of signatures generated prior to the implementation date of the standard as a document. It is to be replaced by newer signature schemes such as EdDSA.\nDSA is covered by https://, filed July 26, 1991 and now expired, and attributed to David W. Kravitz, a former NSA employee. This patent was given to \"The United States of America as represented by the Secretary of Commerce, Washington, D.C.\", and NIST has made this patent available worldwide royalty-free. Claus P. Schnorr claims that his https:// (also now expired) covered DSA; this claim is disputed.\nIn 1993, Dave Banisar managed to get confirmation, via a FOIA request, that the DSA algorithm hasn't been designed by the NIST, but by the NSA.\nOpenSSH announced that DSA was going to be removed in 2025. The support was entirely dropped in version 10.0.\nOperation.\nThe DSA algorithm involves four operations: key generation (which creates the key pair), key distribution, signing and signature verification.\n1. Key generation.\nKey generation has two phases. The first phase is a choice of \"algorithm parameters\" which may be shared between different users of the system, while the second phase computes a single key pair for one user.\nParameter generation.\nThe algorithm parameters are (formula_17, formula_15, formula_28). These may be shared between different users of the system.\nPer-user keys.\nGiven a set of parameters, the second phase computes the key pair for a single user:\nformula_29 is the private key and formula_33 is the public key.\n2. Key distribution.\nThe signer should publish the public key formula_33. That is, they should send the key to the receiver via a reliable, but not necessarily secret, mechanism. The signer should keep the private key formula_29 secret.\n3. Signing.\nA message formula_36 is signed as follows:\nThe signature is formula_45\nThe calculation of formula_37 and formula_47 amounts to creating a new per-message key. The modular exponentiation in computing formula_47 is the most computationally expensive part of the signing operation, but it may be computed before the message is known.\nCalculating the modular inverse formula_49 is the second most expensive part, and it may also be computed before the message is known. It may be computed using the extended Euclidean algorithm or using Fermat's little theorem as formula_50.\n4. Signature Verification.\nOne can verify that a signature formula_45 is a valid signature for a message formula_36 as follows:\nCorrectness of the algorithm.\nThe signature scheme is correct in the sense that the verifier will always accept genuine signatures. This can be shown as follows:\nFirst, since formula_60, it follows that formula_61 by Fermat's little theorem. Since formula_62 and formula_15 is prime, formula_28 must have order\u00a0formula_15.\nThe signer computes\nformula_66\nThus\nformula_67\nSince formula_28 has order formula_15 we have\nformula_70\nFinally, the correctness of DSA follows from\nformula_71\nSensitivity.\nWith DSA, the entropy, secrecy, and uniqueness of the random signature value formula_37 are critical. It is so critical that violating any one of those three requirements can reveal the entire private key to an attacker. Using the same value twice (even while keeping formula_37 secret), using a predictable value, or leaking even a few bits of formula_37 in each of several signatures, is enough to reveal the private key formula_29.\nThis issue affects both DSA and Elliptic Curve Digital Signature Algorithm (ECDSA) \u2013 in December 2010, the group \"fail0verflow\" announced the recovery of the ECDSA private key used by Sony to sign software for the PlayStation 3 game console. The attack was made possible because Sony failed to generate a new random formula_37 for each signature.\nThis issue can be prevented by deriving formula_37 deterministically from the private key and the message hash, as described by . This ensures that formula_37 is different for each formula_79 and unpredictable for attackers who do not know the private key formula_29.\nIn addition, malicious implementations of DSA and ECDSA can be created where formula_37 is chosen in order to subliminally leak information via signatures. For example, an offline private key could be leaked from a perfect offline device that only released innocent-looking signatures.\nImplementations.\nBelow is a list of cryptographic libraries that provide support for DSA:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59471", "revid": "1025242568", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59471", "title": "Monophysite", "text": ""}
{"id": "59473", "revid": "5545776", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59473", "title": "Chesapeake Bay", "text": "Estuary in the U.S. states of Maryland and Virginia\nThe Chesapeake Bay ( ) is the largest estuary in the United States. The bay is located in the Mid-Atlantic region and is primarily separated from the Atlantic Ocean by the Delmarva Peninsula, including parts of the Eastern Shore of Maryland, the Eastern Shore of Virginia, and the state of Delaware. The mouth of the bay at its southern point is located between Cape Henry and Cape Charles. With its northern portion in Maryland and the southern part in Virginia, the Chesapeake Bay is a very important feature for the ecology and economy of those two states, as well as others surrounding within its watershed. More than 150 major rivers and streams flow into the bay's drainage basin, which covers parts of six states (New York, Pennsylvania, Delaware, Maryland, Virginia, and West Virginia) and all of Washington, D.C.\nThe bay is approximately long from its northern headwaters in the Susquehanna River to its outlet in the Atlantic Ocean. It is wide at its narrowest (between Kent County's Plum Point near Newtown in the east and the Harford County western shore near Romney Creek) and at its widest (just south of the mouth of the Potomac River, which divides Maryland from Virginia). Total shoreline including tributaries is , circumnavigating a surface area of . Average depth is , reaching a maximum of . The bay is spanned twice, in Maryland by the Chesapeake Bay Bridge from Sandy Point (near Annapolis) to Kent Island and in Virginia by the Chesapeake Bay Bridge\u2013Tunnel connecting Virginia Beach to Cape Charles.\nKnown for both its beauty and bounty, the bay has become \"emptier\", with fewer crabs, oysters and watermen (fishermen) since the mid-20th century. Nutrient pollution and urban runoff have been identified as major components of impaired water quality in the bay, stressing ecosystems and compounding the decline of shellfish due to overharvesting. Restoration efforts that began in the 1990s have continued into the 21st century and show potential for growth of the native oyster population. The health of the Chesapeake Bay improved in 2015, marking three years of gains over a four-year period. Slight improvements in water quality were observed in 2021, compared to indicators measured in 2020. The bay is experiencing other environmental concerns, including climate change, which is causing sea level rise that erodes coastal areas and infrastructure and changes the marine ecosystem.\nEtymology.\nThe word is an Algonquian word referring to a village 'at a big river'. It is the seventh-oldest surviving English placename in the United States, first applied as \"Chesepiook\" by explorers heading north from the Roanoke Colony into a Chesapeake tributary in 1585 or 1586. The name may also refer to the Chesapeake people or the Chesepian, a Native American tribe who inhabited the area now known as South Hampton Roads in the U.S. state of Virginia. They occupied an area that is now the Norfolk, Portsmouth, Chesapeake, and Virginia Beach areas. In 2005, Algonquian linguist Blair Rudes \"helped to dispel one of the area's most widely held beliefs: that 'Chesapeake' means something like 'great shellfish bay'. It does not, Rudes said. The name might have actually meant something like 'great water', or it might have just referred to a village location at the bay's mouth.\"\nThe first European name for the bay was \"Bahia de Santa Maria\" (St. Mary's bay). This name was coined by the Spanish.\nPhysical geography.\nGeology and formation.\nThe Chesapeake Bay is an estuary to the North Atlantic, lying between the Delmarva Peninsula to the east and the North American mainland to the west. It is the \"ria\", or drowned valley, of the Susquehanna River, meaning that it was the alluvial plain where the river flowed when the sea level was lower. It is not a \"fjord\", because the Laurentide Ice Sheet never reached as far south as the northernmost point on the bay. North of Baltimore, the western shore borders the hilly Piedmont region of Maryland; south of the city the bay lies within the state's low-lying coastal plain, with sedimentary cliffs to the west, and flat islands, winding creeks and marshes to the east. The large rivers entering the bay from the west have broad mouths and are extensions of the main ria for miles up the course of each river.\nThe bay's geology, its present form, and its very location were created by a bolide impact event at the end of the Eocene (about 35.5 million years ago), forming the Chesapeake Bay impact crater and much later the Susquehanna River valley. The bay was formed starting about 10,000 years ago when rising sea levels at the end of the last ice age flooded the Susquehanna River valley. Parts of the bay, especially the Calvert County, Maryland, coastline, are lined by cliffs composed of deposits from receding waters millions of years ago. These cliffs, generally known as Calvert Cliffs, are famous for their fossils, especially fossilized shark teeth, which are commonly found washed up on the beaches next to the cliffs. Scientists' Cliffs is a beach community in Calvert County named for the desire to create a retreat for scientists when the community was founded in 1935.\nHydrology.\nMuch of the bay is shallow. At the point where the Susquehanna River flows into the bay, the average depth is , although this soon diminishes to an average of southeast of the city of Havre de Grace, Maryland, to about just north of Annapolis. On average, the depth of the bay is , including tributaries; over 24 percent of the bay is less than deep.\nBecause the bay is an estuary, it has fresh water, salt water and brackish water. Brackish water has three salinity zones: oligohaline, mesohaline, and polyhaline. The freshwater zone runs from the mouth of the Susquehanna River to north Baltimore. The oligohaline zone has very little salt. Salinity varies from 0.5\u00a0ppt (parts per thousand) to 10\u00a0ppt, and freshwater species can survive there. The north end of the oligohaline zone is north Baltimore and the south end is the Chesapeake Bay Bridge. The mesohaline zone has a medium amount of salt and runs from the Bay Bridge to the mouth of the Rappahannock River. Salinity there ranges from 1.07% to 1.8%. The polyhaline zone is the saltiest zone, and some of the water can be as salty as sea water. It runs from the mouth of the Rappahannock River to the mouth of the bay. The salinity ranges from 1.87% to 3.6%. (3.6% is as salty as the ocean.)\nThe climate of the area surrounding the bay is primarily humid subtropical, with hot, very humid summers and cold to mild winters. Only the area around the mouth of the Susquehanna River is continental in nature, and the mouth of the Susquehanna River and the Susquehanna flats often freeze in winter. It is rare for the surface of the bay to freeze in winter, something that happened most recently in the winter of 1976\u201377.\nThe Chesapeake Bay is the end point of over 150 rivers and streams. The largest rivers flowing directly into the bay, in order of discharge, are the Susquehanna River, Potomac River, James River, Rappahannock River, York River, Patuxent River, and Choptank River.\nFor more information on Chesapeake Bay rivers, see the List of Chesapeake Bay rivers.\nFlora and fauna.\nThe Chesapeake Bay is home to numerous fauna that either migrate to the bay at some point during the year or live there year-round. There are over 300 species of fish and numerous shellfish and crab species. Some of these include the Atlantic menhaden, striped bass, American eel, eastern oyster, Atlantic horseshoe crab, and the blue crab.\nBirds include ospreys, great blue herons, bald eagles, and peregrine falcons, the last two of which were threatened by DDT; their numbers plummeted but have risen in recent years. The piping plover is a near threatened species that inhabits the wetlands.\nLarger fish such as Atlantic sturgeon, varieties of sharks, and stingrays visit the bay. The waters of the Chesapeake Bay have been regarded as one of the most important nursery areas for sharks along the east coast. Megafaunas such as bull sharks, tiger sharks, scalloped hammerhead sharks, and basking sharks and manta rays are also known to visit. Smaller species of sharks and stingrays that are known to be regular to occasional residents in the bay include the smooth dogfish, spiny dogfish, cownose ray, and bonnethead.\nBottlenose dolphins are known to live seasonally/yearly in the bay. There have been unconfirmed sightings of humpback whales in recent years. Endangered North Atlantic right whale and fin, and minke and sei whales have also been sighted within and in the vicinity of the bay.\nA male manatee visited the bay several times between 1994 and 2011, even though the area is north of the species' normal range. The manatee, recognizable due to distinct markings on its body, was nicknamed \"Chessie\" after a legendary sea monster that was allegedly sighted in the bay during the 20th century. The same manatee has been spotted as far north as Rhode Island, and was the first manatee known to travel so far north. Other manatees are occasionally seen in the bay and its tributaries, which contain sea grasses that are part of the manatee's diet.\nLoggerhead turtles are known to visit the bay.\nThe Chesapeake Bay is also home to a diverse flora, both land and aquatic. Common submerged aquatic vegetation includes eelgrass and widgeon grass. A report in 2011 suggested that information on underwater grasses would be released, because \"submerged grasses provide food and habitat for a number of species, adding oxygen to the water and improving water clarity.\" Other vegetation that makes its home in other parts of the bay are wild rice, various trees like the red maple, loblolly pine and bald cypress, and spartina grass and phragmites. Invasive plants have taken a significant foothold in the bay. Plants such as Phragmites, Purple loosestrife and Japanese stiltgrass have established high levels of permanency in Chesapeake wetlands. Additionally, plants such as Brazilian waterweed, native to South America, have spread to most continents with the help of aquarium owners, who often dump the contents of their aquariums into nearby lakes and streams. It is highly invasive and has the potential to flourish in the low-salinity tidal waters of the bay. Dense stands of Brazilian waterweed can restrict water movement, trap sediment and affect water quality. Various local K-12 schools in the Maryland and Virginia region often have programs that cultivate native bay grasses and plant them in the bay.\nHistory.\nPre-Columbian.\nIt is presumed that the Chesapeake Bay was once inhabited by Paleoindians 11,000 years ago. For thousands of years, Native American societies lived in villages of wooden longhouses close to water bodies where they fished and farmed the land. Agricultural products included beans, corn, tobacco, and squash. Villages often lasted between 10 and 20 years before being abandoned due to local resources such as firewood running out or soil depleting. To produce enough food, labor was divided with men hunting while the women supervised the village's farming. All village members took part in the harvesting of fish and shellfish from the local bodies of water. As time went on, communities around the Chesapeake Bay formed confederations such as the Powhatan, the Piscataway, and the Nanticoke. Each of these confederations consisted of a collection of smaller tribes falling under the leadership of a central chief.\nEuropean exploration and settlement.\nIn 1524, Italian explorer Giovanni da Verrazzano, (1485\u20131528), in service of the French crown, (famous for sailing through and thereafter naming the entrance to New York Bay as the \"Verrazzano Narrows\", including now in the 20th century, a suspension bridge also named for him) sailed past the Chesapeake, but did not enter the bay. Spanish explorer Lucas V\u00e1squez de Ayll\u00f3n sent an expedition out from Hispaniola in 1525 that reached the mouths of the Chesapeake and Delaware Bays. It may have been the first European expedition to explore parts of the Chesapeake Bay, which the Spaniards called \"Bah\u00eda de Santa Mar\u00eda\" (\"Bay of St. Mary\") or \"Bah\u00eda de Madre de Dios.\"(\"Bay of the Mother of God\") De Ayll\u00f3n established a short-lived Spanish mission settlement, San Miguel de Gualdape, in 1526 along the Atlantic coast. Many scholars doubt the assertion that it was as far north as the Chesapeake; most place it in present-day Georgia's Sapelo Island. In 1573, Pedro Men\u00e9ndez de M\u00e1rquez, the governor of Spanish Florida, conducted further exploration of the Chesapeake. In 1570, Spanish Jesuits established the short-lived Ajacan Mission on one of the Chesapeake tributaries in present-day Virginia.\nThe arrival of English colonists under Sir Walter Raleigh and Humphrey Gilbert in the late 16th century to found a colony, later settled at Roanoke Island (off the present-day coast of North Carolina) for the Virginia Company, marked the first time that the English approached the gates to the Chesapeake Bay between the capes of Cape Charles and Cape Henry. Three decades later, in 1607, Europeans again entered the bay. Captain John Smith of England explored and mapped the bay between 1607 and 1609, resulting in the publication in 1612 back in the British Isles of \"A Map of Virginia\". Smith wrote in his journal: \"Heaven and earth have never agreed better to frame a place for man's habitation.\" The Captain John Smith Chesapeake National Historic Trail, the first designated \"all-water\" National Historic Trail in the US, was established in 2006 by the National Park Service. The trail follows the route of Smith's historic 17th-century voyage. Because of economic hardships and civil strife in the \"Mother Land\", there was a mass migration of southern English Cavaliers and their servants to the Chesapeake Bay region between 1640 and 1675, to both of the new colonies of the Province of Virginia and the Province of Maryland.\nAmerican Revolution to the present.\nThe Chesapeake Bay was the site of the Battle of the Chesapeake (also known as the \"Battle of the Capes\", Cape Charles and Cape Henry) in 1781, during which the French fleet defeated the Royal Navy in the decisive naval battle of the American Revolutionary War. The French victory enabled General George Washington and his French allies under the Comte de Rochambeau to march down from New York and bottle up a British army under Lord Cornwallis from the North and South Carolinas at the siege of Battle of Yorktown in Yorktown, Virginia. Their marching route from Newport, Rhode Island through Connecticut, New York State, Pennsylvania, New Jersey and Delaware to the \"Head of Elk\" by the Susquehanna River along the shores and also partially sailing down the bay to Virginia. It is also the subject of a designated National Historic Trail as the Washington\u2013Rochambeau Revolutionary Route.\nThe bay would again see conflict during War of 1812. During the year of 1813, from their base on Tangier Island, British naval forces under the command of Admiral George Cockburn raided several towns on the shores of the Chesapeake, treating the bay as if it were a \"British Lake\". The Chesapeake Bay Flotilla, a fleet of shallow-draft armed barges under the command of U.S. Navy Commodore Joshua Barney, was assembled to stall British shore raids and attacks. After months of harassment by Barney, the British landed on the west side of the Patuxent at Benedict, Maryland, the Chesapeake Flotilla was scuttled, and the British trekked overland to rout the U.S. Army at Bladensburg and burn the U.S. Capitol in August 1814. A few days later in a \"pincer attack\", they also sailed up the Potomac River to attack Fort Washington below the National Capital and raided the nearby port town of Alexandria, Virginia.\nThere were so-called \"Oyster Wars\" in the late 19th and early 20th centuries. Until the mid-20th century, oyster harvesting rivaled the crab industry among Chesapeake watermen, a dwindling breed whose skipjacks and other workboats were supplanted by recreational craft in the latter part of the century.\nIn the 1960s, the Calvert Cliffs Nuclear Power Plant on the historic Calvert Cliffs in Calvert County on the Western Shore of Maryland began using water from the bay to cool its reactor.\nNavigation.\nThe Chesapeake Bay forms a link in the Intracoastal Waterway, of the bays, sounds and inlets between the off-shore barrier islands and the coastal mainland along the Atlantic coast connecting the Chesapeake and Delaware Canal (linking the bay to the north and the Delaware River) with the Albemarle and Chesapeake Canal (linking the bay, to the south, via the Elizabeth River, by the cities of Norfolk and Portsmouth to the Albemarle Sound and Pamlico Sound in North Carolina and further to the Sea Islands of Georgia). A busy shipping channel (dredged by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers since the 1850s) runs the length of the bay, is an important transit route for large vessels entering or leaving the Port of Baltimore, and further north through the Chesapeake and Delaware Canal to the ports of Wilmington and Philadelphia on the Delaware River.\nDuring the later half of the 19th century and the first half of the 20th century, the bay was plied by passenger steamships and packet boat lines connecting the various cities on it, notably the Baltimore Steam Packet Company (\"Old Bay Line\").\nIn the later 20th century, a series of road crossings were built. One, the Chesapeake Bay Bridge (also known as the Governor William Preston Lane Jr. Memorial Bridge) between the state capital of Annapolis, Maryland and Matapeake on the Eastern Shore, crossing Kent Island, was constructed 1949\u20131952. A second, parallel, span was added in 1973. The Chesapeake Bay Bridge\u2013Tunnel, connecting Virginia's Eastern Shore with its mainland (at the metropolitan areas of Virginia Beach, Norfolk, Portsmouth, and Chesapeake), is approximately long; it has trestle bridges as well as two stretches of tunnels that allow unimpeded shipping; the bridge is supported by four man-made islands. The Chesapeake Bay Bridge\u2013Tunnel was opened for two lanes in 1964 and four lanes in 1999.\nTides.\nTides in the Chesapeake Bay exhibit an interesting and unique behavior due to the nature of the topography (both horizontal and vertical shape), wind-driven circulation, and how the bay interacts with oceanic tides. Research into the peculiar behavior of tides both at the northern and southern extents of the bay began in the late 1970s. One study noted sea level fluctuations at periods of 5 days, driven by sea level changes at the bay's mouth on the Atlantic coast and local lateral winds, and 2.5 days, caused by resonant oscillations driven by local longitudinal winds, while another study later found that the geometry of the bay permits for a resonant period of 1.46 days.\nA good example of how the different Chesapeake Bay sites experience different tides can be seen in the tidal predictions published by the National Oceanographic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA)(\"See figure\")\nAt the Chesapeake Bay Bridge\u2013Tunnel (CBBT) site, which lies at the southernmost point of the bay where it meets the Atlantic Ocean near Norfolk, Virginia, and the capes of Charles and Henry, there is a distinct semi-diurnal tide throughout the lunar month, with small amplitude modulations during spring (new/full moon) vs. neap (one/three quarter moon) tidal periods. The main forcing of the CBBT tides are typical, semi-diurnal ocean tides that the East Coast of the United States experiences.\nBaltimore, in the northern portion of the bay, experiences a noticeable modulation to form its mixed tidal nature during spring vs. neap tides. Spring tides, when the sun-earth-moon system forms a line, cause the largest tidal amplitudes during lunar monthly tidal variations. In contrast, neap tides, when the sun-earth-moon system forms a right angle, are muted, and in a semi-diurnal tidal system (such as that seen at the CBBT site) this can be seen as a lowest intertidal range.\nTwo interesting points that arise from comparing these two sites at opposite ends of the bay are their tidal characteristics \u2013 semi-diurnal tide for CBBT and mixed tide for Baltimore (due to resonance in the bay) \u2013 and the differences in amplitude (due to dissipation in the bay).\nEconomy.\nFishing industry.\nThe bay is well known for its seafood, especially blue crabs, clams, and oysters. In the middle of the 20th century, the bay supported 9,000 full-time watermen, according to one account. Today, the body of water is less productive than it used to be because of runoff from urban areas (mostly on the Western Shore) and farms (especially on the Eastern Shore and in the Susquehanna River watershed), over-harvesting, and invasion of foreign species.\nThe plentiful oyster harvests led to the development of the skipjack (such as the \"Helen Virginia\"), the state boat of Maryland, which is the only remaining working boat type in the United States still under sail power. Other characteristic bay-area workboats include sail-powered boats such as the log canoe, the pungy, the bugeye, and the motorized Chesapeake Bay deadrise, the state boat of Virginia.\nIn addition to harvesting wild oysters, oyster farming is a growing industry in the bay. Oyster aquaculture is passive in that the bay provides all the natural oyster food needed, making it an environmentally friendly practice in contrast to other kinds of fish farming. Oyster farms provide jobs as well as a natural effort for filtering excess nutrients from the water in an effort to reduce the effects of eutrophication pollution (too much algae). The Chesapeake Bay Program promotes oyster restoration projects to reduce the amount of nitrogen compounds entering the bay.\nThe bay is famous for its rockfish, a regional name for striped bass. Once on the verge of extinction, rockfish have made a significant comeback because of legislative action that put a moratorium on rockfishing, which allowed the species to re-populate. Rockfish can now be fished in strictly controlled and limited quantities.\nOther popular recreational fisheries in the Chesapeake Bay include shad, cobia, croaker, and redfish, winter flounder, and summer flounder. Recently, non-native blue catfish have proliferated in tributaries like the James River and may be moving to other areas of the bay. A commercial fishery exists for menhaden, too oily for human consumption but instead used for bait, fish oil, and livestock feed.\nTourism and recreation.\nThe Chesapeake Bay is a main feature for tourists who visit Maryland and Virginia each year. Fishing, crabbing, swimming, boating, kayaking, and sailing are extremely popular activities enjoyed on the waters of the Chesapeake Bay. As a result, tourism has a notable impact on Maryland's economy. One report suggested that Annapolis was an appealing spot for families, water sports and boating. Commentator Terry Smith spoke about the bay's beauty: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The water is glassy, smooth and gorgeous, his wake white against the deep blue. That's the problem with the Chesapeake. It's so damned beautiful.\nOne account suggested how the Chesapeake attracts people:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;You see them everywhere on Maryland's Eastern Shore, the weekend sailors. They are unmistakable with their deep tans, their baggy shorts, their frayed polo shirts, their Top-Siders worn without socks. Some may not even own their own boats, much less win regattas, but they are inexorably drawn to the Chesapeake Bay\u00a0... I planned to spend my days boating, eating as many Chesapeake Bay blue crabs as possible and making a little study of Eastern Shore locals. For city folk like me, they're interesting, even exotic\u00a0\u2013the weather-beaten crabbers and oystermen called \"watermen,\" gentlemen-farmers and sharecroppers, boat builders, antiques dealers\u00a0\u2013 all of whom sound like Southerners with mouthfuls of marbles when they talk. \u2014 Susan Spano, \"Los Angeles Times\", 2008\nThe Chesapeake Bay plays an extremely important role in Maryland, Virginia, and Pennsylvania's economies, in addition to the ecosystem. The nature-based recreation of wildlife, boating, and ecotourism are dependent on enforcement of the Clean Water Act (CWA), which regulates pollutant discharges and supports related pollution control programs. In 2006, \"roughly eight million wildlife watchers spent $636 million, $960 million, and $1.4 billion in Maryland, Virginia, and Pennsylvania\" according to the Chesapeake Bay Foundation.\nCuisine.\nIn colonial times, simple cooking techniques were used to create one pot meals like ham and potato casserole, clam chowder, or stews with common ingredients like oysters, chicken or venison. When John Smith landed in Chesapeake in 1608, he wrote: \"The fish were so thick, we attempted to catch them with frying pans\". Common regional ingredients in the local cuisine of Chesapeake included terrapins, smoked hams, blue crab, shellfish, local fish, game meats and various species of waterfowl. Blue crab continues to be an especially popular regional specialty.\nEnvironmental issues.\nAgricultural pollution in the colonial era.\nEuropean settlers around the Chesapeake Bay in the late 17th and early 18th centuries brought with them industrial agricultural techniques. Land clearance and deep plowing of farmland increased sediment and nutrient loading into the bay, which continued to increase as the area continued to develop.\nPollution in the 20th century.\nIn the 1970s, the Chesapeake Bay was found to contain one of the planet's first identified marine dead zones, where waters were so depleted of oxygen that they were unable to support life, resulting in massive fish kills. In 2010 the bay's dead zones were estimated to kill 75,000 tons of bottom-dwelling clams and worms each year, weakening the base of the estuary's food chain and robbing the blue crab in particular of a primary food source. Crabs are sometimes observed to amass on shore to escape pockets of oxygen-poor water, a behavior known as a \"crab jubilee\". Hypoxia results in part from large algal blooms, which are nourished by the runoff of residential, farm and industrial waste throughout the watershed. A 2010 report criticized Amish farmers in Pennsylvania for raising cows with inadequate controls on the manure that they generate. Farms in Lancaster County, Pennsylvania generate large quantities of manure that washes into tributaries of the bay.\nThe pollution entering the bay has multiple components that contribute to algal blooms, principally the nutrients phosphorus and nitrogen. The algae prevents sunlight from reaching the bottom of the bay while alive and deoxygenates the bay's water when it dies and rots. Soil erosion and runoff of sediment into the bay, exacerbated by devegetation, construction and the prevalence of pavement in urban and suburban areas, also block vital sunlight. The resulting loss of aquatic vegetation has depleted the habitat for much of the bay's animal life. Beds of eelgrass, the dominant variety in the southern Chesapeake Bay, have shrunk by more than half there since the early 1970s. Overharvesting, pollution, sedimentation and disease have turned much of the bay's bottom into a muddy wasteland.\nThe principal sources of nutrient pollution in the bay are surface runoff from farms, as well as runoff from urban and suburban areas. About half of the nutrient pollutant loads in the bay are generated by manure and poultry litter. Extensive use of lawn fertilizers and air pollution from motor vehicles and power plants are also significant nutrient sources.\nThe sediment record of the bay shows a major increase in nutrient levels, suggesting limited availability of oxygen, starting between the 17th and 18th centuries. (Zimmerman &amp; Canuel, 2002) The overloading of nutrients into the bay only continued to increase throughout the modern era. Recently deposited sediments in the bay have 2 to 3 times greater amounts of organic carbon, and 4 to 20 times greater amounts of nitrogen and phosphorus input into the bay than the pre-colonial era (Cornwell et al., 1996; Fisher et al., 2006).\nThe nutrient runoff from land sources causes a huge increase in available nutrients in the water. Algae present in the bay take up those nutrients and rapidly reproduce in algal blooms. As algae sink to the bottom, they are decomposed, consuming oxygen (Long et al. 2014). Seasonal stratification in the bay typically occurs between Spring and early Fall (Officer et al. 1984; Cerco &amp; Noel 2007). More sunlight, higher temperatures, and less storms and winds during the summer cause strongly stratified water column, with a pycnocline typically 10 meters below the surface (Cerco &amp; Noel; Seliger et al.). As oxygen is depleted from the decomposition of organic matter in bottom waters, but is not able to exchange gas with surface water due to a strong pycnocline, dissolved oxygen levels reach near zero by mid-June and can persist until October (Officer et al.). Organisms living in bottom waters may have some tolerance to hypoxia, but when events exceed their tolerance, ecologically and commercially important crabs, oysters, and mesoplankton become unhealthy and may experience die offs (Kirby &amp; Miller; Officer; Kimmel).\nOne particularly harmful source of toxicity is \"Pfiesteria piscicida\", which can affect both fish and humans. \"Pfiesteria\" caused a small regional panic in the late 1990s when a series of large blooms started killing large numbers of fish while giving swimmers mysterious rashes; nutrient runoff from chicken farms was blamed for the growth.\nSewage overflows and treatment plant upsets.\nSanitary sewers and some sewage treatment plants in the Chesapeake Bay region have occasionally contributed significant pollution to the bay. Although the region's treatment plants are designed to meet state and federal standards, the Baltimore city sewage collection system experiences sanitary sewer overflows (SSOs) during large rainstorms, which can cause excessive pollutant discharges into the bay. In 2021, 11% of nitrogen and 15% of phosphorus levels in the Chesapeake Bay were traced from sewage plants. In 2024, a heavy rainfall led to the overflow of 14 million gallons of sewage discharged by the Back River Wastewater Treatment Plant. The sewage leaked into local Baltimore waterways and the bay, leading to an amount of sewage overflow expected in one year to be released in one day. The city has also had difficulty in providing regular adequate maintenance at the Back River plant, which can lead to spills and leaks.\nThe Patapsco and Back River plants, the two largest treatment plants in Maryland, have contributed to the growth of phragmite plants in biological cleaning tanks, which are used for cleaning returning water of nitrogen and phosphorus. In 2021 the city completed its \"Headworks Project\" at the Back River plant which provides additional underground storage of wastewater, to address the SSO problems, at a cost of $124 million. In April 2025 the Maryland Department of the Environment announced that it had awarded grants to make further improvements to the Baltimore treatment plants, and to install a trash interceptor on the Back River.\nWashington, D.C., similar to Baltimore and many older U.S. cities, operates a combined sewer system. The oldest portions of the sewage collection system were built in the late 19th and early 20th centuries, and cover about one-third of the city's service area. During large rain storms, the collection system may be overloaded, leading to combined sewer overflows (CSOs) and discharges of untreated sewage into the Potomac River, Anacostia River and Rock Creek. To address the city's CSO problems, in 2013 DC Water began building large stormwater storage facilities as part of its \"Clean Rivers\" project. As of 2025 portions of the storage tunnel system are in operation. When the $2.99 billion project concludes in 2030 the system improvements, which include construction of of tunnels, as well as green infrastructure projects, are expected to reduce CSO discharges by 96%.\nDepletion of oysters.\nWhile the bay's salinity is ideal for oysters and the oyster fishery was at one time the bay's most commercially viable, the population has in the last fifty years been devastated. Maryland once had roughly of oyster reefs. In 2008 there were about . It has been estimated that in pre-colonial times, oysters could filter the entirety of the bay in about 3.3 days; by 1988 this time had increased to 325 days. The harvest's gross value decreased 88% from 1982 to 2007. One report suggested the bay had fewer oysters in 2008 than 25 years earlier. The primary problem is overharvesting. Lax government regulations allow anyone with a license to remove oysters from state-owned beds, and although limits are set, they are not strongly enforced. The overharvesting of oysters has made it difficult for them to reproduce, which requires close proximity to one another. A second cause for the oyster depletion is that the drastic increase in human population caused a sharp increase in pollution flowing into the bay. The bay's oyster industry has also suffered from two diseases: MSX and Dermo.\nThe depletion of oysters has had a particularly harmful effect on the quality of the bay. Oysters serve as natural water filters, and their decline has further reduced the water quality of the bay. Water that was once clear for meters is now so turbid that a wader may lose sight of his feet while his knees are still dry.\nInstitutional responses to pollution problems.\nConcern about the increasing discoveries of bay pollution problems, and of the institutional challenges of organizing bay restoration programs over a large geographical area, led to Congress directing the US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) to take a greater role in studying the scientific and technical aspects of the problems beginning in the late 1970s. The agency conducted its research over a seven-year period and published a major report in 1983. The report stated that the bay was an \"ecosystem in decline\" and cited numerous instances of declines in the populations of oysters, crabs, freshwater fish and other wildlife.\nThe growing concerns about pollution also prompted the legislatures of Maryland and Virginia to establish the Chesapeake Bay Commission, an advisory body, in 1980. The commission consults with the state legislatures and executive agencies, as well as Congress, about environmental, economic and social issues related to the bay.\nAs an initial follow-up to the EPA report, the Chesapeake Bay Commission and EPA developed the \"Chesapeake Bay Agreement\" in 1983. The agreement was signed by the governors of Maryland, Virginia and Pennsylvania; the Mayor of the District of Columbia; and the EPA Administrator. The parties agreed to:\nConcurrent with the 1983 agreement EPA began providing matching grants to the bay states for research and restoration projects.\nIn 1987 the parties agreed to set a goal of reducing the amount of nutrients that enter the bay by 40 percent by 2000. In 1992, the bay program partners agreed to continue the 40 percent reduction goal beyond 2000 and to attack nutrients at their source: upstream, in the bay tributaries.\nIn response to the decline of the oyster population, for decades the Maryland Department of Natural Resources (MDNR) has restricted the amount of oyster harvesting in the bay, and designated certain areas as off-limits to harvesting. As of 2025 MDNR continues to regulate oyster harvesting by limiting the amount of oysters harvested per day, and limiting the number of harvest days per week.\nRestoration efforts.\nEfforts of federal, state and local governments, working in partnership through the Chesapeake Bay Program along with the Chesapeake Bay Foundation and other nonprofit environmental groups, to restore or at least maintain the current water quality, have had mixed results. One particular obstacle to cleaning up the bay is that much of the polluting substances are discharged far upstream in states far removed from the bay: New York and Pennsylvania. Despite the State of Maryland spending over $100 million to restore the bay, conditions have continued to grow worse. In the mid-20th century, the bay supported over 6,000 oystermen. As of 2008, there were fewer than 500.\nIn June 2000, the Chesapeake Bay Program adopted \"Chesapeake 2000,\" an agreement adopted by the member jurisdictions, intended to guide restoration activities throughout the Chesapeake Bay watershed through 2010. One component of this agreement was a series of upgrades to sewage treatment plants throughout the watershed. In 2016 EPA stated that the upgrades \"have resulted in steep reductions in nitrogen and phosphorus pollution... despite increases in human population and wastewater volume.\"\nEPA published a series of scientific documents on water quality criteria for the bay between 2004 and 2010. The criteria documents, which describe specific pollutants and their effects on aquatic species, are used by the states to develop water quality standards (WQS) for individual water bodies. Delaware, Maryland, Virginia, and the District of Columbia adopted WQS for various Chesapeake Bay tributaries in the mid-2000s, referencing the EPA criteria documents, as well as their own extensive data gathering and modeling efforts.\nRestoration efforts that began in the 1990s have continued into the 21st century and show potential for growth of the native oyster population. Efforts to repopulate the bay using oyster hatcheries have been carried out by a group called the Oyster Recovery Partnership, with some success. In 2011 the group placed 6 million oysters on of the Trent Hall sanctuary. Scientists from the Virginia Institute of Marine Science at the College of William &amp; Mary claim that experimental reefs created in 2004 now house 180 million native oysters, \"Crassostrea virginica\", which is far fewer than the billions that once existed.\nDams on bay tributaries have blocked passages for migratory fish. Removing such blockages was one of the goals identified in the 2014 bay watershed agreement. During 2022-2023, 13 dams were removed, yielding a total of of tributaries opened to restore fish migration. Since 1989, the cumulative total of fish migration route restorations in the tributaries is .\nRegulatory actions.\nIn 2009 the Chesapeake Bay Foundation (CBF) filed suit against EPA for its failure to finalize a total maximum daily load (TMDL) ruling for the bay, pursuant to the Clean Water Act. The TMDL would restrict water pollution from farms, land development, power plants and sewage treatment plants. EPA, which had been working with the states on various components of the TMDL since the 1980s (e.g. water quality criteria, standards for individual tributaries, improvements in data gathering and modeling techniques), agreed to settle the lawsuit and issued its TMDL for nitrogen, phosphorus and sediment pollution on December 29, 2010. This was the largest, most complex TMDL document that EPA had issued to date. The TMDL was challenged in litigation by the agriculture and construction industries, but EPA's document was upheld by the courts.\nIn 2020 the CBF filed another lawsuit against EPA for its failure to require the states of New York and Pennsylvania to comply with their TMDL goals and reduce pollution in the bay. CBF and EPA reached a settlement on the lawsuit in 2023. EPA agreed to increase its efforts to reduce farm and stormwater runoff pollution in Pennsylvania, including compliance and enforcement actions.\nEPA's 2010 TMDL document requires all states in the bay watershed region to develop detailed implementation plans for pollutant reduction. The states have been developing their plans for years, in many cases building upon restoration projects that they had initiated before EPA's TMDL was finalized. These plans are long and complex, involving regular consultation with many stakeholders (i.e. governments, industry, agriculture, citizen groups). The plans include multiple milestone goals for project initiation or continued progress in water quality, through the use of pollution control upgrades (such as at sewage treatment plants) and more widespread utilization of various best management practices (BMPs). The BMPs are designed for specific sites to control pollution from nonpoint sources, principally agriculture, land development and urban runoff. For example, a farmer may install vegetated stream buffers along a stream bank to reduce runoff of sediment, nutrients and other pollutants. A land developer may install stormwater management facilities such as infiltration basins or constructed wetlands during the construction of housing or commercial buildings.\nIn 2011 both Maryland and Virginia enacted laws to reduce the effects of lawn fertilizer use, by restricting nitrogen and phosphorus content. The Virginia law also banned deicers containing urea, nitrogen or phosphorus.\nInstallation of stormwater management facilities is already a requirement for most new construction projects in the bay region, under various state and local government requirements. These facilities reduce erosion and keep sediment and other pollutants from entering tributaries and the bay. However retrofitting such facilities into existing developed areas is often expensive due to high land costs, or difficult to install among existing structures. As a result, the extent of such retrofit projects in the bay region has been limited.\nIn May 2025 Governor Wes Moore signed the Chesapeake Bay Legacy Act which allots up to $900,000 per year to a new certification program for farmers who use sustainable practices that decrease runoff into the bay, establishes a water quality monitoring program to unify current testing efforts and aims to streamline oyster aquaculture leasing, among other provisions.\nWater quality improvements.\nIn 2010 bay health improved slightly in terms of the overall health of its ecosystem, earning a rating of 31 out of 100, up from a 28 rating in 2008. An estimate in 2006 from a \"blue ribbon panel\" said cleanup costs would be $15 billion. Compounding the problem is that 100,000 new residents move to the area each year. A 2008 \"Washington Post\" report suggested that government administrators had overstated progress on cleanup efforts as a way to \"preserve the flow of federal and state money to the project.\" In January 2011, there were reports that millions of fish had died, but officials suggested it was probably the result of extremely cold weather.\nThe health of the Chesapeake Bay improved in 2015, marking three years of gains over a four-year period, according to a 2016 report by the University of Maryland Center for Environmental Science (UMCES). In 2021 scientists at the UMCES reported slight improvements in bay water quality compared to levels measured in 2020. The greatest improvements were seen in the lower bay areas, while the Patapsco River and Back River (Maryland) regions showed minimal improvement. Positive indicators included decreased nitrogen levels and increases in dissolved oxygen.\nThe CBF reported that as of 2022 pollution control efforts in the bay have continued to show mixed results, with no improvement in levels of toxic contaminants, nitrogen and dissolved oxygen, and a small decrease in water clarity compared to 2020 levels (measured as Secchi depth). Oyster and rockfish populations in the bay have improved, but blue crab populations have continued to decline.\nIn the 2023 annual report the University of Maryland Center for Environmental Science rated the Chesapeake Bay's overall health a C-plus or 55%, its highest score since 2002.\nClimate change.\nThe Chesapeake Bay is already experiencing the effects of climate change. Key among these is sea level rise: water levels in the bay have already risen one foot, with a predicted increase of 1.3 to 5.2 feet in the next 100 years. This has related environmental effects, causing changes in marine ecosystems, destruction of coastal marshes and wetlands, and intrusion of saltwater into otherwise brackish parts of the bay. Sea level rise also compounds the effects of extreme weather on the bay, making coastal flooding as part of the events more extreme and increasing runoff from upstream in the watershed.\nWith increases in flooding events and sea level rise, the 11,600 miles of coastline, which include significant historic buildings and modern infrastructure, will be at risk of erosion. Islands such as Holland Island have disappeared due to the rising sea levels.\nBeyond sea level rise, other changes in the marine ecosystem due to climate change, such as ocean acidification and temperature increases, will put increasing pressure on marine life. Projected effects include decreasing dissolved oxygen, more acidic waters making it harder for shellfish to maintain shells and changing the seasonal cycles important for breeding and other lifecycle activities. Seasonal shifts and warmer temperatures also mean that there is a greater likelihood of pathogens to stay active in the ecosystem.\nClimate change may worsen hypoxia. However, compared to the current effects of nutrient pollution and algal blooms, climate change's effect to increase hypoxia is relatively small. Warmer waters can hold less dissolved oxygen. Therefore, as the bay warms, there may be a longer duration of hypoxia each summer season in the deep central channel of the bay. However, comparing the effects of climate change and nutrient pollution, reduced nutrient pollution would increase oxygen concentrations more dramatically than if climate change were to level out.\nClimate change adaptation and mitigation programs in Maryland and Virginia often include significant programs to address the communities in the Chesapeake Bay. Key infrastructure in Virginia, such as the port of Norfolk, and major agriculture and fishing industries of the Eastern Shore of Maryland will be directly impacted by the changes in the bay.\nScientific research.\nResearchers work in the Chesapeake Bay to collect information about water quality, plant and animal abundances, shoreline erosion, tides, waves, and harmful algal blooms. For example, the Virginia Institute of Marine Science monitors the abundance of submerged aquatic vegetation in the shallow areas of the Chesapeake Bay each summer. Many organizations run continuous monitoring programs. Monitoring programs set out instruments at fixed stations on buoys, moorings, and docks throughout the bay to record things like temperature, salinity, chlorophyll-a concentration, dissolved oxygen, and turbidity over time.\nOrganizations actively collecting data in the Chesapeake Bay include, but are not limited to:\nUnderwater archaeology.\nIn 1988, the Maryland Maritime Archeology Program (MMAP) was established to manage and explore various underwater archaeological. This was in response to the National Abandoned Shipwreck Act passed in 1987, which gave ownership of historically significant shipwrecks to those states with proper management programs.\nLocation and research processes.\nThe Chesapeake Bay watershed has been heavily impacted by natural forces such as erosion, tides, and a history of hurricanes and other storms. Along with environmental factors, the bay has been negatively impacted by humans since being settled in the 17th century, bringing with them problems like pollution, construction, destruction of the environment, and currently poultry farms. All of these circumstances have made it increasingly difficult for the MMAP to identify potential underwater archaeological sites. As sea levels rise and historically significant areas are sunk and covered in sediment, the MMAP relies on various pieces of equipment to locate these man-made anomalies but also ensure that the material being examined is kept intact. Using marine magnetometers (detects iron/absent space), side-scan sonar (detects objects on sea floor), along with precise global positioning systems, Langley and the MMAP have been much more successful in locating submerged archaeological sites. After locating the site, Langley and her team have a strict process in order to preserve the site and its contents, allowing more accurate and thorough research to be conducted. The remains of nearly every site have been submerged in saltwater for sometimes centuries, the integrity of shipwrecks and other materials are fragile and careful precaution must be used when working with them. Taking photos and videos, creating maps, and constructing models are all a part of the process of preserving remains. Susan Langley notes herself, \"If you have only ten percent of a ship's hull, you can reconstruct the ship. Construction techniques can tell us about the people who built the vessels, artifacts can tell us about the people who profited from the ship's trade, and eco-facts\u2014evidence of insect infestation and organic remains, such as seeds, that are preserved in anaerobic, muddy environments\u2014can tell us about the climate and season when a ship sank.\" Still, the MMAP makes it a point to publish their data and information once a site is officially identified; however, the details of the location are left out to sway would-be looters, who have plagued marine archaeologists for decades.\nSignificant sites.\nAltogether there are more than 1,800 ship and boat wrecks that scatter the bottom of the Chesapeake Bay and its surrounding waterways. Dozens of precolonial era canoes and artifacts have been extracted from the bay, helping to portray a better picture of the lives of Native Americans (e.g., Powhatan, Pamunkey, Nansemond) In 1974, scallop fishermen dredged up the skull of a prehistoric mastodon, which through carbon dating was found to be 22,000 years old. Along with the skull, a carved blade was also discovered in the same area. Unable to accurately carbon date the stone tool, archaeologists looked at similar styles of blade carving in order to gauge when it was made. The technique was similar to the Solutrean tools that were crafted in Europe between 22,000 and 17,000 years ago and it was noted that the stone tool must be at least 14,000 years old. The Solutrean hypothesis challenges the previous theory regarding the first inhabitants of North America, whereas it is commonly accepted amongst anthropologists that the Clovis people were the first to settle the region somewhere around 13,000 years ago. There is some controversy surrounding these findings; many anthropologists have disputed this, claiming that the environment and setting make properly identifying the origins of these artifacts nearly impossible.\nThe Chesapeake Bay Flotilla, which was constructed using shallow barges and ships to counter British naval attacks during the War of 1812. After holding strong for some months, the British eventually defeated the flotilla and dozens of these vessels were burnt and sunk. Starting in 1978, there were numerous expeditions launched in hopes of successfully discovering what was left of the Chesapeake Bay Flotilla. Since then, hundreds of artifacts and remains have been extracted from the submerged ships such as weapons, personal items, and many other objects. Underwater archaeologists have also been successful in constructing accurate models and maps of the wreckage amongst the sea floor.\nIn October 1774, the British merchant brig \"Peggy Stewart\" arrived at the port of Annapolis loaded with tea disguised as linens and garments. The tea was hidden by the ship's crew to avoid conflict with local colonists as the recently imposed tea tax had created hostility and uncertainty in the colonies. The crew of \"Peggy Stewart\" informed the colonists of the new taxes for the purchased tea. The colonists refused to pay the tax and after a few days of public meetings, the colonists decided to burn \"Peggy Stewart\" and the contents of it. The brig was burnt to the waterline in what became known as the 'Annapolis Tea Party' and has since become an important site for underwater archaeologists in the Chesapeake Bay. In 1949, after the Nazi's defeat in World War 2, the United States seized a German U-1105 built with sonar-evading rubber sheathing for study purposes. It was sunk the same year in the Potomac River off of the Chesapeake Bay following a high explosives test hosted by the U.S. Navy and has since been a popular site for underwater archaeologists.\nMaryland has controlled the majority of underwater archaeology research around the Chesapeake Bay; however, Virginia's Department of Historic Resources has had a State Underwater Archaeologist since the 1970s. In 1982, the Virginia Department of Historic Resources along with the first State Underwater Archaeologist, John Broadwater, led an expedition to explore and research a sunken fleet of Revolution-era battleships. In September 1781, during the Revolutionary War, the British scuttled more than a dozen ships in the York River, near the mouth of the Chesapeake Bay. Under the ultimate command of Lord Cornwallis, a group of British ships was pushed back towards the rivers of the Chesapeake, and to avoid them from falling into French and Spanish hands, Cornwallis began ordering them to be scuttled with the hopes of stalling the incoming Franco-American forces. Cornwallis was eventually forced to surrender on October 19 and the ships along with its contents were at the bottom of the York River. One of the British ships, \"Betsy\", has been explored more than any other and over 5,000 relics were removed from Betsy on their original expedition in 1982, including weapons, personal objects, and some valuable metals. Broadwater and his team were awarded a 20-page article in the magazine \"National Geographic\" for their findings. Virginia has recently been granted funding for further research of these sunken vessels and expeditions are currently underway with the goal to fully explore the scuttled ships. Unfortunately, following the publicity of these sunken ships, many divers have taken it upon themselves to explore the wreckage for 'treasure'.\nPublications.\nThere are several magazines and publications that cover topics directly related to the Chesapeake Bay and life and tourism within the bay region:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59474", "revid": "47905414", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59474", "title": "Monophysitism", "text": "Christological doctrine\nMonophysitism ( ) or monophysism ( ; from Greek , \"solitary\" and , \"nature\") is a Christological doctrine that states that there was only one nature\u2014the divine\u2014in the person of Jesus Christ, who was the incarnated Word. It is rejected as heretical by the Catholic Church, Eastern Orthodox Church, Anglicanism, Lutheranism, Reformed Christianity (Calvinist), and all mainstream Protestant denominations, which hold to the dyophysitism of the 451 Council of Chalcedon\u2014as well by Oriental Orthodoxy, which holds to miaphysitism.\nBackground.\nThe First Council of Nicaea (325) declared that Christ was both divine (homoousios, consubstantial, of one being or essence, with the Father) and human (was incarnate and became man). In the fifth century a heated controversy arose between the sees and theological schools of Antioch and Alexandria about how divinity and humanity existed in Christ, with the former stressing the humanity, the latter the divinity of Christ. Cyril of Alexandria succeeded in having Nestorius, a prominent exponent of the Antiochian school, condemned at the Council of Ephesus in 431, and insisted on the formula \"one \"physis\" of the incarnate Word\", claiming that any formula that spoke of two \"physeis\" represented Nestorianism. Some taught that in Christ the human nature was completely absorbed by the divine, leaving only a divine nature. In 451, the Council of Chalcedon, on the basis of Pope Leo the Great's 449 declaration, defined that in Christ there were two \"natures\" united in one \"person\".\nThose who insisted on the \"one \"physis\"\" formula were referred to as \"monophysites\" (), while those who accepted the \"two natures\" definition were called \"dyophysites\", a term also applied to followers of Nestorianism.\nGroups called monophysite.\nThe forms of monophysism were numerous, and included the following:\nVerbal monophysitism.\nConcerning verbal declarations of monophysitism, Justo L. Gonz\u00e1lez stated, \"in order not to give an erroneous idea of the theology of the so-called monophysite churches, that have subsisted until the twentieth century, one should point out that all the extreme sects of monophysism disappeared within a brief span, and that the Christology of the present so-called monophysite churches is closer to a verbal than to a real monophysism\".\nPolitical situation of monophysitism after Chalcedon.\nUnder Emperor Basiliscus, who ousted Emperor Zeno in 475, \"the monophysites reached the pinnacle of their power\". In his \"Encyclion\", which he issued in the same year, he revoked the Council of Chalcedon and recognized the Second Council of Ephesus of 449 except for its approval of Eutyches, whom Basiliscus condemned. He required his edict to be signed by each bishop. Among the signatures he obtained were those of three of the four Eastern Patriarchs, but the Patriarch and the populace of the capital protested so resolutely that in 476, seeing that his overthrow was imminent, he issued his \"Anti-Encyclion\" revoking his former edict. In the same year, Zeno returned victoriously.\nEvents had made it clear that there was a split between the population, staunchly Chalcedonian in sympathies, of Constantinople and the Balkans and the largely anti-Chalcedonian population of Egypt and Syria. In an attempt to reconcile both sides, Zeno, with the support of Acacius of Constantinople and Peter III of Alexandria, tried to enforce the compromise Henoticon (Formula of Union) decree of 482, which condemned Eutyches but ignored Chalcedon. Schisms followed on both sides. Rome excommunicated Acacius (leading to the 35-year Acacian schism), while in Egypt the Acephali broke away from Peter III. The Acacian schism continued under Zeno's successor, the monophysite Anastasius I Dicorus and ended only with the accession of the Chalcedonian Justin I in 518.\nJustin I was succeeded by the Chalcedonian Justinian I (527\u2013565), whose wife Empress Theodora protected and assisted the monophysites. Ghassanid patronage of the monophysite Syrian Church under phylarch Al-Harith ibn Jabalah was crucial for its survival, revival, and even its spread. Justinian I was followed by Justin II, who after being a monophysite, perhaps because of Theodora's influence, converted to the Chalcedonian faith before obtaining the imperial throne. Some time later, he adopted a policy of persecuting the monophysites. From Justinian I on, no emperor was a declared monophysite, although they continued their efforts to find compromise formulas such as monoenergism and monothelitism.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59475", "revid": "494861", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59475", "title": "Monothelitism", "text": "Christian theological doctrine\nMonothelitism, or monotheletism, is a theological doctrine in Christianity that was proposed in the 7th century, but was ultimately rejected by the sixth ecumenical council. It held Christ as having only one will and was thus contrary to dyothelitism, the Christological doctrine accepted by most Christian denominations, which holds Christ as having two wills (divine and human). Historically, \"monothelitism\" was closely related to monoenergism, a theological doctrine that holds Jesus Christ as having only one energy. Both doctrines were at the center of Christological disputes during the 7th century.\nMonothelitism is from . Theological notions related to the \"oneness\" of Christ's will emerged as a result of some earlier Christological controversies that were related to monophysitism as formulated by Eutyches (d. 456) and miaphysitism as formulated by non-Chalcedonian followers of Cyril of Alexandria (d. 444). Since the notion of Christ's \"one nature\" implied the \"oneness\" of his will, ecclesiastical and political elites of the Eastern Roman Empire tried during the 7th century to promote monothelitism as a unifying doctrine that would reconcile divided Christian factions. In spite of strong imperial support, those attempts failed, and monothelitism was consequently rejected and denounced as heresy in 680\u2013681 at the Third Council of Constantinople, the sixth ecumenical council.\nMonothelitism is still today taught by some Protestant Christian philosophers, including William Lane Craig and J. P. Moreland. However, the dyothelite view is mainstream in all major branches of Christianity. Modern monothelitism is associated with a certain form of social trinitarianism.\nBackground.\nDuring the 5th century, some regions of the Church were thrown into confusion because of the debates that erupted over the nature of Jesus Christ. Although the Church had already determined that Christ is the son of God, his exact nature remained open to debate. The Church had declared heretical the notion that Jesus is not fully divine in the 4th century (see First Council of Nicaea), during the debates over Arianism, and had declared that he is God the Son who became human. However, in arguing that he is both God and man, there then emerged a dispute over exactly how the human and divine natures of Christ actually exist within the person of Christ.\nThe Christological definition of Chalcedon, as accepted by the Eastern Orthodox, Catholic, Anglican, Lutheran, and Reformed churches, is that Christ remains in two distinct natures, yet these two natures come together within his one hypostasis. More simply, Christ is known as \"both fully human and fully Divine, one in being with the Father\". This position was opposed by the Monophysites who held that Christ possesses one nature only. The term Monophysitism of which Eutychianism is one type, held that the human and divine natures of Christ were fused into one new single (\"mono\") nature. As described by Eutyches, his human nature was \"dissolved like a drop of honey in the sea\", and therefore his nature is really divine. This is distinct from Miaphysitism, which holds that, after the union, Christ is in one theanthropic (human-divine) nature and is generated from the union of two natures. The two are thus united without separation, without confusion, and without alteration, and with each having a particularity. Miaphysitism is the christological doctrine of the Oriental Orthodox churches.\nNevertheless, the resultant debates led the Chalcedonians to accuse the non-Chalcedonians of teaching Christ's humanity to be of a different kind from our own. Meanwhile, the non-Chalcedonians accused the Chalcedonians of espousing a form of Nestorianism, a doctrine rejected in the preceding council that held that Jesus Christ was two distinct subsistences.\nThis internal division was dangerous for the Byzantine Empire, which was under constant threat from external enemies, especially as many of the areas most likely to be lost to the empire (which did happen as a result of the wars with the Umayyad Caliphate) were the regions that were in favour of Monophysitism, and who considered the religious hierarchy at Constantinople to be heretics only interested in crushing their faith. In these provinces, the non-Chalcedonians were far more numerous than the Chalcedonians. In Egypt for instance, some 30,000 Greeks of Chalcedonian persuasion were ranged against some five million Coptic non-Chalcedonians. Meanwhile, Syria was divided between followers of the Chalcedonian Patriarch Paul I and Miaphysite Patriarch Sergius I, and Mesopotamia between Syriac Miaphysities and Nestorian Church of the East, while the church of Armenia was wholly Cyrilline Non-Chalcedonian, and Palestinian Patriarch fully adhered to Chalcedonianism. Consequently, the \"Monothelite\" teaching emerged as a compromise position. The Byzantine emperor Heraclius tried to unite all of the various factions within the empire with this new formula that was more inclusive and more elastic.\nThat approach was needed to win over the non-Chalcedonians since they already believed that Christ has a single nature and so necessarily believed that he holds a single will. However, it was unclear whether the Chalcedonians should believe in Christ's human and divine energy and/or will as well as his human and divine nature because the ecumenical councils had made no ruling on that subject. A ruling for the new doctrine would provide common ground for the non-Chalcedonians and the Chalcedonians to come together, as the non-Chalcedonians could agree that Jesus has two natures if he has only one will, and some Chalcedonians could agree that Jesus has one will if he has two natures.\nFirst attempt: Doctrine of one energy.\nPatriarch Sergius I of Constantinople was the driving force behind this doctrine, with the full blessing of Emperor Heraclius. Coming to the imperial throne in 610, the patriarch had long since converted the emperor to the new doctrine as by 622, Heraclius had communicated with Bishop Paul of Armenia where the emperor asserted that the energy, or the active force, of Christ was single. That doctrine of \"monoenergism\" was the precursor of monotheletism.\nHeraclius's interest then focused on Armenia, and it was probably then that the emperor decided to use monoenergism as a political weapon to reconcile the Non-Chalcedonian Church of Armenia with the Imperial Church. To help bring that about, a synod was held in 622 at Theodosiopolis, called the Synod of Garin, where monoenergism was discussed. Over the next few years Heraclius was preoccupied with his prosecution of the war against the Sassanids, but by 626, he had issued a decree to Arcadius, Bishop of Cyprus, requesting him to teach the doctrine of \"one hegumenic energy\". By all accounts, that was met with notable success, particularly as there was then a large colony of Armenians on the island, which encouraged Heraclius to attempt to seek a wider approval of his compromise. In 626, he asked Patriarch Sergius to approach Cyrus, Bishop of Phasis, to secure his cooperation.\nWith the successful conclusion to the Persian War, Heraclius could devote more time to promoting his compromise, which was now more urgent because of the administration of the recovered monophysite (also referred to as \"non-Chalcedonian\" for rejecting of that particular council) provinces of Syria and Egypt. In 629, a meeting took place between the emperor and Athanasius the Jacobite at Hierapolis. An agreement was struck in which the Jacobites were to return to the Imperial Church on the basis of the single energy doctrine, and Athanasius was to be made Patriarch of Antioch. In 630, Bishop Cyrus was made Patriarch of Alexandria, who soon won over another non-Chalcedonian group. Very soon, three of the five patriarchates (Constantinople, Antioch and Alexandria) were teaching Christ's \"one theandric energy\".\nNot everyone was convinced, particularly a monk of Palestine named Sophronius, who believed that there was something unsound in the doctrine and so became the champion of dyothelitism, the doctrine of the two wills of Christ. He was concerned that for the sake of ecclesiastical unity, doctrinal expressions were being compromised. For the first few years, Patriarch Sergius of Constantinople managed to keep him silent, but when Sophronius was appointed as Patriarch of Jerusalem in 634, he used his newfound position of authority to challenge the validity of the doctrine of monoenergism.\nDetermined to prevent that formidable challenge to his Christological compromise, Sergius wrote to Pope Honorius I (625\u2013638) at Rome to ask him to endorse a position that Church unity should not be endangered by having any discussions or disputes over whether Christ had one energy or two. Sergius added that the doctrine of two energies could lead to the erroneous belief that Jesus has two conflicting wills. Honorius's reply in 635 endorsed that view that all discussions should cease and agreed that Jesus has only one will, not two conflicting wills, since Jesus assumed not the vitiated human nature, tainted by Adam's fall, but human nature as it existed prior to Adam's fall. In the meantime the \"epistola synodica\" of Sophronius appeared, the outcome of the Synod of Cyprus. It attempted to show that the new doctrine was inconsistent with orthodoxy. Sophronius declared that it was nothing more than a bastardised form of monophysitism, which went against the hard-fought achievements at Chalcedon. Suddenly, support for the doctrine began to subside, and soon, former supporters were busy finding flaws and inconsistencies in the proposal. Soon, Sergius and Heraclius abandoned it as a doctrine.\nSecond attempt: Doctrine of one will.\nHowever, Sergius and the emperor refused to give up. Three years later, the patriarch came up with a slightly-modified formula, which Heraclius released as the \"Ecthesis\" in 638. The edict was considered to be the official response to Sophronius's letter. It forbade all mention of Christ possessing one or two energies; instead, it now proclaimed that Christ has two natures but a single will. This did not deny Christ human volition, but insisted that this volition could never be in opposition to the divine will; but the opponents of one will misinterpreted the doctrine as denying Christ any human volition whatever. Sophronius had died before the release of the new doctrine, and his replacement, Bishop Sergius of Jaffa, as Patriarch Abraham I of Jerusalem, approved the modified formula. Sergius died by the end of 638, and his replacement, Pyrrhus, was also a devoted monothelite and a close friend of Heraclius. The two remaining patriarchs in the East also gave their approval to the doctrine now referred to as monothelitism and so it looked as if Heraclius would finally heal the divisions in the imperial church.\nUnfortunately, he had not counted on the popes at Rome. During the same year, 638, Pope Honorius I had died as well. His successor Pope Severinus (640) condemned the \"Ecthesis\" outright and so was forbidden his seat until 640. His successor, Pope John IV (640\u201342), also rejected the doctrine completely, leading to a major schism between the eastern and western halves of the Chalcedonian Church. When news reached Heraclius of the Pope's condemnation, he was already old and ill, and the news only hastened his death. He declared with his dying breath that the controversy was all due to Sergius and that the patriarch had pressured him to give his unwilling approval to the \"Ecthesis\".\nConflict with Rome.\nThis state of schism remained for the next few years. The death of Heraclius in 641 had thrown the political situation in Constantinople into chaos, and his young grandson Constans II (641\u2013668) succeeded him. Meanwhile, in Africa, a monk, Maximus the Confessor, carried on a furious campaign against monothelitism, and in 646, he convinced the African councils to draw up a manifesto against the doctrine, which they forwarded to the new pope, Theodore I (642\u2013649), who, in turn, wrote to Patriarch Paul II of Constantinople to outline the heretical nature of monothelitism. Paul, another devoted monothelite, replied in a letter directing the pope to adhere to the doctrine of one will. Theodore, in turn, excommunicated the patriarch in 649 and declared Paul a heretic.\nConstans II was only 17 and was indifferent to the religious debates convulsing the Church. However, he was concerned about the effect that the debate had on the Roman Empire and so he issued an imperial edict, the Type of Constans. The edict made it illegal to discuss in any manner Christ possessing either one or two wills or one or two energies. He declared that the whole controversy was to be forgotten: \"the scheme which existed before the strife arose shall be maintained, as it would have been if no such disputation had arisen\". However, he would soon discover that the controversy would not die down.\nIn Rome and the West, opposition to monothelitism was reaching fever pitch, and the \"Type\" of Constans did nothing to defuse the situation but indeed made it worse by implying that either doctrine was as good as the other. Theodore planned the Lateran Council of 649 to condemn the \"Ecthesis\" but died before he could convene it, which his successor, Pope Martin I (649\u2013653), did. The council condemned the \"Ecthesis\" but also the \"Type\". After the synod, Pope Martin wrote to Constans to inform him of its conclusions and to require him to condemn both the monothelite doctrine and his own \"Type\". However, Constans was not the sort of emperor to take such a rebuke of imperial authority lightly.\nEven while the Lateran Synod was sitting, Olympius arrived as the new exarch of Ravenna, with instructions to ensure that the \"Type\" was followed in Italy and to use whatever means necessary to ensure that the Pope adhered to it. He was unable to complete his mission and soon died, but his successor, Theodore I Calliopas, seized Pope Martin and abducted him to Constantinople, where he was imprisoned and tortured before he was condemned for breaking the imperial commands and banished before he died from his treatment at the hands of the emperor.\nThe emperor continued to persecute any who spoke out against monothelitism, including Maximus the Confessor and a number of his disciples. Maximus lost his tongue and his right hand in an effort to have him recant. Nevertheless, his brutality had an effect, with the patriarchs, including the popes, remaining silent throughout the remainder of his reign.\nCondemnation.\nAfter Constans's death in 668, the throne passed to his son Constantine IV. Pope Vitalian (657\u2013672), who had hosted the visit of Constans II to Rome in 663, almost immediately declared himself for the doctrine of the two wills of Christ. In response, Patriarch Theodore I of Constantinople and Macarius, Patriarch of Antioch, both pressed Constantine to take some measures against the pope. Constantine, however, decided to let the monothelite question be decided entirely by a church council.\nHe asked if the pope (now Pope Agatho, 678\u2013681) would be willing to send delegates to an ecumenical council to be held at Constantinople so that the question could be firmly ended. Pope Agatho agreed but first held a preliminary synod at Rome 680 to obtain the opinion of the western theologians. Other synods were also held at Milan and at the Council of Hatfield in 680, convoked by Archbishop Theodore of Canterbury. All of the western synods condemned monothelitism, and a report of the Roman synod's acts was sent to Constantinople, along with the western delegates to the council.\nThe council met from 680 to 681. Apart from the Roman representatives, it also hosted representatives from the Patriarchs of Alexandria and Jerusalem, and the Patriarchs of Constantinople and Antioch were present in person. With the exception of two individuals, it condemned the monothelite doctrine as one that diminished the fullness of Christ's humanity and asserted dyothelitism to be the true doctrine, with Christ possessing \"two natural wills and two natural energies, without division, alteration, separation or confusion\". It also anathematised the chief representatives of the discredited doctrine, including Pope Honorius. The churches condemned at Constantinople included the Oriental Orthodox Churches and the Maronite Church, but the Oriental Orthodox have denied that they ever held the monothelite view and describe their own Christology as Miaphysite, and the Maronites accept the Chalcedonian formula since they are in communion with the Roman Catholic Church. That brought to an end the controversy over monothelitism.\nControversy over Honorius I.\nA side issue over the statements of Pope Honorius I and his condemnation by the council arose in discussions concerning papal infallibility. In the view of historians such as John Bagnell Bury, Honorius, with a traditional Latin dislike for dialectics, did not fully comprehend the issues. The question of Monoenergism, as presented by Patriarch Sergius, seemed to Honorius to be a matter of grammar, rather than theology. Though he used the expression \"one will\", he was no Monothelite, for he placed \"one energy\" and \"two energies\" on exactly the same footing. Further, his second letter to Sergius was by and large orthodox. Maximus the Confessor, in his \"Disputation with Pyrrhus\", interprets the statement \"one will\" as referring to the integrity of Christ's human will, in contrast to the fallen human will, which seeks diverse and contradictory goods.\nThe Third Council of Constantinople posthumously anathematised Honorius as a heretic: \"And with these we define that there shall be expelled from the holy Church of God and anathematized Honorius who was some time Pope of Old Rome, because of what we found written by him to Sergius, that in all respects he followed his view and confirmed his impious doctrines\" (13th session) and \"To Honorius, the heretic, anathema!\" (16th session).\nHowever, Pope Leo II's letter of confirmation of the Council interprets the council as intending to criticise Honorius not for error of belief but for \"imprudent economy of silence\". Leo's letter stated: \"We anathematize the inventors of the new error, that is, Theodore, Sergius... and also Honorius, who did not attempt to sanctify this Apostolic Church with the teaching of Apostolic tradition, but by profane treachery permitted its purity to be polluted.\"\nContemporary Monothelitism.\nSome contemporary theologians such as Alvin Plantinga have controversially argued that the council of Chalcedon allowed for two positions on Christology, an abstractist view where Jesus only assumed the property of being a human, while in the concretist view, he assumed concrete human nature, with a human soul, mind, and will. He argued that the abstractist position implies monothelitism within the incarnation, while the concretist position is dyothelitism. This monothelite view has been also held by J. P. Moreland and William Lane Craig. Craig has offered his own of Christology, where he argues that Jesus did not assume a human soul in the incarnation, but the soul of Jesus was instead the Logos, thus teaching that the will and rationality of Christ were divine. This is similar to the teaching of Apollinarius, whose Christology was condemned as a heresy by the first council of Constantinople. However, they sought to revise the doctrines of Apollinarus by arguing that Christ in eternity already possessed those properties necessary for human personality in archetypal form. However, these new Monothelite proposals are highly controversial, and all major branches of Christendom affirm dyothelitism as in the statements of the third council of Constantinople.\nWilliam Lane Craig's social trinitarian model in which all three persons are to be distinguished by having their own centers of consciousness and will lead one to view will as an attribute of hypostasis instead of nature, thus implying monothelitism.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59476", "revid": "877594199", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59476", "title": "Christological", "text": ""}
{"id": "59477", "revid": "51026171", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59477", "title": "Chalcedonian Christianity", "text": "Branch of Christianity that accepts the Council of Chalcedon\nChalcedonian Christianity is the branch of Christianity that accepts and upholds theological resolutions of the Council of Chalcedon, the fourth ecumenical council, held in AD 451. Chalcedonian Christianity accepts the Christological Definition of Chalcedon, a Christian doctrine concerning the union of two natures (divine and human) in one hypostasis of Jesus Christ, who is thus acknowledged as a single person (prosopon). Chalcedonian Christianity also accepts the Chalcedonian confirmation of the Niceno-Constantinopolitan Creed, thus acknowledging the commitment of Chalcedonism to Nicene Christianity.\nChalcedonian Christology is upheld by Roman Catholicism, Eastern Orthodoxy, Lutheranism, Anglicanism and Calvinism (Reformed Christianity), thus comprising the overwhelming majority of Christianity.\nChalcedonian Christology.\nThose present at the Council of Chalcedon accepted Trinitarianism and the concept of hypostatic union, and rejected Arianism, Modalism, and Ebionism as heresies (which had also been rejected at the First Council of Nicaea in AD 325). Those present at the council also rejected the Christological doctrines of the Nestorians, Eutychians, and Monophysites.\nThe Chalcedonian doctrine of the Hypostatic Union states that Jesus Christ has two natures, divine and human, possessing a complete human nature while remaining one divine hypostasis. It asserts that the natures are unmixed and unconfused, with the human nature of Christ being assumed at the incarnation without any change to the divine nature. It also states that while Jesus Christ has assumed a true human nature, body and soul, which shall remain hypostatically united to his divine nature for all of eternity, he is nevertheless not a human person, as human personhood would imply a second created hypostasis existing within Jesus Christ and violating the unity of the God-man.\nThe Hypostatic Union was also viewed as one nature in Roman Christianity by a minority around this time. Single-nature ideas such as Apollinarism and Eutychianism were taught to explain some of the seeming contradictions in Chalcedonian Christianity.\nMajor in Christianity:&lt;br&gt;\n\"Western Christianity\" \n\"Eastern Christianity\" \nProtestantism\nAnabaptism \nAnglicanism \nLutheranism \nReformed \n(Latin Church) \nCatholic Church\n(Eastern Catholic Churches) \nEastern Orthodox Church\nOriental Orthodox Churches\nChurch of the East\nSchism \"(1552)\"\nAssyrian Church of the East \nAncient Church of the East \nProtestant Reformation\n\"(16th century)\"\nGreat Schism \"(1054)\"\nNestorian Schism \"(431)\"\nChalcedonian Schism \"(451)\"\n\"Early Christianity\" \n\"Great Church\"\n(Full communion) \n(Not shown are ante-Nicene, nontrinitarian, and restorationist denominations.)\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59478", "revid": "20308622", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59478", "title": "Monophysites", "text": ""}
{"id": "59479", "revid": "15953555", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59479", "title": "Monothelites", "text": ""}
{"id": "59480", "revid": "14703151", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59480", "title": "Presidio of San Francisco", "text": "The Presidio of San Francisco (originally, El Presidio Real de San Francisco or The Royal Fortress of Saint Francis) is a park and former U.S. Army post on the northern tip of the San Francisco Peninsula in San Francisco, California, and is part of the Golden Gate National Recreation Area.\nIt had been a fortified location since September 17, 1776, when New Spain established the presidio to gain a foothold in Alta California and the San Francisco Bay. It passed to Mexico in 1820, which in turn passed it to the United States in 1848. As part of a military reduction program under the Base Realignment and Closure (BRAC) process from 1988, Congress voted to end the Presidio's status as an active military installation of the U.S. Army. On October 1, 1994, it was transferred to the National Park Service, ending 219 years of military use and beginning its next phase of mixed commercial and public use.\nIn 1996, the United States Congress created the Presidio Trust to oversee and manage the interior 80% of the park's lands, with the National Park Service managing the coastal 20%. In a first-of-its-kind structure, Congress mandated that the Presidio Trust make the Presidio financially self-sufficient by 2013. The Presidio achieved the goal in 2005, eight years ahead of the deadline.\nThe Presidio is at the southern end of the Golden Gate Bridge, and is crossed by the bridge approach road.\nThe park has many wooded areas, hills, and scenic vistas overlooking the Golden Gate itself, the Bridge, San Francisco Bay, and the Pacific Ocean. It was recognized as a California Historical Landmark in 1933 and as a National Historic Landmark in 1962.\nHistory.\nMilitary use.\nThe Presidio was originally a Spanish fort sited by Juan Bautista de Anza on March 28, 1776, built by a party led by Jos\u00e9 Joaqu\u00edn Moraga later that year. The limestone used to build the presidio was mined by Ohlones at the Rockaway Quarry. In 1783, the Presidio's garrison numbered only 33 men. Upon Mexican independence from Spain in 1821, it was briefly operated as a Mexican fortification. The Presidio was seized by the U.S. military at the start of the Mexican\u2013American War in 1846. It was officially reopened by the Americans in 1848 and became home to several army headquarters and units, the last being the United States 6th Army. Several famous U.S. generals, such as William Tecumseh Sherman, George Henry Thomas, and John J. Pershing, made their homes here.\nDuring its long history, the Presidio was involved in most of America's military engagements in the Pacific Rim. Importantly, it was the assembly point for army forces that invaded the Philippines during the Spanish\u2013American War, America's first significant military engagement in the region.\nBeginning in the 1890s, the Presidio was home to the Letterman Army Medical Center (LAMC), named in 1911 for Jonathan Letterman, the medical director of the Civil War\u2013era Army of the Potomac. LAMC provided thousands of war-wounded with high-quality medical care during every US foreign conflict of the 20th century.\nOne of the last two remaining cemeteries within the city's limits is the San Francisco National Cemetery. Among the military personnel interred there are General Frederick Funston, hero of the Spanish\u2013American War and the Philippine\u2013American War and commanding officer of the Presidio at the time of the 1906 earthquake; and General Irvin McDowell, a Union Army commander who lost the First Battle of Bull Run.\nThe Marine Hospital operated a cemetery for merchant seamen approximately from the hospital property. Based on city municipal records, historians estimate that the cemetery was used from 1885 to 1912. As part of the \"Trails Forever\" initiative, the Parks Conservancy, the National Park Service, and the Presidio Trust partnered to build a walking trail along the south side of the site featuring interpretive signage about its history.\nThe Presidio was the home of the Western Defense Command headquarters during World War II. It was here that Lieutenant General John L. DeWitt signed 108 Civilian Exclusion Orders and directives for the internment of Japanese Americans under the authority of Executive Order 9066 signed by President Franklin D. Roosevelt on February 19, 1942.\nThe Presidio sent its few remaining units to war for the last time in 1991 for Desert Storm, the First Gulf War. The role of the Sixth Army was the management of training and coordinating the deployment of Army National Guard and U.S. Army Reserve units in the Western U.S. for Operation Desert Storm.\nPreservation.\nAfter a hard-fought battle, the Presidio averted being sold at auction and came under the management of the Presidio Trust, a U.S. government corporation established by an act of Congress in 1996.\nThe Presidio Trust now manages most of the park in partnership with the National Park Service. The trust has jurisdiction over the interior of 80 percent of the Presidio, including nearly all its historic structures. The National Park Service manages coastal areas. Primary law enforcement throughout the Presidio is the jurisdiction of the United States Park Police.\nOne of the main objectives of the Presidio Trust's program was achieving financial self-sufficiency by fiscal year 2013, which was reached in 2006. Immediately after its inception, the trust began preparing rehabilitation plans for the park. Many areas had to be decontaminated before being prepared for public use.\nThe Presidio Trust Act calls for the \"preservation of the cultural and historic integrity of the Presidio for public use.\" The Act also requires that the Presidio Trust be financially self-sufficient by 2013. These imperatives have resulted in numerous conflicts between the need to maximize income by leasing historic buildings and permitting public use, despite most structures being rented privately. Further differences have arisen from the divergent needs to preserve the integrity of the National Historic Landmark District in the face of new construction, competing pressures for natural habitat restoration, and requirements for commercial purposes that impede public access.\nCrissy Field, a former airfield, has undergone extensive restoration and is now a popular recreational area. It borders on the San Francisco Marina in the east and on the Golden Gate Bridge in the west.\nThe park has a large inventory of approximately 800 buildings, many of them historical. By 2004, about 50% of the buildings on park grounds had been restored and partially remodeled. The Presidio Trust has contracted commercial real estate management companies to help attract and retain residential and commercial tenants. The total capacity is estimated at 5,000 residents when all buildings have been rehabilitated. Among the Presidio's residents is The Bay School of San Francisco, a private, coeducational college preparatory school located in the central Main Post area. Others include The Gordon and Betty Moore Foundation, Tides Foundation, the Arion Press, Sports Basement Presidio, and The Walt Disney Family Museum, a museum in the memory of Walt Disney. Many various commercial enterprises also lease buildings on the Presidio.\nThe Thoreau Center for Sustainability preserved sections of the Letterman Army Hospital .\nThe Presidio of San Francisco is the only site in a national recreation area with an extensive residential leasing program.\nThe Presidio has four creeks that park stewards and volunteers are restoring to expand their riparian habitats' former extents. The creeks are Lobos and Dragonfly creeks, El Polin Spring, and Coyote Gulch.\n1999 \u2013 present.\nThe Trust entered a significant agreement with Lucasfilm to build a new facility called the Letterman Digital Arts Center (LDAC), which is now Lucasfilm's corporate headquarters. The site replaced portions of what was the Letterman Hospital. George Lucas won the development rights for of the Presidio in June 1999, after beating out several rival plans, including a leading proposal by the Shorenstein Company. LDAC replaced the former Lucasfilm headquarters in San Rafael. The $300 million development includes nearly of office space and a underground parking garage with a capacity of 2,500 employees. Lucasfilm's Industrial Light &amp; Magic, Lucas Licensing, and Lucas Online divisions reside at the site. George Lucas's proposal included plans for a high-tech Presidio museum and a \"Great Lawn\" that is now open to the public.\nIn 2007, Donald Fisher, founder of the Gap clothing stores and former board member of the Presidio Trust, announced a plan to build a museum tentatively named the Contemporary Art Museum of the Presidio, to house his art collection. Due to opposition, Fisher withdrew his plans to build the museum in the Presidio and instead donated the art to the San Francisco Museum of Modern Art before he died in 2009.\nAs the Doyle Drive viaduct was deemed seismically unsafe and obsolete, construction started on the demolition of Doyle Drive in 2008 to replace the structure with a flat, broad-lane highway with a tunnel through the bluffs above Crissy Field, called the Presidio Parkway. The project cost $1.1 billion and was completed in 2015, a year ahead of schedule.\nThe Trust plans to create a promenade that will link the Lombard Gate and the new Lucasfilm campus to the Main Post and, ultimately, to the Golden Gate Bridge. The promenade is part of a trail expansion plan that will add of new pathways and eight scenic overlooks throughout the park.\nIn October 2008, artist Andy Goldsworthy constructed the first of a series of sculptures in the Presidio, the \"Spire\". It is tall and located near the Arguello Gate. It represents the tree replanting effort that has been underway at the Presidio. \"Spire\" was followed by \"Wood Line\" in 2011, \"Tree Fall\" in 2013, and \"Earth Wall\" in 2014.\nIn 2010, a trampoline park called House of Air opened inside of an old aircraft hangar.\nAs of 2023, it is estimated that there may be at least four coyote families living in the park.\nPresidio visitor centers.\nThe visitor centers are operated by the National Park Service:\nCrissy Field Center.\nCrissy Field Center (former Air Service/Air Corps/Army Air Forces airfield) is an urban environmental education center with programs for schools, public workshops, after-school programs, summer camps, and more. The center is operated by the Golden Gate National Parks Conservancy and overlooks a restored tidal marsh. The facilities include interactive environmental exhibits, a media lab, a resource library, an art workshop, a science lab, a gathering room, a teaching kitchen, a caf\u00e9, and a bookstore. The landscape of Crissy Field was designed by George Hargreaves. The project restored a naturally functioning and sustaining tidal wetland as a habitat for flora and fauna, previously not in the site's evidence. It also restored a historic grass airfield that became a culturally significant military airfield between 1919 and 1936. The park at Crissy Field expanded and widened the recreational opportunities of the existing San Francisco shore to a broader number of Presidio residents and visitors.\nPresidio Tunnel Tops.\nA major component of the Presidio's attractions is the Presidio Tunnel Tops, which has created a on top of the tunneled portions of Doyle Drive. The park contains several meadows and walking trails, along with viewpoints for major landmarks such as the Golden Gate Bridge. Negotiations between Caltrans, the San Francisco County Transportation Authority, and the Presidio Trust to finalize the land transfer for the park lasted from 2015 to 2018. The budget for the park was $100 million, funded with public funds from the Presidio Trust and private contributions. The park opened for public use on July 17, 2022. In July 2025, Outpost Meadow, a 1.5 acre expansion opened to the public. Il Parco, a cafe is located at the edge of the Tunnel Tops.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59483", "revid": "2927383", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59483", "title": "Carl Wilhelm Scheele", "text": "Swedish German chemist who discovered oxygen (1742\u20131786)\nCarl Wilhelm Scheele (, ; 9 December 1742 \u2013 21 May 1786) was a German-Swedish pharmaceutical chemist. \nScheele discovered oxygen (although Joseph Priestley published his findings first), and identified the elements molybdenum, tungsten, barium, nitrogen, and chlorine, among others. Scheele discovered organic acids tartaric, oxalic, uric, lactic, and citric, as well as hydrofluoric, hydrocyanic, and arsenic acids. He preferred speaking German to Swedish his whole life, as German was commonly spoken among Swedish pharmacists.\nBiography.\nScheele was born in Stralsund, in western Pomerania, which at the time was a Swedish Dominion inside the Holy Roman Empire. Scheele's father, Joachim (or Johann) Christian Scheele, was a grain dealer and brewer from a respected Pomeranian family. His mother was Margaretha Eleanore Warnekros.\nFriends of Scheele's parents taught him the art of reading prescriptions and the meaning of chemical and pharmaceutical signs. Then, in 1757, at the age of fourteen, Carl was sent to Gothenburg as an apprentice pharmacist to another family friend and apothecary, Martin Andreas Bauch. Scheele retained this position for eight years. During this time he ran experiments late into the night and read the works of Nicolas Lemery, Caspar Neumann, Johann von L\u00f6wenstern-Kunckel and Georg Ernst Stahl (the champion of the phlogiston theory). Much of Scheele's later theoretical speculations were based upon Stahl.\nIn 1765 Scheele worked under the progressive and well-informed apothecary C. M. Kjellstr\u00f6m in Malm\u00f6, and became acquainted with Anders Jahan Retzius who was a lecturer at the University of Lund and later a professor of chemistry at Stockholm. Scheele arrived in Stockholm between 1767 and 1769 and worked as a pharmacist. During this period he discovered tartaric acid and with his friend, Retzius, studied the relation of quicklime to calcium carbonate. While in the capital, he also became acquainted with figures including Abraham B\u00e4ck, Peter Jonas Bergius, Bengt Bergius and Carl Friedreich von Schultzenheim.\nIn the fall of 1770 Scheele became director of the laboratory of the great pharmacy of Locke, at Uppsala, about 65 km (40 mi) north of Stockholm. The laboratory supplied chemicals to Professor of Chemistry Torbern Bergman. A friendship developed between Scheele and Bergman after Scheele analyzed a reaction which Bergman and his assistant, Johan Gottlieb Gahn, could not resolve. The reaction was between melted saltpetre and acetic acid that produced a red vapor. Further study of this reaction later led to Scheele's discovery of oxygen (see \"The theory of phlogiston\" below). Based upon this friendship and respect, Scheele was given free use of Bergman's laboratory. Both men were profiting from their working relationship. In 1774 Scheele was nominated by Peter Jonas Bergius to be a member of the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences and was elected 4 February 1775. In 1775 Scheele also managed for a short time a pharmacy in K\u00f6ping. Between the end of 1776 and the beginning of 1777 Scheele established his own business there.\nOn 29 October 1777, Scheele took his seat for the first and only time at a meeting of the Academy of Sciences and on 11 November passed the examination as apothecary before the Royal Medical College, doing so with the highest honours. After his return to K\u00f6ping he devoted himself, outside of his business, to scientific researches which resulted in a long series of important papers.\nIsaac Asimov called him \"hard-luck Scheele\" because he made a number of chemical discoveries that were later credited to others.\nExisting theories before Scheele.\nBy the time he was a teenager, Scheele had learned the dominant theory of gases which in the 1770s was the phlogiston theory. Phlogiston, classified as \"matter of fire\", was supposed to be released from any burning material, and when it was exhausted, combustion would stop. When Scheele discovered oxygen he called it \"fire air\" as it supported combustion. Scheele explained oxygen using phlogistical terms because he did not believe that his discovery disproved the phlogiston theory.\nBefore Scheele made his discovery of oxygen, he studied air. Air was thought to be an element that made up the environment in which chemical reactions took place but did not interfere with the reactions. Scheele's investigation of air enabled him to conclude that air was a mixture of \"fire air\" and \"foul air\"; in other words, a mixture of two gases. Scheele performed numerous experiments in which he heated substances such as saltpetre (potassium nitrate), manganese dioxide, heavy metal nitrates, silver carbonate and mercuric oxide. In all of these experiments, he isolated the same gas: his \"fire air\", which he believed combined with phlogiston in materials to be released during heat-releasing reactions.\nHowever, his first publication, \"Chemische Abhandlung von der Luft und dem Feuer\", was delivered to the printer Swederus in 1775, but not published until 1777, at which time both Joseph Priestley and Antoine Lavoisier had already published their experimental data and conclusions concerning oxygen and the phlogiston theory. Scheele was credited for finding oxygen with two other people, Joseph Priestley and Antoine Lavoisier. The first English edition, \"Chemical Observation and Experiments on Air and Fire\" was published in 1780, with an introduction \"Chemical Treatise on Air and Fire\".\nThe theory of phlogiston.\n Scheele achieved astonishingly prolific and important results without the expensive laboratory equipment to which his Parisian contemporary Antoine Lavoisier was accustomed. Through the studies of Lavoisier, Priestley, Scheele, and others, chemistry was made a standardized field with consistent procedures. Although Scheele was unable to grasp the significance of his discovery of the substance that Lavoisier later named oxygen, his work was essential for the abandonment of the long-held theory of phlogiston.\nScheele's study of the gas not yet named oxygen was prompted by a complaint by Torbern Olof Bergman, a professor at Uppsala University who would eventually become Scheele's friend. Bergman informed Scheele that the saltpeter he had purchased from Scheele's employer, after long heating, produced red vapors (now known to be nitrogen dioxide) when it came into contact with acetic acid. Scheele's quick explanation was that the saltpeter had absorbed phlogiston with the heat (had been reduced to nitrite, in modern terms) and gave off a new phlogisticated gas as an active principle when combined with an acid (even a weak acid).\nBergman next suggested that Scheele analyze the properties of manganese(IV) oxide. It was through his studies of manganese(IV) oxide that Scheele developed his concept of \"fire air\" (his name for oxygen). He ultimately obtained oxygen by heating mercuric oxide, silver carbonate, magnesium nitrate, and other nitrate salts. Scheele wrote about his findings to Lavoisier who was able to see the significance of the results. His discovery of oxygen (ca. 1771) was chronologically earlier than the corresponding work of Priestley and Lavoisier, but he did not publish this discovery until 1777, after both of his rivals had published.\nAlthough Scheele would always believe in some form of the phlogiston theory, his work reduced phlogiston to an unusually simple form, complicated only by the fact that chemists of Scheele's day still believed that light and heat were elements and were to be found in combination with them. Thus, Scheele assumed that hydrogen was composed of phlogiston (a reducing principle lost when objects were burned) plus heat. Scheele speculated that his fire air or oxygen (which he found the active part of air, estimating it to compose one quarter of air) combined with the phlogiston in objects to produce either light or heat (light and heat were presumed to be composed of differing proportions of phlogiston and oxygen).\nWhen other chemists later showed water is produced when burning hydrogen and that rusting of metals added weight to them and that passing water over hot iron gave hydrogen, Scheele modified his theory to suggest that oxygen was the salt (or \"saline principle\" of water), and that when added to iron, water was reproduced, which added weight to the iron as rust.\nNew elements and compounds.\nIn addition to his joint recognition for the discovery of oxygen, Scheele is argued to have been the first to discover other chemical elements such as barium (1772), manganese (1774), molybdenum (1778), and tungsten (1781), as well as several chemical compounds, including citric acid, lactic acid, glycerol, hydrogen cyanide (also known, in aqueous solution, as prussic acid), hydrogen fluoride, and hydrogen sulfide (1777). In addition, he discovered a process similar to pasteurization, along with a means of mass-producing phosphorus (1769), leading Sweden to become one of the world's leading producers of matches.\nScheele made one other very important scientific discovery in 1774, arguably more revolutionary than his isolation of oxygen. He identified lime, silica, and iron in a specimen of pyrolusite (impure manganese dioxide) given to him by his friend, Johann Gottlieb Gahn, but could not identify an additional component (this was the manganese, which Scheele recognized was present as a new element, but could not isolate). When he treated the pyrolusite with hydrochloric acid over a warm sand bath, a yellow-green gas with a strong odor was produced. He found that the gas sank to the bottom of an open bottle and was denser than ordinary air. He also noted that the gas was not soluble in water. It turned corks a yellow color and removed all color from wet, blue litmus paper and some flowers. He called this gas with bleaching abilities, \"dephlogisticated muriatic acid\" (dephlogisticated hydrochloric acid, or oxidized hydrochloric acid). Eventually, Sir Humphry Davy named the gas chlorine, with reference to its pale green colour.\nChlorine's bleaching properties were eventually turned into an industry by Berzelius, and became the foundation of a second industry of disinfection and deodorization of putrefied tissue and wounds (including wounds in living humans) in the hands of Labarraque, by 1824.\nDeath.\nIn the fall of 1785, Scheele began to suffer from symptoms described as kidney disease. In early 1786, he also contracted a disease of the skin, which, combined with his kidney problems, so enfeebled him that he could foresee an early death. With that in mind, he married the widow of his predecessor, Pohl, two days before he died, so that he could pass undisputed title to his pharmacy and his possessions to her.\nWhile Scheele's experiments generated substances which have long since been found to be hazardous, the compounds and elements he used to start his experiments were dangerous to begin with, especially heavy metals. Like most of his contemporaries, in an age where there were few methods of chemical characterisation, Scheele would smell and taste any new substances he discovered. Cumulative exposure to arsenic, mercury, lead, and their compounds and, perhaps, hydrofluoric acid, which he had discovered, as well as other substances, took their toll on Scheele. He died at the early age of 43, on 21 May 1786, at his home in K\u00f6ping. Doctors said that he died of mercury poisoning. \nPublished papers.\nAll of the following papers were published by Scheele within a span of fifteen years.\nScheele's papers appeared first in the \"Transactions\" of the Swedish Academy of Sciences, and in various periodicals such as Lorenz Florenz Friedrich von Crell's \"Chemische Annalen\". Scheele's work was collected and published in four languages beginning with \"M\u00e9moires de Chymie\" by Mme. Claudine Picardet in 1785 and \"Chemical Essays\" by Thomas Beddoes in 1786, followed by Latin and German.\nAnother English translation was published by Dr Leonard Dobbin, in 1931.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59484", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59484", "title": "System/390", "text": ""}
{"id": "59485", "revid": "44062", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59485", "title": "Yuma", "text": "Yuma can refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "59486", "revid": "421426", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59486", "title": "Yuman", "text": ""}
{"id": "59487", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59487", "title": "Nuragici people", "text": ""}
{"id": "59489", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59489", "title": "Perkunos", "text": ""}
{"id": "59490", "revid": "279219", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59490", "title": "Barytine", "text": ""}
{"id": "59491", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59491", "title": "Pikullos", "text": ""}
