{"id": "60559", "revid": "14419815", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60559", "title": "Emily Davison", "text": "English suffragette (1872\u20131913)\nEmily Wilding Davison (11 October 1872\u00a0\u2013 8 June 1913) was an English suffragette who fought for votes for women in Britain in the early twentieth century. A member of the Women's Social and Political Union (WSPU) and a militant fighter for her cause, she was arrested on nine occasions, went on hunger strike seven times and was force-fed on forty-nine occasions. She died after being hit by King George\u00a0V's horse Anmer at the 1913 Derby when she walked onto the track during the race.\nDavison grew up in a middle-class family, and studied at Royal Holloway College, London, and St Hugh's College, Oxford, before taking jobs as a teacher and governess. She joined the WSPU in November 1906 and became an officer of the organisation and a chief steward during marches. She soon became known in the organisation for her militant action; her tactics included breaking windows, throwing stones, setting fire to postboxes, planting bombs and, on three occasions, hiding overnight in the Palace of Westminster\u2014including on the night of the 1911 census. Her funeral on 14 June 1913 was organised by the WSPU. A procession of 5,000 suffragettes and their supporters accompanied her coffin and 50,000 people lined the route through London; her coffin was then taken by train to the family plot in Morpeth, Northumberland.\nDavison was a staunch feminist and passionate Christian, and considered that socialism was a moral and political force for good. Much of her life has been interpreted through the manner of her death. She gave no prior explanation for what she planned to do at the Derby and the uncertainty of her motives and intentions has affected how she has been judged by history. Several theories have been put forward, including accident, suicide or an attempt to pin a suffragette flag to the king's horse.\nBiography.\nEarly life and education.\nEmily Wilding Davison was born at Roxburgh House, Greenwich, in south-east London on 11 October 1872. Her parents were Charles Davison, a retired merchant, and Margaret \"n\u00e9e\" Caisley, both of Morpeth, Northumberland. At the time of his marriage to Margaret in 1868, Charles was 45 and Margaret was 19. Emily was the third of four children born to the couple; her younger sister died of diphtheria in 1880 at the age of six. The marriage to Margaret was Charles's second; his first marriage produced nine children before the death of his wife in 1866.\nThe family moved to Sawbridgeworth, Hertfordshire, while Davison was still a baby; until the age of 11 she was educated at home. When her parents moved the family back to London she went to a day school, then spent a year studying in Dunkirk, France. When she was 13 she attended Kensington High School and later won a bursary to Royal Holloway College in 1891 to study literature. Her father died in early 1893 and she was forced to end her studies because her mother could not afford the fees of \u00a320 a term.\nOn leaving Holloway, Davison became a live-in governess, and continued studying in the evenings. She saved enough money to enrol at St Hugh's College, Oxford, for one term to sit her finals; she achieved first-class honours in English, but could not graduate because degrees from Oxford were closed to women. She worked briefly at a church school in Edgbaston between 1895 and 1896, but found it difficult and moved to Seabury, a private school in Worthing, where she was more settled; she left the town in 1898 and became a private tutor and governess to a family in Northamptonshire. In 1902 she began reading for a degree at the University of London; she graduated with third-class honours in 1908.\nActivism.\nDavison joined the Women's Social and Political Union (WSPU) in November 1906. Formed in 1903 by Emmeline Pankhurst, the WSPU brought together those who thought that militant, confrontational tactics were needed to achieve their ultimate goal of women's suffrage. Davison joined in the WSPU's campaigning and became an officer of the organisation and a chief steward during marches. In 1908 or 1909 she left her job teaching and dedicated herself full-time to the union. She began taking increasingly confrontational actions, which prompted Sylvia Pankhurst\u2014the daughter of Emmeline and a full-time member of the WSPU\u2014to describe her as \"one of the most daring and reckless of the militants\". In March 1909 she was arrested for the first time; she had been part of a deputation of 21 women who marched from Caxton Hall to see the prime minister, H. H. Asquith, the march ended in a fracas with police and she was arrested for \"assaulting the police in the execution of their duty\". She was sentenced to a month in prison. After her release she wrote to \"Votes for Women\", the WSPU's newspaper, saying that \"Through my humble work in this noblest of all causes I have come into a fullness of joy and an interest in living which I never before experienced\".\nIn July 1909 Davison was arrested with fellow suffragettes Mary Leigh and Alice Paul for interrupting a public meeting from which women were barred, held by the Chancellor of the Exchequer, David Lloyd George; she was sentenced to two months for obstruction. She went on hunger strike and was released after five and a half days, during which time she lost ; she stated that she \"felt very weak\" as a result. She was arrested again in September the same year for throwing stones to break windows at a political meeting; the assembly, which was to protest at the 1909 budget, was only open to men. She was sent to Strangeways prison for two months. She again went on hunger strike and was released after two and a half days. She subsequently wrote to \"The Manchester Guardian\" to justify her action of throwing stones as one \"which was meant as a warning to the general public of the personal risk they run in future if they go to Cabinet Ministers' meetings anywhere\". She went on to write that this was justified because of the \"unconstitutional action of Cabinet Ministers in addressing 'public meetings' from which a large section of the public is excluded\".\nDavison was arrested again in early October 1909, while preparing to throw a stone at the cabinet minister Sir Walter Runciman; she acted in the mistaken belief the car in which he travelled contained Lloyd George. A suffragette colleague\u2014Constance Lytton\u2014threw hers first, before the police managed to intervene. Davison was charged with attempted assault, but released; Lytton was imprisoned for a month. Davison used her court appearances to give speeches; excerpts and quotes from these were published in the newspapers. Two weeks later she threw stones at Runciman at a political meeting in Radcliffe, Greater Manchester; she was arrested and sentenced to a week's hard labour. She again went on hunger strike, but the government had authorised the use of force-feeding on prisoners. The historian Gay Gullickson describes the tactic as \"extremely painful, psychologically harrowing, and raised the possibility of dying in jail from medical error or official misjudgment\". Davison said that the experience \"will haunt me with its horror all my life, and is almost indescribable.\u00a0... The torture was barbaric\". Following the first episode of forced feeding, and to prevent a repeat of the experience, Davison barricaded herself in her cell using her bed and a stool and refused to allow the prison authorities to enter. They broke one of the window panes to the cell and turned a fire hose on her for 15 minutes, while attempting to force the door open. By the time the door was opened, the cell was six inches deep in water. She was taken to the prison hospital where she was warmed with hot water bottles. She was force-fed shortly afterwards and released after eight days. Davison's treatment prompted the Labour Party MP Keir Hardie to ask a question in the House of Commons about the \"assault committed on a woman prisoner in Strangeways\"; Davison sued the prison authorities for the use of the hose and, in January 1910, she was awarded 40 shillings in damages.\nIn April 1910 Davison decided to gain entry to the floor of the House of Commons to ask Asquith about the vote for women. She entered the Palace of Westminster with other members of the public and made her way into the heating system, where she hid overnight. On a trip from her hiding place to find water, she was arrested by a policeman, but not prosecuted. The same month she became an employee of the WSPU and began to write for \"Votes for Women\".\nA bipartisan group of MPs formed a Conciliation Committee in early 1910 and proposed a Conciliation Bill that would have brought the vote to a million women, so long as they owned property. While the bill was being discussed, the WSPU put in a temporary truce on activity. The bill failed that November when Asquith's Liberal government reneged on a promise to allow parliamentary time to debate the bill. A WSPU delegation of around 300 women tried to present him with a petition, but were prevented from doing so by an aggressive police response; the suffragettes, who called the day Black Friday, complained of assault, much of which was sexual in nature. Davison was not one of the 122 people arrested, but was incensed by the treatment of the delegation; the following day she broke several windows in the Crown Office in parliament. She was arrested and sentenced to a month in prison. She went on hunger strike again and was force-fed for eight days before being released.\nOn the night of the 1911 census, 2 April, Davison hid in a cupboard in St Mary Undercroft, the chapel of the Palace of Westminster. She remained hidden overnight to avoid being entered onto the census; the attempt was part of a wider suffragette action to avoid being listed by the state. She was found by a cleaner, who reported her presence; Davison was arrested but not charged. The Clerk of Works at the House of Commons completed a census form to include Davison in the returns. She was included in the census twice, as her landlady also included her as being present at her lodgings. Davison had continually written letters to the press to put forward the WSPU position in a non-violent manner\u2014she had 12 published in \"The Manchester Guardian\" between 1909 and 1911\u2014and she undertook a campaign between 1911 and 1913 during which she wrote nearly 200 letters to over 50 newspapers. Several of her letters were published, including about 26 in \"The Sunday Times\" between September 1910 and 1912.\nDavison developed the new tactic of setting fire to postboxes in December 1911. She was arrested for arson on the postbox outside parliament and admitted to setting fire to two others. Sentenced to six months in Holloway Prison, she did not go on hunger strike at first, but the authorities required that she be force-fed between 29 February and 7 March 1912 because they considered her health and appetite to be in decline. In June she and other suffragette inmates barricaded themselves in their cells and went on hunger strike; the authorities broke down the cell doors and force-fed the strikers. Following the force-feeding, Davison decided on what she described as a \"desperate protest\u00a0... made to put a stop to the hideous torture, which was now our lot\" and jumped from one of the interior balconies of the prison. She later wrote:\n...\u00a0as soon as I got out I climbed on to the railing and threw myself out to the wire-netting, a distance of between 20 and 30 feet. The idea in my mind was \"one big tragedy may save many others\". I realised that my best means of carrying out my purpose was the iron staircase. When a good moment came, quite deliberately I walked upstairs and threw myself from the top, as I meant, on to the iron staircase. If I had been successful I should undoubtedly have been killed, as it was a clear drop of 30 to 40 feet. But I caught on the edge of the netting. I then threw myself forward on my head with all my might.\nShe cracked two vertebrae and badly injured her head. Shortly afterwards, and despite her injuries, she was again force-fed before being released ten days early. She wrote to \"The Pall Mall Gazette\" to explain why she \"attempted to commit suicide\":\nI did it deliberately and with all my power, because I felt that by nothing but the sacrifice of human life would the nation be brought to realise the horrible torture our women face! If I had succeeded I am sure that forcible feeding could not in all conscience have been resorted to again.\nAs a result of her action Davison suffered discomfort for the rest of her life. Her arson of postboxes was not authorised by the WSPU leadership and this, together with her other actions, led to her falling out of favour with the organisation; Sylvia Pankhurst later wrote that the WSPU leadership wanted \"to discourage\u00a0... [Davison] in such tendencies\u00a0... She was condemned and ostracized as a self-willed person who persisted in acting upon her own initiative without waiting for official instructions.\" A statement Davison wrote on her release from prison for \"The Suffragette\"\u2014the second official newspaper of the WSPU\u2014was published by the union after her death.\nIn November 1912 Davison was arrested for a final time, for attacking a Baptist minister with a horsewhip or dogwhip, while on a stationary train in Aberdeen railway station; she had mistaken the man for Lloyd George. She was sentenced to ten days' imprisonment and released early following a four-day hunger strike. It was the seventh time she had been on hunger strike, and the forty-ninth time she had been force-fed.\nFatal injury at the Derby.\nOn 4 June 1913 Davison obtained two flags bearing the suffragette colours of purple, white and green from the WSPU offices; she then travelled by train to Epsom, Surrey, to attend the Derby. She positioned herself in the infield at Tattenham Corner, the final bend before the home straight. At this point in the race, with some of the horses having passed her, she ducked under the guard rail and ran onto the course; she may have held in her hands one of the suffragette flags. She reached up to the reins of Anmer\u2014King George\u00a0V's horse, ridden by Herbert Jones\u2014and was hit by the animal, which would have been travelling at around per hour, four seconds after stepping onto the course. Anmer fell in the collision and partly rolled over his jockey, who had his foot momentarily caught in the stirrup. Davison was knocked to the ground unconscious; some reports say she was kicked in the head by Anmer, but the surgeon who operated on Davison stated that \"I could find no trace of her having been kicked by a horse\". The event was captured by three newsreel cameras. The result of the race was not deemed to be void.\nBystanders rushed onto the track and attempted to aid Davison and Jones until both were taken to the nearby Epsom Cottage Hospital. Davison regained partial consciousness in hospital; she was operated on two days after the collision. While in hospital she was sent hate mail. She died on 8 June, aged 40, from a fracture at the base of her skull. Found in Davison's effects were the two suffragette flags, the return stub of her railway ticket to London, her race card, a ticket to a suffragette dance later that day and a diary with appointments for the following week. The King and Queen Mary were present at the race and made enquiries about the health of both Jones and Davison. The King later recorded in his diary that it was \"a most regrettable and scandalous proceeding\"; in her journal the Queen described Davison as a \"horrid woman\". Jones suffered a concussion and other injuries; he spent the evening of 4 June in London, before returning home the following day. He could recall little of the event: \"She seemed to clutch at my horse, and I felt it strike her.\" He recovered sufficiently to race Anmer at Ascot Racecourse two weeks later.\nThe inquest into Davison's death took place at Epsom on 10 June; Jones was not well enough to attend. Davison's half-brother, Captain Henry Davison, gave evidence about his sister, saying that she was \"a woman of very strong reasoning faculties, and passionately devoted to the women's movement\". The coroner decided that, in the absence of evidence to the contrary, Davison had not committed suicide. The coroner also decided that, although she had waited until she could see the horses, \"from the evidence it was clear that the woman did not make for His Majesty's horse in particular\". The verdict of the court was:\nthat Miss Emily Wilding Davison died of fracture of the base of the skull, caused by being accidentally knocked down by a horse through wilfully rushing on to the racecourse on Epsom Downs during the progress of the race for the Derby; death was due to misadventure.\nDavison's purpose in attending the Derby and walking onto the course is unclear. She did not discuss her plans with anyone or leave a note. Several theories have been suggested, including that she intended to cross the track, believing that all horses had passed; that she wanted to pull down the King's horse; that she was trying to attach one of the WSPU flags to a horse; or that she intended to throw herself in front of one of the horses. The historian Elizabeth Crawford considers that \"subsequent explanations of\u00a0... [Davison's] action have created a tangle of fictions, false deductions, hearsay, conjecture, misrepresentation and theory\".\nIn 2013 a Channel 4 documentary used forensic examiners who digitised the original nitrate film from the three cameras present. The film was digitally cleaned and examined. Their examination suggests that Davison intended to throw a suffragette flag around the neck of a horse or attach it to the horse's bridle. A flag was gathered from the course; this was put up for auction and, as at 2021, it hangs in the Houses of Parliament. Michael Tanner, the horse-racing historian and author of a history of the 1913 Derby, doubts the authenticity of the item. Sotheby's, the auction house that sold it, describe it as a sash that was \"reputed\" to have been worn by Davison. The seller stated that her father, Richard Pittway Burton, was the Clerk of the Course at Epsom; Tanner's search of records shows Burton was listed as a dock labourer two weeks prior to the Derby. The official Clerk of the Course on the day of the Derby was Henry Mayson Dorling. When the police listed Davison's possessions, they itemised the two flags provided by the WSPU, both folded up and pinned to the inside of her jacket. They measured 44.5 by 27 inches (113 \u00d7 69\u00a0cm); the sash displayed at the Houses of Parliament measures 82 by 12 inches (210 \u00d7 30\u00a0cm).\nTanner considers that Davison's choice of the King's horse was \"pure happenstance\", as her position on the corner would have left her with a limited view. Examination of the newsreels by the forensic team employed by the Channel 4 documentary determined that Davison was closer to the start of the bend than had been previously assumed, and would have had a better view of the oncoming horses.\nThe contemporary news media were largely unsympathetic to Davison, and many publications \"questioned her sanity and characterised her actions as suicidal\". \"The Pall Mall Gazette\" said it had \"pity for the dementia which led an unfortunate woman to seek a grotesque and meaningless kind of 'martyrdom'\", while \"The Daily Express\" described Davison as \"A well-known malignant suffragette, \u00a0... [who] has a long record of convictions for complicity in suffragette outrages.\" The journalist for \"The Daily Telegraph\" observed that \"Deep in the hearts of every onlooker was a feeling of fierce resentment with the miserable woman\"; the unnamed writer in \"The Daily Mirror\" opined that \"It was quite evident that her condition was serious; otherwise many of the crowd would have fulfilled their evident desire to lynch her.\"\nThe WSPU were quick to describe her as a martyr, part of a campaign to identify her as such. \"The Suffragette\" newspaper marked Davison's death by issuing a copy showing a female angel with raised arms standing in front of the guard rail of a racecourse. The paper's editorial stated that \"Davison has proved that there are in the twentieth-century people who are willing to lay down their lives for an ideal\". Religious phraseology was used in the issue to describe her act, including \"Greater love hath no man than this, that he lay down his life for his friends\", which Gullickson reports as being repeated several times in subsequent discussions of the events. A year after the Derby, \"The Suffragette\" included \"The Price of Liberty\", an essay by Davison. In it, she had written \"To lay down life for friends, that is glorious, selfless, inspiring! But to re-enact the tragedy of Calvary for generations yet unborn, that is the last consummate sacrifice of the Militant\".\nFuneral.\nOn 14 June 1913 Davison's body was transported from Epsom to London; her coffin was inscribed \"Fight on. God will give the victory.\" Five thousand women formed a procession, followed by hundreds of male supporters, that took the body between Victoria and Kings Cross stations; the procession stopped at St George's, Bloomsbury for a brief service led by its vicar, Charles Baumgarten, and Claude Hinscliff, who were members of the Church League for Women's Suffrage. The women marched in ranks wearing the suffragette colours of white and purple, which \"The Manchester Guardian\" described as having \"something of the deliberate brilliance of a military funeral\"; 50,000 people lined the route. The event, which was organised by Grace Roe, is described by June Purvis, Davison's biographer, as \"the last of the great suffragette spectacles\". Emmeline Pankhurst planned to be part of the procession, but she was arrested on the morning, ostensibly to be returned to prison under the \"Cat and Mouse\" Act (1913).\nThe coffin was taken by train to Newcastle upon Tyne with a suffragette guard of honour for the journey; crowds met the train at its scheduled stops. The coffin remained overnight at the city's central station before being taken to Morpeth. A procession of about a hundred suffragettes accompanied the coffin from the station to the St. Mary the Virgin church; it was watched by thousands. Only a few of the suffragettes entered the churchyard, as the service and interment were private. Her gravestone bears the WSPU slogan \"Deeds not words\".\nApproach and analysis.\nDavison's death marked a culmination and a turning point of the militant suffragette campaign. The First World War broke out the following year and, on 10 August 1914, the government released all women hunger strikers and declared an amnesty. Emmeline Pankhurst suspended WSPU operations on 13 August. Pankhurst subsequently assisted the government in the recruitment of women for war work. In 1918 Parliament passed the Representation of the People Act 1918. Among the changes was the granting of the vote to women over the age of 30 who could pass property qualifications. The legislation added 8.5\u00a0million women to the electoral roll; they constituted 43% of the electorate. In 1928 the Representation of the People (Equal Franchise) Act lowered the voting age for women to 21 to put them on equal terms with male voters.\nCrawford sees the events at the 1913 Derby as a lens \"through which\u00a0... [Davison's] whole life has been interpreted\", and the uncertainty of her motives and intentions that day has affected how she has been judged by history. Carolyn Collette, a literary critic who has studied Davison's writing, identifies the different motives ascribed to Davison, including \"uncontrolled impulses\" or a search for martyrdom for women's suffrage. Collette also sees a more current trend among historians \"to accept what some of her close contemporaries believed: that Davison's actions that day were deliberate\" and that she attempted to attach the suffragette colours to the King's horse. Cicely Hale, a suffragette who worked at the WSPU and who knew Davison, described her as \"a fanatic\" who was prepared to die but did not mean to. Other observers, such as Purvis, and Ann Morley and Liz Stanley\u2014Davison's biographers\u2014agree that Davison did not mean to die.\nDavison was a staunch feminist and a passionate Christian whose outlook \"invoked both medieval history and faith in God as part of the armour of her militancy\". Her love of English literature, which she had studied at Oxford, was shown in her identification with Geoffrey Chaucer's \"The Knight's Tale\", including being nicknamed \"Faire Emelye\". Much of Davison's writing reflected the doctrine of the Christian faith and referred to martyrs, martyrdom and triumphant suffering; according to Collette, the use of Christian and medieval language and imagery \"directly reflects the politics and rhetoric of the militant suffrage movement\". Purvis writes that Davison's committed Anglicanism would have stopped her from committing suicide because it would have meant that she could not be buried in consecrated ground. Davison wrote in \"The Price of Liberty\" about the high cost of devotion to the cause:\nIn the New Testament, the Master reminded His followers that when the merchant had found the Pearl of Great Price, he sold all that he had in order to buy it. That is the parable of Militancy! It is that which the women warriors are doing to-day.\nSome are truer warriors than others, but the perfect Amazon is she who will sacrifice all even unto the last, to win the Pearl of Freedom for her sex.\nDavison held a firm moral conviction that socialism was a moral and political force for good. She attended the annual May Day rallies in Hyde Park and, according to the historian Krista Cowman, \"directly linked her militant suffrage activities with socialism\". Her London and Morpeth funeral processions contained a heavy socialist presence in appreciation of her support for the cause.\nLegacy.\nIn 1968 a one-act play written by Joice Worters, \"Emily\", was staged in Northumberland, focusing on the use of violence against the women's campaign. Davison is the subject of an opera, \"Emily\" (2013), by the British composer Tim Benjamin, and of \"Emily Davison\", a song by the American rock singer Greg Kihn. Davison also appears as a supporting character in the 2015 film \"Suffragette\", in which she is portrayed by Natalie Press. Her death and funeral form the climax of the film. In January 2018 the cantata \"Pearl of Freedom\", telling the story of Davison's suffragette struggles, was premiered. The music was by the composer Joanna Marsh; the librettist was David Pountney.\nIn 1990 the Labour MPs Tony Benn and Jeremy Corbyn placed a commemorative plaque inside the cupboard in which Davison had hidden eighty years earlier. In April 2013 a plaque was unveiled at Epsom racecourse to mark the centenary of her death. In January 2017 Royal Holloway announced that its new library would be named after her. The statue of Millicent Fawcett in Parliament Square, London, unveiled in April 2018, features Davison's name and picture, along with those of 58 other women's suffrage supporters, on the plinth of the statue. The Women's Library, at the London School of Economics, holds several collections related to Davison. They include her personal papers and objects connected to her death. In June 2023 English Heritage unveiled a blue plaque at 43 Fairholme Road, Kensington, London where she lived when at Kensington High School in 1880s. A statue of Davison, by the artist Christine Charlesworth, was installed in the marketplace at Epsom in 2021, following a campaign by volunteers from the Emily Davison Memorial Project.\nNotes and references.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "60560", "revid": "45650170", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60560", "title": "Tetrapod", "text": "Clade of the first four-limbed vertebrates and their descendants\nA tetrapod (; from Ancient Greek \u03c4\u03b5\u03c4\u03c1\u03b1- \"(tetra-)\" 'four' and \u03c0\u03bf\u03cd\u03c2 \"(po\u00fas)\" 'foot') is any vertebrate animal of the clade Tetrapoda (). Tetrapods include all extant and extinct amphibians and amniotes, with the latter in turn evolving into two major clades, the sauropsids (reptiles, including dinosaurs and therefore birds) and synapsids (extinct \"pelycosaurs\", therapsids and all extant mammals, including humans). Hox gene mutations have resulted in some tetrapods becoming limbless (snakes, legless lizards, and caecilians) or two-limbed (cetaceans, sirenians, some lizards, kiwis, and the extinct moa and elephant birds). Nevertheless, they still qualify as tetrapods through their ancestry, and some retain a pair of vestigial spurs that are remnants of the hindlimbs.\nTetrapods evolved from a group of semiaquatic animals within the tetrapodomorphs which, in turn, evolved from ancient lobe-finned fish (sarcopterygians) around https://\u00a0million years ago in the Middle Devonian period. Early tetrapodomorphs were transitional between lobe-finned fishes and true four-limbed tetrapods, though most still fit the body plan expected of other lobe-finned fishes. The oldest fossils of four-limbed vertebrates (tetrapods in the broad sense of the word) are trackways from the Middle Devonian, and body fossils became common near the end of the Late Devonian, around 370\u2013360 million years ago. These Devonian species all belonged to the tetrapod stem group, meaning that they did not belong to any modern tetrapod group. \nLimbs evolved prior to terrestrial locomotion, but by the start of the Carboniferous Period, 360 million years ago, a few stem-tetrapods were experimenting with a semiaquatic lifestyle to exploit food and shelter on land. The first crown-tetrapods (those descended from the last common ancestors of extant tetrapods) appeared by the Tournaisian age of the Early Carboniferous.\nThe specific aquatic ancestors of the tetrapods and the process by which they colonized Earth's land after emerging from water remains unclear. The transition from a body plan for gill-based aquatic respiration and tail-propelled aquatic locomotion to one that enables the animal to survive out of water and move around on land is one of the most profound evolutionary changes known. Tetrapods have numerous anatomical and physiological features that are distinct from their aquatic fish ancestors. These include distinct head and neck structures for feeding and movements, appendicular skeletons (shoulder and pelvic girdles in particular) for weight bearing and locomotion, more versatile eyes for seeing, middle ears for hearing, and more efficient heart and lungs for oxygen circulation and exchange outside water.\nStem-tetrapods and \"fish-a-pods\" were primarily aquatic. Modern amphibians are generally semiaquatic; the first stages of their lives are as waterborne eggs and fish-like larvae with gills known as tadpoles, and later undergo metamorphosis to grow limbs and lungs and become partly terrestrial and partly aquatic. However, most tetrapod species today are amniotes, a group of mostly terrestrial tetrapods that evolved early in the Late Carboniferous. The key amniote innovation is the amnion, which enables the eggs to retain their aqueous contents on land. Some tetrapods, such as snakes and caecilians, have lost some or all of their limbs through further speciation and evolution; some have only concealed vestigial bones as a remnant of the limbs of their distant ancestors. Others returned to being amphibious or otherwise living partially or fully aquatic lives, the first during the Carboniferous period, while others, such as whales, as recently as the Cenozoic.\nAmniotes diverged into two branches: one, sauropsids, includes the reptiles: lepidosaurs (lizards, snakes, and the tuatara), archosaurs (crocodilians and dinosaurs, of which birds are a subset), turtles, and various other extinct forms. The other branch, synapsids, include mammals and their extinct relatives. \nAmniotes include the only animals apart from insects that further evolved powered flight: the extinct pterosaurs and extant birds and bats. \nDefinitions.\nThe precise definition of \"tetrapod\" is a subject of strong debate among paleontologists who work with the earliest members of the group.\nApomorphy-based definitions.\nA majority of paleontologists use the term \"tetrapod\" to refer to all vertebrates with four limbs and distinct digits (fingers and toes), as well as legless vertebrates with limbed ancestors. Limbs and digits are major apomorphies (newly evolved traits) which define tetrapods, though they are far from the only skeletal or biological innovations inherent to the group. The first vertebrates with limbs and digits evolved in the Devonian, including the Late Devonian-age \"Ichthyostega\" and \"Acanthostega\", as well as the trackmakers of the Middle Devonian-age Zachelmie trackways.\nDefining tetrapods based on one or two apomorphies can present a problem if these apomorphies were acquired by more than one lineage through convergent evolution. To resolve this potential concern, the apomorphy-based definition is often supported by an equivalent cladistic definition. Cladistics is a modern branch of taxonomy which classifies organisms through evolutionary relationships, as reconstructed by phylogenetic analyses. A cladistic definition would define a group based on how closely related its constituents are. Tetrapoda is widely considered a monophyletic clade, a group with all of its component taxa sharing a single common ancestor. In this sense, Tetrapoda can also be defined as the \"clade of limbed vertebrates\", including all vertebrates descended from the first limbed vertebrates.\nCrown group tetrapods.\nA portion of tetrapod workers, led by French paleontologist Michel Laurin, prefer to restrict the definition of tetrapod to the crown group. A crown group is a subset of a category of animal defined by the most recent common ancestor of living representatives. This cladistic approach defines \"tetrapods\" as the nearest common ancestor of all living amphibians (the lissamphibians) and all living amniotes (reptiles, birds, and mammals), along with all of the descendants of that ancestor. In effect, \"tetrapod\" is a name reserved solely for animals which lie among living tetrapods, so-called crown tetrapods. This is a node-based clade, a group with a common ancestry descended from a single \"node\" (the node being the nearest common ancestor of living species).\nDefining tetrapods based on the crown group would exclude many four-limbed vertebrates which would otherwise be defined as tetrapods. Devonian \"tetrapods\", such as \"Ichthyostega\" and \"Acanthostega\", certainly evolved prior to the split between lissamphibians and amniotes, and thus lie outside the crown group. They would instead lie along the stem group, a subset of animals related to, but not within, the crown group. The stem and crown group together are combined into the total group, given the name Tetrapodomorpha, which refers to all animals closer to living tetrapods than to Dipnoi (lungfishes), the next closest group of living animals. Many early tetrapodomorphs are clearly fish in ecology and anatomy, but later tetrapodomorphs are much more similar to tetrapods in many regards, such as the presence of limbs and digits.\nLaurin's approach to the definition of tetrapods is rooted in the belief that the term has more relevance for neontologists (an informal term used for biologists specializing in living organizms) than paleontologists (who primarily use the apomorphy-based definition). In 1998, he re-established the defunct historical term Stegocephali to replace the apomorphy-based definition of tetrapod used by many authors. Other paleontologists use the term stem-tetrapod to refer to those tetrapod-like vertebrates that are not members of the crown group, including both early limbed \"tetrapods\" and tetrapodomorph fishes. The term \"fishapod\" was popularized after the discovery and 2006 publication of \"Tiktaalik\", an advanced tetrapodomorph fish which was closely related to limbed vertebrates and showed many apparently transitional traits.\nThe two subclades of crown tetrapods are Batrachomorpha and Reptiliomorpha. Batrachomorphs are all animals sharing a more recent common ancestry with living amphibians than with living amniotes (reptiles, birds, and mammals). Reptiliomorphs are all animals sharing a more recent common ancestry with living amniotes than with living amphibians. Gaffney (1979) provided the name Neotetrapoda to the crown group of tetrapods, though few subsequent authors followed this proposal.\nThe earliest fossils attributed to crown-group tetrapods are footprints from the earliest Carboniferous (Tournaisian) of Australia, which appear to belong to early amniotes or potentially even sauropsids. Prior to the discovery of these prints, the earliest evidence of crown-group tetrapods were temnospondyl footprints from slightly later in the Tournaisian, with the earliest body fossils being of the temnospondyl \"Balanerpeton\" from the Vis\u00e9an.\nBiodiversity.\nTetrapoda includes the four traditional living classes: amphibians, reptiles, birds and mammals. Overall, the biodiversity of lissamphibians, as well as of tetrapods generally, has grown exponentially over time; the more than 30,000 species living today are descended from a single amphibian group in the Early to Middle Devonian. However, that diversification process was interrupted at least a few times by major biological crises, such as the Permian\u2013Triassic extinction event, which at least affected amniotes. The overall composition of biodiversity was driven primarily by amphibians in the Palaeozoic, dominated by reptiles in the Mesozoic and expanded by the explosive growth of birds and mammals in the Cenozoic. As biodiversity has grown, so has the number of species and the number of niches that tetrapods have occupied. The first tetrapods were aquatic and fed primarily on fish. Today, the Earth supports a great diversity of tetrapods that live in many habitats and subsist on a variety of diets. The following table shows summary estimates for each tetrapod class from the \"IUCN Red List of Threatened Species\", 2014.3, for the number of extant species that have been described in the literature, as well as the number of threatened species.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nClassification.\nThe classification of tetrapods has a long history. Traditionally, tetrapods are divided into four classes based on gross anatomical and physiological traits. Snakes and other legless reptiles are considered tetrapods because they are sufficiently like other reptiles that have a full complement of limbs. Similar considerations apply to caecilians and aquatic mammals. Newer taxonomy is frequently based on cladistics instead, giving a variable number of major \"branches\" (clades) of the tetrapod family tree.\nAs is the case throughout evolutionary biology today, there is debate over how to properly classify the groups within Tetrapoda. Traditional biological classification sometimes fails to recognize evolutionary transitions between older groups and descendant groups with markedly different characteristics. For example, the birds, which evolved from the dinosaurs, are defined as a separate group from them, because they represent a distinct new type of physical form and functionality. In phylogenetic nomenclature, in contrast, the newer group is always included in the old. For this school of taxonomy, dinosaurs and birds are not groups in contrast to each other, but rather birds are a sub-type \"of\" dinosaurs.\nHistory of classification.\nThe tetrapods, including all large- and medium-sized land animals, have been among the best understood animals since earliest times. By Aristotle's time, the basic division between mammals, birds and egg-laying tetrapods (the \"herptiles\") was well known, and the inclusion of the legless snakes into this group was likewise recognized. With the birth of modern biological classification in the 18th century, Linnaeus used the same division, with the tetrapods occupying the first three of his six classes of animals. While reptiles and amphibians can be quite similar externally, the French zoologist Pierre Andr\u00e9 Latreille recognized the large physiological differences at the beginning of the 19th century and split the herptiles into two classes, giving the four familiar classes of tetrapods: amphibians, reptiles, birds and mammals.\nModern classification.\nWith the basic classification of tetrapods settled, a half a century followed where the classification of living and fossil groups was predominantly done by experts working within classes. In the early 1930s, American vertebrate palaeontologist Alfred Romer (1894\u20131973) produced an overview, drawing together taxonomic work from the various subfields to create an orderly taxonomy in his \"Vertebrate Paleontology\". This classical scheme with minor variations is still used in works where systematic overview is essential, e.g. Benton (1998) and Knobill and Neill (2006). While mostly seen in general works, it is also still used in some specialist works like Fortuny et al. (2011). The taxonomy down to subclass level shown here is from Hildebrand and Goslow (2001):\nThis classification is the one most commonly encountered in school textbooks and popular works. While orderly and easy to use, it has come under critique from cladistics. The earliest tetrapods are grouped under class Amphibia, although several of the groups are more closely related to amniotes than to modern day amphibians. Traditionally, birds are not considered a type of reptile, but crocodiles are more closely related to birds than they are to other reptiles, such as lizards. Birds themselves are thought to be descendants of theropod dinosaurs. Basal non-mammalian synapsids (\"mammal-like reptiles\") traditionally also sort under class Reptilia as a separate subclass, but they are more closely related to mammals than to living reptiles. Considerations like these have led some authors to argue for a new classification based purely on phylogeny, disregarding the anatomy and physiology.\nEvolution.\nTetrapods evolved from early bony fishes (Osteichthyes), specifically from the tetrapodomorph branch of lobe-finned fishes (Sarcopterygii), living in the early to middle Devonian period.\nThe first tetrapods probably evolved in the Emsian stage of the Early Devonian from Tetrapodomorph fish living in shallow water environments.\nThe very earliest tetrapods would have been animals similar to \"Acanthostega\", with legs and lungs as well as gills, but still primarily aquatic and unsuited to life on land.\nThe earliest tetrapods inhabited saltwater, brackish-water, and freshwater environments, as well as environments of highly variable salinity. These traits were shared with many early lobed-finned fishes. As early tetrapods are found on two Devonian continents, Laurussia (Euramerica) and Gondwana, as well as the island of North China, it is widely supposed that early tetrapods were capable of swimming across the shallow (and relatively narrow) continental-shelf seas that separated these landmasses.\nSince the early 20th century, several families of tetrapodomorph fishes have been proposed as the nearest relatives of tetrapods, among them the rhizodonts (notably \"Sauripterus\"), the osteolepidids, the tristichopterids (notably \"Eusthenopteron\"), and more recently the elpistostegalians (also known as Panderichthyida) notably the genus \"Tiktaalik\".\nA notable feature of \"Tiktaalik\" is the absence of bones covering the gills. These bones would otherwise connect the shoulder girdle with skull, making the shoulder girdle part of the skull. With the loss of the gill-covering bones, the shoulder girdle is separated from the skull, connected to the torso by muscle and other soft-tissue connections. The result is the appearance of the neck. This feature appears only in tetrapods and \"Tiktaalik\", not other tetrapodomorph fishes. \"Tiktaalik\" also had a pattern of bones in the skull roof (upper half of the skull) that is similar to the end-Devonian tetrapod \"Ichthyostega\". The two also shared a semi-rigid ribcage of overlapping ribs, which may have substituted for a rigid spine. In conjunction with robust forelimbs and shoulder girdle, both \"Tiktaalik\" and \"Ichthyostega\" may have had the ability to locomote on land in the manner of a seal, with the forward portion of the torso elevated, the hind part dragging behind. Finally, \"Tiktaalik\" fin bones are somewhat similar to the limb bones of tetrapods.\nHowever, there are issues with positing \"Tiktaalik\" as a tetrapod ancestor. For example, it had a long spine with far more vertebrae than any known tetrapod or other tetrapodomorph fish. Also the oldest tetrapod trace fossils (tracks and trackways) predate it by a considerable margin. Several hypotheses have been proposed to explain this date discrepancy: 1) The nearest common ancestor of tetrapods and \"Tiktaalik\" dates to the Early Devonian. By this hypothesis, the lineage is the closest to tetrapods, but \"Tiktaalik\" itself was a late-surviving relic. 2) \"Tiktaalik\" represents a case of parallel evolution. 3) Tetrapods evolved more than once.\nHistory.\nPalaeozoic.\nDevonian stem-tetrapods.\nThe oldest evidence for the existence of tetrapods comes from trace fossils: tracks (footprints) and trackways found in Zache\u0142mie, Poland, dated to the Eifelian stage of the Middle Devonian, https://\u00a0million years ago, although these traces have also been interpreted as the ichnogenus \"Piscichnus\" (fish nests/feeding traces). The adult tetrapods had an estimated length of 2.5 m (8 feet), and lived in a lagoon with an average depth of 1\u20132 m, although it is not known at what depth the underwater tracks were made. The lagoon was inhabited by a variety of marine organisms and was apparently salt water. The average water temperature was 30 degrees C (86 F). The second oldest evidence for tetrapods, also tracks and trackways, date from ca. 385 Mya (Valentia Island, Ireland).\nThe oldest partial fossils of tetrapods date from the Frasnian beginning \u2248380 mya. These include \"Elginerpeton\" and \"Obruchevichthys\". Some paleontologists dispute their status as true (digit-bearing) tetrapods.\nAll known forms of Frasnian tetrapods became extinct in the Late Devonian extinction, also known as the end-Frasnian extinction. This marked the beginning of a gap in the tetrapod fossil record known as the Famennian gap, occupying roughly the first half of the Famennian stage.\nThe oldest near-complete tetrapod fossils, \"Acanthostega\" and \"Ichthyostega\", date from the second half of the Fammennian. Although both were essentially four-footed fish, \"Ichthyostega\" is the earliest known tetrapod that may have had the ability to pull itself onto land and drag itself forward with its forelimbs. There is no evidence that it did so, only that it may have been anatomically capable of doing so.\nThe publication in 2018 of \"Tutusius umlambo\" and \"Umzantsia amazana\" from high latitude Gondwana setting indicate that the tetrapods enjoyed a global distribution by the end of the Devonian and even extended into the high latitudes.\nThe end-Fammenian marked another extinction, known as the end-Fammenian extinction or the Hangenberg event, which is followed by another gap in the tetrapod fossil record, Romer's gap, also known as the Tournaisian gap. This gap, which was initially 30 million years, but has been gradually reduced over time, currently occupies much of the 13.9-million year Tournaisian, the first stage of the Carboniferous period.\nTetrapod-like vertebrates first appeared in the Early Devonian period, and species with limbs and digits were around by the Late Devonian. These early \"stem-tetrapods\" included animals such as \"Ichthyostega\", with legs and lungs as well as gills, but still primarily aquatic and poorly adapted for life on land. The Devonian stem-tetrapods went through two major population bottlenecks during the Late Devonian extinctions, also known as the end-Frasnian and end-Fammenian extinctions. These extinction events led to the disappearance of stem-tetrapods with fish-like features. When stem-tetrapods reappear in the fossil record in early Carboniferous deposits, some 10 million years later, the adult forms of some are somewhat adapted to a terrestrial existence. Why they went to land in the first place is still debated.\nCarboniferous.\nDuring the early Carboniferous, the number of digits on hands and feet of stem-tetrapods became standardized at no more than five, as lineages with more digits died out (exceptions within crown-group tetrapods arose among some secondarily aquatic members). By the very beginning of the Carboniferous, the stem-tetrapods had radiated into two branches of true (\"crown group\") tetrapods, one ancestral to modern amphibians and the other ancestral to amniotes. Modern amphibians are most likely derived from the temnospondyls, a particularly diverse and long-lasting group of tetrapods. A less popular proposal draws comparisons to the \"lepospondyls\", an eclectic mixture of various small tetrapods, including burrowing, limbless, and other bizarrely-shaped forms. The reptiliomorphs (sometimes known as \"anthracosaurs\") were the relatives and ancestors of the amniotes (reptiles, mammals, and kin). The first amniotes are known from the early part of the Late Carboniferous. All basal amniotes had a small body size, like many of their contemporaries, though some Carboniferous tetrapods evolved into large crocodile-like predators, informally known as \"labyrinthodonts\". Amphibians must return to water to lay eggs; in contrast, amniote eggs have a membrane ensuring gas exchange out of water and can therefore be laid on land.\nAmphibians and amniotes were affected by the Carboniferous rainforest collapse (CRC), an extinction event that occurred around 307 million years ago. The sudden collapse of a vital ecosystem shifted the diversity and abundance of major groups. Amniotes and temnospondyls in particular were more suited to the new conditions. They invaded new ecological niches and began diversifying their diets to include plants and other tetrapods, previously having been limited to insects and fish.\nPermian.\nIn the Permian period, amniotes became particularly well-established, and two important clades filled in most terrestrial niches: the sauropsids and the synapsids. The latter were the most important and successful Permian land animals, establishing complex terrestrial ecosystems of predators and prey while acquiring various adaptations retained by their modern descendants, the mammals. Sauropsid diversity was more subdued during the Permian, but they did begin to fracture into several lineages ancestral to modern reptiles. Amniotes were not the only tetrapods to experiment with prolonged life on land. Some temnospondyls, seymouriamorphs, and diadectomorphs also successfully filled terrestrial niches in the earlier part of the Permian. Non-amniote tetrapods declined in the later part of the Permian.\nThe end of the Permian saw a major turnover in fauna during the Permian\u2013Triassic extinction event. There was a protracted loss of species, due to multiple extinction pulses. Many of the once large and diverse groups died out or were greatly reduced.\nMesozoic.\nThe diapsid reptiles (a subgroup of the sauropsids) strongly diversified during the Triassic, giving rise to the turtles, pseudosuchians (crocodilian ancestors), dinosaurs, pterosaurs, and lepidosaurs, along with many other reptile groups on land and sea. Some of the new Triassic reptiles would not survive into the Jurassic, but others would flourish during the Jurassic. Lizards, turtles, dinosaurs, pterosaurs, crocodylomorphs, and plesiosaurs were particular beneficiaries of the Triassic-Jurassic transition. Birds, a particular subset of theropod dinosaurs capable of flight via feathered wings, evolved in the Late Jurassic. In the Cretaceous, snakes developed from lizards, rhynchocephalians (tuataras and kin) declined, and modern birds and crocodilians started to establish themselves.\nAmong the characteristic Paleozoic non-amniote tetrapods, few survived into the Mesozoic. Temnospondyls briefly recovered in the Triassic, spawning the large aquatic stereospondyls and the small terrestrial lissamphibians (the earliest frogs, salamanders, and caecilians). However, stereospondyl diversity would crash at the end of the Triassic. By the Late Cretaceous, the only surviving amphibians were lissamphibians. Many groups of synapsids, such as anomodonts and therocephalians, that once comprised the dominant terrestrial fauna of the Permian, also became extinct during the Triassic. During the Jurassic, one synapsid group (Cynodontia) gave rise to the modern mammals, which survived through the rest of the Mesozoic to later diversify during the Cenozoic. The Cretaceous-Paleogene extinction event at the end of the Mesozoic killed off many organisms, including all the non-avian dinosaurs and nearly all marine reptiles. Birds survived and diversified during the Cenozoic, similar to mammals.\nCenozoic.\nFollowing the great extinction event at the end of the Mesozoic, representatives of seven major groups of tetrapods persisted into the Cenozoic era. One of them, a group of semiaquatic reptiles known as the Choristodera, became extinct 11 million years ago for unclear reasons. The seven Cenozoic tetrapods groups are:\nPhylogeny.\nStem group.\nStem tetrapods are all animals more closely related to tetrapods than to lungfish, but excluding the tetrapod crown group. The cladogram below illustrates the relationships of stem-tetrapods. All these lineages are extinct except for Dipnomorpha and Tetrapoda; from Swartz, 2012:\nCrown group.\nCrown tetrapods are defined as the nearest common ancestor of all living tetrapods (amphibians, reptiles, birds, and mammals) along with all of the descendants of that ancestor.\nThe inclusion of certain extinct groups in the crown Tetrapoda depends on the relationships of modern amphibians, or lissamphibians. There are currently three major hypotheses on the origins of lissamphibians. In the temnospondyl hypothesis (TH), lissamphibians are most closely related to dissorophoid temnospondyls, which would make temnospondyls tetrapods. In the lepospondyl hypothesis (LH), lissamphibians are the sister taxon of lysorophian lepospondyls, making lepospondyls tetrapods and temnospondyls stem-tetrapods. In the polyphyletic hypothesis (PH), frogs and salamanders evolved from dissorophoid temnospondyls while caecilians come out of microsaur lepospondyls, making both lepospondyls and temnospondyls true tetrapods.\nOrigins of modern amphibians.\nTemnospondyl hypothesis (TH).\nThis hypothesis comes in a number of variants, most of which have lissamphibians coming out of the dissorophoid temnospondyls, usually with the focus on amphibamids and branchiosaurids.\nThe temnospondyl hypothesis is the currently favored or majority view, supported by Ruta \"et al\" (2003a,b), Ruta and Coates (2007), Coates \"et al\" (2008), Sigurdsen and Green (2011), and Schoch (2013, 2014).\nCladogram modified after Coates, Ruta and Friedman (2008).\nLepospondyl hypothesis (LH).\nCladogram modified after Laurin, \"How Vertebrates Left the Water\" (2010).\nPolyphyly hypothesis (PH).\nThis hypothesis has batrachians (frogs and salamanders) coming out of dissorophoid temnospondyls, with caecilians out of microsaur lepospondyls. There are two variants, one developed by Carroll, the other by Anderson.\nCladogram modified after Schoch, Frobisch, (2009).\nAnatomy and physiology.\nThe tetrapod's ancestral fish, tetrapodomorph, possessed similar traits to those inherited by the early tetrapods, including internal nostrils and large, fleshy pectoral and pelvic fins built on bones that could give rise to the tetrapod limb. To propagate in the terrestrial environment, animals had to overcome certain challenges. Their bodies needed additional support, because buoyancy was no longer a factor. Water retention was now important, since it was no longer the living matrix, and could be lost easily to the environment. Finally, animals needed new sensory input systems to have any ability to function reasonably on land.\nSkull.\nThe brain only filled half of the skull in the early tetrapods. The rest was filled with fatty tissue or fluid, which gave the brain space for growth as they adapted to a life on land. The palatal and jaw structures of tetramorphs were similar to those of early tetrapods, and their dentition was similar too, with labyrinthine teeth fitting in a pit-and-tooth arrangement on the palate. A major difference between early tetrapodomorph fishes and early tetrapods was in the relative development of the front and back skull portions; the snout is much less developed than in most early tetrapods and the post-orbital skull is exceptionally longer than an amphibian's. A notable characteristic that make a tetrapod's skull different from a fish's are the relative frontal and rear portion lengths. The fish had a long rear portion while the front was short; the orbital vacuities were thus located towards the anterior end. In the tetrapod, the front of the skull lengthened, positioning the orbits farther back on the skull.\nNeck.\nIn tetrapodomorph fishes such as \"Eusthenopteron\", the part of the body that would later become the neck was covered by a number of gill-covering bones known as the opercular series. These bones functioned as part of pump mechanism for forcing water through the mouth and past the gills. When the mouth opened to take in water, the gill flaps closed (including the gill-covering bones), thus ensuring that water entered only through the mouth. When the mouth closed, the gill flaps opened and water was forced through the gills.\nIn \"Acanthostega\", a basal tetrapod, the gill-covering bones have disappeared, although the underlying gill arches are still present. Besides the opercular series, \"Acanthostega\" also lost the throat-covering bones (gular series). The opercular series and gular series combined are sometimes known as the operculo-gular or operculogular series. Other bones in the neck region lost in \"Acanthostega\" (and later tetrapods) include the extrascapular series and the supracleithral series. Both sets of bones connect the shoulder girdle to the skull. With the loss of these bones, tetrapods acquired a neck, allowing the head to rotate somewhat independently of the torso. This, in turn, required stronger soft-tissue connections between head and torso, including muscles and ligaments connecting the skull with the spine and shoulder girdle. Bones and groups of bones were also consolidated and strengthened.\nIn Carboniferous tetrapods, the neck joint (occiput) provided a pivot point for the spine against the back of the skull. In tetrapodomorph fishes such as \"Eusthenopteron\", no such neck joint existed. Instead, the notochord (a rod made of proto-cartilage) entered a hole in the back of the braincase and continued to the middle of the braincase. \"Acanthostega\" had the same arrangement as \"Eusthenopteron\", and thus no neck joint. The neck joint evolved independently in different lineages of early tetrapods.\nAll tetrapods appear to hold their necks at the maximum possible vertical extension when in a normal, alert posture.\nDentition.\nTetrapods had a tooth structure known as \"plicidentine\" characterized by infolding of the enamel as seen in cross-section. The more extreme version found in early tetrapods is known as \"labyrinthodont\" or \"labyrinthodont plicidentine\". This type of tooth structure has evolved independently in several types of bony fishes, both ray-finned and lobe finned, some modern lizards, and in a number of tetrapodomorph fishes. The infolding appears to evolve when a fang or large tooth grows in a small jaw, erupting when it is still weak and immature. The infolding provides added strength to the young tooth, but offers little advantage when the tooth is mature. Such teeth are associated with feeding on soft prey in juveniles.\nAxial skeleton.\nWith the move from water to land, the spine had to resist the bending caused by body weight and had to provide mobility where needed. Previously, it could bend along its entire length. Likewise, the paired appendages had not been formerly connected to the spine, but the slowly strengthening limbs now transmitted their support to the axis of the body.\nGirdles.\nThe shoulder girdle was disconnected from the skull, resulting in improved terrestrial locomotion. The early sarcopterygians' cleithrum was retained as the clavicle, and the interclavicle was well-developed, lying on the underside of the chest. In primitive forms, the two clavicles and the interclavical could have grown ventrally in such a way as to form a broad chest plate. The upper portion of the girdle had a flat, scapular blade (shoulder bone), with the glenoid cavity situated below performing as the articulation surface for the humerus, while ventrally there was a large, flat coracoid plate turning in toward the midline.\nThe pelvic girdle also was much larger than the simple plate found in fishes, accommodating more muscles. It extended far dorsally and was joined to the backbone by one or more specialized sacral ribs. The hind legs were somewhat specialized in that they not only supported weight, but also provided propulsion. The dorsal extension of the pelvis was the ilium, while the broad ventral plate was composed of the pubis in front and the ischium in behind. The three bones met at a single point in the center of the pelvic triangle called the acetabulum, providing a surface of articulation for the femur.\nLimbs.\nFleshy lobe-fins supported on bones seem to have been an ancestral trait of all bony fishes (Osteichthyes). The ancestors of the ray-finned fishes (Actinopterygii) evolved their fins in a different direction. The tetrapodomorph ancestors of the tetrapods further developed their lobe fins. The paired fins had bones distinctly homologous to the humerus, ulna, and radius in the fore-fins and to the femur, tibia, and fibula in the pelvic fins.\nThe paired fins of the early sarcopterygians were smaller than tetrapod limbs, but the skeletal structure was very similar in that the early sarcopterygians had a single proximal bone (analogous to the humerus or femur), two bones in the next segment (forearm or lower leg), and an irregular subdivision of the fin, roughly comparable to the structure of the carpus/tarsus and phalanges of a hand.\nLocomotion.\nIn typical early tetrapod posture, the upper arm and upper leg extended nearly straight horizontal from its body, and the forearm and the lower leg extended downward from the upper segment at a near right angle. The body weight was not centered over the limbs, but was rather transferred 90 degrees outward and down through the lower limbs, which touched the ground. Most of the animal's strength was used to just lift its body off the ground for walking, which was probably slow and difficult. With this sort of posture, it could only make short broad strides. This has been confirmed by fossilized footprints found in Carboniferous rocks.\nFeeding.\nEarly tetrapods had a wide gaping jaw with weak muscles to open and close it. In the jaw were moderate-sized palatal and vomerine (upper) and coronoid (lower) fangs, as well rows of smaller teeth. This was in contrast to the larger fangs and small marginal teeth of earlier tetrapodomorph fishes such as \"Eusthenopteron\". Although this indicates a change in feeding habits, the exact nature of the change in unknown. Some scholars have suggested a change to bottom-feeding or feeding in shallower waters (Ahlberg and Milner 1994). Others have suggesting a mode of feeding comparable to that of the Japanese giant salamander, which uses both suction feeding and direct biting to eat small crustaceans and fish. A study of these jaws shows that they were used for feeding underwater, not on land.\nIn later terrestrial tetrapods, two methods of jaw closure emerge: static and kinetic inertial (also known as snapping). In the static system, the jaw muscles are arranged in such a way that the jaws have maximum force when shut or nearly shut. In the kinetic inertial system, maximum force is applied when the jaws are wide open, resulting in the jaws snapping shut with great velocity and momentum. Although the kinetic inertial system is occasionally found in fish, it requires special adaptations (such as very narrow jaws) to deal with the high viscosity and density of water, which would otherwise impede rapid jaw closure.\nThe tetrapod tongue is built from muscles that once controlled gill openings. The tongue is anchored to the hyoid bone, which was once the lower half of a pair of gill bars (the second pair after the ones that evolved into jaws). The tongue did not evolve until the gills began to disappear. \"Acanthostega\" still had gills, so this would have been a later development. In an aquatically feeding animals, the food is supported by water and can literally float (or get sucked in) to the mouth. On land, the tongue becomes important.\nRespiration.\nThe evolution of early tetrapod respiration was influenced by an event known as the \"charcoal gap\", a period of more than 20 million years, in the middle and late Devonian, when atmospheric oxygen levels were too low to sustain wildfires. During this time, fish inhabiting anoxic waters (very low in oxygen) would have been under evolutionary pressure to develop their air-breathing ability.\nEarly tetrapods probably relied on four methods of respiration: with lungs, with gills, cutaneous respiration (skin breathing), and breathing through the lining of the digestive tract, especially the mouth.\nGills.\nThe early tetrapod \"Acanthostega\" had at least three and probably four pairs of gill bars, each containing deep grooves in the place where one would expect to find the afferent branchial artery. This strongly suggests that functional gills were present. Some aquatic temnospondyls retained internal gills at least into the early Jurassic. Evidence of clear fish-like internal gills is present in \"Archegosaurus\".\nLungs.\nLungs originated as an extra pair of pouches in the throat, behind the gill pouches. They were probably present in the last common ancestor of bony fishes. In some fishes they evolved into swim bladders for maintaining buoyancy. Lungs and swim bladders are homologous (descended from a common ancestral form) as is the case for the pulmonary artery (which delivers de-oxygenated blood from the heart to the lungs) and the arteries that supply swim bladders. Air was introduced into the lungs by a process known as buccal pumping.\nIn the earliest tetrapods, exhalation was probably accomplished with the aid of the muscles of the torso (the thoracoabdominal region). Inhaling with the ribs was either primitive for amniotes, or evolved independently in at least two different lineages of amniotes. It is not found in amphibians. The muscularized diaphragm is unique to mammals.\nRecoil aspiration.\nAlthough tetrapods are widely thought to have inhaled through buccal pumping (mouth pumping), according to an alternative hypothesis, aspiration (inhalation) occurred through passive recoil of the exoskeleton in a manner similar to the contemporary primitive ray-finned fish \"Polypterus\". This fish inhales through its spiracle (blowhole), an anatomical feature present in early tetrapods. Exhalation is powered by muscles in the torso. During exhalation, the bony scales in the upper chest region become indented. When the muscles are relaxed, the bony scales spring back into position, generating considerable negative pressure within the torso, resulting in a very rapid intake of air through the spiracle.\nCutaneous respiration.\nSkin breathing, known as cutaneous respiration, is common in fish and amphibians, and occur both in and out of water. In some animals waterproof barriers impede the exchange of gases through the skin. For example, keratin in human skin, the scales of reptiles, and modern proteinaceous fish scales impede the exchange of gases. However, early tetrapods had scales made of highly vascularized bone covered with skin. For this reason, it is thought that early tetrapods could engage some significant amount of skin breathing.\nCarbon dioxide metabolism.\nAlthough air-breathing fish can absorb oxygen through their lungs, the lungs tend to be ineffective for discharging carbon dioxide. In tetrapods, the ability of lungs to discharge CO2 came about gradually, and was not fully attained until the evolution of amniotes. The same limitation applies to gut air breathing (GUT), i.e., breathing with the lining of the digestive tract. Tetrapod skin would have been effective for both absorbing oxygen and discharging CO2, but only up to a point. For this reason, early tetrapods may have experienced chronic hypercapnia (high levels of blood CO2). This is not uncommon in fish that inhabit waters high in CO2.\nAccording to one hypothesis, the \"sculpted\" or \"ornamented\" dermal skull roof bones found in early tetrapods may have been related to a mechanism for relieving respiratory acidosis (acidic blood caused by excess CO2) through compensatory metabolic alkalosis.\nCirculation.\nEarly tetrapods probably had a three-chambered heart, as do modern amphibians and lepidosaurian and chelonian reptiles, in which oxygenated blood from the lungs and de-oxygenated blood from the respiring tissues enters by separate atria, and is directed via a spiral valve to the appropriate vessel \u2014 aorta for oxygenated blood and pulmonary vein for deoxygenated blood. The spiral valve is essential to keeping the mixing of the two types of blood to a minimum, enabling the animal to have higher metabolic rates, and be more active than otherwise.\nSenses.\nOlfaction.\nThe difference in density between air and water causes smells (certain chemical compounds detectable by chemoreceptors) to behave differently. An animal first venturing out onto land would have difficulty in locating such chemical signals if its sensory apparatus had evolved in the context of aquatic detection. The vomeronasal organ also evolved in the nasal cavity for the first time, for detecting pheromones from biological substrates on land, though it was subsequently lost or reduced to vestigial in some lineages, like archosaurs and catarrhines, but expanded in others like lepidosaurs.\nLateral line system.\nFish have a lateral line system that detects pressure fluctuations in the water. Such pressure is non-detectable in air, but grooves for the lateral line sense organs were found on the skull of early tetrapods, suggesting either an aquatic or largely aquatic habitat. Modern amphibians, which are semi-aquatic, exhibit this feature whereas it has been retired by the higher vertebrates.\nVision.\nChanges in the eye came about because the behavior of light at the surface of the eye differs between an air and water environment due to the difference in refractive index, so the focal length of the lens altered to function in air. The eye was now exposed to a relatively dry environment rather than being bathed by water, so eyelids developed and tear ducts evolved to produce a liquid to moisten the eyeball.\nEarly tetrapods inherited a set of five rod and cone opsins known as the vertebrate opsins.\nFour cone opsins were present in the first vertebrate, inherited from invertebrate ancestors:\nA single rod opsin, rhodopsin, was present in the first jawed vertebrate, inherited from a jawless vertebrate ancestor:\nBalance.\nTetrapods retained the balancing function of the inner ear from fish ancestry.\nHearing.\nAir vibrations could not set up pulsations through the skull as in a proper auditory organ. The spiracle was retained as the otic notch, eventually closed in by the tympanum, a thin, tight membrane of connective tissue also called the eardrum (however this and the otic notch were lost in the ancestral amniotes, and later eardrums were obtained independently).\nThe hyomandibula of fish migrated upwards from its jaw supporting position, and was reduced in size to form the columella. Situated between the tympanum and braincase in an air-filled cavity, the columella was now capable of transmitting vibrations from the exterior of the head to the interior. Thus the columella became an important element in an impedance matching system, coupling airborne sound waves to the receptor system of the inner ear. This system had evolved independently within several different amphibian lineages.\nThe impedance matching ear had to meet certain conditions to work. The columella had to be perpendicular to the tympanum, small and light enough to reduce its inertia, and suspended in an air-filled cavity. In modern species that are sensitive to over 1\u00a0kHz frequencies, the footplate of the columella is 1/20th the area of the tympanum. However, in early amphibians the columella was too large, making the footplate area oversized, preventing the hearing of high frequencies. So it appears they could only hear high intensity, low frequency sounds\u2014and the columella more probably just supported the brain case against the cheek.\nOnly in the early Triassic, about a hundred million years after they conquered land, did the tympanic middle ear evolve (independently) in all the tetrapod lineages. About fifty million years later (late Triassic), in mammals, the columella was reduced even further to become the stapes.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "60562", "revid": "24759391", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60562", "title": "Redlining", "text": "Systemic denial of services to some areas\nRedlining is a discriminatory practice in which financial services are withheld from neighborhoods that have significant numbers of racial and ethnic minorities. Redlining has been most prominent in the United States, and has mostly been directed against African Americans, as well as Mexican Americans in the Southwestern United States. The most common examples involve denial of credit and insurance, denial of healthcare, and the development of food deserts in minority neighborhoods.\nReverse redlining occurs when a lender or insurer targets majority-minority neighborhood residents with inflated interest rates by taking advantage of the lack of lending competition relative to non-redlined neighborhoods. The effect also emerges when service providers artificially restrict the supply of real estate available for loanable funds to nonwhites, thus providing alternative pretext for higher rates. Neighborhoods which were targeted for blockbusting were also subject to reverse redlining.\nIn the 1960s, sociologist John McKnight originally coined the term to describe the discriminatory practice in Chicago, Illinois of banks classifying certain neighborhoods as \"hazardous,\" or not worthy of investment due to the racial makeup of their residents. In the 1980s, a Pulitzer Prize-winning series of articles by investigative reporter Bill Dedman demonstrated how Atlanta banks would often lend in lower-income white neighborhoods but not in middle-income or even upper-income Black neighborhoods.\nBlacklisting was a related mechanism employed by redlining institutions to keep track of areas, groups, and people that the discriminating party intended to exclude. In academic literature, redlining falls under the broader category of credit rationing. The documented history of redlining in the United States is a manifestation of the historical systemic racism that has had wide-ranging impacts on American society, two examples being educational and housing inequality across racial groups. Redlining is also an example of spatial inequality and economic inequality.\nHistory.\nThe specific process termed \"redlining\" in the United States occurred on the background of racial segregation and discrimination against minority populations. It had its origins in sales practices of the National Association of Real Estate Boards and theories about race and property values codified by economists surrounding Richard T. Ely and his Institute for Research in Land Economics and Public Utilities, founded at the University of Wisconsin in 1920. With the National Housing Act of 1934 the federal government began to be involved in the practice and the concurrent establishment of the Federal Housing Administration (FHA). The FHA's formalized redlining process was developed by their Chief Land Economist, Homer Hoyt, as part of an initiative to develop the first underwriting criteria for mortgages. The implementation of this federal policy accelerated the decay and isolation of minority inner-city neighborhoods through withholding of mortgage capital, making it even more difficult for neighborhoods to attract and retain families able to purchase homes. The discriminatory assumptions in redlining exacerbated residential racial segregation and urban decay in the United States.\nIn 1935, the Federal Home Loan Bank Board (FHLBB) asked the Home Owners' Loan Corporation (HOLC) to look at 239 cities and create \"residential security maps\" to indicate the level of security for real-estate investments in each surveyed city. On the maps, the newest areas\u2014those considered desirable for lending purposes\u2014were outlined in green and known as \"Type A\". These were typically affluent suburbs on the outskirts of cities. \"Type B\" neighborhoods, outlined in blue, were considered \"Still Desirable\", whereas older \"Type C\" were labeled \"Declining\" and outlined in yellow. \"Type D\" neighborhoods were outlined in red and were considered the most risky for mortgage support. While about 85% of the residents of such neighborhoods were white, they included most of the African-American urban households. These neighborhoods tended to be the older districts in the center of cities; often they were also African-American neighborhoods, and only six majority African-American neighborhoods in the entire United States were not evaluated as \"Type D.\" Urban planning historians theorize that the maps were used by private and public entities for years afterward to deny loans to people in black communities, though planners and historians have debated the exact role of HOLC and its maps in redlining.\nRedlining maps even became prominent under private organizations, such as appraiser J. M. Brewer's 1934 map of Philadelphia. Private organizations created maps designed to meet the requirements of the Federal Housing Administration's underwriting manual. The lenders had to consider FHA standards if they wanted to receive FHA insurance for their loans. FHA appraisal manuals instructed banks to steer clear of areas with \"inharmonious racial groups\", and recommended that municipalities enact racially restrictive zoning ordinances. Between 1945 and 1959, African Americans received less than 2 percent of all federally insured home loans.\nBanks and mortgage lenders were not the only private entities to develop redlining practices. Property insurance companies also instituted rigid redlining policies in the post-World War II period. According to urban historian Bench Ansfield, the postwar advent of comprehensive homeowners' insurance was limited to the suburbs and withheld from neighborhoods of color in U.S. cities. One Aetna bulletin from 1964 advised underwriters to \"use a red line around questionable areas on territorial maps.\" The New York Urban Coalition warned in 1978, \"A neighborhood without insurance is a neighborhood doomed to death.\"\nFollowing a National Housing Conference in 1973, a group of Chicago community organizations led by The Northwest Community Organization (NCO) formed National People's Action (NPA), to broaden the fight against disinvestment and mortgage redlining in neighborhoods all over the country. This organization, led by Chicago housewife Gale Cincotta and Shel Trapp, a professional community organizer, targeted The Federal Home Loan Bank Board, the governing authority over federally chartered Savings and loan associations (S&amp;L) that held at that time the bulk of the country's home mortgages. NPA embarked on an effort to build a national coalition of urban community organizations to pass a national disclosure regulation or law to require banks to reveal their lending patterns.\nFor many years, urban community organizations had battled neighborhood decay by attacking blockbusting (deceptive encouragement of white flight from neighborhoods in order to buy up real estate at a huge discount and then rent to low-income, usually black tenants), forcing landlords to maintain properties, and requiring cities to board up and tear down abandoned properties. These actions addressed the short-term issues of neighborhood decline. Neighborhood leaders began to learn that these issues and conditions were symptoms of disinvestment that was the true, though hidden, underlying cause of these problems. They changed their strategy as more data was gathered.\nWith the help of NPA, a coalition of loosely affiliated community organizations began to form. At the Third Annual Housing Conference held in Chicago in 1974, eight hundred delegates representing 25 states and 35 cities attended. The strategy focused on the Federal Home Loan Bank Board (FHLBB), which oversaw S&amp;Ls in cities all over the country.\nIn 1974, Chicago's Metropolitan Area Housing Association (MAHA), made up of representatives of local organizations, succeeded in having the Illinois State Legislature pass laws mandating disclosure and outlawing redlining. In Massachusetts, organizers allied with NPA confronted a unique situation. Over 90% of home mortgages were held by state-chartered savings banks. A Jamaica Plain neighborhood organization pushed the disinvestment issue into the statewide gubernatorial race. The Jamaica Plain Banking &amp; Mortgage Committee and its citywide affiliate, The Boston Anti-redlining Coalition (BARC), won a commitment from Democratic candidate Michael S. Dukakis to order statewide disclosure through the Massachusetts State Banking Commission. After Dukakis was elected, his new Banking Commissioner ordered banks to disclose mortgage-lending patterns by ZIP code. The suspected redlining was revealed. Richard W. \"Rick\" Wise, a former community organizer who led the Boston organizing, has published a novel, \"Redlined\", which gives a somewhat fictionalized account of the anti-redlining campaign.\nNPA and its affiliates achieved disclosure of lending practices with the passage of The Home Mortgage Disclosure Act of 1975. The required transparency and review of loan practices began to change lending practices. NPA began to work on reinvestment in areas that had been neglected. Their support helped gain passage in 1977 of the Community Reinvestment Act.\nRedlining was prevalent in Canada from the 1930s to 1950s in Ontario, with intergenerational consequences that persist to the present day.\nEfforts to end.\nLegislation.\nIn the United States, the Fair Housing Act of 1968 was passed to combat the practice of redlining. According to the Department of Housing and Urban Development, \"The Fair Housing Act makes it unlawful to discriminate in the terms, conditions, or privileges of sale of a dwelling because of race or national origin. The Act also makes it unlawful for any person or entity involved in residential real estate-related transactions to discriminate against any person in making available such a transaction, or in the terms or conditions of such a transaction, because of race or national origin.\" The Office of Fair Housing and Equal Opportunity is tasked with administering and enforcing this law.\nThe Equal Credit Opportunity Act (ECOA), codified at 15 U.S.C. \u00a7 1691 et seq., was enacted on October 28, 1974. This law makes it unlawful for any creditor to discriminate against any applicant regarding any aspect of a credit transaction based on race, color, religion, national origin, sex, marital status, or age (provided the applicant has the capacity to contract). It also prohibits discrimination based on the applicant's income deriving from a public assistance program or the applicant's good faith exercise of any right under the Consumer Credit Protection Act. The ECOA applies to any person who regularly participates in credit decisions, including banks, retailers, bankcard companies, finance companies, and credit unions.\nThe part of the law that defines its authority and scope is known as Regulation B, referenced as 12 C.F.R. \u00a7 1002.1(b) (2017). from the (b) that appears in Title 12 part 1002's official identifier: 12 C.F.R. \u00a7 1002.1(b) (2017). Failure to comply with Regulation B can subject a financial institution to civil liability for actual and punitive damages in individual or class actions. Liability for punitive damages can be as much as $10,000 in individual actions and the lesser of $500,000 or 1% of the creditor's net worth in class actions.\nThe Community Reinvestment Act (CRA), passed by Congress in 1977, requires banks to apply the same lending criteria in all communities.\nRegulatory lawsuits.\nIn May 2015, the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development announced that Associated Bank had agreed to a $200 million settlement over redlining in Chicago and Milwaukee. The three-year HUD observation led to the complaint that the bank purposely rejected mortgage applications from black and Latino applicants. The final settlement required AB to open branches in non-white neighborhoods.\nNew York Attorney General Eric Schneiderman announced a settlement with Evans Bank for $825,000 on September 10, 2015. An investigation had uncovered the erasure of black neighborhoods from mortgage lending maps. According to Schneiderman, of the over 1,100 mortgage applications the bank received between 2009 and 2012, only four were from African Americans. Following this investigation, \"The Buffalo News\" reported that more banks could be investigated for the same reasons in the near future. The most notable examples of such DOJ and HUD settlements have focused heavily on community banks in large metropolitan areas, but banks in other regions have been the subject of such orders as well, including First United Security Bank in Thomasville, Alabama, and Community State Bank in Saginaw, Michigan.\nThe United States Department of Justice announced a $33 million settlement with Hudson City Savings Bank, which services New Jersey, New York, and Pennsylvania, on September 24, 2015. The six-year DOJ investigation had proven that the company was intentionally avoiding granting mortgages to Latinos and African Americans and purposely avoided expanding into minority-majority communities. The Justice Department called it the \"largest residential mortgage redlining settlement in its history.\" As a part of the settlement agreement, HCSB was forced to open branches in non-white communities. As U.S. Attorney Paul Fishman explained to Emily Badger for \"The Washington Post\", \"[i]f you lived in a majority-black or Hispanic neighborhood and you wanted to apply for a mortgage, Hudson City Savings Bank was not the place to go.\" The enforcement agencies cited additional evidence of discrimination in Hudson City's broker selection practices, noting that the bank received 80 percent of its mortgage applications from mortgage brokers but that the brokers with whom the bank worked were not located in majority African-American and Hispanic areas.\nOn January 12, 2023, City National Bank of California agreed to pay $31,000,000 to resolve allegations of redlining from 2017 to at least 2020, brought by the United States Department of Justice.\nCommunity organizations.\nShoreBank, a community-development bank in Chicago's South Shore neighborhood, was a part of the private sector fight against redlining. Founded in 1973, ShoreBank sought to combat racist lending practices in Chicago's African-American communities by providing financial services, especially mortgage loans, to local residents. In a 1992 speech, then-Presidential candidate Bill Clinton called ShoreBank \"the most important bank in America\". On August 20, 2010, the bank was declared insolvent, closed by regulators and most of its assets were acquired by Urban Partnership Bank.\nIn the mid-1970s, community organizations, under the banner of the NPA, worked to fight against redlining in South Austin, Illinois. One of these organizations was SACCC (South Austin Coalition Community Council), formed to restore South Austin's neighborhood and to fight against financial institutions accused of propagating redlining. This got the attention of insurance regulators in the Illinois Department of Insurance, as well as federal officers enforcing anti-racial discrimination laws.\nCurrent issues.\nRacial segregation in American cities.\nThe United States Federal Government has enacted legislation since the 1970s to reduce the segregation of American cities. While many cities have reduced the amount of segregated neighborhoods, some still have clearly defined racial boundaries. Since 1990, the City of Chicago has been one of the most persistently racially segregated cities, despite efforts to improve mobility and reduce barriers. Other cities like Detroit, Houston, and Atlanta likewise have very pronounced black and white neighborhoods, the same neighborhoods that were originally redlined by financial institutions decades ago. While other cities have made progress, this continued racial segregation has contributed to reduced economic mobility for millions of people.\nFormerly redlined neighborhoods in places like Los Angeles have been shown to be more likely to have a gang injunction issued against them, as the work of geographer Stefano Bloch and anthropologist Susan A. Phillips shows.\nRacial covenants: current efforts.\nWhile racist covenants, conditions, and restrictions (CCRs) were ruled \"unenforceable\" by the U.S. Supreme Court in the landmark 1948 case Shelley v. Kraemer, this decision did not make them illegal; it only prevented courts from enforcing them. It was not until the passage of the federal Fair Housing Act of 1968 that such discriminatory practices were explicitly outlawed.\nUniversities and nonprofits are creating searchable databases of racial covenants to help homeowners and researchers access information about these restrictive clauses.\nRace wealth gap.\nThe practice of redlining actively helped to create what is now known as the Racial Wealth Gap seen in the United States.\nBlack families in America earned just $57.30 for every $100 in income earned by white families, according to the Census Bureau's Current Population Survey. For every $100 in white family wealth, black families hold just $5.04. In 2016, the median wealth for black and Hispanic families was $17,600 and $20,700, respectively, compared with white families' median wealth of $171,000. The black-white wealth gap has not recovered from the Great Recession. In 2007, immediately before the Great Recession, the median wealth of blacks was nearly 14 percent that of whites. Although black wealth increased at a faster rate than white wealth in 2016, blacks still owned less than 10 percent of whites' wealth at the median.\nA multigenerational study of people from five race groups analyzed upward mobility trends in American cities. The study concluded that black men who grew up in racially segregated neighborhoods were substantially less likely to gain upward economic mobility, finding \"black children born to parents in the bottom household income quintile have a 2.5% chance of rising to the top quintile of household income, compared with 10.6% for whites.\" Because of this intergenerational poverty, black households are \"stuck in place\" and are less able to grow wealth.\nA 2017 study by Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago economists found that redlining\u2014the practice whereby banks discriminated against the inhabitants of certain neighborhoods\u2014had a persistent adverse impact on the neighborhoods, with redlining affecting homeownership rates, home values and credit scores in 2010. Since many African-Americans could not access conventional home loans, they had to turn to predatory lenders (who charged high interest rates). Due to lower home ownership rates, slumlords were able to rent out apartments that would otherwise be owned.\nRetail.\nBrick and mortar.\nRetail redlining is a spatially discriminatory practice among retailers. Taxicab services and delivery food may not serve certain areas, based on their ethnic-minority composition and assumptions about business (and perceived crime), rather than data and economic criteria, such as the potential profitability of operating in those areas. Consequently, consumers in these areas are vulnerable to prices set by fewer retailers. They may be exploited by retailers who charge higher prices and/or offer them inferior goods.\nOnline.\nA 2012 study by \"The Wall Street Journal\" found that Staples, The Home Depot, Rosetta Stone and some other online retailers displayed different prices to customers in different locations (distinct from shipping prices). Staples based discounts on proximity to competitors like OfficeMax and Office Depot. This generally resulted in higher prices for customers in more rural areas, who were on average less wealthy than customers seeing lower prices.\nLiquorlining.\nSome service providers target low-income neighborhoods for nuisance sales. When those services are believed to have adverse effects on a community, they may considered to be a form of \"reverse redlining\". The term \"liquorlining\" is sometimes used to describe high densities of liquor stores in low income and/or minority communities relative to surrounding areas. High densities of liquor stores are associated with crime and public health issues, which may in turn drive away supermarkets, grocery stores, and other retail outlets, contributing to low levels of economic development. Controlled for income, nonwhites face higher concentrations of liquor stores than do whites. One study done on \"liquorlining\" found that, in urban neighborhoods, there is weak correlation between demand for alcohol and supply of liquor stores.\nFinancial services.\nStudent loans.\nIn December 2007, a class action lawsuit was brought against student loan lending giant Sallie Mae in the United States District Court for the District of Connecticut. The class alleged that Sallie Mae discriminated against African American and Hispanic private student loan applicants.\nThe case alleged that the factors Sallie Mae used to underwrite private student loans caused a disparate impact on students attending schools with higher minority populations. The suit also alleged that Sallie Mae failed to properly disclose loan terms to private student loan borrowers.\nThe lawsuit was settled in 2011. The terms of the settlement included Sallie Mae agreeing to make a $500,000 donation to the United Negro College Fund and the attorneys for the plaintiffs receiving $1.8 million in attorneys' fees.\nCredit cards.\nCredit card redlining is a spatially discriminatory practice among credit card issuers, of providing different amounts of credit to different areas, based on their ethnic-minority composition, rather than on economic criteria, such as the potential profitability of operating in those areas. Scholars assess certain policies, such as credit card issuers reducing credit lines of individuals with a record of purchases at retailers frequented by so-called \"high-risk\" customers, to be akin to redlining.\nBanks.\nMuch of the economic impacts we find as a result of redlining and the banking system directly impact the African American community. Beginning in the 1960s, there was a large influx of black veterans and their families moving into suburban white communities. As blacks moved in, whites moved out and the market value of these homes dropped dramatically. In observation of said market values, bank lenders were able to keep close track by literally drawing red lines around the neighborhoods on a map. These lines signified areas that they would not invest in. By way of racial redlining, not only banks but savings and loans companies, insurance companies, grocery chains, and even pizza delivery companies thwarted economic vitality in black communities. The severe lacking in civil rights laws in combination with the economic impact led to the passing of the Community Reinvestment Act in 1977.\nRacial and economic redlining set the people who live in these communities up for failure from the start, so much so that banks would often deny people who came from these areas bank loans or offered them at stricter repayment rates. As a result, there was a very low rate at which people (in particular African Americans) were able to own their homes; opening the door for slum landlords (who could get approved for low interest loans in those communities) to take over and do as they saw fit.\nInsurance.\nGregory D. Squires wrote in 2003 that data showed that race continues to affect the policies and practices of the insurance industry. Racial profiling or redlining has a long history in the property-insurance industry in the United States. From a review of industry underwriting and marketing materials, court documents, and research by government agencies, industry and community groups, and academics, it is clear that race has long affected and continues to affect the policies and practices of the insurance industry. Home-insurance agents may try to assess the ethnicity of a potential customer just by telephone, affecting what services they offer to inquiries about purchasing a home insurance policy. This type of discrimination is called linguistic profiling. There have also been concerns raised about redlining in the automotive insurance industry. Reviews of insurance scores based on credit are shown to have unequal results by ethnic group. The Ohio Department of Insurance in the early 21st century allows insurance providers to use maps and collection of demographic data by ZIP code in determining insurance rates. The FHEO Director of Investigations at the Department of Housing and Urban Development, Sara Pratt, wrote:\nLike other forms of discrimination, the history of insurance redlining began in conscious, overt racial discrimination practiced openly and with significant community support in communities throughout the country. There was documented overt discrimination in practices relating to residential housing\u2014from the appraisal manuals which established an articulated \"policy\" of preferences based on race, religion and national origin. to lending practices which only made loans available in certain parts of town or to certain borrowers, to the decision-making process in loans and insurance which allowed the insertion of discriminatory assessments into final decisions about either.\nMortgages.\nIn reverse redlining, lenders and insurers target minority consumers by charging them more than a similarly situated white consumer would be charged, specifically marketing the most expensive and onerous loan products. In the 2000s, some financial institutions considered black communities as suitable for subprime mortgages. Wells Fargo partnered with churches in black communities, where pastors would deliver \"wealth building\" sermons encouraging new mortgage applications. The bank would then make a donation to the church in return for every new application. Many working-class blacks wanted to be included in the nation's home-owning trend. Instead of empowering them to contribute to homeownership and community progress, predatory lending practices through reverse redlining stripped the equity homeowners sought and drained the wealth of those communities for the enrichment of financial firms. The growth of subprime lending, higher cost loans to borrowers with flaws on their credit records, prior to the 2008 financial crisis, coupled with growing law enforcement activity in those areas, clearly showed a surge in manipulative practices. Not all subprime loans were predatory, but virtually all predatory loans were subprime. Predatory loans are dangerous because they charge unreasonably higher rates and fees compared to the risk, trapping homeowners in unaffordable debt and often costing them their homes and life savings.\nA survey of two districts of similar incomes, one being largely white and the other largely black, found that bank branches in the black community offered exclusively subprime loans. Studies found out that high-income blacks were almost twice as likely to end up with subprime home-purchase mortgages compared to low-income whites. Fueled by deep racism, some loan officers referred to blacks as \"mud people\" and to subprime lending as \"ghetto loans\". Lower savings rate and distrust of banks, stemming from this legacy of redlining, may explain why there are fewer financial institutions in minority neighborhoods. In the early 21st century, brokers and telemarketers actively encouraged subprime mortgages to be offered to minority residents. A majority of the loans were refinance transactions, allowing homeowners to take cash out of their appreciating property or pay off credit card and other debt.\nRedlining has helped preserve residential segregation between blacks and whites in the United States. Lending institutions such as Wells Fargo have shown that they treat black mortgage applicants differently when they are buying homes in white neighborhoods than when buying homes in black neighborhoods by offering them subprime and predatory loans when black residents try and integrate neighborhoods.\nThe inequality in loaning extends past residential to commercial loans as well; Dan Immergluck writes that in 2002, small businesses in black neighborhoods received fewer loans, even after accounting for business density, business size, industrial mix, neighborhood income, and the credit quality of local businesses.\nSeveral State Attorneys General have begun investigating these de facto practices, which may violate fair lending laws. The NAACP filed a class-action lawsuit charging systematic racial discrimination by more than a dozen banks.\nThese are not isolated incidents. According to the US Department of Justice, since 2021 alone, the department has announced 11 redlining cases and secured over $109 million in relief for communities of color that have been the victims of lending discrimination nationwide. The three most wealthy banks in the US, Bank of America, JPMorgan Chase, and Wells Fargo have all been discovered participating in discriminatory lending.\nWells Fargo, the largest residential home mortgage originator in the United States settled a lawsuit in 2012 after it was discovered they were using discriminatory lending practices against African-American and Hispanic borrowers between 2004 and 2009. This settlement, the second largest fair lending settlement in the history of the United States Department of Justice, involves compensation of $184.3 million for wholesale borrowers who were steered into subprime mortgages or charged higher fees and rates than white borrowers due to their race or national origin. Wells Fargo agreed to provide $50 million in direct down payment assistance to affected communities. In this suit, it was shown that in 2007 customers in the Chicago area who borrowed $300,000 from Wells Fargo through an independent broker had on average paid $2,937 more in broker fees if African-American, and $2,187 more if Hispanic, compared with white borrowers with similar credit risk.\nIn 2011, Bank of America, the second largest bank in the U.S. settled a lawsuit for $335 million. The lawsuit alleged that the bank charged higher fees and interest rates to African American and Hispanic borrowers compared to white borrowers with similar credit profiles. These citizens were completely taken advantage of. \"Chances are, the victims had no idea they were being victimized, It was discrimination with a smile\" said Thomas E. Perez, the Justice Department's assistant attorney general for civil rights. More recently, in 2017, JPMorgan Chase settled a lawsuit for $55 million. The lawsuit again alleged that the bank charged higher interest rates and fees to minority borrowers than to white borrowers with similar credit profiles for mortgage loans between 2006 and 2009.\nA quantitative analysis examining trends in racial discrimination in the U.S. housing market from 1976 to 2016 found that discrimination by the means of direct denial of mortgage rates has significantly decreased since the 1970s, but that racial gaps in mortgage costs have not. In addition, they found that the probability of receiving a response to an initial inquiry is 8% lower among blacks, 4% lower among Hispanics, and 3% lower among Asians compared to whites.\nEnvironmental racism.\nNeighborhoods' current socioeconomic susceptibility is impacted by the historical redlining in the 1930s, one of several racist and discriminatory practices. Redlined communities continued to be segregated by race and economic status as a result of this discriminatory strategy, which was based on racial demography and perceived risk for mortgage investment. Which leads to investments in those areas being less likely. Policies related to redlining and urban decay can also act as a form of environmental racism, which in turn affect public health. Urban minority communities may face environmental racism in the form of parks that are smaller, less accessible and of poorer quality than those in more affluent or white areas in some cities, which may have an indirect effect on health, since young people have fewer places to play, and adults have fewer opportunities for exercise. A 2022 study published in the journal Environmental Science &amp; Technology Letters found redlined areas in 202 US cities had higher levels of air pollution (nitrogen dioxide and fine particulate matter) in 2010. One of the most important environmental risk factors, exposure to combustion-related air pollutants is directly linked to a host of health effects, such as cardiovascular disease, respiratory conditions, and cardiovascular death. African-Americans are 75 percent more likely than others to live near facilities that produce hazardous waste and pollutants. Philadelphia, which has a 44 percent Black population, received a warning from the American Lung Association in 2019: \"If you live in Philadelphia County, the air you breathe may put your health at risk.\" It was found that a refinery in Grays Ferry, Philadelphia, is responsible for most of the toxic air emissions in the city. The refinery had not been in compliance with the Clean Air Act for 9 out of the 12 quarters through 2019.\nProfessor Kyung Hwa Jung of Columbia University's College of Physicians and Surgeons wrote in 2022 on the legacy of residential redlining in American history and its implications for the temporal patterns of air pollution surrounding schools in New York City today. Using land-use regression models from the NYC Community Air Survey, they looked at the annual average concentrations of combustion-related air pollutants (black carbon (BC), particulate matter (PM2.5), nitrogen dioxide (NO2), and nitric oxide (NO)) in a 250-meter radius around schools. They concentrated on schools because, given how densely populated New York City is, a 2006 study that was cited suggested that schools may be a significant source of exposure to BC and PM2.5 because they are frequently situated close to busy roads and heavy truck routes. in which \"6.4 million US children attended schools within 250\u2009m of a major roadway and were likely exposed to high levels of traffic pollution\" Moreover, a recent study discovered that historical redlining in American cities has been connected to differences in air pollution levels, with greater levels of PM2.5 and NO2 in redlined communities than in non-redlined regions. Black, Hispanic, and Asian individuals are generally more exposed to PM2.5 than white individuals are. Black and Hispanic groups are also more exposed to BC, even when socioeconomic status has been taken into account. Kyung Hwa Jung's study came up with the same results, indicating that, compared to other areas, historically redlined communities in New York City had greater rates of Black people, deprivation, socioeconomic vulnerability, and inferior youth opportunity. They also had higher diesel emissions and a larger density of local truck routes. Despite the fact that pollution levels in NYC have decreased compared to historical levels due to recent environmental laws, non-redlined neighborhoods still exhibit significant levels of air pollution.\nIn 1990, Robert Wallace wrote that the pattern of the AIDS outbreak during the 1980s was affected by the outcomes of a program of \"planned shrinkage\" directed at African-American and Hispanic communities. It was implemented through systematic denial of municipal services, particularly fire protection resources, essential to maintain urban levels of population density and ensure community stability. Institutionalized racism affects general health care as well as the quality of AIDS health intervention and services in minority communities. The over-representation of minorities in various disease categories, including AIDS, is partially related to environmental racism. The national response to the AIDS epidemic in minority communities was slow during the 1980s and 1990s, showing an insensitivity to ethnic diversity in prevention efforts and AIDS health services.\nEnvironmental justice scholars such as Laura Pulido, Department Head of Ethnic Studies and Professor at the University of Oregon, and David Pellow, Dehlsen and Department Chair of Environmental Studies and Director of the Global Environmental Justice Project at the University of California, Santa Barbara, argue that recognizing environmental racism as an element stemming from the entrenched legacies of racial capitalism is crucial to the movement, with white supremacy continuing to shape human relationships with nature and labor.\nWorkforce.\nWorkers living in American inner cities have more difficulty finding jobs than suburban workers do.\nDigital redlining.\n\"Digital redlining\" is a term used to refer to the practice of creating and perpetuating inequities between racial, cultural, and class groups specifically through the use of digital technologies, digital content, and the internet. \"Digital redlining\" is an extension of the historical housing discrimination practice of redlining to include an ability to discriminate against vulnerable classes of society using algorithms, connected digital technologies, and big data. This extension of the term tends to include both geographically based and non-geographically based discrimination. For example, in March 2019 the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) charged Facebook with housing discrimination over the company's targeted advertising practices. While these charges included geographically based targeting in the form of a tool that allowed advertisers to draw a red line on a map; they also included non-geographically based methods that did not use maps but rather utilized algorithmic targeting using Facebook's user profile information to directly exclude specific groups of people. A press release from HUD on March 28, 2019, stated that HUD was charging that \"Facebook enabled advertisers to exclude people whom Facebook classified as parents; non-American-born; non-Christian; interested in accessibility; interested in Hispanic culture; or a wide variety of other interests that closely align with the Fair Housing Act's protected classes.\"\nPolitical redlining.\nPolitical redlining is the process of restricting the supply of political information with assumptions about demographics and present or past opinions. It occurs when political campaign managers delimit which population is less likely to vote and design information campaigns only with likely voters in mind. It can also occur when politicians, lobbyists, or political campaign managers identify which communities to actively discourage from voting through voter suppression campaigns.\nRedlining and Health Inequality.\nA growing body of peer-reviewed research has documented associations between historical redlining and present-day health outcomes across multiple conditions. A 2024 systematic review in Public Health Nursing examined 36 studies and found that 86% reported significant associations between historic redlining and adverse health outcomes, including cardiovascular disease, preterm birth, cancer incidence and mortality, and asthma. A systematic review and meta-analysis in 2022 found that women living in historically redlined areas had significantly higher odds of preterm birth compared to those in non-redlined areas. Research published in Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences found associations between historical redlining and cardiovascular health outcomes.\nHealth inequality in the United States persists today as a direct result of the effects of redlining. This is because health in America is synonymous with wealth, both of which minority groups have been denied as a result of discriminatory practices. Wealth affords the privilege of living in a neighborhood or community with clean air, pure water, outdoor spaces and places for recreation and exercise, safe streets during the day and night, infrastructure that supports the growth of intergenerational wealth through access to good schools, healthy food, public transportation, and opportunities to connect, belong, and contribute to the surrounding community. Wealth also provides stability of home as those with capital are not confined to the deteriorating housing stock that minority groups who were redlined were forced to try and rehabilitate without access to loans.\nIn the case of retail businesses like supermarkets, the purposeful construction of stores impractically far away from targeted residents results in a redlining effect. This has been referred to as supermarket redlining and has been proposed as a cause of lower access to supermarkets that is characteristic of some scholarly definitions of food deserts. The concept describes how large chain supermarkets tend to relocate out of or refrain from opening stores in inner-city areas or impoverished neighborhoods due to perceived urban and economic obstacles, decreasing certain communities' access to supermarkets.\nCancer Outcomes.\nAnother outcome associated with redlining is varying cancer outcomes. For example, a study published in the \"Journal of the American Medical Association\" found non-redlined areas to have more favorable breast cancer outcomes among non-Latina white women. A 2023 study published in the J\"ournal of the American College of Surgeons\" found that, beyond cancer outcomes, redlining also contributes to lower cancer screening rates. Specifically, the study found that, in redlined versus non-redlined neighborhoods, there were 24% lower odds of being screened for breast cancer, 64% lower odds for colorectal cancer, and 79% lower odds in cervical cancer. It is important that strategies to combat screening disparities be structurally competent and location-specific, as Amanda Harper, senior staff writer at Ohio State's Comprehensive Cancer Center \u2013 James Cancer Hospital and Solove Research Institute writes. For example, if transportation is a barrier, travel vouchers or mobile clinics should be employed. The health inequalities that arise from redlining manifest in many forms, and cancer outcomes and screening are two ways redlined communities present differences when compared to non-redlined communities.\nLife Expectancy.\nOverall life expectancy has improved, but there are still discrepancies between the life expectancies of different racial groups. The concentration of disparities in minority neighborhoods, reinforced by redlining, has resulted in worse health outcomes and lower life expectancies in these neighborhoods. Continued economic isolation and property devaluation resulting from redlining have widened the differences in life expectancy between redlined communities and neighboring highly rated communities. When comparing redlined neighborhoods to highly graded neighborhoods by the Home Owners' Loan Corporation, life expectancy in redlined communities is on average 3.6 years lower. However, there is significant variation in this difference among different cities. In Baltimore, red or yellow rated communities, meaning \"declining,\" or \"risky for mortgage support,\" had a life expectancy five years shorter than communities rated green or blue, meaning \"desirable.\" In Richmond, Virginia, one predominantly black neighborhood has a life expectancy of 21 years shorter than that of a nearby predominantly white neighborhood, which had been highly rated by the HOLC in the 1930s.\nCOVID-19.\nRedlining intentionally excluded black Americans from accumulating intergenerational wealth. The effects of this exclusion on black Americans' health continue to play out daily, generations later, in the same communities. This is evident currently in the disproportionate effects that COVID-19 has had on the same communities which the HOLC redlined in the 1930s. Research published in September 2020 overlaid maps of the highly affected COVID-19 areas with the HOLC maps, showing that those areas marked \"risky\" to lenders because they contained minority residents were the same neighborhoods most affected by COVID-19. The Centers for Disease Control (CDC) looks at inequities in the social determinants of health like concentrated poverty and healthcare access that are interrelated and influence health outcomes with regard to COVID-19 as well as quality of life in general for minority groups. The CDC points to discrimination within health care, education, criminal justice, housing, and finance, direct results of systematically subversive tactics like redlining which led to chronic and toxic stress that shaped social and economic factors for minority groups, increasing their risk for COVID-19. Healthcare access is similarly limited by factors like a lack of public transportation, child care, and communication and language barriers which result from the spatial and economic isolation of minority communities from redlining. Educational, income, and wealth gaps that result from this isolation mean that minority groups' limited access to the job market may force them to remain in fields that have a higher risk of exposure to the virus, without options to take time off. Finally, a direct result of redlining is the overcrowding of minority groups into neighborhoods that do not boast adequate housing to sustain burgeoning populations, leading to crowded conditions that make prevention strategies for COVID-19 nearly impossible to implement.\nAfter years of de facto discrimination achieved through redlining, a system of structural racism blocking the achievement of health equity for all Americans has developed. As a result, a de facto health narrative that does not inspire belonging, compel political participation, nor dictate strategic change towards the social justice model for health equity has matured. In order to eliminate health inequality in America, a new de facto health narrative needs to dictate strategy. The process for achieving health equity relies on healthcare leaders articulating, acting on, and building the vision into all decisions and structures that support equity. Sufficient resources must be allocated to establishing a governance structure that can oversee health equity work. This includes taking specific action to address the social determinants of building intergenerational wealth as well as confronting institutional racism within health systems themselves. Next, health systems need to address the socioeconomic determinants of health which disadvantage minority groups. Through training, education, support groups, housing support, improved transportation, resource assistance, and community health programs, health equity organizations can begin to break down the long-lasting barriers that tactics like redlining have imposed on achieving health equity. In addition to ensuring the equal health outcomes of patients, healthcare organizations can also utilize their position as employers to develop a more diverse workforce through improved hiring practices and ensuring living wages to minority employees.\nStrategies to reverse effects of redlining.\nRedlining has contributed to the long-term decline of low-income, inner city neighborhoods and the continuation of ethnic minority enclaves. Compared to prospering ethnic minority areas, historically redlined or other struggling black communities need targeted investments in infrastructure and services in order to prosper.\nSome of these strategies include:\nMoreover, residents of historically redlined neighborhoods face risks for worse health outcomes and lower life expectancies. Healthcare professionals play a crucial role in efforts to reverse the impact of redlining on adverse health outcomes. Metzl and Hansen propose that the U.S. medical education system should train healthcare professionals to recognize the larger structural contexts and social and economic conditions that influence patient health outcomes, including the legacy of redlining. Infusing clinical training with structural awareness allows healthcare providers to consider the structural barriers that shape patients' health and illness. The faculty at Wayne State University School of Medicine in Detroit, Michigan launched a course called \"Healing Between the Lines\" to teach medical students and residents about the effects of structural injustices on health, including historical redlining as a \"critical driver\" of the life expectancy gap of Detroit. From a healthcare policy perspective, Egede and other scholars recommend Medicaid expansion, Medicaid coverage mandatorily including Community Health Worker services, value-based health system payments, and federal incentives for expanding hospitals and clinics. Healthcare providers and individuals in the healthcare system are crucial in addressing the long-lasting health consequences of historical redlining.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "60563", "revid": "34424104", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60563", "title": "Chancellor of Germany (1949\u2013present)", "text": ""}
{"id": "60564", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60564", "title": "Takeru Kobayashi", "text": "Japanese competitive eater (born 1978)\n is a retired Japanese competitive eater. Described as \"the godfather of competitive eating\", he is a six-time Nathan's Hot Dog Eating Contest champion and widely credited with popularizing the sport.\nCompetition and records.\nBorn in Nagano, Japan, he won the 2000 Japanese variety show \"TV Champion\" Gluttony Championship by eating 16 bowls of ramen in 1 hour in the final. Also competing in the popular TV show \"Food Battle Club\", he went on to win the final round of several stages, besting his mentor and previous champion. This resulted in a frenzy of fame for him in Japan and Asia before he appeared in the United States.\nKobayashi set his first world record in western culture in his rookie appearance on July 4, 2001, when he ate 50 hot dogs in 12 minutes at the Nathan's Coney Island Hot Dog Eating Contest, almost doubling the previous record of &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;25+1\u20448. The record was so unexpected that the organizers ran out of signs indicating how many hot dogs Kobayashi had eaten and had to resort to handwritten signs. He would go on to break his own record three times in winning the contest 6 consecutive times (2001\u20132006). \nKobayashi is known for having created the \"Solomon Method\" of separating the hot dog from the bun then breaking it in half, while eating the dogs, then dunking the buns in water to wash the dogs down quickly. As this method became the basis to the competition for all the competitors, it also became apparent amongst the eaters, that Kobayashi's main opponent would dunk their own buns into the water while dissolving them, allowing his opponent to cheat. This later resulted in Kobayashi changing his own dunking technique and refusing to eat at any further hot dog competitions unless agreeing to a \"No Dunking Rule\". After much controversy between Kobayashi and the abuse he sustained from Major League Eating, he left the competition altogether to compete in a new taco competition called The Gringo Bandito Taco Eating Challenge, sponsored by Dexter Holland from The Offspring. Kobayashi went on to be the undefeated champion for nine years, his best score being 159 tacos in 10 minutes, until 2018 when the competition came to an end. \nIn the 2006 Krystal Square Off, Kobayashi's mark of 97 hamburgers was 30 better than his winning total in 2005 and 28 better than the world record he set in 2004. \nAt a speed-eating contest in Hong Kong on August 13, 2005, Kobayashi consumed 83 vegetarian jiaozi dumplings in 8 minutes. The next day, he ate 100 roasted pork buns in 12 minutes. Kobayashi also won the 2005 Alka-Seltzer US Open of Competitive Eating, a three-hour International Federation of Competitive Eating (IFOCE), elimination tournament on ESPN, as well as the Glutton Bowl, a two-hour IFOCE eating special that aired on the Fox Network in 2002. On Fox's 2003 show \"Man vs. Beast\", Kobayashi lost in an eating competition against a 1089-pound (494\u00a0kg) Kodiak bear, when he ate 31 bunless hot dogs in 2 minutes and 36 seconds to the bear's 50. In a 2014 interview, Kobayashi claims to have beaten the bear in the rehearsal. On August 5, 2006, Kobayashi set yet another world record at the Johnsonville World Bratwurst Eating Championship in Sheboygan, Wisconsin, by downing 58 bratwurst sausages in 10 minutes, shattering the previous record of 35 set the previous year by Sonya Thomas. On September 23, 2006, Takeru Kobayashi set the world record at the Phantom Food Festival in Boston, for eating 41 Summer Shack lobster rolls in 10 minutes, replacing the previous record of 22 rolls. Other world-eating records held by Kobayashi include of cow brains in 15 minutes and of rice balls in 30 minutes.\nOn June 25, 2007, Kobayashi announced on his blog that he seriously injured his jaw during training. He stated that he could only open his jaw about the width of a fingertip. Kobayashi's participation in the July 4, 2007, Nathan's contest continued as scheduled. He was able to eat a personal record 63 hot dogs, though his mark was bettered by Joey Chestnut's 66.\nOn July 4, 2008, Kobayashi once again competed in the Nathan's contest. He ate 59 hot dogs, tying Chestnut, but lost a sudden death five dog eat off to finish second. This was controversial, as the five dog eat off was decided at the spur of the moment, and had not been an official rule previously, to decide a winner in the circumstance of a tie.\nKobayashi went on to defeat Joey Chestnut, on May 31, 2009, in a Pizza Hut P'Zone competition at Sony Studios in Culver City, California. The competition aired on Spike TV on June 21. In July 2009, Kobayashi visited Puerto Rico in a special appearance for Taco Bell's Why Pay More Challenge, eating 64 tacos in 15 minutes for a local charity. On July 4, 2009, he competed again in the Nathan's contest. He ate 64.5 hot dogs to Joey Chestnut's 68. On September 27, 2009, Kobayashi defeated Chestnut with a score of 93 (68 Krystals, 5 Big Angus Burgers), earning the $20,000 top prize. Chestnut was second, with 81, and Pat \"Deep Dish\" Bertoletti finished third, with 76.\nOn July 4, 2011, Kobayashi competed on the rooftop of a Manhattan bar simultaneously with the Nathan's Contest at Coney Island via a live video simulcast of the event. Kobayashi finished 69 hot dogs, one more than the officially recognized world record at the time.\nOn January 23, 2012. Kobayashi went on The Wendy Williams Show to set the record for eating the most Twinkies in one minute, for the \"Save The Twinkie\" campaign, and set a new world record of 14 Twinkies. On February 3, 2012, Kobayashi set the new Wing Bowl record for eating chicken wings at Wing Bowl XX, held at the Wells Fargo Center in Philadelphia. His total was 337 wings in his first competition in that event. On August 26, 2012, Kobayashi set the new world record at the New York State Fair in Syracuse for eating 110 hot dogs in 10 minutes. In October 2012, Kobayashi set the new world record at the State Fair of Texas for eating 60 hot dogs in 2 minutes 35 seconds. On June 30, 2012, Kobayashi revealed the terms of the Major League Eating (MLE) contract he was required to sign in order to compete in Nathan's Fourth of July hot dog eating competition. The year-long contract limited him to $40,000 and took away any rights to endorse or engage in anything outside of what MLE mandated. On July 4, 2012, Kobayashi competed in the Crif Dog Classic. He ate 58.5 hot dogs and buns. On October 11, 2012, Kobayashi set the new world record at the Gringo Bandito Taco Challenge by eating 106 tacos in 10 minutes\nOn July 21, 2013, Kobayashi defended his title at the Gringo Bandito Taco Challenge. On October 6, 2013, Kobayashi won \"LET 'EM EAT\" Canada's biggest pizza eating contest for the fourth year in a row.\nOn August 4, 2014, Kobayashi set the new world record at \"LET 'EM EAT\" Canada's biggest pizza eating contest by eating 62 slices of pizza (15 and a half pizzas) in 12 minutes.\n2024\nIn May 2024, Kobayashi announced his retirement from competitive eating, citing long-term health concerns including damage to his digestive system and loss of the ability to fully taste and smell food.\nAlthough he had announced his retirement earlier in 2024, Kobayashi agreed to return for the Netflix live event Unfinished Beef against Joey Chestnut in September 2024, stating that he wanted their long-standing rivalry to be resolved on a global stage.\nKobayashi competed against Joey Chestnut in September 2024 in a live-streamed Netflix event titled \"\". Chestnut defeated Kobayashi, eating 83 hot dogs in 10 minutes. Kobayashi ate 66 hot dogs, breaking his personal best that he set in 2009 at the Nathan's Hot Dog Eating Contest.\nTraining and techniques.\nKobayashi expands his stomach for a competition by eating larger and larger amounts of food, and then exercises to ensure that fat will not impede expansion of his stomach during a competition. His official web site gives his height as and his weight as . As of July 4, 2009, Kobayashi weighed in at 60\u00a0kg (132\u00a0lb) for the annual 4th of July hot dog eating competition on Coney Island. Kobayashi is also known for his trademark body wiggle, referred to by some as the \"Kobayashi Shake\", to force food down his esophagus and settle more compactly in his stomach. He eats hot dogs by splitting the frankfurter in half, dipping the buns in water, and then stuffing both parts in his mouth. He calls this the Solomon Method.\nIn the Japanese TV program \"TV Champion\", in a competition to see how much ramen one can eat in 1 hour, Kobayashi adopted a tactic of lifting the noodles at once to allow air to pass through the noodles, and then putting them in his mouth after they had cooled down.\nContractual dispute and Nathan's Famous ban.\nJuly 2010 controversy.\nOn June 28, 2010, Kobayashi announced he would not compete in the Nathan's Fourth of July Hot Dog Eating Competition, reportedly due to the company's insistence that Kobayashi sign an exclusive contract.\nOn July 4, 2010, Kobayashi was in attendance watching from the crowd at the Nathan's International Hot Dog Eating Contest. Wearing a black T-shirt that read \"Free Kobi\", Kobayashi mingled with the crowd, standing inside a police-barricaded pen just under the stage. After the competition ended, the spectators began chanting his name loudly, demanding that they \"let him eat\". Accordingly, Kobayashi indulged their wishes by climbing up onto the stage to a thunderous ovation. Although he was initially ushered by security officers up to the stage, one security officer (thought to have been requested by George Shea) arrested him from behind, and Kobayashi began resisting and thrashing his body around at the officials attempting to commandeer him. A struggle ensued, eventually resulting in Kobayashi being thrown against the barricades and tossed into the fences before finally being handcuffed and placed inside a police car. Some witnesses reported that Kobayashi was simply intending to shake the hand of the winner, Joey Chestnut, as a gesture of sportsmanship and goodwill. This has led analysts to believe that Kobayashi was fully intent on a contract renegotiation with MLE, and that congratulating Chestnut loosely resembled a \"peace offering\" from Kobayashi. Co-host and MLE President Richard Shea stated that \"[Kobayashi] tried to jump on stage during the awards ceremony to disrupt it.\" He was charged with resisting arrest, trespassing, and obstructing government administration and subsequently was taken to jail, awaiting an appearance in Brooklyn Criminal Court.\nKobayashi's interpreter and publicist, Maggie James (later, his wife), said he had originally gone in hopes to cheer on his fellow competitive eaters, but after arriving at the venue only to hear support from the fans demanding that they \"let him eat,\" he was swooped onto the stage due to the excitement. She said \"There's a contract dispute, they weren't giving him his freedom. It was unfair.\" Kobayashi told reporters he had a sandwich and a glass of milk while being held. \"I am very hungry,\" he said. \"I wish there were hot dogs in jail.\" On August 5, 2010, all charges against Kobayashi were dismissed by a judge in Brooklyn. Despite his record six consecutive victories in their annual event, Nathan\u2019s removed Kobayashi\u2019s image from their \"Wall of Fame\" in 2011. After Kobayashi left Nathan's, the hot dog contest lost sponsorship from Old Navy, Heinz Tomato Ketchup, and Pepto-Bismol, and its year-to-year Nielsen ratings fell. With an average 0.7 HH U.S. rating, it was off a tenth of a point from 2012, when it aired on ESPN. ESPN averaged 1.949 million viewers for 2011\u2019s Nathan's Famous Hot Dog Eating Contest but went down 41%, to 1.15 million viewers, in 2013.\nJuly 4, 2011 competing events.\nIn 2011, Kobayashi was still barred from the annual Nathan's event due to the contract dispute. On July 4, he competed on the rooftop of a Manhattan bar, 230 Fifth, for the duration of the Coney Island contest. Two official judges from the Athletic Association of NY observed Kobayashi while the live broadcast of the event played next to him on a large television screen. Kobayashi finished 69 hot dogs, one more than the officially recognized world record at the time.\nJuly 4, 2012 competing events.\nIn 2012, Kobayashi was still barred from the annual Nathan's event due to the contract dispute. Kobayashi ate 58.5 at Crif dog classic, eating a different type hot dog from Nathan's Famous Fourth of July International Hot Dog Eating Contest.\nJuly 4, 2014 competing events.\nKobayashi ate 113 bunless Nathan's hot dogs at 230 Fifth.\nOther pursuits.\nIn 2005, Kobayashi appeared in a commercial for ESPN's SportsCenter. In 2007, Kobayashi appeared in commercials for MasterCard and Coors Light. In 2008 Kobayashi appeared in a Western Canada Lottery Corporation commercial. On May 30, 2009, Kobayashi attended the Spike Guys' Choice Awards. \nIn November 2010, Kobayashi appeared in a magazine featuring men's clothing published as an offshoot of \"V\" magazine, VMAN 20th Winter. In November 2010, Kobayashi competed against Donkey Kong in a banana eating contest at the Rio-Can Centre in Toronto as part of the launch for Nintendo's \"Donkey Kong Country Returns\". On July 7, 2011, Kobayashi made a guest appearance at Hewlett Packard event 2011. The other guests were Snoop Dogg, Sugar Ray, Dan Finnerty, Third Eye Blind, Candlebox. In 2011, Kobayashi appeared in TVB commercial. In Spring 2011, Kobayashi appeared in his first major fashion editorial in Canada's \"The Block\" magazine as a model. Additionally, Kobayashi is an aspiring dog trainer, with six labradoodles he calls his \"hot dogs.\" In June 2012, Kobayashi made a special guest appearance and a taco demonstration at The Offspring's release party for their album \"Days Go By\".\nIn 2012, Kobayashi appeared in an Eight O'Clock Coffee and a Hofmann commercial. In 2012, Kobayashi appeared on a celebrity edition of \"Fear Factor\". In 2013, Kobayashi appeared in Just-Eat and Thuzio commercials. Kobayashi has been featured on \"Late Night with Jimmy Fallon\", \"Saturday Night Live\", MTV's \"True Life\", MTV After Hours With Josh Horowitz, \"The Daily Show with Jon Stewart\", \"The Wendy Williams Show\" and has done original features with Buzzfeed.com, CollegeHumor.com and SI.com, and is a featured user on the foodie mobile and web-based app Foodspotting. On July 4, 2013, Kobayashi unveiled his new line of all-beef midwestern grain-fed hot dogs, known officially as \"Kobi Dogs\" at Eventi Hotel in New York. On September 16, 2014, he appeared in a YouTube video competing with a hamster. The video ends with Kobayashi acknowledging his defeat by placing a medal around the hamster's neck. On September 22, 2015, Kobayashi, along with Patrick Bertoletti, Kevin Strahle and Bob Shoudt, consumed a 40-pound goat in 13 minutes and 22 seconds at Taco In A Bag in Chicago. In 2015, Takeru Kobayashi consumed 110 hot dogs without buns in 10 minutes. On April 26, 2019, Nicole Lucas Haimes' feature documentary \"The Good, The Bad, The Hungry\" premiered at The Tribeca Film Festival, with Kobayashi and Joey Chestnut in attendance.\nIn popular culture.\nIn the 93rd \"TV Funhouse\" short on the November 11th, 2006 episode of \"Saturday Night Live\", Kobayashi is the titular character of \"Kobayashi\", a parody of popular anime series, namely \"Dragon Ball Z\", where he appears in-between animated scenes as himself. Kobayashi's eating abilities partially inspired the \"King of the Hill\" episode \"The Fat and the Furious\". This episode originally aired on November 10, 2002. In 2004, a character inspired by Kobayashi, namely \"Kobarushi\", appears in \"Megas XLR\"'s episode \"Bad Guy\". Kobayashi also helped inspire the 2005 ' episode \"\". The episode features a victim who ate himself to death, in part from eating several hot dogs at a hot dog eating contest. Kobayashi is mentioned by Will Ferrell's character, Ricky Bobby, in the 2006 film '. \nReferenced in movie \"Step Brothers\" by Randy (Rob Riggle) after Derek (Adam Scott) threatens that Randy will, \"...eat Brennan's (Will Ferrell's) dick\", if Brennan botches the Catalina Wine Mixer, Randy adds, \"Like Kobayashi!\". Kobayashi appears in the ending cinematic of level three, \"Around the World in 80 Bites\" in the 2007 video game, \"The Simpsons Game\". In \"The Simpsons\" episode \"Luca$\" in the 25th season, the character Lucas Bortner wears a T-shirt with a photo of Kobayashi eating and refers to him in a dialogue. The \"Family Guy\" episode \"Killer Queen\" features a parody of Kobayashi named Charles Yamamoto (voiced by Robert Wu), a hot dog-eating champion who is dethroned by Chris Griffin at a hot dog-eating contest, later making numerous attempts on Chris' life in revenge for defeating and dishonoring him at the competition. In the \"1000 Ways to Die\" skit \"Vom-Ate-Dead\", a professional eater modeled after Takeru Kobayashi is cornered by an emetophiliac woman who forces him to vomit on her, which causes her death when she chokes on an undigested piece of hot dog. Kobayashi appears as himself on a 2012 episode of \"Jake and Amir\", a CollegeHumor web series. He becomes aggressive when Jake tries to feed him hot dogs. Kobayashi appears as himself in the movie \"The Houses October Built 2\". He is in the Brain Eating Contest during the Zombie Pub Crawl in Minneapolis, Minnesota.\nKobayashi was featured in the 2024 Netflix documentary \"Hack your Health: Secrets of Your Gut\", where he announced his retirement from competitive eating and a desire to create more healthy hot dogs.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "60566", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60566", "title": "Advanced RISC Machine", "text": ""}
{"id": "60567", "revid": "7852030", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60567", "title": "President of Germany", "text": "Head of state of Germany\nThe President of Germany, officially titled the Federal President of the Federal Republic of Germany (), is the head of state of Germany. The current officeholder is Frank-Walter Steinmeier who was elected on 12 February 2017 and re-elected on 13 February 2022. He is currently serving his second five-year-term, which began on 19 March 2022.\nUnder the 1949 constitution (Basic Law) Germany has a parliamentary system of government in which the chancellor (similar to a prime minister or minister-president in other parliamentary democracies) is the head of government. The president has a ceremonial role as figurehead, but also has the right and duty to act politically. They can give direction to general political and societal debates and have some important \"reserve powers\" in case of political instability (such as those provided for by Article 81 of the Basic Law). The president also holds the prerogative to grant pardons on behalf of the federation. The German presidents, who can be elected to two consecutive five-year terms, have wide discretion about how they exercise their official duties.\nUnder Article 59 (1) of the Basic Law (German Constitution), the president represents the Federal Republic of Germany in matters of international law, concludes treaties with foreign states on its behalf and accredits diplomats. Furthermore, all federal laws must be signed by the president before they can come into effect; presidents may veto a law if they believe it to violate the constitution.\nThe president's actions and public appearances represent the state itself, its existence, legitimacy, and unity. The president enjoys a higher ranking at official functions than the chancellor. The president's role is integrative and includes the control function of upholding the law and the constitution. It is a matter of political tradition \u2013 not legal restrictions \u2013 that the president generally does not comment routinely on issues in the news, particularly when there is some controversy among the political parties. This distance from day-to-day politics and daily governmental issues allows the president to be a source of clarification, to influence public debate, voice criticism, offer suggestions, and make proposals. In order to exercise this power, they traditionally act above party politics.\nElection.\nThe president is elected for a term of five years by secret ballot, without debate, by a specially convened Federal Convention which mirrors the aggregated majority position in the Bundestag (the federal parliament) and in the parliaments of the 16 German states. The convention consists of all Bundestag members, as well as an equal number of electors elected by the state legislatures in proportion to their respective populations. Since reunification, all Federal Conventions have had more than 1200 members, as the Bundestag has always had more than 600 parliamentarians since then. It is not required that state electors are chosen from the members of the state legislature; often some prominent citizens are chosen.\nThe German constitution, the Basic Law, requires that the convention be convened no later than 30 days before the scheduled expiry of the sitting president's term or 30 days after a premature expiry of a president's term. The body is convened and chaired by the President of the Bundestag. From 1979 to 2009, all these conventions were held on 23 May, the anniversary of the foundation of the Federal Republic in 1949. The resignation of Horst K\u00f6hler in 2010, which necessitated an early meeting of the Federal Convention, brought this tradition to an end.\nIn the first two rounds of the election, the candidate who achieves an absolute majority is elected. If, after two votes, no single candidate has received this level of support, in the third and final vote the candidate who wins a plurality of votes cast is elected.\nThe result of the election is often determined by party politics. In most cases, the candidate of the majority party or coalition in the Bundestag is considered to be the likely winner. However, as the members of the Federal Convention vote by secret ballot and are free to vote against their party's candidate, some presidential elections were considered open or too close to call beforehand because of relatively balanced majority positions or because the governing coalition's parties could not agree on one candidate and endorsed different people, as they did in 1969, when Gustav Heinemann won by only six votes on the third ballot. In other cases, elections have turned out to be much closer than expected. For example, in 2010, Wulff was expected to win on the first ballot, as the parties supporting him (CDU, CSU and FDP) had a stable absolute majority in the Federal Convention. Nevertheless, he failed to win a majority in the first and second ballots, while his main opponent Joachim Gauck had an unexpectedly strong showing. In the end, Wulff obtained a majority in the third ballot. If the opposition has turned in a strong showing in state elections, it can potentially have enough support to defeat the chancellor's party's candidate; this happened in the elections in 1979 and 2004. For this reason, presidential elections can indicate the result of an upcoming general election. According to a long-standing adage in German politics, \"if you can create a President, you can form a government.\"\nList of elections.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nQualifications.\nThe office of president is open to all Germans who are entitled to vote in Bundestag elections and have reached the age of 40, but no one may serve more than two consecutive five-year terms. As yet (2025), only five presidents (Heuss, L\u00fcbke, von Weizs\u00e4cker, K\u00f6hler and Steinmeier (in office)) have been elected for a second term and only two of them (Heuss and von Weizs\u00e4cker) completed those terms, while L\u00fcbke and K\u00f6hler resigned during their second term. The president must not be a member of the federal government or of a legislature at either the federal or state level.\nOath.\nAfter taking office the president must take the following oath, stipulated by Article 56 of the Basic Law, in a joint session of the Bundestag and the Bundesrat (it is the only event that demands such a joint session constitutionally). The religious references may optionally be omitted.\nI swear that I will dedicate my efforts to the well-being of the German people, promote their welfare, protect them from harm, uphold and defend the Basic Law and the laws of the Federation, perform my duties conscientiously and do justice to all. (So help me God.)\nGerman constitutional law does not consider oaths of office as \"constitutive\" but only as \"affirmative\". This means that the president does not have to take the oath at the moment of entering office in order to be able to exercise its constitutional powers. In practice, the oath is usually administered during the first days or weeks of a president's term on a date convenient for a joint session of the Bundestag and the Bundesrat. Nevertheless, in theory a persistent refusal to take the oath is considered to be an impeachable offence by legal scholars. If a president is re-elected for a second consecutive term, he does not take the oath again.\nDuties and functions.\nThe president is involved in the formation of the Federal Government and remains in close cooperation with it. Basically, the president is free to act on his own discretion. However, according to Article 58 of the German constitution, the decrees, and directives of the president require the countersignature of the chancellor or the corresponding federal minister in charge of the respective field of politics. This rule ensures the coherence of government action, similar to the system of checks and balances in the United States. There is no need for a countersignature if the president proposes, appoints, or dismisses the chancellor; convenes or dissolves the Bundestag according to Article 63; declares a legislative state of emergency; calls on a chancellor and ministers to remain in office after the end of a chancellor's term until a successor is elected; or exercises his right to pardon on behalf of the federation - as these are exclusive powers of the president.\nTherefore, the president also receives the chancellor regularly for talks on current policy issues. German presidents also hold talks with individual federal ministers and other senior officials at their own discretion. The \"Head of the Office of the President\" represents the will and views of the president in the meetings of the Federal Cabinet and reports back to the president.\nThe president's most prominent powers and duties include:\nAppointment of the Federal Government.\nAfter an election or other vacancy in the chancellor's office, the president must propose an individual to the Bundestag to be elected chancellor. The Bundestag is required to vote on this proposed candidate. If this vote fails, the right of nomination falls to the Bundestag, which is then given 14 days to elect another person. In either case, the President is obliged to appoint the person if a majority of the entire elected Bundestag, not just those present, votes for them (the so-called \"Kanzlermehrheit\", \"Chancellor majority\").\nIf the Bundestag cannot elect anyone with a majority in the 14-day period, it is required to hold one final ballot. If a person is elected with a majority on this ballot, the President is once again obliged to appoint them. If there is no majority, the President has seven days to either appoint the person who received a plurality of votes on the final ballot or dissolve the Bundestag. \nThe chancellor may only be removed if the Bundestag passes a constructive vote of no confidence, indicating that a prospective new chancellor has the support of a majority. The President is then required to dismiss the chancellor and appoint the new candidate.\nThe president also appoints and dismisses the remaining members of the federal government upon proposal of the chancellor. This theoretically means that the president can appoint only those candidates presented by the chancellor. It is unclear whether the president could refuse to dismiss or appoint a proposed federal minister, as no president has ever done so.\nThe constitution places no restrictions on who may be chancellor. In practice, the president only proposes a person as chancellor who has previously garnered a majority support in prior coalition talks and traditionally does not interfere in those talks. However, after the \"Jamaica coalition\" talks failed in the wake of the 2017 election, President Steinmeier invited several Bundestag party leaders to try to bring them together to form a working government.\nOther appointments.\nThe president appoints federal judges, federal civil servants, and military officers.\nDissolution of the Bundestag.\nUnlike the head of state in Westminster system parliamentary democracies, the President does not have the reserve power to unilaterally dissolve the Bundestag. The Bundestag also does not have the power to dissolve itself. Dissolution by the President can only occur in two scenarios caused by action of the Bundestag:\nThe first scenario has never happened. The second has been used to call snap elections in 1972, 1983, 2005, and 2025, in all four cases with the incumbent chancellor asking his own party to vote down the confidence motion and obtaining a dissolution. Though the use of this strategy is controversial and the 1983 and 2005 cases resulted in complaints to the Federal Constitutional Court, it has been upheld as lawful.\nPromulgation of the law.\nAll federal laws must be signed by the president before they can come into effect. The president may refuse to sign the law, thus effectively vetoing it. In principle, the president has the full veto authority on any bill, but this, however, is not how past presidents handled their power. Usually, the president checks if the law was passed according to the order mandated by the Constitution and/or if the content of the law is constitutional. Only in cases in which the incumbent president had serious doubts about the constitutionality of a bill laid before them, they have refused to sign it. It also has to be stated that the president may at their own discretion sign such a \"vetoed\" bill at any later time, if for example the Basic Law has been changed in the relevant aspect or if the bill in question has been amended according to his concerns, because their initial refusal to sign a bill is not technically a final veto.\nAs of 2023, this has happened only nine times and no president has done it more often than two times during their term:\nKarl Carstens, Roman Herzog, Johannes Rau, Christian Wulff, and Joachim Gauck have signed and promulgated all bills during their respective terms. \nForeign relations.\nThe president represents Germany in the world (Art. 59 Basic Law), undertakes foreign visits, and receives foreign dignitaries. They also conclude treaties with foreign nations (which do not come into effect until affirmed by the Bundestag), accredit German diplomats, and receive the letters of accreditation of foreign diplomats.\nPardons and honours.\nAccording to Article 60 (2) of the German Constitution, the president has the power to pardon. This means the president \"has the authority to revoke or commute penal or disciplinary sentences in individual cases. The federal president cannot, however, issue an amnesty waiving or commuting sentences for a whole category of offenses. That requires a law enacted by the Bundestag in conjunction with the Bundesrat. Due to the federal structure of Germany the federal president is only responsible for dealing with certain criminal matters (e.g. espionage and terrorism) and disciplinary proceedings against federal civil servants, federal judges, and soldiers\".\nIt is customary that the federal president becomes the honorary godparent of the seventh child in a family if the parents wish it. They also send letters of congratulations to centenarians and long-time married couples.\nLegislative state of emergency.\nArticle 81 makes it possible to enact a law without the approval of the Bundestag: if the Bundestag rejects a motion of confidence, but a new chancellor is not elected nor is the Bundestag dissolved, the chancellor can declare a draft law to be \"urgent\". If the Bundestag refuses to approve the draft, the cabinet can ask the federal president to declare a \"legislative state of emergency\" (\"Gesetzgebungsnotstand\") with regard to that specific law proposal.\nAfter the declaration of the president, the Bundestag has four weeks to discuss the draft law. If it does not approve it the cabinet can ask the Federal Council for approval. After the consent of the Federal Council is secured, the draft law becomes law.\nThere are some constraints on the \"legislative state of emergency\". After a president has declared the state of emergency for the first time, the government has only six months to use the procedure for other law proposals. Given the terms provided by the constitution, it is unlikely that the government can enact more than one other draft law in this way.\nAlso, the emergency has to be declared afresh for every proposal. This means that the six months are not a period in which the government together with the president and the Federal Council simply replaces the Bundestag as lawgiver. The Bundestag remains fully competent to pass laws during these six months. The state of emergency also ends if the office of the chancellor ends. During the same term and after the six months, the chancellor cannot use the procedure of Article 81 again.\nA \"legislative state of emergency\" has never been declared. In case of serious disagreement between the chancellor and the Bundestag, the chancellor resigns or the Bundestag faces new elections. The provision of Article 81 is intended to assist the government for a short time, but not to use it in crisis for a longer period. According to constitutional commentator Bryde, Article 81 provides the executive (government) with the power to \"enable decrees in a state of emergency\" (\"exekutives Notverordnungsrecht\"), but for historical reasons the constitution avoided this expression.\nPolitics and influence.\nThough candidates are usually selected by a political party or parties, the president nonetheless is traditionally expected to refrain from being an active member of any party after assuming office. Every president to date, except Joachim Gauck (who was an independent), has suspended their party membership for the duration of their term. Presidents have, however, spoken publicly about their personal views on political matters. The very fact that a president is expected to remain above politics usually means that when they do speak out on an issue, it is considered to be of great importance. In some cases, a presidential speech has dominated German political debate for a year or more.\nReserve powers.\nAccording to article 81 of the German constitution, the president can declare a \"Legislation Emergency\" and allow the federal government and the Bundesrat to enact laws without the approval of the Bundestag. They also have important decisive power regarding the appointment of a chancellor who was elected by plurality only, or the dissolution of the Bundestag under certain circumstances.\nIt is also theoretically possible, albeit a drastic step which has not happened since 1949, that the president refuses to sign legislation merely because they disagree with its content, thus vetoing it, or refuse to approve a cabinet appointment. In all cases in which a bill was not signed by the federal president, all presidents have claimed that the bill in question was manifestly unconstitutional. For example, in the autumn of 2006, President Horst K\u00f6hler did so twice within three months. Also, in some cases, a president has signed a law while asking that the political parties refer the case to the Federal Constitutional Court in order to test the law's constitutionality.\nSuccession.\nThe Basic Law did not create an office of Vice President, but designated the President of the Bundesrat (by constitutional custom the head of government of one of the sixteen German states, elected by the Bundesrat in a predetermined order of annual alternation) as deputy of the president of Germany (Basic Law, Article 57). If the office of president falls vacant, they assume the powers of the president on an acting basis until a successor is elected. While doing so, they do not continue to exercise the role of chair of the Bundesrat. If the president is temporarily unable to perform their duties (this happens frequently, for example if the president is abroad on a state visit), he can at his own discretion delegate his powers or parts of them to the president of the Bundesrat. For example, in early November 2022, then President of the Bundesrat Peter Tschentscher deputised President Steinmeier when the latter was on a trip to Asia.\nIf the president dies in office, resigns, or is otherwise removed from office, a successor is to be elected within thirty days. So far, there have been three instances of the premature end of a president's term of office:\nBack in 1949, Karl Arnold, at the time Minister-President of North Rhine-Westphalia and President of the Bundesrat, also acted as head of state for a few days: after the Basic Law had come into effect and he himself was elected as President of the Bundesrat, the first President of Germany was not yet elected and the office therefore vacant.\nNone of these three presidents of the Bundesrat acting as President, has used any of the more important powers of the president, as for example vetoing a law or dissolving the Bundestag, although they would have been entitled to do so under the same conditions as the president.\nImpeachment and removal.\nWhile in office, the president enjoys immunity from prosecution and cannot be voted out of office or recalled. The only mechanism for removing the president is impeachment by the Bundestag or Bundesrat for willfully violating German law. In either of the two bodies a two-thirds majority is required. Once the Bundestag or the Bundesrat impeaches the president, the Federal Constitutional Court is charged with determining if they are guilty of the offence. If the charge is sustained, the court has the authority to remove the president from office.\nPresidential office and symbols.\nResidences and office.\nThe official residence of the president is Bellevue Palace in Berlin. The president's second official residence is the Hammerschmidt Villa in Bonn, the former capital city of West Germany.\nAlthough these are the president's official residences, they do not live in Bellevue palace. Instead, it is only used as a ceremonial office. The president and their spouse live in a villa in Dahlem which is part of the Berlin borough of Steglitz-Zehlendorf.\nThe Office of the President (\"Bundespr\u00e4sidialamt\") is a supreme federal authority. It organises the president's work, supports the president in the performance of their duties as head of state, and coordinate their working relationships with other parts of the German government and administration. Its top official, who takes precedence over all other German state secretaries, is the Head of the Office of the President (\"Chef des Bundespr\u00e4sidialamts\").\nThe office and its staff advise the president, inform them of all developments in domestic and foreign affairs and carry out the instructions of the president or forward these to the corresponding ministry or authority.\nTransportation.\nThe president's car is usually black, made in Germany and has the numberplate \"0 \u2013 1\" with the presidential standard on the right wing of the car. The president also uses a VIP helicopter operated by the Federal Police and VIP aircraft (Bombardier Global 5000, Airbus A319CJ, Airbus A321, or A350) operated by the Executive Transport Wing of the German Air Force. When the president is on board, the flight's callsign is \"German Airforce 001\".\nHistory.\nThe modern-day position of German president is significantly different from the Reich President of the Weimar Republic \u2013 a position which held considerable power and was regarded as an important figure in political life.\nWeimar Republic.\nThe position of president of Germany was first established by the Weimar Constitution, which was drafted in the aftermath of World War I and the abdication of Emperor Wilhelm II in 1918. In Germany the new head of state was called the .\nFriedrich Ebert served as Germany's first president, followed by Paul von Hindenburg. The office effectively came to an end upon Hindenburg's death in 1934 when its powers were merged with those of the chancellor. Adolf Hitler ruled Germany as \"F\u00fchrer und Reichskanzler\", combining his previous positions in the party and government. However, he did officially become president; the office was not abolished (though the constitutionally mandated presidential elections every seven years did not take place in the Nazi era) and briefly revived at the end of World War II when Hitler appointed Grand Admiral Karl D\u00f6nitz as his successor as \"President of Germany\". D\u00f6nitz agreed to the surrender to the Allies and was arrested a few days later.\nThe Weimar Constitution created a semi-presidential system in which power was divided between the president, a cabinet, and a parliament. The president enjoyed far greater power than the current president and had an active political role rather than a largely ceremonial one. The influence of the president increased greatly as a result of the instability of the Weimar period. The president appointed the chancellor and, at his recommendation, appointed and dismissed members of the cabinet as well. It was also necessary for the cabinet to have the confidence of the Reichstag (parliament) because it could be removed by a vote of no confidence. All bills had to receive the signature of the president to become law and, although he did not have an absolute veto on legislation, he could insist that a law be submitted for the approval of voters in a referendum. The president had the authority to dissolve the Reichstag, conduct foreign affairs, and had command the armed forces. Article 48 of the constitution provided the president sweeping powers in the event of a crisis. If there was a threat to \"public order and security\", he could, with the co-signature of the chancellor (per article 50), suspend civil rights and legislate by decree.\nThe Weimar constitution provided that the president be directly elected and serve a seven-year term. The election involved a form of the two-round system. The first president was elected by the National Assembly and subsequently only two direct presidential elections took place. They were the election of Paul von Hindenburg in 1925 and his re-election in 1932.\nThe system created by the Weimar Constitution led to a number of problems. The use of a proportional electoral system without thresholds allowed the rise of a multitude of political parties which made it difficult for any of them to establish stable coalitions. This factionalism contributed to frequent changes in government. In March 1930, when no workable majority could be formed after the resignation of the second M\u00fcller cabinet, President Hindenburg appointed Heinrich Br\u00fcning chancellor \"with the note that his cabinet was to be put together without regard to coalition ties\". Br\u00fcning's term in office was the beginning of the rule by decree which marked the three presidential cabinets that preceded Adolf Hitler's chancellorship.\nGerman Democratic Republic (\"East Germany\").\nThe German Democratic Republic established the office of a head of state with the title of President of the Republic (German: \"Pr\u00e4sident der Republik\") in 1949, but abandoned the office with the death of the first president, Wilhelm Pieck, in 1960 in favour of a collective head of state closely modelled on its Soviet counterpart. All government positions of the country, including the presidency, were appointed by the ruling Socialist Unity Party of Germany on the approval of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union. Following the end of communist rule due to the Peaceful Revolution, the head of state became the parliamentary speaker with new, fair elections. Later that year, a draft constitution was written that would have restored the presidency, but ultimately this never materialised.\nFederal Republic of Germany (\"West Germany\", 1949\u20131990).\nWith the promulgation of the \"Grundgesetz\" in 1949, the office of President of the Federal Republic (in German: \"Bundespr\u00e4sident\") was created in West Germany. Partly due to the misuse of presidential powers in the Weimar Republic, the office's powers were significantly reduced. Not only are they indirectly elected, but most of the real power was transferred to the chancellor.\nBecause the reunification of Germany in 1990 was accomplished by the five East German states joining the Federal Republic, the president became the president of all German states without the establishment of a new presidential office.\nList of presidents.\nTwelve persons have served as President of the Federal Republic of Germany. Six of them were members of the CDU (L\u00fcbke, Carstens, von Weizs\u00e4cker, Herzog, K\u00f6hler, Wulff), three were members of the SPD (Heinemann, Rau, Steinmeier), two were members of the FDP (Heuss, Scheel) and one was an independent (Gauck). Four presidents were ministers in the federal government before entering office (L\u00fcbke \"Agriculture\", Heinemann \"Justice\", Scheel, Steinmeier \"Foreign Affairs\"), two of them (Scheel, Steinmeier) having been Vice-Chancellor of Germany. Three were head of a state government (von Weizs\u00e4cker \"West Berlin\", Rau \"North Rhine-Westphalia\", Wulff \"Lower Saxony\"), Rau having been President of the Bundesrat. Two were members of the Bundestag (Heuss, Carstens), Carstens having been President of the Bundestag. One was president of the Federal Constitutional Court (Herzog), director of the IMF (K\u00f6hler), and Federal Commissioner for the Stasi Records (Gauck). Only five presidents (Heuss, L\u00fcbke, von Weizs\u00e4cker, K\u00f6hler, Steinmeier) have been re-elected for a second five-year-term and only two of those (Heuss, von Weizs\u00e4cker) served the full ten years. Christian Wulff served the shortest tenure (1 year, 7 months and 18 days) of all presidents.\nThe president is (according to Art. 57 GG) deputised by the president of the Bundesrat who can perform any of the president's duties, if the president is temporarily unable to do so and delegates these duties to them (this frequently happens during state visits), or if the Presidency falls vacant, in which case they become acting President until a successor is elected, which has to happen within thirty days. This has happened three times:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "60569", "revid": "910180", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60569", "title": "Rectifier", "text": "Electrical device that converts AC to DC\nA rectifier is an electrical device that converts alternating current (AC), which periodically reverses direction, to direct current (DC), which flows in only one direction.\nThe process is known as \"rectification\", since it \"straightens\" the direction of current. Physically, rectifiers take a number of forms, including vacuum tube diodes, wet chemical cells, mercury-arc valves, stacks of copper and selenium oxide plates, semiconductor diodes, silicon-controlled rectifiers and other silicon-based semiconductor switches. Historically, even synchronous electromechanical switches and motor-generator sets have been used. Early radio receivers, called crystal radios, used a \"cat's whisker\" of fine wire pressing on a crystal of galena (lead sulfide) to serve as a point-contact rectifier or \"crystal detector\".\nRectifiers have many uses, but are often found serving as components of DC power supplies and high-voltage direct current power transmission systems. Rectification may serve in roles other than to generate direct current for use as a source of power. As noted, rectifiers can serve as detectors of radio signals. In gas heating systems flame rectification is used to detect the presence of a flame.\nDepending on the type of alternating current supply and the arrangement of the rectifier circuit, the output voltage may require additional smoothing to produce a uniform steady voltage. Many applications of rectifiers, such as power supplies for radio, television and computer equipment, require a \"steady\" constant DC voltage (as would be produced by a battery). In these applications the output of the rectifier is smoothed by an electronic filter, which may be a capacitor, choke, or set of capacitors, chokes and resistors, possibly followed by a voltage regulator to produce a steady voltage.\nA device that performs the opposite function, that is converting DC to AC, is called an inverter.\nRectifier devices.\nBefore the development of silicon semiconductor rectifiers, vacuum tube thermionic diodes and copper oxide- or selenium-based metal rectifier stacks were used. The first vacuum tube diodes designed for rectifier application in power supply circuits were introduced in April 1915 by Saul Dushman of General Electric. With the introduction of semiconductor electronics, vacuum tube rectifiers became obsolete, except for some enthusiasts of vacuum tube audio equipment. For power rectification from very low to very high current, semiconductor diodes of various types (junction diodes, Schottky diodes, etc.) are widely used.\nOther devices that have control electrodes as well as acting as unidirectional current valves are used where more than simple rectification is required\u2014e.g., where variable output voltage is needed. High-power rectifiers, such as those used in high-voltage direct current power transmission, employ silicon semiconductor devices of various types. These are thyristors or other controlled switching solid-state switches, which effectively function as diodes to pass current in only one direction.\nRectifier circuits.\nRectifier circuits may be single-phase or multi-phase. Most low power rectifiers for domestic equipment are single-phase, but three-phase rectification is very important for industrial applications and for the transmission of energy as DC (HVDC).\nSingle-phase rectifiers.\nHalf-wave rectification.\nIn half-wave rectification of a single-phase supply, either the positive or negative half of the AC wave is passed, while the other half is blocked. Because only one half of the input waveform reaches the output, mean voltage is lower. Half-wave rectification requires a single diode in a single-phase supply, or three in a three-phase supply. Rectifiers yield a unidirectional but pulsating direct current; half-wave rectifiers produce far more ripple than full-wave rectifiers, and much more filtering is needed to eliminate harmonics of the AC frequency from the output.\nThe no-load output DC voltage of an ideal half-wave rectifier for a sinusoidal input voltage is:\n formula_1\nwhere:\n \"V\"dc, \"V\"av \u2013 the DC or average output voltage,\n \"V\"peak, the peak value of the phase input voltages,\n \"V\"rms, the root mean square (RMS) value of output voltage.\nFull-wave rectification.\nA full-wave rectifier converts the whole of the input waveform to one of constant polarity (positive or negative) at its output. Mathematically, this corresponds to the absolute value function. Full-wave rectification converts both polarities of the input waveform to pulsating DC (direct current), and yields a higher average output voltage. Two diodes and a center-tapped transformer, or four diodes in a bridge configuration and any AC source (including a transformer without center tap), are needed. Single semiconductor diodes, double diodes with a common cathode or common anode, and four- or six-diode bridges are manufactured as single components.\nFor single-phase AC, if the transformer is center-tapped, then two diodes back-to-back (cathode-to-cathode or anode-to-anode, depending on output polarity required) can form a full-wave rectifier. Twice as many turns are required on the transformer secondary to obtain the same output voltage than for a bridge rectifier, but the power rating is unchanged.\nThe average and RMS no-load output voltages of an ideal single-phase full-wave rectifier are:\n formula_2\nVery common double-diode rectifier vacuum tubes contained a single common cathode and two anodes inside a single envelope, achieving full-wave rectification with positive output. The 5U4 and the 80/5Y3 (4 pin)/(octal) were popular examples of this configuration.\nThree-phase rectifiers.\nSingle-phase rectifiers are commonly used for power supplies for domestic equipment. However, for most industrial and high-power applications, three-phase rectifier circuits are the norm. As with single-phase rectifiers, three-phase rectifiers can take the form of a half-wave circuit, a full-wave circuit using a center-tapped transformer, or a full-wave bridge circuit.\nThyristors are commonly used in place of diodes to create a circuit that can regulate the output voltage. Many devices that provide direct current actually 'generate' three-phase AC. For example, an automobile alternator contains nine diodes, six of which function as a full-wave rectifier for battery charging.\nThree-phase, half-wave circuit.\nAn uncontrolled three-phase, half-wave midpoint circuit requires three diodes, one connected to each phase. This is the simplest type of three-phase rectifier but suffers from relatively high harmonic distortion on both the AC and DC connections. This type of rectifier is said to have a pulse-number of three, since the output voltage on the DC side contains three distinct pulses per cycle of the grid frequency:\nThe peak values formula_3 of this three-pulse DC voltage are calculated from the RMS value formula_4 of the input phase voltage (line to neutral voltage, 120\u00a0V in North America, 240\u00a0V within Europe at mains operation): formula_5. The average no-load output voltage formula_6 results from the integral under the graph of a positive half-wave with the period duration of formula_7 (from 30\u00b0 to 150\u00b0):\n formula_8\nThree-phase, full-wave circuit using center-tapped transformer.\nIf the AC supply is fed via a transformer with a center tap, a rectifier circuit with improved harmonic performance can be obtained. This rectifier now requires six diodes, one connected to each end of each transformer secondary winding. This circuit has a pulse-number of six, and in effect, can be thought of as a six-phase, half-wave circuit.\nBefore solid-state devices became available, the half-wave circuit, and the full-wave circuit using a center-tapped transformer, were very commonly used in industrial rectifiers using mercury-arc valves. This was because the three or six AC supply inputs could be fed to a corresponding number of anode electrodes on a single tank, sharing a common cathode.\nWith the advent of diodes and thyristors, these circuits have become less popular and the three-phase bridge circuit has become the most common circuit.\nThree-phase bridge rectifier uncontrolled.\nFor an uncontrolled three-phase bridge rectifier, six diodes are used, and the circuit again has a pulse number of six. For this reason, it is also commonly referred to as a \"six-pulse bridge\". The B6 circuit can be seen simplified as a series connection of two three-pulse center circuits.\nFor low-power applications, double diodes in series, with the anode of the first diode connected to the cathode of the second, are manufactured as a single component for this purpose. Some commercially available double diodes have all four terminals available so the user can configure them for single-phase split supply use, half a bridge, or three-phase rectifier.\nFor higher-power applications, a single discrete device is usually used for each of the six arms of the bridge. For the very highest powers, each arm of the bridge may consist of tens or hundreds of separate devices in parallel (where very high current is needed, for example in aluminium smelting) or in series (where very high voltages are needed, for example in high-voltage direct current power transmission).\nThe pulsating DC voltage results from the differences of the instantaneous positive and negative phase voltages formula_4, phase-shifted by 30\u00b0:\nThe ideal, no-load average output voltage formula_10 of the B6 circuit results from the integral under the graph of a DC voltage pulse with the period duration of formula_11 (from 60\u00b0 to 120\u00b0) with the peak value formula_12:\n formula_13\n formula_14\nIf the three-phase bridge rectifier is operated symmetrically (as positive and negative supply voltage), the center point of the rectifier on the output side (or the so-called isolated reference potential) opposite the center point of the transformer (or the neutral conductor) has a potential difference in the form of a triangular common-mode voltage. For this reason, these two centers must never be connected to each other, otherwise short-circuit currents would flow. The ground of the three-phase bridge rectifier in symmetrical operation is thus decoupled from the neutral conductor or the earth of the mains voltage. Powered by a transformer, earthing of the center point of the bridge is possible, provided that the secondary winding of the transformer is electrically isolated from the mains voltage and the star point of the secondary winding is not on earth. In this case, however, (negligible) leakage currents are flowing over the transformer windings.\nThe common-mode voltage is formed out of the respective average values of the differences between the positive and negative phase voltages, which form the pulsating DC voltage. The peak value of the delta voltage formula_15 amounts of the peak value of the phase input voltage formula_3 and is calculated with formula_3 minus half of the DC voltage at 60\u00b0 of the period:\n formula_18\nThe RMS value of the common-mode voltage is calculated from the form factor for triangular oscillations:\n formula_19\nIf the circuit is operated asymmetrically (as a simple supply voltage with just one positive pole), both the positive and negative poles (or the isolated reference potential) are pulsating opposite the center (or the ground) of the input voltage analogously to the positive and negative waveforms of the phase voltages. However, the differences in the phase voltages result in the six-pulse DC voltage (over the duration of a period). The strict separation of the transformer center from the negative pole (otherwise short-circuit currents will flow) or a possible grounding of the negative pole when powered by an isolating transformer apply correspondingly to the symmetrical operation.\nThree-phase bridge rectifier controlled.\nThe controlled three-phase bridge rectifier uses thyristors in place of diodes. The output voltage is reduced by the factor cos(\u03b1):\n formula_20\nOr, expressed in terms of the line to line input voltage:\n formula_21\nwhere:\n \"V\"LLpeak is the peak value of the line to line input voltages,\n \"V\"peak is the peak value of the phase (line to neutral) input voltages, and\n \"\u03b1\" is the firing angle of the thyristor (0 if diodes are used to perform rectification)\nThe above equations are only valid when no current is drawn from the AC supply or in the theoretical case when the AC supply connections have no inductance. In practice, the supply inductance causes a reduction of DC output voltage with increasing load, typically in the range 10\u201320% at full load.\nThe effect of supply inductance is to slow down the transfer process (called commutation) from one phase to the next. As result of this is that at each transition between a pair of devices, there is a period of overlap during which three (rather than two) devices in the bridge are conducting simultaneously. The overlap angle is usually referred to by the symbol \u03bc (or u), and may be 20\u00a030\u00b0 at full load.\nWith supply inductance taken into account, the output voltage of the rectifier is reduced to\n formula_22\nThe overlap angle \"\u03bc\" is directly related to the DC current, and the above equation may be re-expressed as\n formula_23\nwhere:\n \"L\"c is the commutating inductance per phase, and\n \"I\"d is the direct current.\nTwelve-pulse bridge.\nAlthough better than single-phase rectifiers or three-phase half-wave rectifiers, six-pulse rectifier circuits still produce considerable harmonic distortion on both the AC and DC connections. For very high-power rectifiers the twelve-pulse bridge connection is usually used. A twelve-pulse bridge consists of two six-pulse bridge circuits connected in series, with their AC connections fed from a supply transformer that produces a 30\u00b0 phase shift between the two bridges. This cancels many of the characteristic harmonics the six-pulse bridges produce.\nThe 30-degree phase shift is usually achieved by using a transformer with two sets of secondary windings, one in star (wye) connection and one in delta connection.\nVoltage-multiplying rectifiers.\nThe simple half-wave rectifier can be built in two electrical configurations with the diodes pointing in opposite directions, one version connects the negative terminal of the output direct to the AC supply and the other connects the positive terminal of the output direct to the AC supply. By combining both of these with separate output smoothing it is possible to get an output voltage of nearly double the peak AC input voltage. This also provides a tap in the middle, which allows use of such a circuit as a split rail power supply.\nA variant of this is to use two capacitors in series for the output smoothing on a bridge rectifier then place a switch between the midpoint of those capacitors and one of the AC input terminals. With the switch open, this circuit acts like a normal bridge rectifier. With the switch closed, it acts like a voltage doubling rectifier. In other words, this makes it easy to derive a voltage of roughly 320\u00a0V (\u00b115%, approx.) DC from any 120\u00a0V or 230\u00a0V mains supply in the world, this can then be fed into a relatively simple switched-mode power supply. However, for a given desired ripple, the value of both capacitors must be twice the value of the single one required for a normal bridge rectifier; when the switch is closed each one must filter the output of a half-wave rectifier, and when the switch is open the two capacitors are connected in series with an equivalent value of half one of them.\n In a Cockcroft-Walton voltage multiplier, stages of capacitors and diodes are cascaded to amplify a low AC voltage to a high DC voltage. These circuits are capable of producing a DC output voltage potential up to about ten times the peak AC input voltage, in practice limited by current capacity and voltage regulation issues. Diode voltage multipliers, frequently used as a trailing boost stage or primary high voltage (HV) source, are used in HV laser power supplies, powering devices such as cathode-ray tubes (CRT) (like those used in CRT based television, radar and sonar displays), photon amplifying devices found in image intensifying and photo multiplier tubes (PMT), and magnetron based radio frequency (RF) devices used in radar transmitters and microwave ovens. Before the introduction of semiconductor electronics, transformerless vacuum tube receivers powered directly from AC power sometimes used voltage doublers to generate roughly 300\u00a0VDC from a 100\u2013120\u00a0V power line.\nQuantification of rectifiers.\nSeveral ratios are used to quantify the function and performance of rectifiers or their output, including transformer utilization factor (TUF), conversion ratio (\"\u03b7\"), ripple factor, form factor, and peak factor. The two primary measures are DC voltage (or offset) and peak-peak ripple voltage, which are constituent components of the output voltage.\nConversion ratio.\nConversion ratio (also called \"rectification ratio\", and confusingly, \"efficiency\") \"\u03b7\" is defined as the ratio of DC output power to the input power from the AC supply. Even with ideal rectifiers, the ratio is less than 100% because some of the output power is AC power rather than DC which manifests as ripple superimposed on the DC waveform. The ratio can be improved with the use of smoothing circuits which reduce the ripple and hence reduce the AC content of the output. Conversion ratio is reduced by losses in transformer windings and power dissipation in the rectifier element itself. This ratio is of little practical significance because a rectifier is almost always followed by a filter to increase DC voltage and reduce ripple. In some three-phase and multi-phase applications the conversion ratio is high enough that smoothing circuitry is unnecessary.\nIn other circuits, like filament heater circuits in vacuum tube electronics where the load is almost entirely resistive, smoothing circuitry may be omitted because resistors dissipate both AC and DC power, so no power is lost.\nFor a half-wave rectifier the ratio is very modest.\n formula_24 (the divisors are 2 rather than \u221a2 because no power is delivered on the negative half-cycle)\n formula_25\nThus maximum conversion ratio for a half-wave rectifier is,\n formula_26\nSimilarly, for a full-wave rectifier,\n formula_27\n formula_28\n formula_29\nThree-phase rectifiers, especially three-phase full-wave rectifiers, have much greater conversion ratios because the ripple is intrinsically smaller.\nFor a three-phase half-wave rectifier,\n formula_30\n formula_31\nFor a three-phase full-wave rectifier,\n formula_32\n formula_33\nTransformer utilization ratio.\nThe transformer utilization factor (TUF) of a rectifier circuit is defined as the ratio of the DC power available at the input resistor to the AC rating of the output coil of a transformer.\n formula_34\nThe formula_35 rating of the transformer can be defined as: formula_36\nRectifier voltage drop.\nSee also: \nA real rectifier characteristically drops part of the input voltage (a voltage drop, for silicon devices, of typically 0.7 volts plus an equivalent resistance, in general non-linear)\u2014and at high frequencies, distorts waveforms in other ways. Unlike an ideal rectifier, it dissipates some power.\nAn aspect of most rectification is a loss from the peak input voltage to the peak output voltage, caused by the built-in voltage drop across the diodes (around 0.7 V for ordinary silicon p\u2013n junction diodes and 0.3 V for Schottky diodes). Half-wave rectification and full-wave rectification using a center-tapped secondary produces a peak voltage loss of one diode drop. Bridge rectification has a loss of two diode drops. This reduces output voltage, and limits the available output voltage if a very low alternating voltage must be rectified. As the diodes do not conduct below this voltage, the circuit only passes current through for a portion of each half-cycle, causing short segments of zero voltage (where instantaneous input voltage is below one or two diode drops) to appear between each \"hump\".\nPeak loss is very important for low voltage rectifiers (for example, 12\u00a0V or less) but is insignificant in high-voltage applications such as HVDC power transmission systems.\nHarmonic distortion.\nNon-linear loads like rectifiers produce current harmonics of the source frequency on the AC side and voltage harmonics of the source frequency on the DC side, due to switching behavior.\nRectifier output smoothing.\nWhile half-wave and full-wave rectification deliver unidirectional current, neither produces a constant voltage. There is a large AC ripple voltage component at the source frequency for a half-wave rectifier, and twice the source frequency for a full-wave rectifier. Ripple voltage is usually specified peak-to-peak. Producing steady DC from a rectified AC supply requires a smoothing circuit or filter. In its simplest form this can be just a capacitor (functioning as both a smoothing capacitor as well as a reservoir, buffer or bulk capacitor), choke, resistor, Zener diode and resistor, or voltage regulator placed at the output of the rectifier. In practice, most smoothing filters utilize multiple components to efficiently reduce ripple voltage to a level tolerable by the circuit.\nThe filter capacitor releases its stored energy during the part of the AC cycle when the AC source does not supply any power, that is, when the AC source changes its direction of flow of current.\nPerformance with low impedance source.\nThe above diagram shows the voltage waveforms of the reservoir performance when supplied from a voltage source with near zero impedance, such as a mains supply. Both voltages start from zero at time t=0 at the far left of the image, then the capacitor voltage follows the rectified AC voltage as it increases, the capacitor is charged and current is supplied to the load. At the end of the mains quarter cycle, the capacitor is charged to the peak value Vp of the rectifier voltage. Following this, the rectifier input voltage starts to decrease to its minimum value Vmin as it enters the next quarter cycle. This initiates the discharge of the capacitor through the load while the capacitor holds up the output voltage to the load.\nThe size of the capacitor C is determined by the amount of ripple r that can be tolerated, where r=(Vp\u2212Vmin)/Vp.\nThese circuits are very frequently fed from transformers, which may have significant internal impedance in the form of resistance and/or reactance. Transformer internal impedance modifies the reservoir capacitor waveform, changes the peak voltage, and introduces regulation issues.\nCapacitor-input filter.\nFor a given load, sizing of a smoothing capacitor is a tradeoff between reducing ripple voltage and increasing ripple current. The peak current is set by the rate of rise of the supply voltage on the rising edge of the incoming sine-wave, reduced by the resistance of the transformer windings. High ripple currents increase I2R losses (in the form of heat) in the capacitor, rectifier and transformer windings, and may exceed the ampacity of the components or VA rating of the transformer. Vacuum tube rectifiers specify the maximum capacitance of the input capacitor, and SS diode rectifiers also have current limitations. Capacitors for this application need low ESR, or ripple current may overheat them. To limit ripple voltage to a specified value the required capacitor size is proportional to the load current and inversely proportional to the supply frequency and the number of output peaks of the rectifier per input cycle. Full-wave rectified output requires a smaller capacitor because it is double the frequency of half-wave rectified output. To reduce ripple to a satisfactory limit with just a single capacitor would often require a capacitor of impractical size. This is because the ripple current rating of a capacitor does not increase linearly with size and there may also be height limitations. For high current applications banks of capacitors are used instead.\nChoke-input filter.\nIt is also possible to put the rectified waveform into a choke-input filter. The advantage of this circuit is that the current waveform is smoother: current is drawn over the entire cycle, instead of being drawn in pulses at the peaks of AC voltage each half-cycle as in a capacitor input filter. The disadvantage is that the voltage output is much lower \u2013 the average of an AC half-cycle rather than the peak; this is about 90% of the RMS voltage versus formula_37 times the RMS voltage (unloaded) for a capacitor input filter. Offsetting this is superior voltage regulation and higher available current, which reduce peak voltage and ripple current demands on power supply components. Inductors require cores of iron or other magnetic materials, and add weight and size. Their use in power supplies for electronic equipment has therefore dwindled in favour of semiconductor circuits such as voltage regulators.\nResistor as input filter.\nIn cases where ripple voltage is insignificant, like battery chargers, the input filter may be a single series resistor to adjust the output voltage to that required by the circuit. A resistor reduces both output voltage and ripple voltage proportionately. A disadvantage of a resistor input filter is that it consumes power in the form of waste heat that is not available to the load, so it is employed only in low current circuits.\nHigher order and cascade filters.\nTo further reduce ripple, the initial filter element may be followed by additional alternating series and shunt filter components, or by a voltage regulator. Series filter components may be resistors or chokes; shunt elements may be resistors or capacitors. The filter may raise DC voltage as well as reduce ripple. Filters are often constructed from pairs of series/shunt components called RC (series resistor, shunt capacitor) or LC (series choke, shunt capacitor) sections. Two common filter geometries are known as Pi (capacitor, choke, capacitor) and T (choke, capacitor, choke) filters. Sometimes the series elements are resistors \u2013 because resistors are smaller and cheaper \u2013 when a lower DC output is desirable or permissible. Another kind of special filter geometry is a series resonant choke or tuned choke filter. Unlike the other filter geometries which are low-pass filters, a resonant choke filter is a band-stop filter: it is a parallel combination of choke and capacitor which resonates at the frequency of the ripple voltage, presenting a very high impedance to the ripple. It may be followed by a shunt capacitor to complete the filter.\nVoltage regulators.\nA more usual alternative to additional filter components, if the DC load requires very low ripple voltage, is to follow the input filter with a voltage regulator. A voltage regulator operates on a different principle than a filter, which is essentially a voltage divider that shunts voltage at the ripple frequency away from the load. Rather, a regulator increases or decreases current supplied to the load in order to maintain a constant output voltage.\nA simple passive shunt voltage regulator may consist of a series resistor to drop source voltage to the required level and a Zener diode shunt with reverse voltage equal to the set voltage. When input voltage rises, the diode dumps current to maintain the set output voltage. This kind of regulator is usually employed only in low voltage, low current circuits because Zener diodes have both voltage and current limitations. It is also very inefficient, because it dumps excess current, which is not available to the load.\nA more efficient alternative to a shunt voltage regulator is an active voltage regulator circuit. An active regulator employs reactive components to store and discharge energy, so that most or all current supplied by the rectifier is passed to the load. It may also use negative and positive feedback in conjunction with at least one voltage amplifying component like a transistor to maintain output voltage when source voltage drops. The input filter must prevent the troughs of the ripple dropping below the minimum voltage required by the regulator to produce the required output voltage. The regulator serves both to significantly reduce the ripple and to deal with variations in supply and load characteristics.\nApplications.\nThe primary application of rectifiers is to derive DC power from an AC supply (AC to DC converter). Rectifiers are used inside the power supplies of virtually all electronic equipment. AC/DC power supplies may be broadly divided into linear power supplies and switched-mode power supplies. In such power supplies, the rectifier will be in series following the transformer and be followed by a smoothing filter and possibly a voltage regulator.\nConverting DC power from one voltage to another is much more complicated. One method of DC-to-DC conversion first converts power to AC (using a device called an inverter), then uses a transformer to change the voltage, and finally rectifies power back to DC. A frequency of typically several tens of kilohertz is used, as this requires much smaller inductance than at lower frequencies and obviates the use of heavy, bulky, and expensive iron-cored transformers. Another method of converting DC voltages uses a charge pump, using rapid switching to change the connections of capacitors; this technique is generally limited to supplies up to a couple of watts, owing to the size of capacitors required.\nRectifiers are also used for detection of amplitude modulated radio signals. The signal may be amplified before detection. If not, a very low voltage drop diode or a diode biased with a fixed voltage must be used. When using a rectifier for demodulation the capacitor and load resistance must be carefully matched: too low a capacitance makes the high frequency carrier pass to the output, and too high makes the capacitor just charge and stay charged.\nRectifiers supply polarized voltage for welding. In such circuits control of the output current is required; this is sometimes achieved by replacing some of the diodes in a bridge rectifier with thyristors, effectively diodes whose voltage output can be regulated by switching on and off with phase-fired controllers.\nThyristors are used in various classes of railway rolling stock systems so that fine control of the traction motors can be achieved. Gate turn-off thyristors are used to produce alternating current from a DC supply, for example on the Eurostar Trains to power the three-phase traction motors.\nRectification technologies.\nElectromechanical.\nBefore about 1905 when tube-type rectifiers were developed, power conversion devices were purely electro-mechanical in design. Mechanical rectifiers used some form of rotation or resonant vibration driven by electromagnets, which operated a switch or commutator to reverse the current.\nThese mechanical rectifiers were noisy and had high maintenance requirements, including lubrication and replacement of moving parts due to wear. Opening mechanical contacts under load resulted in electrical arcs and sparks that heated and eroded the contacts. They also were not able to handle AC frequencies above several thousand cycles per second.\nSynchronous rectifier.\nTo convert alternating into direct current in electric locomotives, a synchronous rectifier may be used. It consists of a synchronous motor driving a set of heavy-duty electrical contacts. The motor spins in time with the AC frequency and periodically reverses the connections to the load at an instant when the sinusoidal current goes through a zero-crossing. The contacts do not have to \"switch\" a large current, but they must be able to \"carry\" a large current to supply the locomotive's DC traction motors.\nVibrating rectifier.\nThese consisted of a resonant reed, vibrated by an alternating magnetic field created by an AC electromagnet, with contacts that reversed the direction of the current on the negative half cycles. They were used in low power devices, such as battery chargers, to rectify the low voltage produced by a step-down transformer. Another use was in battery power supplies for portable vacuum tube radios, to provide the high DC voltage for the tubes. These operated as a mechanical version of modern solid-state switching inverters, with a transformer to step the battery voltage up, and a set of vibrator contacts on the transformer core, operated by its magnetic field, to repeatedly break the DC battery current to create a pulsing AC to power the transformer. Then a second set of rectifier contacts on the vibrator rectified the high AC voltage from the transformer secondary to DC.\nMotor\u2013generator set.\nA \"motor\u2013generator set\", or the similar \"rotary converter\", is not strictly a rectifier as it does not actually \"rectify\" current, but rather \"generates\" DC from an AC source. In an \"M\u2013G set\", the shaft of an AC motor is mechanically coupled to that of a DC generator. The DC generator produces multiphase alternating currents in its armature windings, which a commutator on the armature shaft converts into a direct current output; or a homopolar generator produces a direct current without the need for a commutator. M\u2013G sets are useful for producing DC for railway traction motors, industrial motors and other high-current applications, and were common in many high-power DC uses (for example, carbon-arc lamp projectors for outdoor theaters) before high-power semiconductors became widely available.\nElectrolytic.\nThe electrolytic rectifier was a device from the early twentieth century that is no longer used. A home-made version is illustrated in the 1913 book \"The Boy Mechanic\" but it would be suitable for use only at very low voltages because of the low breakdown voltage and the risk of electric shock. A more complex device of this kind was patented by G. W. Carpenter in 1928 (US Patent 1671970).\nWhen two different metals are suspended in an electrolyte solution, direct current flowing one way through the solution sees less resistance than in the other direction. Electrolytic rectifiers most commonly used an aluminum anode and a lead or steel cathode, suspended in a solution of triammonium orthophosphate.\nThe rectification action is due to a thin coating of aluminium hydroxide on the aluminum electrode, formed by first applying a strong current to the cell to build up the coating. The rectification process is temperature-sensitive, and for best efficiency should not operate above 86\u00a0\u00b0F (30\u00a0\u00b0C). There is also a breakdown voltage where the coating is penetrated and the cell is short-circuited. Electrochemical methods are often more fragile than mechanical methods, and can be sensitive to usage variations, which can drastically change or completely disrupt the rectification processes.\nSimilar electrolytic devices were used as lightning arresters around the same era by suspending many aluminium cones in a tank of triammonium orthophosphate solution. Unlike the rectifier above, only aluminium electrodes were used, and used on A.C., there was no polarization and thus no rectifier action, but the chemistry was similar.\nThe modern electrolytic capacitor, an essential component of most rectifier circuit configurations was also developed from the electrolytic rectifier.\nPlasma type.\nThe development of vacuum tube technology in the early 20th century resulted in the invention of various tube-type rectifiers, which largely replaced the noisy, inefficient mechanical rectifiers.\nMercury-arc.\nA rectifier used in high-voltage direct current (HVDC) power transmission systems and industrial processing between about 1909 to 1975 is a \"mercury-arc rectifier\" or \"mercury-arc valve\". The device is enclosed in a bulbous glass vessel or large metal tub. One electrode, the cathode, is submerged in a pool of liquid mercury at the bottom of the vessel and one or more high purity graphite electrodes, called anodes, are suspended above the pool. There may be several auxiliary electrodes to aid in starting and maintaining the arc. When an electric arc is established between the cathode pool and suspended anodes, a stream of electrons flows from the cathode to the anodes through the ionized mercury, but not the other way (in principle, this is a higher-power counterpart to flame rectification, which uses the same one-way current transmission properties of the plasma naturally present in a flame).\nThese devices can be used at power levels of hundreds of kilowatts, and may be built to handle one to six phases of AC current. Mercury-arc rectifiers have been replaced by silicon semiconductor rectifiers and high-power thyristor circuits in the mid-1970s. The most powerful mercury-arc rectifiers ever built were installed in the Manitoba Hydro Nelson River Bipole HVDC project, with a combined rating of more than 1\u00a0GW and 450\u00a0kV.\nArgon gas electron tube.\nThe General Electric Tungar rectifier was a mercury vapor (ex.:5B24) or argon (ex.:328) gas-filled electron tube device with a tungsten filament cathode and a carbon button anode. It operated similarly to the thermionic vacuum tube diode, but the gas in the tube ionized during forward conduction, giving it a much lower forward voltage drop so it could rectify lower voltages. It was used for battery chargers and similar applications from the 1920s until lower-cost metal rectifiers, and later semiconductor diodes, supplanted it. These were made up to a few hundred volts and a few amperes rating, and in some sizes strongly resembled an incandescent lamp with an additional electrode.\nThe 0Z4 was a gas-filled rectifier tube commonly used in vacuum tube car radios in the 1940s and 1950s. It was a conventional full-wave rectifier tube with two anodes and one cathode, but was unique in that it had no filament (thus the \"0\" in its type number). The electrodes were shaped such that the reverse breakdown voltage was much higher than the forward breakdown voltage. Once the breakdown voltage was exceeded, the 0Z4 switched to a low-resistance state with a forward voltage drop of about 24\u00a0V.\nDiode vacuum tube (valve).\nThe thermionic vacuum-tube diode, originally called the Fleming valve, was invented by John Ambrose Fleming in 1904 as a detector for radio waves in radio receivers, and evolved into a general rectifier. It consisted of an evacuated glass bulb with a filament heated by a separate current, and a metal plate anode. The filament emitted electrons by thermionic emission (the Edison effect), discovered by Thomas Edison in 1884, and a positive voltage on the plate caused a current of electrons through the tube from filament to plate. Since only the filament produced electrons, the tube would only conduct current in one direction, allowing the tube to rectify an alternating current.\nThermionic diode rectifiers were widely used in power supplies in vacuum tube consumer electronic products, such as phonographs, radios, and televisions, for example the All American Five radio receiver, to provide the high DC plate voltage needed by other vacuum tubes. \"Full-wave\" versions with two separate plates were popular because they could be used with a center-tapped transformer to make a full-wave rectifier. Vacuum tube rectifiers were made for very high voltages, such as the high voltage power supply for the CRT of television receivers, and the kenotron used for power supply in X-ray equipment. However, compared to modern semiconductor diodes, vacuum tube rectifiers have high internal resistance due to space charge and therefore high voltage drops, causing high power dissipation and low efficiency. They are rarely able to handle currents exceeding 250\u00a0mA owing to the limits of plate power dissipation, and cannot be used for low voltage applications, such as battery chargers. Another limitation of the vacuum tube rectifier is that the heater power supply often requires special arrangements to insulate it from the high voltages of the rectifier circuit.\nSolid state.\nCrystal detector.\nThe crystal detector, the earliest type of semiconductor diode, was used as a detector in some of the earliest radio receivers, called crystal radios, to rectify the radio carrier wave and extract the modulation which produced the sound in the earphones. Invented by Jagadish Chandra Bose and G. W. Pickard around 1902, it was a significant improvement over earlier detectors such as the coherer. One popular type of crystal detector, often called a \"cat's whisker detector\", consists of a crystal of some semiconducting mineral, usually galena (lead sulfide), with a light springy wire touching its surface. Its fragility and limited current capability made it unsuitable for power supply applications. It was used widely in radios until the 1920s when vacuum tubes replaced it. In the 1930s, researchers miniaturized and improved the crystal detector for use at microwave frequencies, developing the first semiconductor diodes.\nSelenium and copper oxide rectifiers.\nOnce common until replaced by more compact and less costly silicon solid-state rectifiers in the 1970s, these units used stacks of oxide-coated metal plates and took advantage of the semiconductor properties of selenium or copper oxide. While selenium rectifiers were lighter in weight and used less power than comparable vacuum tube rectifiers, they had the disadvantage of finite life expectancy, increasing resistance with age, and were only suitable to use at low frequencies. Both selenium and copper oxide rectifiers have somewhat better tolerance of momentary voltage transients than silicon rectifiers.\nTypically these rectifiers were made up of stacks of metal plates or washers, held together by a central bolt, with the number of stacks determined by voltage; each cell was rated for about 20 V. An automotive battery charger rectifier might have only one cell: the high-voltage power supply for a vacuum tube might have dozens of stacked plates. Current density in an air-cooled selenium stack was about 600 mA per square inch of active area (about 90 mA per square centimeter).\nSilicon and germanium diodes.\nSilicon diodes are the most widely used rectifiers for lower voltages and powers, and have largely replaced other rectifiers. Due to their substantially lower forward voltage (0.3V versus 0.7V for silicon diodes) germanium diodes have an inherent advantage over silicon diodes in low voltage circuits. \nHigh power: thyristors (SCRs) and newer silicon-based voltage sourced converters.\nIn high-power applications, from 1975 to 2000, most mercury valve arc-rectifiers were replaced by stacks of very high power thyristors, silicon devices with two extra layers of semiconductor, in comparison to a simple diode.\nIn medium-power transmission applications, even more complex and sophisticated voltage sourced converter (VSC) silicon semiconductor rectifier systems, such as insulated gate bipolar transistors (IGBT) and gate turn-off thyristors (GTO), have made smaller high voltage DC power transmission systems economical. All of these devices function as rectifiers.\nAs of 2009[ [update]] it was expected that these high-power silicon \"self-commutating switches\", in particular IGBTs and a variant thyristor (related to the GTO) called the integrated gate-commutated thyristor (IGCT), would be scaled-up in power rating to the point that they would eventually replace simple thyristor-based AC rectification systems for the highest power-transmission DC applications.\nActive rectifier.\nActive rectification is a technique for improving the efficiency of rectification by replacing diodes with actively controlled switches such as transistors, usually power MOSFETs or power BJTs. Whereas normal semiconductor diodes have a roughly fixed voltage drop of around 0.5 to 1 volts, active rectifiers behave as resistances, and can have arbitrarily low voltage drop.\nHistorically, vibrator-driven switches or motor-driven commutators have also been used for mechanical rectifiers and synchronous rectification.\nActive rectification has many applications. It is frequently used for arrays of photovoltaic panels to avoid reverse current flow that can cause overheating with partial shading while giving minimum power loss.\nCurrent research.\nA major area of research is to develop higher frequency rectifiers, that can rectify into terahertz and light frequencies. These devices are used in optical heterodyne detection, which has myriad applications in optical fiber communication and atomic clocks. Another prospective application for such devices is to directly rectify light waves picked up by tiny antennas, called nantennas, to produce DC electric power. It is thought that arrays of antennas could be a more efficient means of producing solar power than solar cells.\nA related area of research is to develop smaller rectifiers, because a smaller device has a higher cutoff frequency. Research projects are attempting to develop a unimolecular rectifier, a single organic molecule that would function as a rectifier.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "60570", "revid": "68043", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60570", "title": "IBM POWER", "text": "IBM POWER (or IBM Power) may refer to:\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "60571", "revid": "37052726", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60571", "title": "POWER", "text": ""}
{"id": "60572", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60572", "title": "Visual Instruction Set", "text": "Visual Instruction Set, or VIS, is a SIMD instruction set extension for SPARC V9 microprocessors developed by Sun Microsystems. There are five versions of VIS: VIS 1, VIS 2, VIS 2+, VIS 3 and VIS 4.\nHistory.\nVIS 1 was introduced in 1994 and was first implemented by Sun in their UltraSPARC microprocessor (1995) and by Fujitsu in their SPARC64 GP microprocessors (2000).\nVIS 2 was first implemented by the UltraSPARC III. All subsequent UltraSPARC and SPARC64 microprocessors implement the instruction set.\nVIS 3 was first implemented in the SPARC T4 microprocessor. \nVIS 4 was first implemented in the SPARC M7 microprocessor.\nDifferences vs x86.\nVIS is not an instruction toolkit like Intel's MMX and SSE. MMX has only 8 registers shared with the FPU stack, while SPARC processors have 32 registers, also aliased to the double-precision (64-bit) floating point registers.\nAs with the SIMD instruction set extensions on other RISC processors, VIS strictly conforms to the main principle of RISC: keep the instruction set concise and efficient.\nThis design is very different from comparable extensions on CISC processors, such as MMX, SSE, SSE2, SSE3, SSE4, 3DNow!.\nSometimes, programmers must use several VIS instructions to accomplish an operation that can be done with only one MMX or SSE instruction, but it should be kept in mind that fewer instructions do not automatically result in better performance.\nFunctionality.\nVIS re-uses existing SPARC V9 64-bit floating point registers to hold multiple 8, 16, or 32-bit integer values. In this respect, VIS is more similar to the design of MMX than other SIMD architectures such as SSE/SSE2/AltiVec.\nVIS includes a number of operations primarily for graphics support, so most of them are only for integers. These include 3D to 2D conversion, edge processing and pixel distance.\nThere are four ways to use VIS in code:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "60573", "revid": "49435103", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60573", "title": "Show Low, Arizona", "text": "City in Arizona, United States\nShow Low is a city in Navajo County, Arizona. It lies on the Mogollon Rim in east central Arizona, at an elevation of 6,345 feet (1,934 m). The city was established in 1870 and incorporated in 1953. According to the 2020 United States census, the population of the city was 11,732.\nName and history.\nAccording to a legend, the city's unusual name resulted from a marathon poker game between Corydon E. Cooley and Marion Clark. The two men were equal partners in a ranch; however, the partners determined that there was not enough room for both of them in their settlement, and agreed to settle the issue over a game of \"Seven Up\" (with the winner taking the ranch and the loser leaving). After the game seemed to have no winner in sight, Clark said, \"If you can show low, you win.\" In response, Cooley turned up the deuce of clubs (the lowest possible card) and replied, \"Show low it is.\" As a tribute to the legend, Show Low's main street is named \"Deuce of Clubs\" in remembrance.\nIn 2002, a large forest fire, the Rodeo\u2013Chediski Fire, threatened the city and forced an evacuation. The fire was extinguished less than a half mile from the city's border, and Show Low was completely spared. The city is near extensive forests, and is a popular recreational area.\nGeography.\nAccording to the United States Census Bureau, the city has a total area of , of which is land and (0.25%) is water.\nClimate.\nWinters in Show Low bring highs between 45\u00a0\u00b0F (7\u00a0\u00b0C) and 55\u00a0\u00b0F (13\u00a0\u00b0C), with lows usually below freezing between November and March, averaging in the 20s December through February, and in the low 30s for November and March.\nIn the summer, highs in Show Low average approximately 85\u00a0\u00b0F (29\u00a0\u00b0C), with an occasional day above 90\u00a0\u00b0F (32\u00a0\u00b0C) not uncommon for the city. As the sun sets in the summertime, temperatures plummet dramatically, sometimes upwards of 30\u00a0\u00b0F (17\u00a0\u00b0C). This nightly temperature swing results in summertime lows typically ranging between 50\u00a0\u00b0F (10\u00a0\u00b0C) and 60\u00a0\u00b0F (16\u00a0\u00b0C).\nShow Low has reached below-freezing temperatures every month at least once in its history except July and August, where temperatures have only reached 38\u00a0\u00b0F (3\u00a0\u00b0C) and 37\u00a0\u00b0F (3\u00a0\u00b0C) respectively.\nShow Low has twice reached 100\u00a0\u00b0F (38\u00a0\u00b0C), its record high temperature: once on May 31, 1969, and again on July 14, 2003. Show Low's record low temperature of -25\u00a0\u00b0F (-32\u00a0\u00b0C) was set on January 8, 1971.\nShow Low averages about of rain per year.\nThe city has a Mediterranean climate (K\u00f6ppen \"Csa\"). Unlike most locations with this climate, but similar to most of Arizona, the rainfall maximum is in the summer due to the North American Monsoon.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAs of the census of 2000, there were 7,695 people, 2,885 households, and 2,117 families residing in the city. The population density was . There were 7186 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the city was 90.3% White, 0.4% Black or African American, 3.2% Native American, 0.5% Asian, 0.1% Pacific Islander, 3.4% from other races, and 2.2% from two or more races. 9.4% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.\nThere were 2,885 households, out of which 34.8% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 58.2% were married couples living together, 11.1% had a female householder with no husband present, and 26.6% were non-families. 21.9% of all households were made up of individuals, and 9.5% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.62 and the average family size was 3.04.\nIn the city, the population was spread out, with 29.2% under the age of 18, 7.4% from 18 to 24, 24.9% from 25 to 44, 23.5% from 45 to 64, and 15.0% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 37 years. For every 100 females, there were 95.1 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 88.5 males.\nThe median income for a household in the city was $32,356, and the median income for a family was $36,397. Males had a median income of $28,882 versus $24,590 for females. The per capita income for the city was $15,536. About 11.7% of families and 15.0% of the population were below the poverty line, including 23.6% of those under age 18 and 6.0% of those age 65 or over.\nTransportation.\nShow Low Regional Airport (IATA: SOW, ICAO: KSOW) provides passenger airline service through Southern Airways Express to Phoenix. The airport maintains a single passenger terminal for this purpose. The airport is also commonly used for air cargo, air-taxi, and as a fixed-base operator for general aviation.\nThe city also maintains a minor public transportation operation in conjunction with neighboring Pinetop-Lakeside. Two shuttles service multiple retail, high-traffic, and government offices and also the airport and nearby Hon-Dah casino (57 stops in all)https://. The city also operates the White Mountain Connection bus, which serves Pinetop-Lakeside, Taylor, Snowflake, and Holbrook. Mountain Valley Shuttle provides a daily shuttle from Show Low to Phoenix.\nEducation.\nAlmost all of the city is a part of the Show Low Unified School District. A portion of the city is within the boundaries of the Blue Ridge Unified School District.\nSchools that serve the SLUSD portion of the city include Linden Elementary, Nikolaus Homestead Elementary, Whipple Ranch Elementary, White Mountain Institute, Show Low Junior High School, and Show Low High School.\nAdditionally St. Anthony School (K-8) of the Roman Catholic Diocese of Gallup is in Show Low. Circa 2009 it covered to grade 4. As of that time it was adding the 5th grade the following year and adding another grade each year until grade 8.\nShow Low is home to one of Northland Pioneer College's four regional campuses, the White Mountain Campus.\nEconomy.\nTop employers.\nAccording to the city's 2014 \"Comprehensive Annual Financial Report\", the top employers in the city are:\nNearest cities and towns.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\nhttps:// Retrieved July 24, 2009\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "60574", "revid": "22651524", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60574", "title": "VIS", "text": ""}
{"id": "60575", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60575", "title": "Cardiac arrest", "text": "Sudden or unexpected loss of heartbeat\nMedical condition&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nCardiac arrest (also known as sudden cardiac arrest [SCA]) is a condition in which the heart suddenly and unexpectedly stops beating. When the heart stops, blood cannot circulate properly through the body and the blood flow to the brain and other organs is decreased. When the brain does not receive enough blood, this can cause a person to lose consciousness and brain cells begin to die within minutes due to lack of oxygen. Coma and persistent vegetative state may result from cardiac arrest. Cardiac arrest is typically identified by the absence of a central pulse and abnormal or absent breathing.\nCardiac arrest and resultant hemodynamic collapse often occur due to arrhythmias (irregular heart rhythms). Ventricular fibrillation and ventricular tachycardia are most commonly recorded. However, as many incidents of cardiac arrest occur out-of-hospital or when a person is not having their cardiac activity monitored, it is difficult to identify the specific mechanism in each case.\nStructural heart disease, such as coronary artery disease, is a common underlying condition in people who experience cardiac arrest. The most common risk factors include age and cardiovascular disease. Additional underlying cardiac conditions include heart failure and inherited arrhythmias. Additional factors that may contribute to cardiac arrest include major blood loss, lack of oxygen, electrolyte disturbance (such as very low potassium), electrical injury, and intense physical exercise.\nCardiac arrest is diagnosed by the inability to find a pulse in an unresponsive patient. The goal of treatment for cardiac arrest is to rapidly achieve return of spontaneous circulation using a variety of interventions including CPR, defibrillation or cardiac pacing. Two protocols have been established for CPR: basic life support (BLS) and advanced cardiac life support (ACLS).\nIf return of spontaneous circulation is achieved with these interventions, then sudden cardiac arrest has occurred. By contrast, if the person does not survive the event, this is referred to as sudden cardiac death. Among those whose pulses are re-established, the care team may initiate measures to protect the person from brain injury and preserve neurological function. Some methods may include airway management and mechanical ventilation, maintenance of blood pressure and end-organ perfusion via fluid resuscitation and vasopressor support, correction of electrolyte imbalance, EKG monitoring and management of reversible causes, and temperature management. Targeted temperature management may improve outcomes. In post-resuscitation care, an implantable cardiac defibrillator may be considered to reduce the chance of death from recurrence.\nPer the 2015 American Heart Association Guidelines, there were approximately 535,000 incidents of cardiac arrest annually in the United States (about 13 per 10,000 people). Of these, 326,000 (61%) experience cardiac arrest outside of a hospital setting, while 209,000 (39%) occur within a hospital.\nCardiac arrest becomes more common with age and affects males more often than females. In the United States, black people are twice as likely to die from cardiac arrest as white people. Asian and Hispanic people are not as frequently affected as white people.\nSigns and symptoms.\nCardiac arrest is not preceded by any warning symptoms in approximately 50 percent of people. For individuals who do experience symptoms, the symptoms are usually nonspecific to the cardiac arrest. For example, new or worsening chest pain, fatigue, blackouts, dizziness, shortness of breath, weakness, or vomiting.\nWhen cardiac arrest is suspected by a layperson (due to signs of unconsciousness, abnormal breathing or no pulse) it should be assumed that the victim is in cardiac arrest. Bystanders should call emergency medical services (such as 911, 999 or 112) and initiate CPR.\nRisk factors.\nMajor risk factors for cardiac arrest include age and underlying cardiovascular disease. A prior episode of sudden cardiac arrest increases the likelihood of future episodes. A 2021 meta-analysis assessing the recurrence of cardiac arrest in out-of-hospital cardiac arrest survivors identified that 15% of survivors experienced a second event, most often in the first year. Furthermore, of those who experienced recurrence, 35% had a third episode.\nAdditional significant risk factors include cigarette smoking, high blood pressure, high cholesterol, history of arrhythmia, lack of physical exercise, obesity, diabetes, family history, cardiomyopathy, alcohol use, and possibly caffeine intake. Current cigarette smokers with coronary artery disease were found to have a two to threefold increase in the risk of sudden death between ages 30 and 59. Furthermore, it was found that former smokers' risk was closer to that of those who had never smoked. A statistical analysis of many of these risk factors determined that approximately 50% of all cardiac arrests occur in 10% of the population perceived to be at greatest risk, due to aggregate harm of multiple risk factors, demonstrating that cumulative risk of multiple comorbidities exceeds the sum of each risk individually.\nCauses and mechanisms.\nThe underlying causes of sudden cardiac arrest can result from cardiac and non-cardiac causes. The most common underlying causes are different, depending on the patient's age. Common cardiac causes include coronary artery disease, non-atherosclerotic coronary artery abnormalities, structural heart damage, and inherited arrhythmias. Common non-cardiac causes include respiratory arrest, diabetes, medications, and trauma.\nThe most common mechanism underlying sudden cardiac arrest is an arrhythmia (an irregular rhythm). Without organized electrical activity in the heart muscle, there is inconsistent contraction of the ventricles, which prevents the heart from generating adequate cardiac output (forward pumping of blood from the heart to the rest of the body). This hemodynamic collapse results in poor blood flow to the brain and other organs, which if prolonged causes persistent damage.\nThere are many different types of arrhythmias, but the ones most frequently recorded in sudden cardiac arrest are ventricular tachycardia and ventricular fibrillation. Both ventricular tachycardia and ventricular fibrillation can prevent the heart from generating coordinated ventricular contractions, thereby failing to sustain adequate blood circulation.\nLess common initial arrhythmias occurring in cardiac arrest include pulseless electrical activity and asystole. These rhythms are seen when there is prolonged cardiac arrest, progression of ventricular fibrillation, or efforts like defibrillation fail to resuscitate the person.\nCardiac causes.\nCoronary artery disease.\nCoronary artery disease (CAD), also known as atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease, involves the deposition of cholesterol and subsequent inflammation-driven formation of atherosclerotic plaques in the arteries. CAD involves the accumulation and remodeling of the coronary vessels along with other systemic blood vessels. When an atherosclerotic plaque dislodges, it can block the flow of blood and oxygen through small arteries, such as the coronary arteries, resulting in ischemic injury. In the heart, this results in myocardial tissue damage which can lead to structural and functional changes that disrupt normal conduction patterns and alter heart rate and contraction.\nCAD underlies 68 percent of sudden cardiac deaths in the United States. Indeed, postmortem examinations have shown that the most common finding in cases of sudden cardiac death is chronic, high-grade stenosis of at least one segment of a major coronary artery.\nWhile CAD is a leading contributing factor, this is an age-dependent factor, with CAD being a less common cause of sudden cardiac death in people under the age of 40.\nNon-atherosclerotic coronary artery abnormalities.\nAbnormalities of the coronary arteries not related to atherosclerosis include inflammation (known as coronary arteritis), embolism, vasospasm, mechanical abnormalities related to connective tissue diseases or trauma, and congenital coronary artery anomalies (most commonly anomalous origin of the left coronary artery from the pulmonary artery). These conditions account for 10-15% of cardiac arrest and sudden cardiac death.\nStructural heart disease.\nExamples of structural heart diseases include: cardiomyopathies (hypertrophic, dilated, or arrhythmogenic), cardiac rhythm disturbances, myocarditis, and congestive heart failure.\nLeft ventricular hypertrophy is a leading cause of sudden cardiac deaths in the adult population. This is most commonly the result of longstanding high blood pressure, or hypertension, which has led to maladaptive overgrowth of muscular tissue of the left ventricle, the heart's main pumping chamber. This is because elevated blood pressure over the course of several years requires the heart to adapt to the requirement of pumping harder to adequately circulate blood throughout the body. If the heart does this for a prolonged period of time, the left ventricle can experience hypertrophy (grow larger) in a way that decreases the heart's effectiveness. Left ventricular hypertrophy can be demonstrated on an echocardiogram and electrocardiogram (EKG).\nAbnormalities of the cardiac conduction system (notably the atrioventricular node and His-Purkinje system) may predispose an individual to arrhythmias with a risk of progressing to sudden cardiac arrest, albeit this risk remains low. Many of these conduction blocks can be treated with internal cardiac defibrillators for those determined to be at high risk due to severity of fibrosis or severe electrophysiologic disturbances.\nStructural heart diseases unrelated to coronary artery disease account for 10% of all sudden cardiac deaths. A 1999 review of sudden cardiac deaths in the United States found that structural heart diseases accounted for over 30% of sudden cardiac arrests for those under 30 years.\nInherited arrhythmia syndromes.\nArrhythmias not due to structural heart disease account for 5 to 10% of sudden cardiac arrests. These are frequently caused by genetic disorders. The genetic mutations often affect specialized proteins known as ion channels that conduct electrically charged particles across the cell membrane, and this group of conditions is therefore often referred to as channelopathies. Examples of these inherited arrhythmia syndromes include long QT syndrome (LQTS), Brugada syndrome (BrS), catecholaminergic polymorphic ventricular tachycardia (CPVT), and short QT syndrome (SQTS). Many are also associated with environmental or neurogenic triggers such as response to loud sounds that can initiate lethal arrhythmias.\nLQTS, a condition often mentioned in young people's deaths, occurs in one of every 5000 to 7000 newborns and is estimated to be responsible for 3000 deaths annually compared to the approximately 300,000 cardiac arrests seen by emergency services. These conditions are a fraction of the overall deaths related to cardiac arrest but represent conditions that may be detected prior to arrest and may be treatable. The symptomatic expression of LQTS is quite broad and more often presents with syncope rather than cardiac arrest. The risk of cardiac arrest is still present, and people with family histories of sudden cardiac arrests should be screened for LQTS and other treatable causes of lethal arrhythmia. Higher levels of risk for cardiac arrest are associated with female sex, more significant QT prolongation, history of unexplained syncope (fainting spells), or premature sudden cardiac death. Additionally, individuals with LQTS should avoid certain medications that carry the risk of increasing the severity of this conduction abnormality, such as certain anti-arrhythmics, anti-depressants, and quinolone or macrolide antibiotics.\nAlthough it is not recognized as an inherited condition, Wolff\u2013Parkinson\u2013White syndrome in which an accessory conduction pathway bypassing the atrioventricular node is present and can cause abnormal conduction patterns leading to supraventricular tachycardia, pre-excited atrial fibrillation, and cardiac arrest. Ebstein's anomaly has an increased risk of accessory pathways as well.\nNon-cardiac causes.\nNon-cardiac causes account for 15 to 25% of cardiac arrests. Common non-cardiac causes include respiratory arrest, diabetes, certain medications, and blunt trauma (especially to the chest).\nAdditional non-cardiac causes include hemorrhage, aortic rupture, hypovolemic shock, pulmonary embolism, poisoning such as from the stings of certain jellyfish, and electrical injury.\nCircadian patterns are also recognized as triggering factors in cardiac arrest. Per a 2021 systematic review, throughout the day there are two main peak times in which cardiac arrest occurs. The first is in the morning hours and the second is in the afternoon. Moreover, survival rates following cardiac arrest were lowest when occurring between midnight and 6am.\nMany of these non-cardiac causes of cardiac arrest are reversible. A common mnemonic used to recall the reversible causes of cardiac arrest is referred to as the Hs and Ts. The Hs are hypovolemia, hypoxia, hydrogen cation excess (acidosis), hyperkalemia, hypokalemia, hypothermia, and hypoglycemia. The Ts are toxins, (cardiac) tamponade, tension pneumothorax, thrombosis (myocardial infarction), thromboembolism, and trauma.\nMechanism.\nThe definitive electrical mechanisms of cardiac arrest, which may arise from any of the functional, structural, or physiologic abnormalities mentioned above, are characterized by arrhythmias. Ventricular fibrillation and pulseless or sustained ventricular tachycardia are the most commonly recorded arrhythmias preceding cardiac arrest. These are rapid and erratic arrhythmias that alter the circulatory pathway such that adequate blood flow cannot be sustained and is inadequate to meet the body's needs.\nThe mechanism responsible for the majority of sudden cardiac deaths is ventricular fibrillation. Ventricular fibrillation is a tachyarrhythmia characterized by turbulent electrical activity in the ventricular myocardium leading to a heart rate too disorganized and rapid to produce any meaningful cardiac output, thus resulting in insufficient perfusion of the brain and essential organs. Some of the electrophysiologic mechanisms underpinning ventricular fibrillations include ectopic automaticity, re-entry, and triggered activity. However, structural changes in the diseased heart as a result of inherited factors (mutations in ion-channel coding genes, for example) cannot explain the sudden onset of cardiac arrest.\nIn ventricular tachycardia, the heart also beats faster than normal, which may prevent the heart chambers from properly filling with blood. Ventricular tachycardia is characterized by an altered QRS complex and a heart rate greater than 100 beats per minute. When V-tach is sustained (lasts for at least 30 seconds), inadequate blood flow to heart tissue can lead to cardiac arrest.\nBradyarrhythmias occur following dissociation of spontaneous electrical conduction and the mechanical function of the heart resulting in pulseless electrical activity (PEA) or through complete absence of electrical activity of the heart resulting in asystole. Similar to the result of tachyarrhythmias, these conditions lead to an inability to sustain adequate cardiac output.\nDiagnosis.\nCardiac arrest is synonymous with clinical death. The physical examination to diagnose cardiac arrest focuses on the absence of a pulse. In many cases, lack of a central pulse (carotid arteries and/or femoral arteries) is the gold standard. Lack of a pulse in the periphery (radial/pedal) may also result from other conditions (e.g. shock) or be the rescuer's misinterpretation.\nObtaining a thorough history can help inform the potential cause and prognosis. The provider taking the person's clinical history should try to learn whether the episode was observed by anyone else, when it happened, what the patient was doing (in particular whether there was any trauma), and whether drugs were involved.\nDuring resuscitation efforts, continuous monitoring equipment including EKG leads should be attached to the patient so that providers can analyze the electrical activity of the cardiac cycle and use this information to guide the management efforts. EKG readings will help to identify the arrhythmia present and allow the team to monitor any changes that occur with the administration of CPR and defibrillation. Clinicians classify cardiac arrest into \"shockable\" versus \"non-shockable\", as determined by the EKG rhythm. This refers to whether a particular class of cardiac dysrhythmia is treatable using defibrillation. The two \"shockable\" rhythms are ventricular fibrillation and pulseless ventricular tachycardia, while the two \"non-shockable\" rhythms are asystole and pulseless electrical activity. Moreover, in the post-resuscitation patient, a 12-lead EKG can help identify some causes of cardiac arrest, such as STEMI which may require specific treatments.\nPoint-of-care ultrasound (POCUS) is a tool that can be used to examine the movement of the heart and its force of contraction at the patient's bedside. POCUS can accurately diagnose cardiac arrest in hospital settings, as well as visualize cardiac wall motion contractions. Using POCUS, clinicians can have limited, two-dimensional views of different parts of the heart during arrest. These images can help clinicians determine whether electrical activity within the heart is pulseless or pseudo-pulseless, as well as help them diagnose the potentially reversible causes of an arrest. Published guidelines from the American Society of Echocardiography, American College of Emergency Physicians, European Resuscitation Council, and the American Heart Association, as well as the 2018 preoperative Advanced Cardiac Life Support guidelines, have recognized the potential benefits of using POCUS in diagnosing and managing cardiac arrest.\nPOCUS can help predict outcomes in resuscitation efforts. Specifically, use of transthoracic ultrasound can be a helpful tool in predicting mortality in cases of cardiac arrest, with a systematic review from 2020 finding that there is a significant positive correlation between presence of cardiac motion and short term survival with CPR.\nOwing to the inaccuracy diagnosis solely based on central pulse detection, some bodies like the European Resuscitation Council have de-emphasized its importance. Instead, the current guidelines prompt individuals to begin CPR on any unconscious person with absent or abnormal breathing. The Resuscitation Council in the United Kingdom stands in line with the European Resuscitation Council's recommendations and those of the American Heart Association. They have suggested that the technique to check carotid pulses should be used only by healthcare professionals with specific training and expertise, and even then that it should be viewed in conjunction with other indicators like agonal respiration.\nVarious other methods for detecting circulation and therefore diagnosing cardiac arrest have been proposed. Guidelines following the 2000 International Liaison Committee on Resuscitation recommendations were for rescuers to look for \"signs of circulation\" but not specifically the pulse. These signs included coughing, gasping, color, twitching, and movement. Per evidence that these guidelines were ineffective, the current International Liaison Committee on Resuscitation recommendation is that cardiac arrest should be diagnosed in all casualties who are unconscious and not breathing normally, a similar protocol to that which the European Resuscitation Council has adopted. In a non-acute setting where the patient is expired, diagnosis of cardiac arrest can be done via molecular autopsy or postmortem molecular testing, which uses a set of molecular techniques to find the ion channels that are cardiac defective. This could help elucidate the cause of death in the patient.\nOther physical signs or symptoms can help determine the potential cause of the cardiac arrest. Below is a chart of the clinical findings and signs/symptoms a person may have and potential causes associated with them.\nPrevention.\nPrimary prevention.\nWith the lack of positive outcomes following cardiac arrest, efforts have been spent finding effective strategies to prevent cardiac arrest events. The approach to primary prevention promotes a healthy diet, exercise, limited alcohol consumption, and smoking cessation.\nExercise is an effective preventative measure for cardiac arrest in the general population but may be risky for those with pre-existing conditions. The risk of a transient catastrophic cardiac event increases in individuals with heart disease during and immediately after exercise. The lifetime and acute risks of cardiac arrest are decreased in people with heart disease who perform regular exercise, perhaps suggesting the benefits of exercise outweigh the risks.\nA 2021 study found that diet may be a modifiable risk factor for a lower incidence of sudden cardiac death. The study found that those who fell under the category of having \"Southern [United States] diets\" representing those of \"added fats, fried food, eggs, organ and processed meats, and sugar-sweetened beverages\" had a positive association with an increased risk of cardiac arrest, while those deemed following the \"Mediterranean diets\" had an inverse relationship regarding the risk of cardiac arrest. According to a 2012 review published, omega-3 PUFA supplementation is not associated with a lower risk of sudden cardiac death.\nA Cochrane review published in 2016 found moderate-quality evidence to show that blood pressure-lowering drugs do not reduce the risk of sudden cardiac death.\nIn certain high-risk patient populations, implantable cardioverter-defibrillators (ICD) are also used to prevent sudden cardiac death. Such conditions include the inherited arrhythmias (long QT syndrome, Brugada syndrome, etc) and heart failure.\nSecondary prevention.\nAn implantable cardioverter-defibrillator (ICD) is a battery-powered device that monitors electrical activity in the heart, and when an arrhythmia is detected, can deliver an electrical shock to terminate the abnormal rhythm. ICDs are used to prevent sudden cardiac death (SCD) in those who have survived a prior episode of sudden cardiac arrest (SCA) due to ventricular fibrillation or ventricular tachycardia.\nNumerous studies have been conducted on the use of ICDs for the secondary prevention of SCD. These studies have shown improved survival with ICDs compared to the use of anti-arrhythmic drugs. ICD therapy is associated with a 50% relative risk reduction in death caused by an arrhythmia and a 25% relative risk reduction in all-cause mortality.\nPrevention of SCD with ICD therapy for high-risk patient populations has similarly shown improved survival rates in several large studies. The high-risk patient populations in these studies were defined as those with severe ischemic cardiomyopathy (determined by a reduced left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF)). The LVEF criteria used in these trials ranged from less than or equal to 30% in MADIT-II to less than or equal to 40% in MUSTT.\nAlternatively, a wearable cardioverter defibrillator (eg, LifeVest) can be used instead of an implantable defibrillator, and the wearable option can be used as a temporary bridge to an implantable device. Such instances are endocarditis where an implantable device is at high risk of becoming infected if implanted too soon.\nCrash teams.\nIn hospital, a cardiac arrest is referred to as a \"crash\", or a \"code\". This typically refers to code blue on the hospital emergency codes. A dramatic drop in vital sign measurements is referred to as \"coding\" or \"crashing\", though coding is usually used when it results in cardiac arrest, while crashing might not. Treatment for cardiac arrest is sometimes referred to as \"calling a code\".\nPatients in general wards often deteriorate for several hours or even days before a cardiac arrest occurs. This has been attributed to a lack of knowledge and skill amongst ward-based staff, in particular, a failure to measure the respiratory rate, which is often the major predictor of a deterioration and can often change up to 48 hours prior to a cardiac arrest. In response, many hospitals now have increased training for ward-based staff. A number of \"early warning\" systems also exist that aim to quantify the person's risk of deterioration based on their vital signs and thus provide a guide to staff. In addition, specialist staff are being used more effectively to augment the work already being done at the ward level. These include:\nManagement.\nSudden cardiac arrest may be treated via attempts at resuscitation. This is usually carried out based on basic life support, advanced cardiac life support (ACLS), pediatric advanced life support (PALS), or neonatal resuscitation program (NRP) guidelines.\nCardiopulmonary resuscitation.\nEarly cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) is essential to surviving cardiac arrest with good neurological function. It is recommended that it be started as soon as possible with minimal interruptions once begun. The components of CPR that make the greatest difference in survival are chest compressions and defibrillating shockable rhythms. After defibrillation, chest compressions should be continued for two minutes before another rhythm check. This is based on a compression rate of 100-120 compressions per minute, a compression depth of 5\u20136 centimeters into the chest, full chest recoil, and a ventilation rate of 10 breath ventilations per minute. Mechanical chest compressions (as performed by a machine) are no better than chest compressions performed by hand. It is unclear if a few minutes of CPR before defibrillation results in different outcomes than immediate defibrillation.\nCorrectly performed bystander CPR has been shown to increase survival, however it is performed in fewer than 30% of out-of-hospital cardiac arrests (OHCAs) as of 2007[ [update]]. A 2019 meta-analysis found that use of dispatcher-assisted CPR improved outcomes, including survival, when compared with undirected bystander CPR. Likewise, a 2022 systematic review on exercise-related cardiac arrests supported early intervention of bystander CPR and AED use (for shockable rhythms) as they improve survival outcomes.\nIf high-quality CPR has not resulted in return of spontaneous circulation and the person's heart rhythm is in asystole, stopping CPR and pronouncing the person's death is generally reasonable after 20 minutes. Exceptions to this include certain cases with hypothermia or drowning victims. Some of these cases should have longer and more sustained CPR until they are nearly normothermic.\nIf cardiac arrest occurs after 20 weeks of pregnancy, the uterus should be pulled or pushed to the left during CPR. If a pulse has not returned by four minutes, an emergency Cesarean section is recommended.\nAirway management.\nHigh levels of oxygen are generally given during CPR. Either a bag valve mask or an advanced airway may be used to help with breathing particularly since vomiting and regurgitation are common, especially in OHCA. If this occurs, then modification to existing oropharyngeal suction may be required, such as using suction-assisted airway management.\nTracheal intubation has not been found to improve survival rates or neurological outcomes in cardiac arrest, and in the prehospital environment, may worsen it. Endotracheal tubes and supraglottic airways appear equally useful.\nMouth-to-mouth as a means of providing respirations to the person has been phased out due to the risk of contracting infectious diseases from the affected person.\nWhen done by emergency medical personnel, 30 compressions followed by two breaths appear to be better than continuous chest compressions and breaths being given while compressions are ongoing. For bystanders, CPR that involves only chest compressions results in better outcomes as compared to standard CPR for those who have gone into cardiac arrest due to heart issues.\nDefibrillation.\nDefibrillation is indicated if an shockable rhythm is present; the two shockable rhythms are ventricular fibrillation and ventricular tachycardia. These shockable rhythms have a 25-40% likelihood of survival, compared with a significantly lower rate (less than 5%) in non-shockable rhythms. The non-shockable rhythms include asystole and pulseless electrical activity.\nVentricular fibrillation involves the ventricles of the heart rapidly contracting in an disorganized pattern, and thereby limiting blood flow from the heart. This is due to an uncoordinated electrical activity. The electrocardiogram (ECG) shows irregular QRS complexes at a very high rate (&gt;300 beats per minute). In ventricular tachycardia, the ECG will show a wide complex rhythm at a rate higher than 100 beats per minute. These two rhythm lead to hemodynamic instability and compromise, resulting in poor perfusion to vital organs (including the heart itself).\nA defibrillator \u2014\u00a0either implanted or external \u2014 delivers an electrical current that results in the entire myocardium simultaneously depolarized thereby stopping the arrhythmia. Defibrillators can deliver energy as monophasic or biphasic waveforms, although biphasic defibrillators are now the most common. Prior studies suggest that biphasic shock is more likely to produce successful defibrillation after a single shock, however rate of survival is comparable between the methods.\nIn out-of-hospital arrests (OHCA), the defibrillation is often made by an automated external defibrillator (AED), a portable machine that can be used by any user. The AED provides voice instructions that guide the process, automatically checks the person's condition, and applies the appropriate electric shocks. Some defibrillators even provide feedback on the quality of CPR compressions, encouraging the lay rescuer to press the person's chest hard enough to circulate blood.\nThere is increasing use of public access to defibrillators. This typically involves placing AEDs in publicly-accessible places and training staff in these areas on how to use them. This allows defibrillation to occur prior to the arrival of emergency services, which has been shown to increase the chances of survival. People who have cardiac arrests in remote locations have worse outcomes.\nDefibrillation cannot reverse asystole or pulseless electrical activity, and CPR must be initiated first in these cases. A similar concept, cardioversion, utilizes the same defibrillation machine but is used for other rhythms such as atrial fibrillation and supraventricular tachycardia. In these rhythms, the machine is \"synchronized\" to the QRS complex to avoid shocking on the T wave (and inducing VT or VF). Cardioversion can be done electively for rhythm control, or urgently if the rhythm is unstable.\nMedications.\nMedications recommended in the ACLS protocol include epinephrine, amiodarone, and lidocaine. The timing and administration of these medications depends on the underlying arrhythmia of the arrest.\nEpinephrine acts on the alpha-1 receptor, which in turn increases the blood flow that supplies the heart. Epinephrine in adults improves survival but does not appear to improve neurologically normal survival. In ventricular fibrillation and pulseless ventricular tachycardia, 1\u00a0mg of epinephrine is given every 3\u20135 minutes, following an initial round of CPR and defibrillation. Doses higher than 1\u00a0mg of epinephrine are not recommended for routine use in cardiac arrest. If the person has a non-shockable rhythm, such as asystole, following an initial round of CPR, 1\u00a0mg of epinephrine should be given every 3\u20135 minutes, with the goal of obtaining a shockable rhythm.\nAmiodarone and lidocaine are anti-arrhythmic medications. Amiodarone is a class III antiarrhythmic. Amiodarone may be used in cases of ventricular fibrillation, ventricular tachycardia, and wide complex tachycardia. Lidocaine is a Class IB anti-arrhythmic, also used to manage acute arrhythmias. Anti-arrhythmic medications may be used after an unsuccessful defibrillation attempt. However, neither lidocaine nor amiodarone improves survival to hospital discharge, despite both equally improving survival to hospital admission. The first dose is given as a 300\u00a0mg bolus. The second dose is given as a 600\u00a0mg bolus.\nAdditional medications.\nBicarbonate, given as sodium bicarbonate, works to stabilize acidosis and hyperkalemia, both of which can contribute to and exacerbate cardiac arrest. If acid-base or electrolyte disturbance is evident, bicarbonate may be used. However, if there is little suspicion that these imbalances are occurring and contributing to the arrest, routine use of bicarbonate is not recommended as it does not provide additional benefit.\nCalcium, given as calcium chloride, works as an inotrope and vasopressor. Calcium is used in specific circumstances such as electrolyte disturbances (hyperkalemia) and calcium-channel blocker toxicity. Overall, calcium is not routinely used during cardiac arrest as it does not provide additional benefit (compared to non-use) and may even cause harm (poor neurologic outcomes).\nVasopressin overall does not improve or worsen outcomes compared to epinephrine. The combination of epinephrine, vasopressin, and methylprednisolone appears to improve outcomes. \nThe use of atropine, lidocaine, and amiodarone have not been shown to improve survival from cardiac arrest.\nAtropine is used for symptomatic bradycardia. It is given at a dose of 1\u00a0mg (iv), and additional 1\u00a0mg (iv) doses can be given every 3\u20135 minutes for a total of 3\u00a0mg. However, the 2010 guidelines from the American Heart Association removed the recommendation for atropine use in pulseless electrical activity and asystole for lack of evidence supporting its use.\nSpecial considerations.\nHemodialysis patients carry a greater risk of cardiac arrest events. Multiple factors contribute including increased cardiovascular risk factors, electrolyte disturbances (calcium and potassium, caused by accumulation and aggressive removal), and acid-base disturbances. Calcium levels are considered a key factor contributing to cardiac arrests in this population.\nTricyclic antidepressant (TCA) overdose can lead to cardiac arrest with typical ECG findings including wide QRS and prolonged QTc. Treatment for this condition includes activated charcoal and sodium bicarbonate.\nMagnesium can be given at a does of 2 g (iv or oral bolus) to manage torsades de points. However, without specific indication, magnesium is not generally given in cardiac arrest. In people with a confirmed pulmonary embolism as the cause of arrest, thrombolytics may be of benefit. Evidence for use of naloxone in those with cardiac arrest due to opioids is unclear, but it may still be used. In people with cardiac arrest due to a local anesthetic, lipid emulsion may be used.\nTargeted temperature management.\nCurrent international guidelines suggest cooling adults after cardiac arrest using targeted temperature management (TTM) with the goal of improving neurological outcomes. The process involves cooling for a 24-hour period, with a target temperature of , followed by gradual rewarming over the next 12 to 24 hrs. There are several methods used to lower the body temperature, such as applying ice packs or cold-water circulating pads directly to the body or infusing cold saline.\nThe effectiveness of TTM after OHCA is an area of ongoing study. Several recent reviews have found that patients treated with TTM have more favorable neurological outcomes. However, pre-hospital TTM after OHCA has been shown to increase the risk of adverse outcomes. The rates of re-arrest may be higher in people who were treated with pre-hospital TTM. Moreover, TTM may have adverse neurological effects in people who survive post-cardiac arrest\".\" Osborn waves on ECG are frequent during TTM, particularly in patients treated with 33 \u00b0C. Osborn waves are not associated with increased risk of ventricular arrhythmia, and may be considered a benign physiological phenomenon, associated with lower mortality in univariable analyses.\nDo not resuscitate.\nSome people choose to avoid aggressive measures at the end of life. A do not resuscitate order (DNR) in the form of an advance health care directive makes it clear that in the event of cardiac arrest, the person does not wish to receive cardiopulmonary resuscitation. Other directives may be made to stipulate the desire for intubation in the event of respiratory failure or, if comfort measures are all that are desired, by stipulating that healthcare providers should \"allow natural death\".\nChain of survival.\nSeveral organizations promote the idea of a chain of survival. The chain consists of the following \"links\":\nIf one or more links in the chain are missing or delayed, then the chances of survival drop significantly.\nThese protocols are often initiated by a code blue, which usually denotes impending or acute onset of cardiac arrest or respiratory failure.\nOther.\nResuscitation with extracorporeal membrane oxygenation devices has been attempted with better results for in-hospital cardiac arrest (29% survival) than OHCA (4% survival) in populations selected to benefit most.\nCardiac catheterization in those who have survived an OHCA appears to improve outcomes, although high-quality evidence is lacking. It is recommended to be done as soon as possible in those who have had a cardiac arrest with ST elevation due to underlying heart problems.\nThe precordial thump may be considered in those with witnessed, monitored, unstable ventricular tachycardia (including pulseless VT) if a defibrillator is not immediately ready for use, but it should not delay CPR and shock delivery or be used in those with unwitnessed OHCA.\nPrognosis.\nThe overall rate of survival among those who have OHCA is 10%. Among those who have an OHCA, 70% occur at home, and their survival rate is 6%. For those who have an in-hospital cardiac arrest (IHCA), the survival rate one year from at least the occurrence of cardiac arrest is estimated to be 13%. For IHCA, survival to discharge is around 22%. Those who survive to return of spontaneous circulation and hospital admission frequently present with post-cardiac arrest syndrome, which usually presents with neurological injury that can range from mild memory problems to coma. One-year survival is estimated to be higher in people with cardiac admission diagnoses (39%) when compared to those with non-cardiac admission diagnoses (11%).\nA 1997 review found rates of survival to discharge of 14%, although different studies varied from 0 to 28%. In those over the age of 70 who have a cardiac arrest while in hospital, survival to hospital discharge is less than 20%. How well these individuals manage after leaving the hospital is not clear.\nThe global rate of people who were able to recover from OHCA after receiving CPR has been found to be approximately 30%, and the rate of survival to discharge from the hospital has been estimated at 9%. Survival to discharge from the hospital is more likely among people whose cardiac arrest was witnessed by a bystander or emergency medical services, who received bystander CPR, and who live in Europe and North America. Relatively lower survival to hospital discharge rates have been observed in Asian countries.\nPrognosis is typically assessed 72 hours or more after cardiac arrest. Rates of survival are better in those who had someone witness their collapse, received bystander CPR or had either V-fib or V-tach when assessed. Survival among those with V-fib or V-tach is 15 to 23%. Women are more likely to survive cardiac arrest and leave the hospital than men. Hypoxic ischemic brain injury is a concerning outcome for people suffering a cardiac arrest. Most improvements in cognition occur during the first three months following cardiac arrest, with some individuals reporting improvement up to one year post-cardiac arrest. 50 \u2013 70% of cardiac arrest survivors report fatigue as a symptom.\nEpidemiology.\nUnited States.\nThe risk of cardiac arrest varies with geographical region, age, and gender. The lifetime risk is three times greater in men (12.3%) than women (4.2%) based on analysis of the Framingham Heart Study. This gender difference disappeared beyond 85 years of age. Around half of these individuals are younger than 65 years of age.\nBased on death certificates, sudden cardiac death accounts for about 20% of all deaths in the United States. In the United States, approximately 326,000 cases of out-of-hospital and 209,000 cases of IHCA occur among adults annually, which works out to be an incidence of approximately 110.8 per 100,000 adults per year.\nIn the United States, during-pregnancy cardiac arrest occurs in about one in twelve-thousand deliveries or 1.8 per 10,000 live births. Rates are lower in Canada.\nOther regions.\nNon-Western regions of the world have differing incidences. The incidence of sudden cardiac death in China is 41.8 per 100,000 and in South India is 39.7 per 100,000.\nSociety and culture.\nNames.\nIn many publications, the stated or implicit meaning of \"sudden cardiac death\" is sudden death from cardiac causes. Some physicians call cardiac arrest \"sudden cardiac death\" even if the person survives. Thus one can hear mentions of \"prior episodes of sudden cardiac death\" in a living person.\nIn 2021, the American Heart Association clarified that \"heart attack\" is often mistakenly used to describe cardiac arrest. While a heart attack refers to death of heart muscle tissue as a result of blood supply loss, cardiac arrest is caused when the heart's electrical system malfunctions. Furthermore, the American Heart Association explains that \"if corrective measures are not taken rapidly, this condition progresses to sudden death. Cardiac arrest should be used to signify an event as described above, that is reversed, usually by CPR and/or defibrillation or cardioversion, or cardiac pacing. Sudden cardiac death should not be used to describe events that are not fatal\".\nSlow code.\nA \"slow code\" is a slang term for the practice of deceptively delivering sub-optimal CPR to a person in cardiac arrest, when CPR is considered to have no medical benefit. A \"show code\" is the practice of faking the response altogether for the sake of the person's family.\nSuch practices are ethically controversial and are banned in some jurisdictions. The European Resuscitation Council Guidelines released a statement in 2021 that clinicians are not suggested to participate/take part in \"slow codes\". According to the American College of Physicians, half-hearted resuscitation efforts are deceptive and should not be performed by physicians or nurses.\nChildren.\nIn children, the most common cause of cardiac arrest is shock or respiratory failure that has not been treated. Cardiac arrhythmias are another possible cause. Arrhythmias such as asystole or bradycardia are more likely in children, in contrast to ventricular fibrillation or tachycardia as seen in adults. \nAdditional causes of sudden unexplained cardiac arrest in children include hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and coronary artery abnormalities. In childhood hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, previous adverse cardiac events, non-sustained ventricular tachycardia, syncope, and left ventricular hypertrophy have been shown to predict sudden cardiac death. Other causes can include drugs, such as cocaine and methamphetamine, or overdose of medications, such as antidepressants.\nFor management of pediatric cardiac arrest, CPR should be initiated if suspected. Guidelines provide algorithms for pediatric cardiac arrest management. Recommended medications during pediatric resuscitation include epinephrine, lidocaine, and amiodarone. However, the use of sodium bicarbonate or calcium is not recommended. The use of calcium in children has been associated with poor neurological function as well as decreased survival. Correct dosing of medications in children is dependent on weight, and to minimize time spent calculating medication doses, the use of a Broselow tape is recommended.\nRates of survival in children with cardiac arrest are 3 to 16% in North America.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "60576", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60576", "title": "Visual instruction set", "text": ""}
{"id": "60578", "revid": "1306352", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60578", "title": "AMD64", "text": ""}
{"id": "60579", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60579", "title": "Crystal River, Florida", "text": "City in Florida, United States\nCrystal River is a city in Citrus County, Florida, United States. The population was 3,396 in the 2020 census, up from 3,108 at the 2010 census. It is part of the Homosassa Springs, Florida Metropolitan Statistical Area. The city was incorporated in 1903 and is the self-professed \"Home of the Manatee\". Crystal River Preserve State Park is located nearby, and Crystal River Archaeological State Park is located in the city's northwest side.\nCrystal River is at the heart of the Nature Coast of Florida. The city is situated around Kings Bay, which is spring-fed so it keeps a constant temperature year round. A cluster of 50 springs designated as a first-magnitude system feeds Kings Bay. A first-magnitude system discharges 100 cubic feet or more of water per second, which equals about 64 million gallons of water per day. Because of this discharge amount, the Crystal River Springs group is the second largest springs group in Florida, the first being Wakulla Springs in Wakulla County near Tallahassee. Kings Bay can be home to over 400 manatees during the winter when the water temperature in the Gulf of Mexico cools, and is the only place in the United States where people can legally interact with them in their natural conditions without that interaction being viewed as harassment by law enforcement agencies. Tourism based on watching and swimming with manatees is the fastest growing contribution to the local economy. In 2005, there was a movement to dissolve the city which did not succeed, and the city has since grown by annexation.\nGeography.\nCrystal River is located northwest of the center of Citrus County at , on the northeast side of Kings Bay and the Crystal River, an inlet of the Gulf of Mexico. U.S. Routes 19 and 98 pass through the center of the city, leading south to Homosassa Springs and north to Chiefland. State Road 44 leads east from Crystal River to Inverness, the Citrus County seat.\nAccording to the United States Census Bureau, the city of Crystal River has a total area of , of which is land and 9.35% is water.\nHistory.\nIn the Pleistocene era, the land on which Crystal River is located was vastly different from today. The west coast of Florida is thought to have extended an additional into the Gulf of Mexico. During excavations for the Crystal River Nuclear Plant in 1969, scientists discovered rhinoceros and mastodon bones, as well as the shells of an extremely large armadillo and a large land tortoise.\nAround 500 BCE mound-building Native Americans (possibly Deptford culture) built a settlement along the Crystal River, which in the present day is the Crystal River Archaeological State Park. It was abandoned prior to European colonization for unknown reasons. The Native American name for Crystal River was \"Weewahi Iaca\".\nFollowing the Second Seminole War, settlers were encouraged into the area due to the passing of the Armed Occupation Act of 1842 by the United States federal government. Twenty-two men filed for patents for land in Crystal River. By the mid-1800s, families began to settle in the Crystal River area.\nMail was delivered by horse and buggy, and a stagecoach came from Ocala (Fort King) to Crystal River, stopping at the Stage Stand, which today is the Stage Stand Cemetery in Homosassa.\nWhile no land battles were fought in the Crystal River area during the Civil War, there were many instances of skirmishes on the water directly off the coast of the Crystal and Homosassa rivers, as well as near Hickory Island in Yankeetown. By the time of the Civil War, Florida was an important source and supplier of food and other goods such as beef, pork, fish, corn, sugar, cotton, naval stores and salt. The Union was aware of this, and soon after the war began, the Union Navy blockaded the entire coast of Florida.\nFollowing the Civil War, Crystal River grew. People from states to the north began to arrive, attracted by the area's mild climate and the potential of becoming wealthy growing citrus fruits. Early settlers to the area had found wild citrus trees growing in abundance, thanks in part to the Spanish explorers who had brought oranges with them on their ships and had discarded the seeds in the new world. This gave rise to the planting of citrus groves. The \"Big Freeze\" of 1894\u20131895 destroyed most of the citrus groves in the county.\nA very early industry in the area was the turpentine business. Many of the barges during the Civil War blockade had been carrying turpentine, likely from the turpentine still of William Turner, who resided in Red Level. Other early industry in the Crystal River area included cedar mills. In 1882, James Williams moved his cedar mill to Crystal River, and began operating on King's Bay. The mill produced pencil boards, which were then shipped to Jersey City, New Jersey, by ship, and later on by train. The Dixon Cedar Mill was one of the largest industries in Crystal River, providing employment to many in the area, including women and African Americans.\nCrystal River had been part of Hernando County since its inception in 1843. In 1844, the county name changed from \"Hernando\" to \"Benton\", in honor of Senator Thomas Hart Benton who had sponsored the Armed Occupation Act of 1842, which had brought settlers to the area. The county name returned to Hernando in 1850.\nBy the late 1800s, the area along the west side of the county was growing rapidly, and the citizens of the area began to see a need for a new county with a county seat that was easier to reach. In 1887, Hernando County was divided into three parts: Pasco County, Hernando County, and Citrus County. The town of Mannfield was named the temporary county seat for two years. Mannfield was chosen as it was in the geographic center of the new county and was more accessible to citizens. The site for the eventual county seat, Inverness, was decided by a vote in 1891.\nPhosphate was discovered in 1889 in the east side of Citrus County, and the phosphate industry grew rapidly. Historians have claimed it to be \"one of the richest phosphate deposits in the world.\" The phosphate industry would boom in Crystal River and Citrus County until 1914, when it could no longer be shipped due to World War I.\nIn 1888, the railroad reached Crystal River. The arrival of the railroad proved to be a boon; it provided an easier way to ship and receive goods. It was also an easier way for tourists to travel in and out of the city. Sport fishing became a draw for many wealthy northerners. In the early 1990s, Arctic Air of America Inc. moved to Crystal River.\nCrystal River became a town in 1903. It was officially incorporated as a city on July 3, 1923.\nCrystal River Mall opened north of the center of town in 1990, which is now closed down.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\n2010 and 2020 census.\nAs of the 2020 United States census, there were 3,396 people, 1,481 households, and 744 families residing in the city.\nAs of the 2010 United States census, there were 3,108 people, 1,472 households, and 835 families residing in the city.\nIn 2010, the population density was . There were 2,036 housing units at an average density of .\nIn 2010, there were 1,472 households, out of which 18% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 43.0% were married couples living together, 9.6% had a female householder with no husband present, and 43.3% were non-families. 56.7% of all households were made up of individuals, and 19.6% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.06 and the average family size was 2.61.\nIn 2010, in the city, the population was spread out, with 15.9% under the age of 18, 3.7% from 18 to 24, 15.7% from 25 to 44, 31% from 45 to 64, and 33.9% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 56 years. The population was composed of 1,477 males and 1,631 females.\n2000 census.\nAs of the census of 2000, there were 3,485 people, 1,498 households, and 927 families residing in the city. The population density was . There were 1,956 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the city was 83.76% White, 12.88% Black or African American, 0.40% Native American, 1.32% Asian, 0.06% Pacific Islander, 0.46% from other races, and 1.12% from two or more races. 3.04% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.\nIn 2000, there were 1,498 households out of which 21.8% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 48.0% were married couples living together, 10.5% had a female householder with no husband present, and 38.1% were non-families. 32.0% of all households were made up of individuals and 13.0% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.16 and the average family size was 2.68.\nIn 2000, in the city the population was spread out with 19.0% under the age of 18, 5.2% from 18 to 24, 20.9% from 25 to 44, 27.2% from 45 to 64, and 27.6% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 48 years. For every 100 females there were 91.8 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 87.8 males.\nIn 2000, the median income for a household in the city was $37,207, and the median income for a family was $47,250. Males had a median income of $39,357 versus $25,417 for females. The per capita income for the city was $25,866. About 3.5% of families and 9.9% of the population were below the poverty line, including 12.4% of those under age 18 and 9.5% of those age 65 or over.\nGovernment.\nCrystal River uses a city council with five elected members, including the mayor. As of March 2024, the current mayor of Crystal River is Joe Meek.\nEducation.\nThe city is served by Citrus County Schools. Residents are zoned to Crystal River Primary [elementary] School, Crystal River Middle School, and Crystal River High School.\nThe Coastal Region Library of Citrus Libraries is in Crystal River.\nHealthcare.\nThe only hospital that operates in Crystal River is TGH Crystal River.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Sister-inline/styles.css\"/&gt; Media related to at Wikimedia Commons"}
{"id": "60580", "revid": "1225494286", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60580", "title": "CPU architecture", "text": ""}
{"id": "60582", "revid": "1314121708", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60582", "title": "Chancellor of Austria", "text": "Head of government of Austria\nThe chancellor of Austria, officially the federal chancellor of the Republic of Austria (), is the head of government of the Republic of Austria.\nTwenty-nine people have served as chancellor. The current holder of the office Christian Stocker was sworn in on 3 March 2025 as chancellor.\nThe chancellor's place in Austria's political system.\nAustria's chancellor chairs and leads the cabinet, which is composed of the chancellor, the vice chancellor and the ministers. Together with the president, who is head of state, the cabinet forms the country's executive branch leadership.\nAustria is a parliamentary republic, the system of government in which real power is vested in the head of government. However, in Austria most executive actions of great extent can only be exercised by the president, upon advice or with the countersignature of the chancellor or a specific minister. Therefore the chancellor often requires the president's consent to implement greater decisions. Neither the ministers nor the vice chancellor report to the chancellor.\nIn legislature, the chancellor's power depends on the size of their affiliated parliamentary group. In case of a coalition cabinet, the chancellor commonly is the leader of the party most represented in the National Council, with the leader of the party able to grant a majority, usually serving as the vice chancellor.\nThe first Austrian sovereign head of government was the State Chancellor of the Austrian Empire, a position only held by Klemens von Metternich. The office was later renamed to Minister-President of the Austrian Empire and remained from there on until the dissolution of Austria-Hungary. The first head of government after the monarchy was the State Chancellor of German-Austria, an office again only held by one person; Karl Renner. After allied powers declined a union between Austria and Germany, the office was renamed to just State Chancellor of Austria and later changed to Federal Chancellor, which remained the position's final form until present day.\nThe official residence and executive office of the chancellor is the chancellery, which is located at the Ballhausplatz in the center of Vienna. Both the chancellor as well as the cabinet are appointed by the president and can be dismissed by the president.\nThe current officeholder is Christian Stocker, who was sworn in as chancellor on 3 March 2025 by President Alexander Van der Bellen.\nHistory.\nThe use of the term Chancellor (, derived from ) as head of the chancery writing office can be traced back as far as the 9th century, when under King Louis the German the office of the Archchancellor (), later Imperial Chancellor (), was created as a high office on the service of the Holy Roman Emperor. The task was usually fulfilled by the Prince-Archbishops of Mainz as Archchancellors of the German lands.\nIn the course of the Imperial reform, the Habsburg Emperor Maximilian I in 1498 attempted to counter the spiritual power of the with a more secular position of an Imperial Court Chancellor (), but the two became merged. These were also the times when attempts were made to balance Imperial absolutism by the creation of Imperial Governments (), ultimately a failure.\nHabsburg Monarchy.\nNevertheless, when Maximilian's grandson Ferdinand I succeeded him as Archduke of Austria in 1521, his elder brother Emperor Charles V (1519\u20131556) appointed Mercurino Gattinara as \"Grand Chancellor of all the realms and kingdoms of the king\" (). The separate position of an Austrian Court Chancellor appeared as a around 1526, when the Habsburg monarchy arose with the Bohemian and Hungarian inheritance; it was however once again merged with the equivalent office of the Holy Roman Empire in 1559.\nUpon the 1620 Battle of White Mountain and the suppression of the Bohemian revolt, Emperor Ferdinand II had separate Court Chancelleries established in order to strengthen the unity of the Habsburg hereditary lands. Beside a Bohemian and Hungarian chancellery, he created the office of an Austrian chancellor in Vienna, responsible for the Archduchy of Austria proper (i.e. Upper and Lower Austria) with the Inner Austrian territories and Tyrol. Under Emperor Leopold I (1658\u20131705) the term again became with Johann Paul Freiherr von Hocher (1667\u20131683), and Theodor von Strattman (1683\u20131693).\nThe eighteenth century was dominated by Prince Wenzel Anton of Kaunitz-Rietberg (1753\u20131792), who was Chancellor to four Habsburg emperors from Maria Theresa to Francis II, with the titles of both and . He was succeeded by Johann Philipp von Cobenzl (1792\u20131793), who was dismissed by Emperor Francis II over the Partition of Poland and was succeeded by Johann Amadeus von Thugut (1793\u20131800). Thugut's chancellorship did not survive the Austrian defeats by the French at the battles of Marengo and Hohenlinden in 1800 and he was replaced by Count Ludwig von Cobenzl (1800\u20131805), his predecessor's cousin, but who in turn was dismissed following the Austrian defeat at Austerlitz in 1805.\nAustrian Empire.\nWith the consequent dissolution of the Holy Roman Empire and founding of the Austrian Empire, Francis II abdicated the former Imperial Throne, but remained Emperor Francis I of Austria in 1806. He had replaced Cobenzl with Johann Philipp Stadion, Count von Warthausen (1805\u20131809) the previous year, but his career was in turn cut short in 1809 following yet another Austrian defeat by Napoleon at the Battle of Wagram and subsequent humiliation at the Treaty of Sch\u00f6nbrunn. Prince Klemens von Metternich was appointed by Francis I to the positions of and (1821\u20131848). However, there is some opinion that the Chancellor title was not used between Prince Kaunitz-Rietberg's resignation in 1792 and 1821. \nAs the Metternich system had become a synonym for his reactionary politics, the title of a State Chancellor was abolished upon the 1848 revolutions. The position became that of a Minister-President of Austria, equivalent to Prime Minister, with the exception of Count Friedrich Ferdinand von Beust (1867\u20131871)\nthe title only re-emerging at the birth of German Austria after World War I in 1918, when Karl Renner was appointed . With the enactment of the Constitution of Austria on 10 November 1920, the actual term was implemented as head of the executive branch of the First Austrian Republic.\nAppointment.\nThe Chancellor is appointed and sworn in by the President. In theory, the President can appoint anyone eligible to be elected to the National Council, essentially meaning any Austrian national over the age of 18. In practice, a Chancellor is unable to govern without the confidence of the National Council. For this reason, the Chancellor usually is the leader of the largest party in the National Council, or the senior partner in a coalition government. A notable exception to this occurred after the 1999 election. The Freedom Party won the most seats and went into coalition with the People's Party. While this would have normally made Freedom Party leader J\u00f6rg Haider Chancellor, he was deemed too controversial to be a member of the Cabinet, let alone Chancellor. He thus stepped aside in favour of People's Party leader Wolfgang Sch\u00fcssel.\nThere are no term limits for the Chancellor. As a matter of constitutional convention, the Chancellor usually offers their resignation to the President upon dissolution of the National Council. The President usually declines the offer of resignation and directs the Chancellor and the cabinet to operate as a caretaker government until a new National Council is in session and a new majority leader has emerged. In fact, the constitution expressly encourages the President to use a Chancellor as the interim successor.\nA Chancellor is typically appointed or dismissed together with all of the ministers, which means the whole government. Technically, the President can only appoint ministers on advice of the Chancellor, so the Chancellor is appointed first. Having been sworn in, the Chancellor presents the President with a list of ministers; they will usually have been installed just minutes later. Neither Chancellors nor ministers need to be confirmed by either house of parliament; the appointees are fully capable of discharging the functions of their respective offices immediately after having been sworn in.\nThe National Council can force the President to dismiss a Chancellor or a minister through a vote of no confidence. The President is constitutionally required to sack any minister whom the National Council wants gone. Opposition parties will sometimes table votes of no confidence against ministers, and occasionally whole cabinets, in order to demonstrate criticism; these votes had not been expected to pass. The first successful vote of no confidence in Austrian federal politics took place in May 2019 when Sebastian Kurz was ousted as Chancellor.\nRole and powers.\nThe Chancellor chairs the meetings of the cabinet. The constitution does not vest the Chancellor with the authority to issue directions to ministers; it characterizes his or her role in the cabinet as that of a \"primus inter pares\". The power of the office to set policy derives partly from its inherent prestige, partly from the fact that the President is required to dismiss ministers the Chancellor requests removed, and partly from the Chancellor's position of leadership in the party or coalition controlling the National Council.\nMost articles of the constitution that mention the office of Chancellor are tasking the incumbent with notarizing decisions by the President or by various constitutional bodies, with ensuring that these decisions are duly announced to the general public, or with acting as an intermediary between various branches of government. In particular, the Chancellor\nThe Chancellor also convenes the Federal Assembly if the National Council moves to have the President removed from office, or if the National Council moves to lift the immunity of the President from criminal prosecution. In the former case, the Federal Assembly votes on whether to allow a referendum on the matter. In the latter case, the assent of the Federal Assembly is required for the President's immunity to be rescinded.\nFinally, the Chancellor becomes Acting President if the President is incapacitated. However, if the President remains incapacitated beyond twenty days or has died, the role of Acting President is passed on to the three Presidents of the National Council.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "60583", "revid": "753665", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60583", "title": "Andr\u00e9 Campra", "text": "French composer and conductor\nAndr\u00e9 Campra (; baptized 4 December 1660 \u2013 29 June 1744) was a French composer and conductor of the Baroque era. The leading French opera composer in the period between Jean-Baptiste Lully and Jean-Philippe Rameau, Campra wrote several \"trag\u00e9dies en musique\" and \"op\u00e9ra-ballets\" that were extremely well received. He also wrote three books of cantatas as well as religious music, including a requiem.\nBiography.\nCampra was the son of Giovanni Francesco Campra, a surgeon and violinist from Graglia, Italy, and Louise Fabry, from Aix-en-Provence. His father was his first music teacher. He was baptised on 4 December 1660 in the \u00c9glise de la Madeleine in Aix. He became a choirboy in the Cath\u00e9drale Saint-Sauveur there in 1674 and commenced ecclesiastical studies four years later. He was reprimanded by his superiors in 1681 for having taken part in theatrical performances without permission, but was nevertheless made a chaplain on 27 May of that year.\nHe served as \"ma\u00eetre de musique\" (music director) at the cathedrals of Arles and Toulouse and then, from 1694 to 1700, served in a similar capacity at the cathedral of Notre-Dame de Paris. Andr\u00e9 Campra introduced violins into the performance of sacred music at the Cathedral of Paris, an innovation that proved controversial at a time when the instrument was still associated with popular street music. In 1697 he began composing for the theatre, initially publishing some works under his brother\u2019s name in order to safeguard his reputation with ecclesiastical authorities. He resigned his position at Notre-Dame in 1700 and thereafter devoted himself to theatrical composition, achieving considerable critical success. By 1705 he had attained such prominence as a composer that he became the subject of hostile commentary in the press. From 1720 onward, he restricted his activity to the composition of sacred music.\nAlthough Campra had obtained critical success he lacked financial security. In 1722 he was engaged briefly as \"ma\u00eetre de musique\" by the Prince of Conti. After the death of the regent Philippe d'Orl\u00e9ans in December 1723, Campra became \"sous-ma\u00eetre\" at the Royal Chapel in Versailles. In 1730 he became the \"Inspecteur G\u00e9n\u00e9ral\" at the Op\u00e9ra (Royal Academy of Music).\nHe died in Versailles on 29 June 1744 at the age of 83.\nMusic and style.\n\"L'Europe galante\" (1697), which Campra wrote with librettist Antoine Houdar de la Motte, is often cited as the first op\u00e9ra-ballet, as it was the first work of French opera to feature characters from the contemporary world rather than from mythology, as well as the first to employ comic intrigue as a part of the dramatic structure. \"L'Europe galante\" followed the structure of Pascale Colasse's \"Ballet des Saisons\", which introduced the op\u00e9ra-ballet structure by which each act contains an independent action but featured mythological (rather than contemporary) characters.\nPrincipal works.\nStage works\nCantatas\nSacred works\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "60584", "revid": "38962780", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60584", "title": "Christian Democratic Union of Germany", "text": "Centre-right political party in Germany\nThe Christian Democratic Union of Germany ( , CDU ) is a Christian democratic and conservative political party in Germany. It is the major party of the centre-right in German politics. Friedrich Merz has been federal chairman of the CDU since 31 January 2022, and has served as the Chancellor of Germany since 6 May 2025.\nThe CDU is the largest party in the Bundestag, the German federal legislature, with 208 out of 630 seats, having won 28.5% of votes in the 2025 federal election. It forms the CDU/CSU Bundestag faction, also known as the Union, with its Bavarian counterpart, the Christian Social Union in Bavaria (CSU). The group's parliamentary leader has been Jens Spahn since 5 May 2025.\nFounded in 1945 as an interdenominational Christian party, the CDU effectively succeeded the pre-Nazi era Catholic Centre Party, with many former members joining the party, including its first leader Konrad Adenauer. The party also included politicians of other backgrounds, including liberals and conservatives. As a result, the party claims to represent \"Christian-social, liberal and conservative\" elements. The CDU is generally pro-European in outlook. Black is the party's customary and historical electoral colour. Other colours include red for the logo, orange for the flag, and black-red-gold for the corporate design.\nThe CDU leads the federal government in a grand coalition with the Social Democratic Party of Germany (SPD), after returning as the largest party in the 2025 federal election. It previously led the federal government from 1949 to 1969, 1982 to 1998, and 2005 to 2021. Germany's three longest-serving post-war Chancellors have all come from the CDU, specifically: Helmut Kohl (1982\u20131998), Angela Merkel (2005\u20132021), and Konrad Adenauer (1949\u20131963). The party also currently leads the governments of seven of Germany's sixteen states. \nThe CDU is a member of the Centrist Democrat International, the International Democracy Union, and the European People's Party (EPP). It is the largest party in the EPP with 23 MEPs. Ursula von der Leyen, the current President of the European Commission, is also a member of the CDU.\nHistory.\nFounding period.\nImmediately following the end of World War II and the foreign occupation of Germany, simultaneous yet unrelated meetings began occurring throughout the country, each with the intention of planning a Christian-democratic party. Consequently, the CDU was established in Berlin on 26 June 1945 and in Rheinland and Westfalen in September of the same year.\nThe founding members of the CDU consisted primarily of former members of the Centre Party, the German Democratic Party, the German National People's Party, and the German People's Party. In the Cold War, years after World War II up to the 1960s (see \"Vergangenheitsbew\u00e4ltigung\"), the CDU attracted conservative, anti-communist, former Nazis as well as Nazi collaborators into its higher ranks (like Hans Globke and Theodor Oberl\u00e4nder but also future CDU chairman and West German chancellor Kurt Georg Kiesinger). A prominent member was theologian Eugen Gerstenmaier, who became Acting Chairman of the Foreign Board (1949\u20131969).\nThe result of these meetings was the establishment of an inter-confessional (Catholic and Protestant alike) party influenced heavily by the political tradition of liberal conservatism. The CDU experienced considerable success gaining widespread support from the time of its creation in Berlin on 26 June 1945 until its first convention on 21 October 1950, at which future West German Chancellor Konrad Adenauer was named the first Chairman of the party.\nAdenauer era (1949\u20131963).\nIn the beginning, it was not clear which party would be favored by the victors of World War II, but by the end of the 1940s the governments of the United States and of the United Kingdom began to lean more toward the CDU and significantly away from the Social Democratic Party of Germany (SPD), especially due to geopolitical reasons. The latter was more nationalist and sought German reunification even at the expense of concessions to the Soviet Union (USSR), depicting Adenauer as an instrument of both the Americans and the Vatican. The Western powers appreciated the CDU's right-ward slant, its commitment to capitalism, and its value as a pivotal oppositional force to the communists, thereby keeping consistent with US/UK foreign policy. In addition, Adenauer was also trusted by the British.\nHowever, the party was split over issues of rearmament within the Western alliance and German unification as a neutral state. Adenauer staunchly defended his pro-Western position and outmaneuvered some of his opponents. He also refused to consider the SPD as a party of the coalition until he felt sure that they shared his anti-communist position. The principled rejection of a reunification that would alienate Germany from the Western alliance made it harder to attract Protestant voters to the party, as most refugees from the former German territories east of the Oder river were of that faith, as were the majority of the inhabitants of East Germany.\nTherefore, the CDU was the dominant political party for the first two decades following the establishment of West Germany in 1949. The durable alliance that the party had established with the liberal Free Democratic Party (FDP) as the leading tandem of several federal governments, and, implicitly, the strong partnership between Chancellor Adenauer and President Theodor Heuss enabled West Germany to thoroughly rebuild itself in the wake of World War II. Adenauer remained the party's leader until 1963, when former Minister of Economics Ludwig Erhard replaced him. As the Free Democratic Party (FDP) withdrew from the governing coalition in 1966 due to disagreements over fiscal and economic policy, Erhard was forced to resign. Consequently, a grand coalition with the SPD took over government under CDU Chancellor Kurt Georg Kiesinger.\nOpposition against social-liberal governments (1969\u20131982).\nThe SPD quickly gained popularity and succeeded in forming a social-liberal coalition with the FDP following the 1969 federal election, forcing the CDU out of power for the first time in its history. The CDU and CSU were highly critical of Chancellor Willy Brandt's \"change through rapprochement\" policy towards the Eastern bloc \"(Ostpolitik)\" and protested sharply against the 1970 treaties of Moscow and Warsaw that renounced claims to the former eastern territories of Germany and recognised the Oder\u2013Neisse line as Germany's eastern border. The Union parties had close ties with the \"Heimatvertriebene\" associations (Germans who fled or were expelled from the eastern territories) who hoped for a return of or in these territories. Seven Bundestag members, including former vice chancellor Erich Mende, defected from the FDP and SPD to the CDU in protest against these treaties, depriving Brandt of his majority, and providing a thin majority for the CDU and CSU. In April 1972, the CDU saw its chance to return to power, calling a constructive vote of no confidence. CDU chairman Rainer Barzel was almost certain to become the new Chancellor. But not all parliamentarians voted as expected (it was later revealed that two CDU/CSU deputies had been bribed by the East German Stasi): Brandt won the vote and stayed in office. Thus, the CDU continued its role as opposition for a total of thirteen years. In 1982, the FDP withdrew from the coalition with the SPD and allowed the CDU to regain power.\nKohl era (1982\u20131998).\nCDU Chairman Helmut Kohl became the new Chancellor of West Germany and his CDU/CSU\u2013FDP coalition was confirmed in the 1983 federal election.\nAfter the collapse of the East German government in 1989, Kohl\u2014supported by the governments of the United States and reluctantly by those of France and the United Kingdom\u2014called for German reunification. On 3 October 1990, the government of East Germany was abolished and its territory acceded to the territory of the Basic Law already in place in West Germany. The East German CDU merged with its West German counterpart and elections were held for the reunified country. Public support for the coalition's work in the process of German reunification was reiterated in the 1990 federal election in which the CDU\u2013FDP governing coalition experienced a clear victory. Although Kohl was re-elected, the party began losing much of its popularity because of an economic recession in the former GDR and increased taxes in the west. The CDU was nonetheless able to win the 1994 federal election by a narrow margin thanks to an economic recovery.\nKohl served as chairman until the party's electoral defeat in 1998, when he was succeeded by Wolfgang Sch\u00e4uble. In the 1998 federal election, the CDU polled 28.4% and the CSU 6.7% of the national vote, the lowest result for those parties since 1949; a red\u2013green coalition under the leadership of Gerhard Schr\u00f6der took power until 2005.\nMerkel era (2000\u20132018).\nSch\u00e4uble resigned in early 2000 as a result of a party financing scandal and was replaced by Angela Merkel, the first woman and the first person from East Germany to lead the federal party. She remained the leader of the CDU for more than eighteen years. In the 2002 federal election, Merkel ceded the position of CDU/CSU's joint candidate for the chancellor's office to the leader of the sister party, Bavarian minister-president Edmund Stoiber. CDU and CSU polled slightly higher (29.5% and 9.0%, respectively), but still lacked the majority needed for a CDU\u2013FDP coalition government and stayed in opposition.\nIn 2005, early elections were called after the CDU dealt the governing SPD a major blow, winning more than ten state elections, most of which were landslide victories. The resulting grand coalition between the CDU/CSU and the SPD faced a serious challenge stemming from both parties' demand for the chancellorship. After three weeks of negotiations, the two parties reached a deal whereby CDU received the chancellorship while the SPD retained 8 of the 16 seats in the cabinet and a majority of the most prestigious cabinet posts. The coalition deal was approved by both parties at party conferences on 14 November. Merkel was confirmed as the first female Chancellor of Germany by the majority of delegates (397 to 217) in the newly assembled Bundestag on 22 November. Since her first term in office, from 2005 to 2009, there have been discussions if the CDU was still \"sufficiently conservative\" or if it was \"social-democratising\". In March 2009, Merkel answered with the statement \"Sometimes I am liberal, sometimes I am conservative, sometimes I am Christian-social\u2014and this is what defines the CDU.\"\nAlthough the CDU/CSU lost support in the 2009 federal elections, their \"desired partner\" the FDP experienced the best election cycle in its history, thereby enabling a CDU/CSU\u2013FDP coalition. This marked the first change of coalition partner by a Chancellor in German history and the first centre-right coalition government since 1998. CDU candidate Christian Wulff won the 2010 presidential election in the third ballot, while opposition candidate Joachim Gauck (a Protestant pastor and former anti-communist activist in East Germany, who was favoured even by some CDU members) received a number of \"faithless\" votes from the government camp.\nThe decisions to suspend conscription (late 2010) and to phase out nuclear energy (shortly after the Fukushima disaster in 2011) broke with long-term principles of the CDU, moving the party into a more socially liberal direction and alienating some of its more conservative members and voters. At its November 2011 conference the party proposed a \"wage floor\", after having expressly rejected minimum wages during the previous years. Psephologist and Merkel advisor Matthias Jung coined the term \"asymmetric demobilisation\" for the CDU's strategy (practised in the 2009, 2013 and 2017 campaigns) of adopting issues and positions close to its rivals, e.g. regarding social justice (SPD) and ecology (Greens), thus avoiding conflicts that might mobilise their potential supporters. Some of the promises in the CDU's 2013 election platform were seen as \"overtaking the SPD on the left\". While this strategy proved to be quite successful in elections, it also raised warnings that the CDU's profile would become \"random\", the party would lose its \"essence\" and it might even be dangerous for democracy in general if parties became indistinguishable and voters demotivated.\nPresident Wulff resigned in February 2012 due to allegations of corruption, triggering an early presidential election. This time the CDU supported, reluctantly, nonpartisan candidate Joachim Gauck. The CDU/CSU\u2013FDP coalition lasted until the 2013 federal election, when the FDP lost all its seats in the Bundestag while the CDU and CSU won their best result since 1990, only a few seats short of an absolute majority. This was partly due to the CDU's expansion of voter base to all socio-structural groups (class, age or gender), partly due to the personal popularity of Chancellor Merkel. After talks with the Greens had failed, the CDU/CSU formed a new grand coalition with the SPD.\nDespite their long-cherished slogan of \"There must be no democratically legitimised party to the right of CDU/CSU\", the Union has had a serious competitor to its right since 2013. The right-wing populist Alternative for Germany (AfD) was founded with the involvement of disgruntled CDU members. It drew on the discontent of some conservatives with the Merkel administration's handling of the European debt crisis (2009\u201314) and later the 2015 refugee crisis, lamenting a purported loss of sovereignty and control or even \"state failure\". Nearly 10 percent of early AfD members were defectors from the CDU.\nIn 2017, the Bundestag voted to legalise same-sex marriage. Merkel had allowed the conscience vote to happen despite her personal objections. While she herself and the majority of the party's representatives voted against the proposal, a number of CDU deputies supported it. In the 2017 election, the CDU and CSU lost a large portion of their voteshare: With 26.8 percent of party list votes, the CDU received its worst result since 1949, losing more than fifty seats in the Bundestag (despite an enlargement of the parliament). After failing to negotiate a coalition with the FDP and Greens, they continued their grand coalition with the SPD. In October 2018, Merkel announced that she would step down as leader of the CDU that December and not seek reelection, but wanted to remain as Chancellor until 2021.\nPost-Merkel and Merz era (2018\u2013present).\nOn 7 December 2018, Annegret Kramp-Karrenbauer was elected as federal chairwoman of the CDU. Kramp-Karrenbauer was considered Merkel's ideological successor, though holding more socially conservative positions, such as opposition to same-sex marriage. Kramp-Karrenbauer's election saw a rise in support for the CDU in national polling, and her personal popularity was initially high. However, she suffered a sharp decline in popularity in the lead-up to the 2019 European Parliament election, in which the CDU/CSU suffered its worst ever result in a national election with just 29%. Kramp-Karrenbauer thereafter remained one of the least popular politicians nationally.\nThe CSU's Manfred Weber was the \"Spitzenkandidat\" for the European People's Party in the 2019 European Parliament election. However, the EPP group ultimately nominated the CDU's Ursula von der Leyen as their candidate for President of the European Commission; she was elected in July 2019, becoming the first woman to hold the office.\nKramp-Karrenbauer resigned as party chair on 10 February 2020, in the midst of the 2020 Thuringian government crisis. The Thuringian CDU had been perceived as cooperating with the Alternative for Germany (AfD) to prevent the election of a left-wing government, breaching the long-standing taboo in Germany surrounding cooperation with the far-right. Kramp-Karrenbauer was perceived as unable to enforce discipline within the party during the crisis, which she claimed was complicated by unclear positions within the party regarding cooperation with the AfD and The Left, which party statute holds to be equally unacceptable. While the Thuringia crisis was the immediate trigger for Kramp-Karrenbauer's resignation, she stated the decision had \"matured some time ago\", and media attributed it to the troubled development of her brief leadership.\nKramp-Karrenbauer remained in office as Minister of Defence and interim party leader from February until the leadership election was held in January 2021. Originally scheduled for April 2020, it was delayed multiple times due to the COVID-19 pandemic, and was ultimately held online. Minister-President of North Rhine-Westphalia Armin Laschet won the election with 52.8% of delegate votes. His main opponent Friedrich Merz, was seen as more right-wing, who won 47.2% of vote; Merz had also run against Kramp-Karrenbauer in 2018 and been defeated. Laschet's election was seen as an affirmation of Merkel's leadership and the CDU's centrist orientation.\nOn 7 October 2021, Armin Laschet, signaled that he would step down after a disastrous general election result, with the CDU suffering its worst ever general election result. A new leadership election was called in December and Friedrich Merz, of the right-wing faction of the CDU, was elected by a large majority of 62.1% of voters, defeating pro-Merkel candidates Norbert R\u00f6ttgen and Helge Braun. The Congress of the CDU officially elected Merz as new party Chairman on 22 January 2022, and he assumed office on 31 January 2022.\nIn the 2024 European parliament election, the CDU remained the largest party in Germany, winning 30.0% of the vote in a combined list with the CSU, led by CSU MEP Manfred Weber. The combined list held on to all 29 seats, with the CDU maintaining 23 seats while the CSU had the remaining 6 seats. In October 2024, CDU again became proponents of nuclear energy, advocating reactivation of closed reactors and construction of new plants.\nThe CDU contested the 2025 German federal election with Friedrich Merz as their chancellor candidate. Their manifesto signalled a shift to the right on immigration as well as increased support for Ukraine. The CDU eventually won the election, gaining 12 seats. Following the election results, the CDU began negotiations with the SPD to form another grand coalition. In May 2025, Friedrich Merz, leader of the CDU, formed a coalition government between the CDU/CSU and the SPD (grand coalition). Co-leader of the SPD, Lars Klingbeil, became vice chancellor and finance minister of the new government.\nIdeology and platform.\nIn her 2005 campaign, Angela Merkel was unwilling to express explicitly Christian views while maintaining that her party had never lost its concept of values. Merkel and Bundestag President Norbert Lammert have been keen to clarify that CDU references to the \"dominant culture\" imply \"tolerance and living together\". According to party analyst Stephan Eisel, her avoiding the values issue may have had the opposite effect as she failed to mobilize the party's core constituency.\nThe CDU applies the principles of Christian democracy and emphasizes the \"Christian understanding of humans and their responsibility toward God\". However, CDU membership consists of people adhering to a variety of religions as well as non-religious individuals. The CDU's policies derive from political Catholicism, Catholic social teaching and political Protestantism as well as economic liberalism and national conservatism. The party has adopted more liberal economic policies since Helmut Kohl's term in office as the Chancellor of Germany (1982\u20131998).\nAs a conservative party, the CDU supports stronger punishments of crimes and involvement on the part of the Bundeswehr in cases of domestic anti-terrorism offensives. In terms of immigrants, the CDU supports initiatives to integrate immigrants through language courses and aims to further control immigration. It holds that dual citizenship should only be allowed in exceptional cases.\nIn terms of foreign policy, the CDU commits itself to European integration and a strong relation with the United States. In the European Union, the party opposes the entry of Turkey, preferring instead a privileged partnership. In addition to citing various human rights violations, the CDU also believes that Turkey's unwillingness to recognise Cyprus as an independent sovereign state contradicts the European Union policy that its members must recognise the existence of one another. \nThe party supports a business-friendly adaptation of the European Green Deal, and would like to continue to allow vehicles with combustion engines, research synthetic fuels and promote research into nuclear fusion. The party calls for EU member states to limit their annual borrowing to three percent of their gross domestic product. \nThe CDU has governed in four federal-level and numerous state-level Grand Coalitions with the Social Democratic Party (SPD) as well as in state and local-level coalitions with the Alliance 90/The Greens.\nCordon sanitaire.\nThe CDU has an official party congress adjudication that prohibits coalitions and any sort of cooperation with either The Left or the Alternative for Germany.\nCDU officially prohibits any cooperation with the AfD, but does not clearly define what that means. In the eastern federal states, however, there is ongoing tolerance for, or cooperation of CDU with, the right-wing radical AfD at the local and district level. \nCDU leader Friedrich Merz took blowback for his political approaches to the AfD after he called his party in 2023 an \"alternative... with substance\". Political observers from abroad say that the CDU's boundaries with the far-right are eroding.\nOrganisation.\nStructure.\nParty congress.\nThe party congress is the highest organ of the CDU. It meets at least every two years, determines the basic lines of CDU policy, approves the party program and decides on the statutes of the CDU.\nThe CDU party congress consists of the delegates of the CDU regional associations, the foreign associations and the honorary chairmen. The state associations send exactly 1,000 delegates who have to be elected by the state or district conventions. The number of delegates that a regional association can send depends on the number of members of the association six months before the party congress and the result of the last federal election in the respective federal state. The foreign associations recognized by the federal executive committee each send a delegate to the party congress, regardless of their number of members.\nFederal committee.\nThe federal committee is the second highest body and deals with all political and organizational matters that are not expressly reserved for the federal party congress. For this reason it is often called a \"small party congress\".\nFederal executive board and presidium.\nThe CDU federal executive heads the federal party. It implements the resolutions of the federal party congress and the federal committee and convenes the federal party congress. The CDU Presidium is responsible for executing the resolutions of the federal executive committee and handling current and urgent business. It consists of the leading members of the federal executive board and is not an organ of the CDU in Germany.\nMembership.\nBefore 1966, membership totals in the CDU organisation were only estimated. The numbers after 1966 are based on the total from 31 December of the previous year. In 2023, the CDU had 363.101 members.\nSpecial organizations.\nNotable suborganisations of the CDU are the following:\nKonrad Adenauer Foundation.\nThe Konrad Adenauer Foundation is the think-tank of the CDU. It is named after the first Chancellor of the Federal Republic of Germany and first president of the CDU. The foundation offers political education, conducts scientific fact-finding research for political projects, grants scholarships to gifted individuals, researches the history of Christian democracy and supports and encourages European unification, international understanding and development-policy cooperation. Its annual budget amounts to around 120 million euro and is mostly funded by taxpayer money.\nRelationship with the CSU.\nBoth the CDU and the Christian Social Union in Bavaria (CSU) originated after World War II, sharing a concern for the Christian worldview. In the Bundestag, the CDU is represented in a common faction with the CSU. This faction is called CDU/CSU, or informally the Union. Its basis is a binding agreement known as a \"Fraktionsvertrag\" between the two parties.\nThe CDU and CSU share a common youth organisation, the Junge Union, a common pupil organisation, the Sch\u00fcler Union Deutschlands, a common student organisation, the Ring Christlich-Demokratischer Studenten and a common \"Mittelstand\" organisation, the Mittelstands- und Wirtschaftsvereinigung.\nThe CDU and CSU are legally and organisationally separate parties; their ideological differences are sometimes a source of conflict. The most notable and serious such incident was in 1976, when the CSU under Franz Josef Strau\u00df ended the alliance with the CDU at a party conference in Wildbad Kreuth. This decision was reversed shortly thereafter when the CDU threatened to run candidates against the CSU in Bavaria.\nThe relationship of CDU to the CSU has historic parallels to previous Christian-democratic parties in Germany, with the Catholic Centre Party having served as a national Catholic party throughout the German Empire and the Weimar Republic while the Bavarian People's Party functioning as the Bavarian variant.\nSince its formation, the CSU has been more conservative than the CDU. The CSU and the state of Bavaria decided not to sign the Basic Law for the Federal Republic of Germany as they insisted on more autonomy for the individual states. The CSU has actively participated in all political affairs of the Bundestag, the German government, the Bundesrat, the parliamentary elections of the German President, the European Parliament and meetings with Mikhail Gorbachev in Russia.\nElection results.\nState parliaments (\"L\u00e4nder\").\nThe CDU does not contest elections in Bavaria due to the alliance with Bavarian sister party, the Christian Social Union in Bavaria.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "60585", "revid": "49152960", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60585", "title": "Social Democratic Party of Germany", "text": "Political party in Germany\nThe Social Democratic Party of Germany ( , SPD ) is a social democratic political party in Germany. It is one of the major parties of contemporary Germany. Lars Klingbeil has been the party's leader since the 2021 SPD federal Party convention together with B\u00e4rbel Bas, who joined him in June 2025. After losing the 2025 federal election, the party is part of the Merz government as the junior coalition partner. The SPD is a member of 12 of the 16 German state governments and is a leading partner in seven of them.\nThe SPD was founded in 1875 from a merger of smaller socialist parties, and grew rapidly after the lifting of Germany's repressive Anti-Socialist Laws in 1890 to become the largest socialist party in Western Europe until 1933. In 1891, it adopted its Marxist-influenced Erfurt Program, though in practice it was moderate and focused on building working-class organizations. In the 1912 federal election, the SPD won 34.8 percent of votes and became the largest party in the Reichstag, but was still excluded from government. After the start of the First World War in 1914, the party split between a pro-war mainstream and the anti-war Independent Social Democratic Party, some members of which later formed the Communist Party of Germany (KPD). The SPD played a leading role in the German revolution of 1918\u20131919 and in the foundation of the Weimar Republic. The SPD politician Friedrich Ebert served as the first president of Germany from 1919 to 1925.\nAfter the rise of the Nazi Party to power, the SPD was the only party in the Reichstag which voted against the Enabling Act of 1933; the SPD was subsequently banned, and operated in exile as the Sopade. After the Second World War from 1939 to 1945, the SPD was re-established. In the Soviet occupation zone, it was forced to merge with the KPD to form the Socialist Unity Party of Germany. In West Germany, the SPD became one of two major parties alongside the CDU/CSU. In its Godesberg Program of 1959, the SPD dropped its commitment to Marxism, becoming a big tent party of the centre-left. The SPD led the federal government from 1969 to 1982 (under Willy Brandt and Helmut Schmidt), 1998 to 2005 (under Gerhard Schr\u00f6der) and again from 2021 to 2025 under Olaf Scholz. It served as a junior partner to a CDU/CSU-led government from 1966 to 1969, 2005 to 2009, 2013 to 2021 and again since 2025. \nThe SPD holds pro-European stances and is a member of the Party of European Socialists and sits with the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats group in the European Parliament. With 14 MEPs, it is the third largest party in the group. The SPD was a founding member of the Socialist International, but the party left in 2013 after criticising its acceptance of parties they consider to be violating human rights. The SPD subsequently founded the Progressive Alliance and was joined by numerous other parties around the world. Previously, the SPD was a founding member of both the Second International and the Labour and Socialist International.\nHistory.\nThe Social Democratic Party has its origins in the General German Workers' Association, founded in 1863, and the Social Democratic Workers' Party, founded in 1869. The two groups merged in 1875 to create the Socialist Workers' Party of Germany (). From 1878 to 1890, the Anti-Socialist Laws banned any group that aimed at spreading socialist principles, but the party still gained support in elections. In 1890, when the ban was lifted, the party adopted its current name. The SPD was the largest Marxist party in Europe and consistently the most popular party in German federal elections from 1890 onward, although it was surpassed by other parties in terms of seats won in the Reichstag due to the electoral system.\nIn the years leading up to World War I, the SPD remained radical in principle, but moderate in reality. According to Roger Eatwell and Anthony Wright, the SPD became a party of reform, with social democracy representing \"a party that strives after the socialist transformation of society by the means of democratic and economic reforms\". They emphasise this development as central to understanding 20th-century social democracy, of which the SPD was a major influence. In the 1912 federal election, the SPD won 34.8 per cent of votes and became the largest party in the Reichstag with 110 seats, although it was still excluded from government. Despite the Second International's agreement to oppose militarism, the SPD supported the German war effort and adopted a policy, known as , of refraining from calling strikes or criticising the government. Internal opposition to the policy grew throughout the war. Anti-war members were expelled in 1916 and 1917, leading to the formation of the Independent Social Democratic Party of Germany (USPD).\nThe SPD played a key role in the German Revolution of 1918\u20131919. On 9 November 1918, leading SPD member Friedrich Ebert was designated chancellor and fellow Social Democrat Philipp Scheidemann, on his own authority, proclaimed Germany a republic. The SPD government introduced a large number of reforms in the following months, introducing various civil liberties and labor rights. However, they used military force against communist and socialist revolutionary groups, leading to a permanent split between the SPD and the USPD, as well as the Spartacist League which would go on to form the Communist Party of Germany (KPD) and integrate a majority of USPD members as well. The SPD was the largest party during the first 13 years of the new Weimar Republic. It decisively won the 1919 federal election with 37.9 per cent of votes, and Ebert became the first president in February. The position of chancellor was held by Social Democrats until the 1920 federal election, when the SPD lost a substantial portion of its support, falling to 22 per cent of votes. After this, the SPD yielded the chancellery to other parties, although it remained part of the government until 1924. Ebert died in 1925 and was succeeded by conservative Paul von Hindenburg. After making gains in the 1928 federal election, the SPD's Hermann M\u00fcller became chancellor.\nAs Germany was struck hard by the Great Depression, and unable to negotiate an effective response to the crisis, M\u00fcller resigned in 1930. The SPD was sidelined as the Nazi Party gained popularity and conservatives dominated the government, assisted by Hindenburg's frequent use of emergency powers. The , the SPD's paramilitary wing, was frequently involved in violent confrontations with the Nazi \"Sturmabteilung\". The Nazis overtook the SPD as the largest party in July 1932 and Adolf Hitler was appointed chancellor in January 1933. Of the parties present in the Reichstag during the passage of the Enabling Act of 1933, the SPD was the only one to vote against; most of the communist deputies had been arrested ahead of the vote. The SPD was banned in June. Many members were subsequently imprisoned and killed by the Nazi government while others fled the country. The party-in-exile was called Sopade.\nAfter the end of World War II, the re-establishment of the SPD was permitted in the Western occupation zones in 1945. In the Soviet occupation zone, the SPD was forcibly merged with the KPD in 1946 to form the Socialist Unity Party of Germany (SED). The SED was the ruling party of East Germany until 1989. In West Germany, the SPD became one of two major parties, alongside the Christian Democratic Union (CDU). In the inaugural 1949 federal election, it placed second with 29.2 per cent of votes and led the opposition to the CDU government. In its 1959 Godesberg Program, the party dropped its commitment to Marxism and sought to appeal to middle class voters, becoming a big tent party of the centre-left.\nAlthough strongly leftist, the SPD was willing to compromise. Only through its support did the governing CDU/CSU pass a denazification law that its coalition partner the Free Democratic Party (FDP) and the far-right German Party voted against. At the same time, the SPD opposed the pro-West integration of West Germany because they believed that made a re-unification of Germany impossible. Austria could have become a sovereign neutral state in 1956, but a 1952 Soviet suggestion for Germans to form a neutral state was ignored by the CDU/CSU\u2013FDP government. After 17 years in opposition, the SPD became the junior partner in a grand coalition with the CDU/CSU which lasted from 1966 to 1969. After the 1969 federal election, the SPD's Willy Brandt became chancellor in a coalition with the liberal Free Democratic Party. His government sought to normalise relations with East Germany and the Eastern Bloc, a policy known as \"Ostpolitik\". The party achieved its best ever result of 45.8 per cent in 1972, one of only three occasions in which it formed the largest Bundestag faction. After Brandt's resignation in 1974, his successor Helmut Schmidt served as chancellor until 1982, when the SPD returned to opposition.\nDuring the Peaceful Revolution in East Germany, the East German SPD was refounded. It merged with the West German party in 1990, shortly before German reunification. The SPD returned to government under Gerhard Schr\u00f6der after the 1998 federal election in a coalition with The Greens. This government was re-elected in 2002 but defeated in 2005. The SPD then became junior partner of a grand coalition with the CDU/CSU until 2009. After a term in opposition, they again served as junior partner to the CDU/CSU after the 2013 federal election. This arrangement was renewed after the 2017 federal election. SPD narrowly won against the CDU/CSU in the September 2021 federal election, becoming the biggest party in the federal parliament (Bundestag). Social Democrat Olaf Scholz became the new chancellor in December 2021, and formed a coalition government with the Green Party and the Free Democrats. In the 2024 European Parliament election, the party fell to third behind the far right AfD and the CDU/CSU. In December 2024, the traffic light coalition ended with the FDP leaving and Scholz losing a vote of confidence. The SPD entered the 2025 German federal election behind in the polls, and achieved its worst result in post-war history, with just 120 seats. The party placed third behind Alternative for Germany (AfD), with CDU leader Friedrich Merz projected to become Germany's next chancellor. In May 2025, Friedrich Merz, leader of the CDU, formed a coalition government between the CDU/CSU and the SPD (grand coalition). Co-leader of the SPD, Lars Klingbeil, became vice chancellor and finance minister of the new government.\nIdeology and platform.\nThe SPD was established as a Marxist party in 1875. It underwent a major shift in policies, reflected in the differences between the Heidelberg Program of 1925 which called for \"the transformation of the capitalist system of private ownership of the means of production to social ownership\" and the Godesberg Program of 1959 which aimed to broaden the party's voter base and to move its political position toward the political centre. After World War II, the SPD was re-formed in West Germany after being banned by the Nazi regime; in East Germany, it merged with the Communist Party of Germany to form the ruling Socialist Unity Party of Germany. Under the chairmanship of Kurt Schumacher, the SPD was a socialist party representing the interests of the working class and of trade unions. With the 1959 Godesberg Program, the party evolved from a socialist working-class party to a modern social democratic party. The SPD's Hamburg Programme, adopted in 2007, describes democratic socialism as \"the vision of a free and fair society in solidarity\", which requires \"a structure in economy, state and society guaranteeing civil, political, social and economic basic rights for all people living a life without exploitation, suppression and violence, hence in social and human security\", the realization of which is emphasized as a \"permanent task\". Social democracy serves as the \"principle of our actions\".\nThe party platform of the SPD espouses the goal of democratic socialism, which it envisions as a societal arrangement in which freedom and social justice are paramount. According to the party platform, political freedom, justice and social solidarity form the basis of social democracy.\nInternal factions.\nThe SPD is mostly composed of members belonging to either of the two main wings, namely the Keynesian social democrats and Third Way moderate social democrats belonging to the Seeheimer Kreis. While the more moderate Seeheimer Kreis generally support the Agenda 2010 programs introduced by Chancellor Gerhard Schr\u00f6der, the classical social democrats continue to defend classical left-wing policies and the welfare state. The Keynesian left-wing of the SPD claims that in recent years the welfare state has been curtailed through reform programs such as the Agenda 2010, Hartz IV, and the more economic liberal stance of the SPD which were endorsed by centrist social democrats. In reaction to Agenda 2010, an inner-party dissident movement developed, leading to the foundation of the new party Labour and Social Justice \u2013 The Electoral Alternative (\"Arbeit &amp; soziale Gerechtigkeit \u2013 Die Wahlalternative\", WASG) in 2005, which later merged into The Left (\"Die Linke\") in 2007. The Parlamentarische Linke comprises left-wing SPD Members of the German Bundestag.\nInternational relations.\nThe SPD sits with the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats group in the European Parliament. Previously, the SPD was a founding member of both the Second International and the Labour and Socialist International. The SPD was a founding member of the Socialist International, but the party left in 2013 after criticising its acceptance of parties they consider to be violating human rights. The SPD subsequently founded the Progressive Alliance and was joined by numerous other parties around the world. In 1984, the SPD initiated party dialogues with the Chinese Communist Party (CCP), becoming the first international party relationship CCP established outside of other communist parties.\nElectorate.\nSocial structure.\nPrior to World War II, as the main non-revolutionary left-wing party, the Social Democrats fared best among non-Catholic workers as well as intellectuals favouring social progressive causes and increased economic equality. Led by Kurt Schumacher after World War II, the SPD initially opposed both the social market economy and Konrad Adenauer's drive towards Western integration fiercely; after Schumacher's death, however, it accepted the social market economy and Germany's position in the Western alliance in order to appeal to a broader range of voters. It still remains associated with the economic causes of unionised employees and working class voters. In the 1990s, the left and moderate wings of the party drifted apart. This culminated in a secession of a significant number of party members which later joined the socialist party WASG; the party later merged into The Left (\"Die Linke\").\nGeographic distribution.\nMuch of the SPD's current-day support comes from large cities, especially northern and western Germany and Berlin. As of 2019, 10 of the country's 15 biggest cities are led by SPD mayors. The metropolitan Ruhr Area, where coal mining and steel production were once the main industries, have provided a significant base for the SPD in the 20th century. In the city of Bremen, the SPD has continuously governed since 1949.\nIn southern Germany, the SPD typically garners less support except in the largest cities. At the 2009 federal election, the party lost its only constituency in the entire state of Bavaria (in Munich).\nSmall town and rural support comes especially from the traditionally Protestant areas of northern Germany and Brandenburg (with previous exceptions such as Western Pomerania where CDU leader Angela Merkel held her constituency, which the SPD gained in 2021) and a number of university towns. A striking example of the general pattern is the traditionally Catholic Emsland, where the Social Democrats generally gain a low percentage of votes, whereas the Reformed Protestant region of East Frisia directly to the north, with its strong traditional streak of anti-Catholicism, is one of their strongest constituencies.\nFurther south, the SPD also enjoys solid support in northern Hesse, parts of Palatinate and the Saarland. The social democrats are weakest in the south-eastern states of Bavaria, Saxony and Thuringia, where the party's percentage of votes dropped to single-digit figures in the 2018 and 2019 elections. In 2021, it significantly increased its vote share in the states of the former east.\nPost-war leadership.\nThe federal leader is supported by six Deputy Leaders and the party executive. As of 2025, the leaders are B\u00e4rbel Bas and Lars Klingbeil. As Germany is a federal republic, each of Germany's states have their own SPD party at the state level.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nElection results.\nThe SPD, at times called SAPD, took part in general elections determining the composition of parliament. For elections up until 1933, the parliament was called the Reichstag, except for the one of 1919 which was called the National Assembly and since 1949 the parliament is called Bundestag. Note that changes in borders (1871, 1919, 1920, 1949, 1957 and 1990) varied the number of eligible voters whereas electoral laws also changed the ballot system (only constituencies until 1912, only party lists until 1949 and a mixed system thereafter), the suffrage (women vote since 1919; minimum active voting age was 25 till 1918, 20 till 1946, 21 till 1972 and 18 since), the number of seats (fixed or flexible) and the length of the legislative period (three or four years). The list begins after the SPD was formed in 1875, when labour parties unified to form the SPD (then SAPD, current name since 1890).\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "60587", "revid": "28458788", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60587", "title": "Johann Pachelbel", "text": "German composer and organist (1653\u20131706)\nJohann Pachelbel (also Bachelbel; baptised 11 September\u00a0[O.S. 1 September]\u00a01653 \u2013 buried 9 March 1706) was a German composer, organist, and teacher who brought the south German organ schools to their peak. He composed a large body of sacred and secular music, and his contributions to the development of the chorale prelude and fugue have earned him a place among the most important composers of the middle Baroque era.\nPachelbel's music enjoyed enormous popularity during his lifetime; he had many pupils and his music became a model for the composers of south and central Germany. Today, Pachelbel is best known for the Canon in D; other well known works include the Chaconne in F minor, the Toccata in E minor for organ, and the \"Hexachordum Apollinis\", a set of keyboard variations.\nHe was influenced by southern German composers, such as Johann Jakob Froberger and Johann Caspar Kerll, Italians such as Girolamo Frescobaldi and Alessandro Poglietti, French composers, and the composers of the Nuremberg tradition. He preferred a lucid, uncomplicated contrapuntal style that emphasized melodic and harmonic clarity. His music is less virtuosic and less adventurous harmonically than that of Dieterich Buxtehude, although, like Buxtehude, Pachelbel experimented with different ensembles and instrumental combinations in his chamber music and, most importantly, his vocal music, much of which features exceptionally rich instrumentation. Pachelbel explored many variation forms and associated techniques, which manifest themselves in various diverse pieces, from sacred concertos to harpsichord suites.\nLife.\n1653\u20131674: Early youth and education (Nuremberg, Altdorf, Regensburg).\nJohann Pachelbel was born in 1653 in Nuremberg into a middle-class family, son of Johann (Hans) Pachelbel (born 1613 in Wunsiedel, Germany), a wine dealer, and his second wife Anna (Anne) Maria Mair. The exact date of Johann's birth is unknown, but he was baptized on 1 September. Among his many siblings was an older brother, Johann Matth\u00e4us (1644\u20131710), who served as Kantor in Feuchtwangen, near Nuremberg.\nDuring his early youth, Pachelbel received musical training from Heinrich Schwemmer, who later became the cantor of St. Sebaldus Church (\"Sebalduskirche\"). Some sources indicate that Pachelbel also studied with Georg Caspar Wecker, organist of the same church and an important composer of the Nuremberg school, but this is now considered unlikely. In any case, both Wecker and Schwemmer were trained by Johann Erasmus Kindermann, one of the founders of the Nuremberg musical tradition, who had been at one time a pupil of Johann Staden.\nJohann Mattheson, whose \"Grundlage einer Ehrenpforte\" (Hamburg, 1740) is one of the most important sources of information about Pachelbel's life, mentions that the young Pachelbel demonstrated exceptional musical and academic abilities. He received his primary education in St. Lorenz Hauptschule and the \"Auditorio Aegediano\" in Nuremberg, then on 29 June 1669, he became a student at the University of Altdorf, where he was also appointed organist of St. Lorenz church the same year. Financial difficulties forced Pachelbel to leave the university after less than a year. In order to complete his studies, he became a scholarship student, in 1670, at the \"Gymnasium Poeticum\" at Regensburg. The school authorities were so impressed by Pachelbel's academic qualifications that he was admitted above the school's normal quota.\nPachelbel was also permitted to study music outside the Gymnasium. His teacher was Kaspar (\"Caspar\") Prentz, once a student of Johann Caspar Kerll. Since the latter was greatly influenced by Italian composers such as Giacomo Carissimi, it is likely through Prentz that Pachelbel started developing an interest in contemporary Italian music, and Catholic church music in general.\n1673\u20131690: Career (Vienna, Eisenach, Erfurt).\nPrentz left for Eichst\u00e4tt in 1672. This period of Pachelbel's life is the least documented one, so it is unknown whether he stayed in Regensburg until 1673 or left the same year his teacher did; at any rate, by 1673 Pachelbel was living in Vienna, where he became a deputy organist at the Saint Stephen Cathedral. At the time, Vienna was the center of the vast Habsburg empire and had much cultural importance; its tastes in music were predominantly Italian. Several renowned cosmopolitan composers worked there, many of them contributing to the exchange of musical traditions in Europe. In particular, Johann Jakob Froberger served as court organist in Vienna until 1657 and was succeeded by Alessandro Poglietti. Georg Muffat lived in the city for some time, and, most importantly, Johann Caspar Kerll moved to Vienna in 1673. While there, he may have known or even taught Pachelbel, whose music shows traces of Kerll's style. Pachelbel spent five years in Vienna, absorbing the music of Catholic composers from southern Germany and Italy. In some respects, Pachelbel is similar to Haydn, who too served as a professional musician of the \"Stephansdom\" in his youth and as such was exposed to music of the leading composers of the time. Although he was a Lutheran, his works were influenced by Catholic music.\nIn 1677, Pachelbel moved to Eisenach, where he found employment as court organist under Kapellmeister Daniel Eberlin (also a native of Nuremberg), in the employ of Johann Georg I, Duke of Saxe-Eisenach. He met members of the Bach family in Eisenach (which was the home city of J. S. Bach's father, Johann Ambrosius Bach), and became a close friend of Johann Ambrosius and tutor to his children. However, Pachelbel spent only one year in Eisenach. In 1678, Bernhard II, Duke of Saxe-Jena, Johann Georg's brother, died and during the period of mourning court musicians were greatly curtailed. Pachelbel was left unemployed. He requested a testimonial from Eberlin, who wrote one for him, describing Pachelbel as a 'perfect and rare virtuoso'\u00a0\u2013 \"einen perfekten und raren Virtuosen\". With this document, Pachelbel left Eisenach on 18 May 1678.\nIn June 1678, Pachelbel was employed as organist of the Predigerkirche in Erfurt, succeeding Johann Effler (c. 1640\u20131711; Effler later preceded Johann Sebastian Bach in Weimar). The Bach family was very well known in Erfurt (where virtually all organists would later be called \"Bachs\"), so Pachelbel's friendship with them continued here. Pachelbel became godfather to Johann Ambrosius' daughter, Johanna Juditha, taught Johann Christoph Bach (1671\u20131721), Johann Sebastian's eldest brother, and lived in Johann Christian Bach's (1640\u20131682) house. Pachelbel remained in Erfurt for 12 years and established his reputation as one of the leading German organ composers of the time during his stay. The chorale prelude became one of his most characteristic products of the Erfurt period, since Pachelbel's contract specifically required him to compose the preludes for church services. His duties also included organ maintenance and, more importantly, composing a large-scale work every year to demonstrate his progress as composer and organist, as every work of that kind had to be better than the one composed the year before.\nJohann Christian Bach (1640\u20131682), Pachelbel's landlord in Erfurt, died in 1682. In June 1684, Pachelbel purchased the house (called \"Zur silbernen Tasche\", now Junkersand 1) from Johann Christian's widow. In 1686, he was offered a position as organist of the St. Trinitatis church (\"Trinitatiskirche\") in Sondershausen. Pachelbel initially accepted the invitation but, as a surviving letter indicates, had to reject the offer after a long series of negotiations: it appears that he was required to consult with Erfurt's elders and church authorities before considering any job offers. It seems that the situation had been resolved quietly and without harm to Pachelbel's reputation; he was offered a raise and stayed in the city for four more years.\nPachelbel married twice during his stay in Erfurt. Barbara Gabler, daughter of the Stadt-Major of Erfurt, became his first wife, on 25 October 1681. The marriage took place in the house of the bride's father. Both Barbara and their only son died in October 1683 during a plague. Pachelbel's first published work, a set of chorale variations called \"Musicalische Sterbens-Gedancken\" (\"Musical Thoughts on Death\", Erfurt, 1683), was probably influenced by this event.\nTen months later, Pachelbel married Judith Drommer (Trummert), daughter of a coppersmith, on 24 August 1684. They had five sons and two daughters. Two of the sons, Wilhelm Hieronymus Pachelbel and Charles Theodore Pachelbel, also became organ composers; the latter moved to the American colonies in 1734. Another son, Johann Michael, became an instrument maker in Nuremberg and traveled as far as London and Jamaica. One of the daughters, Amalia Pachelbel, achieved recognition as a painter and engraver.\n1690\u20131706: Final years (Stuttgart, Gotha, Nuremberg).\nAlthough Pachelbel was an outstandingly successful organist, composer, and teacher at Erfurt, he asked permission to leave, apparently seeking a better appointment, and was formally released on 15 August 1690, bearing a testimonial praising his diligence and fidelity.\nHe was employed in less than a fortnight: from 1 September 1690, he was a musician-organist in the W\u00fcrttemberg court at Stuttgart under the patronage of Duchess Magdalena Sibylla. That job was better, but, unfortunately, he lived there only two years before fleeing the French attacks of the War of the Grand Alliance. His next job was in Gotha as the town organist, a post he occupied for two years, starting on 8 November 1692; there he published his first, and only, liturgical music collection: \"Acht Chorale zum Praeambulieren\" in 1693 (\"Erster Theil etlicher Chor\u00e4le\").\nWhen former pupil Johann Christoph Bach married in October 1694, the Bach family celebrated the marriage on 23 October 1694 in Ohrdruf, and invited him and other composers to provide the music; he probably attended\u2014if so, it was the only time Johann Sebastian Bach, then nine years old, met Johann Pachelbel.\nIn his three years in Gotha, he was twice offered positions, in Germany at Stuttgart and in England at Oxford University; he declined both. Meanwhile, in Nuremberg, when the St. Sebaldus Church organist Georg Caspar Wecker (and his possible former teacher) died on 20 April 1695, the city authorities were so anxious to appoint Pachelbel (then a famous Nuremberger) to the position that they officially invited him to assume it without holding the usual job examination or inviting applications from prominent organists from lesser churches. He accepted, was released from Gotha in 1695, and arrived in Nuremberg in summer, with the city council paying his per diem expenses.\nPachelbel lived the rest of his life in Nuremberg, during which he published the chamber music collection \"Musicalische Erg\u00f6tzung\", and, most importantly, the \"Hexachordum Apollinis\" (Nuremberg, 1699), a set of six keyboard arias with variations. Though most influenced by Italian and southern German composers, he knew the northern German school, because he dedicated the \"Hexachordum Apollinis\" to Dieterich Buxtehude. Also composed in the final years were Italian-influenced concertato Vespers and a set of more than ninety Magnificat fugues.\nJohann Pachelbel died at the age of 52, in early March 1706, and was buried on 9 March; Mattheson cites either 3 March or 7 March 1706 as the death date, yet it is unlikely that the corpse was allowed to linger unburied as long as six days. Contemporary custom was to bury the dead on the third or fourth post-mortem day; so, either 6 or 7 March 1706 is a likelier death date. He is buried in the St. Rochus Cemetery, a Protestant cemetery.\n\"Apart from harpsichord suites, this section concentrates only on the works whose ascription is not questioned. For a complete list of works which includes pieces with questionable authorship and lost compositions, see List of compositions by Johann Pachelbel.\"\nWorks.\nDuring his lifetime, Pachelbel was best known as an organ composer. He wrote more than two hundred pieces for the instrument, both liturgical and secular, and explored most of the genres that existed at the time. Pachelbel was also a prolific vocal music composer: around a hundred of such works survive, including some 40 large-scale works. Only a few chamber music pieces by Pachelbel exist, although he might have composed many more, particularly while serving as court musician in Eisenach and Stuttgart.\nSeveral principal sources exist for Pachelbel's music, although none of them as important as, for example, the Oldham manuscript is for Louis Couperin. Among the more significant materials are several manuscripts that were lost before and during World War II but partially available as microfilms of the Winterthur collection, a two-volume manuscript currently in possession of the Oxford Bodleian Library which is a major source for Pachelbel's late work, and the first part of the \"Tabulaturbuch\" (1692, currently at the Biblioteka Jagiello\u0144ska in Krak\u00f3w) compiled by Pachelbel's pupil Johann Valentin Eckelt, which includes the only known Pachelbel autographs). The Neumeister Collection and the so-called Weimar tablature of 1704 provide valuable information about Pachelbel's school, although they do not contain any pieces that can be confidently ascribed to him.\nCurrently, there is no standard numbering system for Pachelbel's works. Several catalogues are used, by Antoine Bouchard (POP numbers, organ works only), Jean M. Perreault (P numbers, currently the most complete catalogue; organized alphabetically), Hideo Tsukamoto (T numbers, L for lost works; organized thematically) and Kathryn Jane Welter (PC numbers).\nKeyboard music.\nMuch of Pachelbel's liturgical organ music, particularly the chorale preludes, is relatively simple and written for manuals only: no pedal is required. This is partly due to Lutheran religious practice where congregants sang the chorales. Household instruments like virginals or clavichords accompanied the singing, so Pachelbel and many of his contemporaries made music playable using these instruments. The quality of the organs Pachelbel used also played a role: south German instruments were not, as a rule, as complex and as versatile as the north German ones, and Pachelbel's organs must have only had around 15 to 25 stops on two manuals (compare to Buxtehude's Marienkirche instrument with 52 stops, 15 of them in the pedal). Finally, neither the Nuremberg nor the southern German organ tradition endorsed extensive use of pedals seen in the works by composers of the northern German school.\nOnly two volumes of Pachelbel's organ music were published and distributed during his lifetime: \"Musikalische Sterbens-Gedancken\" (Musical Thoughts on Death; Erfurt, 1683)\u00a0\u2013 a set of chorale variations in memory of his deceased wife and child, and \"Acht Chor\u00e4le\" (Nuremberg, 1693). Pachelbel employed white mensural notation when writing out numerous compositions (several chorales, all ricercars, some fantasias); a notational system that uses hollow note heads and omits bar lines (measure delimiters). The system had been widely used since the 15th century but was gradually being replaced in this period by modern notation (sometimes called \"black notation\").\nChorale preludes.\nChorale preludes constitute almost half of Pachelbel's surviving organ works, in part because of his Erfurt job duties which required him to compose chorale preludes on a regular basis. The models Pachelbel used most frequently are the three-part cantus firmus setting, the chorale fugue and, most importantly, a model he invented which combined the two types. This latter type begins with a brief chorale fugue that is followed by a three- or four-part cantus firmus setting. Chorale phrases are treated one at a time, in the order in which they occur; frequently, the accompanying voices anticipate the next phrase by using bits of the melody in imitative counterpoint. An example from \"Wenn mein St\u00fcndlein vorhanden ist\":\nThe piece begins with a chorale fugue (not shown here) that turns into a four-part chorale setting which starts at bar 35. The slow-moving chorale (the \"cantus firmus\", i.e., the original hymn tune) is in the soprano, and is highlighted in blue. The lower voices anticipate the shape of the second phrase of the chorale in an imitative fashion (notice the distinctive pattern of two repeated notes). Pachelbel wrote numerous chorales using this model (\"Auf meinen lieben Gott\", \"Ach wie elend ist unsre Zeit\", \"Wenn mein St\u00fcndlein vorhanden ist\", etc.), which soon became a standard form.\nA distinctive feature of almost all of Pachelbel's chorale preludes is his treatment of the melody: the cantus firmus features virtually no figuration or ornamentation of any kind, always presented in the plainest possible way in one of the outer voices. Pachelbel's knowledge of both ancient and contemporary chorale techniques is reflected in \"Acht Chor\u00e4le zum Praeambulieren\", a collection of eight chorales he published in 1693. It included, among other types, several chorales written using outdated models. Of these, \"Nun lob, mein Seel, den Herren\" is based on the hymn by Johann Gramann, a paraphrase of Psalm 103; it is one of the very few Pachelbel chorales with cantus firmus in the tenor. \"\" is a three-part setting with melodic ornamentation of the chorale melody, which Pachelbel employed very rarely. Finally, \"Jesus Christus, unser Heiland der von uns\" is a typical bicinium chorale with one of the hands playing the unadorned chorale while the other provides constant fast-paced accompaniment written mostly in sixteenth notes.\nFugues.\nPachelbel wrote more than one hundred fugues on free themes. These fall into two categories: some 30 free fugues and around 90 of the so-called Magnificat Fugues. His fugues are usually based on non-thematic material, and are shorter than the later model (of which those of J. S. Bach are a prime example). The contrapuntal devices of stretto, diminution and inversion are very rarely employed in any of them. Nevertheless, Pachelbel's fugues display a tendency towards a more unified, subject-dependent structure which was to become the key element of late Baroque fugues. Given the number of fugues he composed and the extraordinary variety of subjects he used, Pachelbel is regarded as one of the key composers in the evolution of the form. He was also the first major composer to pair a fugue with a preludial movement (a toccata or a prelude)\u00a0\u2013 this technique was adopted by later composers and was used extensively by J. S. Bach.\nThe Magnificat Fugues were all composed during Pachelbel's final years in Nuremberg. The singing of the Magnificat at Vespers was usually accompanied by the organist, and earlier composers provided examples of Magnificat settings for organ, based on themes from the chant. Pachelbel's fugues, however, are almost all based on free themes and it is not yet understood exactly where they fit during the service. It is possible that they served to help singers establish pitch, or simply act as introductory pieces played before the beginning of the service. There are 95 pieces extant, covering all eight church modes: 23 in \"primi toni\", 10 in \"secundi toni\", 11 in \"tertii toni\", 8 in \"quarti toni\", 12 in \"quinti toni\", 10 in \"sexti toni\", 8 in \"septimi toni\" and 13 in \"octavi toni\". Although a few two- and four-voice works are present, most employ three voices (sometimes expanding to four-voice polyphony for a bar or two). With the exception of the three double fugues (primi toni No. 12, sexti toni No. 1 and octavi toni No. 8), all are straightforward pieces, frequently in common time and comparatively short\u00a0\u2013 at an average tempo, most take around a minute and a half to play.\nAlthough most of them are brief, the subjects are extremely varied (see Example 1). Frequently some form of note repetition is used to emphasize a rhythmic (rather than melodic) contour. Many feature a dramatic leap (up to an octave), which may or may not be mirrored in one of the voices sometime during an episode\u00a0\u2013 a characteristic Pachelbel technique, although it was also employed by earlier composers, albeit less pronounced. Minor alterations to the subject between the entries are observed in some of the fugues, and simple countersubjects occur several times. An interesting technique employed in many of the pieces is an occasional resort to \"style bris\u00e9\" for a few bars, both during episodes and in codas. The double fugues exhibit a typical three-section structure: fugue on subject 1, fugue on subject 2, and the counterpoint with simultaneous use of both subjects.\nMost of Pachelbel's free fugues are in three or four voices, with the notable exception of two bicinia pieces. Pachelbel frequently used repercussion subjects of different kinds, with note repetition sometimes extended to span a whole measure (such as in the subject of a G minor fugue, see illustration). Some of the fugues employ textures more suited for the harpsichord, particularly those with broken chord figuration. The three ricercars Pachelbel composed, that are more akin to his fugues than to ricercars by Frescobaldi or Froberger, are perhaps more technically interesting. In the original sources, all three use white notation and are marked alla breve. The polythematic C minor ricercar is the most popular and frequently performed and recorded. It is built on two contrasting themes (a slow chromatic pattern and a lively simplistic motif) that appear in their normal and inverted forms and concludes with both themes appearing simultaneously. The F-sharp minor ricercar uses the same concept and is slightly more interesting musically: the key of F-sharp minor requires a more flexible tuning than the standard meantone temperament of the Baroque era and was therefore rarely used by contemporary composers. This means that Pachelbel may have used his own tuning system, of which little is known. \"Ricercare in C major\" is mostly in three voices and employing the same kind of writing with consecutive thirds as seen in Pachelbel's toccatas (see below).\nPachelbel's use of repercussion subjects and extensive repeated note passages may be regarded as another characteristic feature of his organ pieces. Extreme examples of note repetition in the subject are found in magnificat fugues: quarti toni No. 4 has eight repeated notes, octavi toni No. 6 has twelve. Also, even a fugue with an ordinary subject can rely on strings of repeated notes, as it happens, for example, in magnificat fugue octavi toni No. 12:\nChaconnes and variations.\nPachelbel's apparent affinity for variation form is evident from his organ works that explore the genre: chaconnes, chorale variations and several sets of arias with variations. The six chaconnes, together with Buxtehude's ostinato organ works, represent a shift from the older chaconne style: they completely abandon the dance idiom, introduce contrapuntal density, employ miscellaneous chorale improvisation techniques, and, most importantly, give the bass line much thematic significance for the development of the piece. Pachelbel's chaconnes are distinctly south German in style; the duple meter C major chaconne (possibly an early work) is reminiscent of Kerll's D minor passacaglia. The remaining five works are all in triple meter and display a wide variety of moods and techniques, concentrating on melodic content (as opposed to the emphasis on harmonic complexity and virtuosity in Buxtehude's chaconnes). The ostinato bass is not necessarily repeated unaltered throughout the piece and is sometimes subjected to minor alterations and ornamentation. The D major, D minor and F minor chaconnes are among Pachelbel's best-known organ pieces, and the latter is often cited as his best organ work.\nIn 1699 Pachelbel published \"Hexachordum Apollinis\" (the title is a reference to Apollo's lyre), a collection of six variations set in different keys. It is dedicated to composers Ferdinand Tobias Richter (a friend from the Vienna years) and Dieterich Buxtehude. Each set follows the \"aria and variations\" model, arias numbered \"Aria prima\" through \"Aria sexta\" (\"first\" through \"sixth\"). The final piece, which is also the best-known today, is subtitled \"Aria Sebaldina\", a reference to St. Sebaldus Church where Pachelbel worked at the time. Most of the variations are in common time, with Aria Sebaldina and its variations being the only notable exceptions; they are in 3/4 time. The pieces explore a wide range of variation techniques.\nPachelbel's other variation sets include a few arias and an arietta (a short aria) with variations and a few pieces designated as chorale variations. Four works of the latter type were published in Erfurt in 1683 under the title \"Musicalische Sterbens-Gedancken\" (\"Musical Thoughts on Death\"), which might refer to the death of Pachelbel's first wife that occurred in the same year. This was Pachelbel's first published work and it is now partially lost. These pieces, along with Georg B\u00f6hm's works, may or may not have influenced Johann Sebastian Bach's early organ partitas.\nToccatas.\nAbout 20 toccatas by Pachelbel survive, including several brief pieces referred to as \"toccatinas\" in the Perreault catalogue. They are characterized by consistent use of pedal point: for the most part, Pachelbel's toccatas consist of relatively fast passagework in both hands over sustained pedal notes. Although a similar technique is employed in toccatas by Froberger and Frescobaldi's pedal toccatas, Pachelbel distinguishes himself from these composers by having no sections with imitative counterpoint\u2013in fact, unlike most toccatas from the early and middle Baroque periods, Pachelbel's contributions to the genre are not sectional, unless rhapsodic introductory passages in a few pieces (most notably the E minor toccata) are counted as separate sections. Furthermore, no other Baroque composer used pedal point with such consistency in toccatas.\nMany of Pachelbel's toccatas explore a single melodic motif, and later works are written in a simple style in which two voices interact over sustained pedal notes, and said interaction\u00a0\u2013 already much simpler than the virtuosic passages in earlier works\u00a0\u2013 sometimes resorts to consecutive thirds, sixths or tenths. Compare the earlier D major toccata, with passages in the typical middle Baroque style, with one of the late C major toccatas:\nSometimes a bar or two of consecutive thirds embellish the otherwise more complex toccata-occasionally there is a whole section written in that manner; and a few toccatas (particularly one of the D minor and one of the G minor pieces) are composed using only this technique, with almost no variation. Partly due to their simplicity, the toccatas are very accessible works; however, the E minor and C minor ones which receive more attention than the rest are in fact slightly more complex.\nFantasias.\nPachelbel composed six fantasias. Three of them (the A minor, C major and one of the two D Dorian pieces) are sectional compositions in 3/2 time; the sections are never connected thematically; the other D Dorian piece's structure is reminiscent of Pachelbel's magnificat fugues, with the main theme accompanied by two simple countersubjects.\nThe E-flat major and G minor fantasias are variations on the Italian \"toccata di durezze e ligature\" genre. Both are gentle free-flowing pieces featuring intricate passages in both hands with many accidentals, close to similar pieces by Girolamo Frescobaldi or Giovanni de Macque.\nPreludes.\nAlmost all pieces designated as preludes resemble Pachelbel's toccatas closely, since they too feature virtuosic passagework in one or both hands over sustained notes. However, most of the preludes are much shorter than the toccatas: the A minor prelude (pictured below) only has 9 bars, the G major piece has 10. The only exception is one of the two D minor pieces, which is very similar to Pachelbel's late simplistic toccatas, and considerably longer than any other prelude. The toccata idiom is completely absent, however, in the short Prelude in A minor:\nA texture of similar density is also found in the ending of the shorter D minor piece, where three voices engage in imitative counterpoint. In pairs of preludes and fugues Pachelbel aimed to separate homophonic, improvisatory texture of the prelude from the strict counterpoint of the fugue.\nOther keyboard music.\nAround 20 dance suites transmitted in a 1683 manuscript (now destroyed) were previously attributed to Pachelbel, but today his authorship is questioned for all but three suites, numbers 29, 32 and 33B in the Seiffert edition. The pieces are clearly not without French influence (but not so much as Buxtehude's) and are comparable in terms of style and technique to Froberger's suites. Seventeen keys are used, including F-sharp minor. Number 29 has all four traditional movements, the other two authentic pieces only have three (no gigue), and the rest follow the classical model (Allemande, Courante, Sarabande, Gigue), sometimes updated with an extra movement (usually less developed), a more modern dance such as a gavotte or a ballet. All movements are in binary form, except for two arias.\nChamber music.\nPachelbel's chamber music is much less virtuosic than Biber's \"Mystery Sonatas\" or Buxtehude's Opus 1 and Opus 2 chamber sonatas. The famous Canon in D belongs to this genre, as it was originally scored for 3 violins and a basso continuo, and paired with a gigue in the same key. The canon shares an important quality with the chaconne and passacaglia: it consists of a ground bass over which the violins play a three-voice canon based on a simple theme, the violins' parts form 28 variations of the melody. The gigue which originally accompanied the canon is a simple piece that uses strict fugal writing.\n\"Musicalische Erg\u00f6tzung\" (\"Musical Delight\") is a set of six chamber suites for two scordatura violins and basso continuo published sometime after 1695. At the time, scordatura tuning was used to produce special effects and execute tricky passages. However, Pachelbel's collection was intended for amateur violinists, and scordatura tuning is used here as a basic introduction to the technique. Scordatura only involves the tonic, dominant and sometimes the subdominant notes.\nEach suite of \"Musikalische Erg\u00f6tzung\" begins with an introductory \"Sonata\" or \"Sonatina\" in one movement. In suites 1 and 3 these introductory movements are \"Allegro\" three-voice fughettas and stretti. The other four sonatas are reminiscent of French overtures. They have two \"Adagio\" sections which juxtapose slower and faster rhythms: the first section uses patterns of dotted quarter and eighth notes in a non-imitative manner. The second employs the violins in an imitative, sometimes homophonic structure, that uses shorter note values. The dance movements of the suites show traces of Italian (in the gigues of suites 2 and 6) and German (allemande appears in suites 1 and 2) influence, but the majority of the movements are clearly influenced by the French style. The suites do not adhere to a fixed structure: the allemande is only present in two suites, the gigues in four, two suites end with a chaconne, and the fourth suite contains two arias.\nPachelbel's other chamber music includes an aria and variations (\"Aria con variazioni in A major\") and four standalone suites scored for a string quartet or a typical French five-part string ensemble with 2 violins, 2 violas and a violone (the latter reinforces the basso continuo). Of these, the five-part suite in G major (\"Partie a 5 in G major\") is a variation suite, where each movement begins with a theme from the opening sonatina; like its four-part cousin (\"Partie a 4 in G major\") and the third standalone suite (\"Partie a 4 in F-sharp minor\") it updates the German suite model by using the latest French dances such as the gavotte or the ballet. The three pieces mentioned all end with a \"Finale\" movement. \"Partie a 4 in G major\" features no figuration for the lower part, which means that it was not a basso continuo and that, as Jean M. Perreault writes, \"this work may well count as the first true string quartet, at least within the Germanophone domain.\"\nVocal music.\nJohann Gottfried Walther famously described Pachelbel's vocal works as \"more perfectly executed than anything before them\". Already the earliest examples of Pachelbel's vocal writing, two arias \"So ist denn dies der Tag\" and \"So ist denn nur die Treu\" composed in Erfurt in 1679 (which are also Pachelbel's earliest datable pieces,) display impressive mastery of large-scale composition (\"So ist denn dies der Tag\" is scored for soprano, SATB choir, 2 violins, 3 violas, 4 trumpets, timpani and basso continuo) and exceptional knowledge of contemporary techniques.\nThese latter features are also found in Pachelbel's Vespers pieces and sacred concertos, large-scale compositions which are probably his most important vocal works. Almost all of them adopt the modern concertato idiom and many are scored for unusually large groups of instruments (\"Jauchzet dem Herrn, alle Welt (in C)\" uses four trumpets, timpani, 2 violins, 3 violas, violone and basso continuo; \"Lobet den Herrn in seinem Heiligtum\" is scored for a five-part chorus, two flutes, bassoon, five trumpets, trombone, drums, cymbals, harp, two violins, basso continuo and organ). Pachelbel explores a very wide range of styles: psalm settings (\"Gott ist unser Zuversicht\"), chorale concertos (\"Christ lag in Todesbanden\"), sets of chorale variations (\"Was Gott tut, das ist wohlgetan\"), concerted motets, etc. The ensembles for which these works are scored are equally diverse: from the famous D major Magnificat setting written for a 4-part choir, 4 violas and basso continuo, to the \"Magnificat in C major\" scored for a five-part chorus, 4 trumpets, timpani, 2 violins, a single viola and two violas da gamba, bassoon, basso continuo and organ.\nPachelbel's large-scale vocal works are mostly written in modern style influenced by Italian Catholic music, with only a few non-concerted pieces and old plainchant cantus firmus techniques employed very infrequently. The string ensemble is typical for the time, three viols and two violins. The former are either used to provide harmonic content in instrumental sections or to double the vocal lines in tutti sections; the violins either engage in contrapuntal textures of varying density or are employed for ornamentation. Distinct features of Pachelbel's vocal writing in these pieces, aside from the fact that it is almost always very strongly tonal, include frequent use of permutation fugues and writing for paired voices. The Magnificat settings, most composed during Pachelbel's late Nuremberg years, are influenced by the Italian-Viennese style and distinguish themselves from their antecedents by treating the canticle in a variety of ways and stepping away from text-dependent composition.\nOther vocal music includes motets, arias and two masses. Of the eleven extant motets, ten are scored for two four-part choruses. Most of this music is harmonically simple and makes little use of complex polyphony (indeed, the polyphonic passages frequently feature reduction of parts). The texts are taken from the psalms, except in \"Nun danket alle Gott\" which uses a short passage from \"Ecclesiastes\". The motets are structured according to the text they use. One important feature found in \"Gott ist unser Zuversicht\" and \"Nun danket alle Gott\" is that their endings are four-part chorale settings reminiscent of Pachelbel's organ chorale model: the chorale, presented in long note values, is sung by the sopranos, while the six lower parts accompany with passages in shorter note values:\nThe arias, aside from the two 1679 works discussed above, are usually scored for solo voice accompanied by several instruments; most were written for occasions such as weddings, birthdays, funerals and baptisms. They include both simple strophic and complex sectional pieces of varying degrees of complexity, some include sections for the chorus. The concerted Mass in C major is probably an early work; the D major Missa brevis is a small mass for an SATB choir in three movements (Kyrie, Gloria, Credo). It is simple, unadorned and reminiscent of his motets.\nPosthumous influence.\nOne of the last middle Baroque composers, Pachelbel did not have any considerable influence on most of the famous late Baroque composers, such as George Frideric Handel, Domenico Scarlatti or Georg Philipp Telemann. However, he did influence Johann Sebastian Bach indirectly; the young Johann Sebastian was tutored by his older brother Johann Christoph Bach, who studied with Pachelbel, so J.S. Bach's early chorales and chorale variations borrow from Pachelbel's music, though the style of northern German composers, such as Georg B\u00f6hm, Dieterich Buxtehude, and Johann Adam Reincken, also played an important role in the development of Bach's talent.\nPachelbel was the last great composer of the Nuremberg tradition and the last important southern German composer. Pachelbel's influence was mostly limited to his pupils, most notably Johann Christoph Bach, Johann Heinrich Buttstett, Andreas Nicolaus Vetter, and two of Pachelbel's sons, Wilhelm Hieronymus and Charles Theodore. The latter became one of the first European composers to take up residence in the American colonies and so Pachelbel influenced, although indirectly and only to a certain degree, the American church music of the era. Composer, musicologist and writer Johann Gottfried Walther is probably the most famous of the composers influenced by Pachelbel\u00a0\u2013 he is, in fact, referred to as the \"second Pachelbel\" in Mattheson's \"Grundlage einer Ehrenpforte\".\nAs the Baroque style went out of fashion during the 18th century, the majority of Baroque and pre-Baroque composers were virtually forgotten. Local organists in Nuremberg and Erfurt knew Pachelbel's music and occasionally performed it, but the public and the majority of composers and performers did not pay much attention to Pachelbel and his contemporaries. In the first half of the 19th century, some organ works by Pachelbel were published and several musicologists started considering him an important composer, particularly Philipp Spitta, who was one of the first researchers to trace Pachelbel's role in the development of Baroque keyboard music. Much of Pachelbel's work was published in the early 20th century in the \"Denkm\u00e4ler der Tonkunst in \u00d6sterreich\" series, but it was not until the rise of interest in early Baroque music in the middle of the 20th century and the advent of historically informed performance practice and associated research that Pachelbel's works began to be studied extensively and again performed more frequently.\nPachelbel's Canon, a piece of chamber music scored for three violins and basso continuo and originally paired with a gigue in the same key, experienced a surge in popularity during the 1970s. This is due to a recording by Jean-Fran\u00e7ois Paillard in 1968, which made it a universally recognized cultural item. Its visibility was increased by its choice as the theme music for the film \"Ordinary People\" in 1980. One of the most recognized and famous Baroque compositions, it became popular for use in weddings, rivaling Wagner's Bridal Chorus. Despite its centuries-old heritage, the \"Canon\"'s chord progression has been used widely in pop music in the 20th and 21st centuries. It has been called \"almost the godfather of pop music\" by Pete Waterman.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nGeneral references\nScores\nRecordings"}
{"id": "60588", "revid": "23483242", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60588", "title": "Bill Monroe", "text": "American bluegrass musician, songwriter (1911\u20131996)\nWilliam Smith Monroe ( ; September 13, 1911 \u2013 September 9, 1996) was an American mandolinist, singer, and songwriter who created the bluegrass music genre. For this reason, he is often called the \"Father of Bluegrass\".\nThe genre takes its name from his band, the Blue Grass Boys, who named their group for the bluegrass of Monroe's home state of Kentucky. He described the genre as \"Scottish bagpipes and ole-time fiddlin'. It's Methodist and Holiness and Baptist. It's blues and jazz, and it has a high lonesome sound.\"\nEarly life.\nMonroe was born on his family's farm near Rosine, Kentucky, the youngest of eight children of James Buchanan \"Buck\" and Malissa (Vandiver) Monroe. His mother and her brother, James Pendleton \"Pen\" Vandiver, were both musically talented, and Monroe and his family grew up playing and singing at home.\nBill was of Scottish and English heritage. Because his older brothers Birch and Charlie already played the fiddle and guitar, Bill was resigned to playing the less desirable mandolin. He recalled that his brothers insisted that he remove four of the mandolin's eight strings so he would not play too loudly.\nMonroe's mother died when he was ten, and his father died six years later. Eventually, his brothers and sisters moved away, leaving Monroe to bounce between uncles and aunts until finally settling in with his disabled uncle Pendleton Vandiver, whom he often accompanied when Vandiver played the fiddle at dances. This experience inspired one of Monroe's most famous compositions, \"Uncle Pen\", recorded in 1950, and the 1972 album \"Bill Monroe's Uncle Pen.\" On that album, Monroe recorded a number of traditional fiddle tunes he had often heard performed by Vandiver. Vandiver has been credited with giving Monroe \"a repertoire of tunes that sank into Bill's aurally trained memory and a sense of rhythm that seeped into his bones.\"\nAlso significant in Monroe's musical life was Arnold Shultz, an influential fiddler and guitarist who introduced Monroe to the blues. In an interview with Ralph Rinzler, Monroe described the fiddling of Shultz as being infused with more blues than a white fiddler, although he would play common songs such as \"Sally Goodin\".\nCareer.\nIn 1929, Monroe moved to Indiana to work at an oil refinery with his brothers Birch and Charlie. Together with a friend, Larry Moore, they formed the \"Monroe Brothers\", to play at local dances and house parties.\nBirch and Moore soon left the group, and Bill and Charlie carried on as a duo, eventually winning spots performing live on radio stations, first in Indiana and then, sponsored by Texas Crystals, on several radio broadcasts in Shenandoah, Iowa, Nebraska, South Carolina and North Carolina from 1934 to 1936. RCA Victor signed the Monroe Brothers to a recording contract in 1936. They scored an immediate hit single with the gospel song \"What Would You Give in Exchange For Your Soul?\" and ultimately recorded 60 tracks for Victor's Bluebird label between 1936 and 1938.\nAfter the Monroe Brothers disbanded in 1938, Bill Monroe formed The Kentuckians in Little Rock, Arkansas, but the group only lasted for three months. Monroe then left Little Rock for Atlanta, Georgia, to form the first edition of the Blue Grass Boys, with singer/guitarist Cleo Davis, fiddler Art Wooten, and bassist Amos Garren.\nIn October 1939, Monroe successfully auditioned for a regular spot on the Grand Ole Opry, impressing Opry founder George D. Hay with his energetic performance of Jimmie Rodgers's \"Mule Skinner Blues\". Monroe recorded that song, along with seven others, at his first solo recording session for RCA Victor in 1940; by this time, the Blue Grass Boys consisted of singer/guitarist Clyde Moody, fiddler Tommy Magness, and bassist Bill Wesbrooks.\nWhile the fast tempos and instrumental virtuosity characteristic of bluegrass music are apparent even on these early tracks, Monroe was still experimenting with the sound of his group. He seldom sang lead vocals on his Victor recordings, often preferring to contribute high tenor harmonies as he had in the Monroe Brothers. A 1945 session for Columbia Records featured an accordion, soon dropped from the band. Most importantly, Monroe added banjo player David \"Stringbean\" Akeman to the Blue Grass Boys in 1942. Akeman played the instrument in a relatively primitive style and was rarely featured in instrumental solos. Monroe's pre-1946 recordings represent a transitional style between the string-band tradition from which he came and the musical innovation to follow.\n\"Original Bluegrass Band\" and Monroe's heyday.\nKey developments occurred in Monroe's music with the addition of Lester Flatt and Earl Scruggs to the Blue Grass Boys in December 1945. Flatt played a solid rhythm guitar style that would help to set the course for bluegrass timing. Scruggs played the banjo with a distinctive three-finger picking style that immediately caused a sensation among Opry audiences. Flatt and Scruggs joined a highly accomplished group that included fiddler Howdy Forrester and bassist Joe Forrester and would soon include fiddler Chubby Wise and bassist Howard Watts, who often performed under the name \"Cedric Rainwater\".\nIn retrospect, this line-up of the Blue Grass Boys has been dubbed the \"Original Bluegrass Band\", as the music finally included all the elements that characterize bluegrass music, including breakneck tempos, sophisticated vocal harmony arrangements, and impressive instrumental proficiency demonstrated in solos or \"breaks\" on the mandolin, banjo, and fiddle. By this time, Monroe had acquired the 1923 Gibson F5 model \"Lloyd Loar\" mandolin, which became his trademark instrument for the remainder of his career.\nThe 28 songs recorded by this version of the Blue Grass Boys for Columbia Records in 1946 and 1947 soon became classics of the genre, including \"Toy Heart\", \"Blue Grass Breakdown\", \"Molly and Tenbrooks\", \"Wicked Path of Sin\", \"My Rose of Old Kentucky\", \"Little Cabin Home on the Hill\", and Monroe's most famous song \"Blue Moon of Kentucky\", which was recorded by Elvis Presley in 1954, appearing as the B-side of his first single for Sun Records. Monroe gave his blessing to Presley's rock and roll cover of the song, originally a slow ballad in waltz time, and re-recorded it himself with a faster arrangement after Presley's version became a hit. Several gospel-themed numbers are credited to the \"Blue Grass Quartet\", which featured four-part vocal arrangements accompanied solely by mandolin and guitar \u2013 Monroe's usual practice when performing \"sacred\" songs.\nBoth Flatt and Scruggs left Monroe's band in early 1948, soon forming their own group, the Foggy Mountain Boys. In 1949, after signing with Decca Records, Monroe entered what has been called the \"golden age\" of his career with what many consider the classic \"high lonesome\" version of the Blue Grass Boys, featuring the lead vocals and rhythm guitar of Jimmy Martin, the banjo of Rudy Lyle (replacing Don Reno), and fiddlers such as Merle \"Red\" Taylor, Charlie Cline, Bobby Hicks, and Vassar Clements.\nThis band recorded a number of bluegrass classics, including \"My Little Georgia Rose\", \"On and On\", \"Memories of Mother and Dad\", and \"Uncle Pen\", as well as instrumentals such as \"Roanoke\", \"Big Mon\", \"Stoney Lonesome\", \"Get Up John\", and the mandolin feature \"Raw Hide\". Carter Stanley joined the Blue Grass Boys as guitarist for a short time in 1951 during a period when The Stanley Brothers had temporarily disbanded.\nOn January 16, 1953, Monroe was critically injured in a two-car wreck. He and \"Bluegrass Boys\" bass player, Bessie Lee Mauldin, were returning home from a fox hunt north of Nashville. On highway 31-W, near White House, their car was struck by a drunken driver. Monroe, who had suffered injuries to his back, left arm and nose, was rushed to General Hospital in Nashville. It took him almost four months to recover and resume touring. In the meantime Charlie Cline and Jimmy Martin kept the band together.\nBy the late 1950s, however, Monroe's commercial fortunes had begun to slip. The rise of rock-and-roll and the development of the \"Nashville sound\" in mainstream country music both represented threats to the viability of bluegrass. While still a mainstay on the Grand Ole Opry, Monroe found diminishing success on the singles charts, and struggled to keep his band together in the face of declining demand for live performances.\nFolk revival.\nMonroe's fortunes began to improve during the American folk music revival of the early 1960s.\nThe word \"bluegrass\" first appeared around this time to describe the sound of Monroe and similar artists such as Flatt and Scruggs, the Stanley Brothers, Reno and Smiley, Jim and Jesse, and the Osborne Brothers. While Flatt and Scruggs immediately recognized the potential for a lucrative new audience in cities and on college campuses in the North, Monroe was slower to respond. Under the influence of Ralph Rinzler, a young musician and folklorist from New Jersey who briefly became Monroe's manager in 1963, Monroe gradually expanded his geographic reach beyond the traditional southern country music circuit. Rinzler was also responsible for a lengthy profile and interview in the influential folk music magazine \"Sing Out!\" that first publicly referred to Monroe as the \"father\" of bluegrass. Accordingly, at the first bluegrass festival organized by Carlton Haney at Roanoke, Virginia in 1965, Bill Monroe was the central figure.\nIn 1964, before the Grateful Dead got together, Jerry Garcia caravanned across the country from California to tag along with Monroe. He was playing in the band The Black Mountain Boys in Palo Alto with Sandy Rothman, and in May 1964, he visited Neil Rosenberg at Bean Blossom, playing the banjo and making tapes of Monroe's performances.\nThe growing national popularity of Monroe's music during the 1960s was also apparent in the increasingly diverse background of musicians recruited into his band. Non-southerners who served as Blue Grass Boys during this period included banjo player Bill Keith and singer/guitarist Peter Rowan from Massachusetts, fiddler Gene Lowinger from New Jersey, banjo player Lamar Grier from Maryland, banjo player Steve Arkin from New York, and singer/guitarist Roland White and fiddler Richard Greene from California.\nLater years.\nEven after the folk revival faded in the mid-1960s, it left a loyal audience for bluegrass music. Bluegrass festivals became common, with fans often traveling long distances to see a number of different acts over several days of performances. In 1967, Monroe himself founded an annual bluegrass festival at Bean Blossom in southern Indiana, a park he had purchased in 1951, which routinely attracted a crowd of thousands; a double LP from the festival featuring Monroe, Jimmy Martin, Lester Flatt, and Jim and Jesse was released in 1973. The annual \"Bill Monroe Bean Blossom Bluegrass Festival\" is now the world's oldest continuously running annual bluegrass festival.\nMonroe's compositions during his later period were largely instrumentals, including \"Jerusalem Ridge\", \"Old Dangerfield\" (originally spelled Daingerfield after the town in East Texas), and \"My Last Days on Earth\"; he settled into a new role as a musical patriarch who continued to influence younger generations of musicians. Monroe recorded two albums of duets in the 1980s; the first featured collaborations with country stars such as Emmylou Harris, Waylon Jennings, and The Oak Ridge Boys, while the second paired him with other prominent bluegrass musicians. A 1989 live album celebrated his 50th year on the Grand Ole Opry. Monroe also kept a hectic touring schedule. On April 7, 1990, Monroe performed for Farm Aid IV in Indianapolis, Indiana along with Willie Nelson, John Mellencamp, Neil Young and with many other artists.\nMonroe also had the distinction of playing for four consecutive presidents: Carter, Reagan, Bush and Clinton.\nDeath.\nMonroe's last performance occurred on March 15, 1996. He ended his touring and playing career in April, following a stroke. Monroe died on September 9, 1996, in Springfield, Tennessee, four days shy of his 85th birthday.\nLegacy and influence.\nAccording to Ralph Rinzler, Monroe impacted music in the following five ways:\nMonroe was made an honorary Kentucky Colonel in 1966.148 He was inducted into the Country Music Hall of Fame in 1970, the Nashville Songwriters Hall of Fame in 1971, and the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame (as an \"early influence\") in 1997. Jimmie Rodgers, Bob Wills, Hank Williams Sr., and Johnny Cash are the only other performers honored in all three. As the \"father of bluegrass\", he was also an inaugural inductee into the International Bluegrass Music Hall of Honor in 1991. Monroe was a recipient of a 1982 National Heritage Fellowship awarded by the National Endowment for the Arts, which is the United States government's highest honor in the folk and traditional arts. That year's fellowships were the first bestowed by the NEA. In 1993, he received the Grammy Lifetime Achievement Award, and he was awarded the National Medal of Arts in 1995. His well-known song \"Blue Moon of Kentucky\" has been covered not only by bluegrass but also rock and country artists, most notably Elvis Presley, Paul McCartney, and Patsy Cline. In 2003, CMT had Monroe ranked No.\u00a016 on \"CMT 40 Greatest Men of Country Music\".\nArtists that claimed to be influenced by or to be playing the bluegrass genre were often bullied by Monroe. He always considered himself the father and caretaker of bluegrass. He would often say of new bands that did not perform to his standards, \"That ain't no part of nothin'.\" Even those who question the scope of bluegrass refer to Monroe as a \"musical giant\" and recognize that \"there would be no bluegrass without Bill Monroe.\"\nMore than 150 musicians played in the Blue Grass Boys over the nearly 60 years of Monroe's performing career. Monroe tended to recruit promising young musicians who served an apprenticeship with him before becoming accomplished artists in their own right. Some of Monroe's band members who went on to greater prominence include singer/guitarists Clyde Moody, Lester Flatt, Jack Cooke, Mac Wiseman, Jimmy Martin, Carter Stanley, Del McCoury, Peter Rowan, Roland White, Roland Dunn and Doug Green; banjo players Earl Scruggs, Bob Black, Butch Robins, Don Reno, Stringbean, Sonny Osborne, and Bill Keith; and fiddlers Tommy Magness, Chubby Wise, Vassar Clements, Byron Berline, Kenny Baker, Bobby Hicks, Gordon Terry, Randall Franks and Glen Duncan. Monroe also regularly performed with flat-picking guitar virtuoso Doc Watson.\nModern bluegrass singer and mandolin player Ricky Skaggs was influenced by Monroe. Skaggs was only six years old, in 1960, when he first got to perform onstage with Monroe and his band at the high school in Martha, Kentucky. He stated, \"I think Bill Monroe's importance to American music is as important as someone like Robert Johnson was to blues, or Louis Armstrong. He was so influential: I think he's probably the only musician that had a whole style of music named after his band.\"\nIn 1999, the portion of Indiana State Road 135 running from Morgantown through to Nashville, Indiana was dedicated to Monroe and is known as the Bill Monroe Memorial Highway.\nBlue Grass Boys.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nDiscography.\nStudio albums\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Sister-inline/styles.css\"/&gt; Quotations related to at Wikiquote"}
{"id": "60589", "revid": "2068487", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60589", "title": "Grand Ole Opry", "text": "Radio broadcast from Nashville, Tennessee\nThe Grand Ole Opry is a regular live country-music radio broadcast originating from Nashville, Tennessee, on WSM, held between two and five nights per week, depending on the time of year. It was founded on November 28, 1925, by George D. Hay as the \"WSM Barn Dance\", taking its current name in 1927. Currently owned and operated by Opry Entertainment (a joint venture between NBCUniversal, Atairos and majority shareholder Ryman Hospitality Properties), it is the longest-running radio broadcast in U.S. history. Dedicated to honoring country music and its history, the Opry showcases a mix of famous singers and contemporary chart-toppers performing country, bluegrass, Americana, folk, and gospel music as well as comedic performances and skits. It attracts hundreds of thousands of visitors from around the world and millions of radio and internet listeners.\nIn the 1930s, the show began hiring professionals and expanded to four hours. Broadcasting by then at 50,000 watts, WSM made the program a Saturday night musical tradition in nearly 30 states. In 1939, it debuted nationally on NBC Radio. The Opry moved to its most famous former home, the Ryman Auditorium, in 1943. As it developed in importance, so did the city of Nashville, which became America's \"country music capital\". The \"Grand Ole Opry\" holds such significance in Nashville that it is included as a \"home of\" mention on the welcome signs seen by motorists at the Metro Nashville/Davidson County line.\nMembership in the Opry remains one of country music's crowning achievements. Just over 225 acts have been members of the Grand Ole Opry out of the thousands of acts that have existed during the history of country music. At present (2024), about 75 acts are members. As Tina Benitez-Evans wrote in American Songwriter, \"Membership in the Grand Ole Opry is one of the highest achievements within the country music community.\"\nSince 1974, the show has been broadcast from the Grand Ole Opry House east of downtown Nashville, with an annual three-month winter foray back to the Ryman from 1999 to 2020, and again for shorter winter residencies beginning in 2023. In addition to the radio programs, performances have been sporadically televised over the years, originally on The Nashville Network, and later CMT, GAC, and Circle. As of 2025, video compilations of previous \"Opry\" performances (dubbed \"Opry Live\") are distributed digitally every Saturday evening on FAST network Circle Country as well as the \"Opry\"'s YouTube and Facebook outlets, and syndicated to a number of television stations across North America.\nHistory.\nBeginnings.\nThe \"Grand Ole Opry\" started as the \"WSM Barn Dance\" in the new fifth-floor radio studio of the National Life &amp; Accident Insurance Company in downtown Nashville on November 28, 1925. On October 17, 1925, management began a program featuring \"Dr. Humphrey Bate and his string quartet of old-time musicians.\" On November 2, WSM hired long-time announcer and program director George D. Hay, an enterprising pioneer from the \"National Barn Dance\" program at WLS in Chicago, who was also named the most popular radio announcer in America as a result of his radio work with both WLS and WMC in Memphis, Tennessee. Though only 29 when he was hired by WSM and turned 30 a week later, Hay (known as the \"Solemn Old Judge\") launched the \"WSM Barn Dance\" with 77-year-old fiddler Uncle Jimmy Thompson on November 28, 1925, and that date is celebrated as the day the \"Grand Ole Opry\" began.\nSome of the bands regularly on the show during its early days included Bill Monroe, the Possum Hunters (with Humphrey Bate), the Fruit Jar Drinkers with Uncle Dave Macon, the Crook Brothers, the Binkley Brothers' Dixie Clodhoppers, Sid Harkreader, DeFord Bailey, Fiddlin' Arthur Smith, and the Gully Jumpers.\nJudge Hay liked the Fruit Jar Drinkers and asked them to appear last on each show because he wanted to always close each segment with \"red hot fiddle playing\". They were the second band accepted on \"Barn Dance\", with the Crook Brothers being the first. When the Opry began having square dancers on the show, the Fruit Jar Drinkers always played for them. In 1926, Uncle Dave Macon, a Tennessee banjo player who had recorded several songs and toured on the vaudeville circuit, became its first real star.\nName.\nThe phrase \"Grand Ole Opry\" was first uttered on radio on December 10, 1927. At the time, the NBC Red Network's \"Music Appreciation Hour\", a program with classical music and selections from grand opera, was followed by Hay's \"Barn Dance\". That evening, as he was introducing DeFord Bailey, the show's first performer of the night, George Hay said the following words: \"For the past hour, we have been listening to music largely from Grand Opera, but from now on, we will present 'The Grand Ole Opry'.\"\nLarger venues.\nAs audiences for the live show increased, National Life &amp; Accident Insurance's radio venue became too small to accommodate the hordes of fans. They built a larger studio, but it was still not large enough. After several months broadcasting with no live audience, National Life decided to allow the show to move outside its home offices. In October 1934, the Opry moved into then-suburban Hillsboro Theatre (now the Belcourt) before moving to the Dixie Tabernacle in East Nashville on June 13, 1936. The Opry then moved to the War Memorial Auditorium, a downtown venue adjacent to the State Capitol, and a 25-cent admission fee was charged to try to curb the large crowds, but to no avail. In June 1943, the Opry moved to the Ryman Auditorium.\nOne hour of the Opry was nationally broadcast by the NBC Red Network from 1939 to 1956, and for much of its run, it aired one hour after the program that had inspired it, \"National Barn Dance\". The NBC segment, originally known by the name of its sponsor, \"The Prince Albert Show\", was first hosted by Acuff, who was succeeded by Red Foley from 1946 to 1954. From October 15, 1955, to September 1956, ABC-TV aired a live, hour-long television version once a month on Saturday nights (sponsored by Ralston-Purina) that pre-empted one hour of the then-90-minute \"Ozark Jubilee\". From 1955 to 1957, Al Gannaway owned and produced both \"The Country Show\" and \"Stars of the Grand Ole Opry,\" both filmed programs syndicated by Flamingo Films, a company Al Gannaway acquired. Gannaway still owns the right to these shows; furthermore, Gannaway\"Stars of the Grand Ole Opry\" was the first television show shot in color.\nOn October 2, 1954, nineteen year old Elvis Presley made his first and only appearance at the Grand Ole Opry; although the audience reacted politely to Presley's revolutionary brand of rockabilly music, Opry manager Jim Denny told record producer Sam Phillips after the show that the singer's style was not suited to the program.\n1960s.\nAs the hippie counterculture movement spread across the country during the 1960s, the Opry maintained a strait-laced, conservative image with \"longhairs\" not being featured on the show. Artists were expected to dress conservatively, with women regularly wearing gingham country dresses; Jeannie Seely, upon joining the Opry in 1967, fought management to wear more contemporary attire such as miniskirts and go-go boots, arguing that if the Opry were going to have a dress code, it should be enforced upon the audience as well and that she was only wearing what most young women of the time were wearing. Seely's actions effectively caused the fall of a gingham curtain. Despite her disputes with the dress code, Seely would remain loyal to the Opry; she would make over 5,300 appearances on the program over her 58 years as a member, ending upon her death in 2025.\nThe Byrds were a notable exception. Country rock pioneer Gram Parsons, who was a member of the group at the time, was in Nashville to work on the band's country rock album, \"Sweetheart of the Rodeo\". The band's record label, Columbia Records, had arranged for The Byrds to perform at the Ryman on March 15, 1968, a prospect that thrilled Parsons. However, when the band took the stage the audience's response was immediately hostile, resulting in derisive heckling, booing, and mocking calls of \"tweet, tweet\" and \"cut your hair\" The Byrds further outraged the Opry establishment by ignoring accepted protocol when they performed Parsons' song \"Hickory Wind\" instead of the Merle Haggard song \"Life in Prison\", as had been announced by Tompall Glaser. Two decades later, long after Parsons' death, members of The Byrds reconciled with the Opry and collaborated on the 1989 album \"\".\nAnother artist that ran afoul of the Opry's stringent standards was Jerry Lee Lewis, who made his first appearance on the show on January 20, 1973, after several years of success on the country charts. Lewis was given two conditions by management for his Opry appearance \u2013 no rock and roll and no profanity \u2013 and he proceeded to disregard both, even referring to himself as a \"motherfucker\" at one point. In a continuous 40-minute set, Lewis played a mixture of his rock and roll hits and covers of other singers' country songs. It has been said that he was bitter about how he was treated when he first arrived in Nashville in 1955 and he supposedly used his Opry appearance to exact revenge on the Nashville music industry.\nCountry legend Johnny Cash, who made his Opry debut on July 5, 1956 and met his future wife June Carter Cash on that day, was banned from the program in 1965 after drunkenly smashing the stage lights with the microphone stand. Cash commented on the incident years later: \"I don't know how much they wanted me in the first place,\" he says, \"but the night I broke all the stage lights with the microphone stand, they said they couldn't use me anymore. So I went out and used it as an excuse to really get wild and ended up in the hospital, the third time I broke my nose.\" In 1968, Cash was allowed to return, after the success of his \"At Folsom Prison\" album and his recovery from addiction.\nGrand Ole Opry House.\nRyman Auditorium was home to the Opry until 1974. By the late 1960s, National Life &amp; Accident desired a new, larger, more modern home for the long-running radio show. Already 51 years old at the time the Opry moved there, the Ryman was beginning to suffer from disrepair as the downtown neighborhood around it fell victim to increasing urban decay. Despite these shortcomings, the show's popularity continued to increase, and its weekly crowds were outgrowing the 2,362-seat venue. The Opry's operators wanted to build a new air-conditioned theater, with greater seating capacity, ample parking, and the ability to serve as a television production facility. Their ideal location would be in a less urbanized part of town to provide visitors with a \"safer, more controlled, and more enjoyable experience\".\nNational Life &amp; Accident purchased farmland owned by a local sausage manufacturer (Rudy's Farm) in the Pennington Bend area of Nashville, nine miles east of downtown and adjacent to the newly constructed Briley Parkway. The new Opry venue was the centerpiece of a grand entertainment complex at that location, which later included Opryland USA Theme Park and Opryland Hotel. The theme park opened to the public on June 30, 1972, well ahead of the 4,000-seat Opry House, which debuted nearly two years later, on Saturday, March 16, 1974. The last show of the Grand Ole Opry at the Ryman Auditorium was held on March 15, 1974.\nOpening night was attended by sitting U.S. President Richard Nixon, who played a few songs on the piano. To carry on the tradition of the show's run at the Ryman, a six-foot circle of oak was cut from the corner of the Ryman's stage and inlaid into center stage at the new venue. Artists on stage usually stood on the circle as they performed, and most modern performers still follow this tradition.\nThe theme park was closed and demolished following the 1997 season, but the Grand Ole Opry House remains in use. The immediate area around it was left intact, even throughout the construction of Opry Mills, which opened in May 2000. The outside was decorated with the commemorative plaques of country music Grammy winners, formerly of Opryland's StarWalk, until the display was retired, reconfigured, and moved downtown to become the Music City Walk of Fame in 2006.\nThe \"Grand Ole Opry\" continues to be performed every Tuesday, Friday, Saturday, and occasionally Wednesday and Sunday at the Grand Ole Opry House. The site was added to the National Register of Historic Places on January 27, 2015.\nThe Grand Ole Opry House was also the home of the Country Music Association Awards from 1974 to 2004, and hosted three weeks of tapings for the long-running game show \"Wheel of Fortune\" in 2003. The three weeks are: Country music stars week, Nashville week and sweethearts weeks. The venue has also been the site of the GMA Dove Awards on multiple occasions.\nOn December 21, 2018, the backstage band room was officially named the Jimmy Capps Music Room in honor of Capps's 60th anniversary on the \"Opry\".\nReturn to Ryman Auditorium.\nFollowing the departure of the Opry, Ryman Auditorium sat mostly vacant and decaying for 20 years. An initial effort by National Life &amp; Accident to tear down the Ryman and use its bricks to build a chapel at Opryland USA was met with resounding resistance from the public, including many influential musicians of the time. The plans were abandoned, and the building remained standing with an uncertain future. Despite the absence of performances, the building remained a tourist attraction throughout the remainder of the 1970s and 1980s.\nIn 1991 and 1992, Emmylou Harris performed a series of concerts there and released some of the recordings as an album entitled \"At the Ryman\". The concert and album's high acclaim renewed interest in reviving Ryman Auditorium as an active venue. Beginning in September 1993, Gaylord Entertainment initiated a full renovation of the Ryman, restoring it to a world-class concert hall that reopened with a broadcast of \"A Prairie Home Companion\" on June 4, 1994.\nOn Sunday, October 18, 1998, the Opry held a benefit show at Ryman Auditorium, marking its return to the venue for the first time since its final show on March 15, 1974.\nBeginning in November 1999, the Opry was held at Ryman Auditorium for three months, partly due to the ongoing construction of Opry Mills. The Opry returned to the Ryman for the three winter months every year until 2019\u201320, allowing the show to acknowledge its roots while also taking advantage of a smaller venue during an off-peak season for tourism. Following a COVID-19 pandemic-related hiatus after the 2020 season, the show has returned to The Ryman for shorter winter residencies since 2023. While still officially the \"Grand Ole Opry\", the shows there are billed as \"Opry at the Ryman\". From 2002 to 2014, a traveling version of the \"Radio City Christmas Spectacular\" took up residence at the Grand Ole Opry House each holiday season while the \"Opry\" was away. It was replaced by \"Dr. Seuss' How the Grinch Stole Christmas! The Musical\" from 2015 in 2017 and by Cirque Dreams Holidaze in 2018.\n2010 flooding.\nIn May 2010, the Opry House was flooded, along with much of Nashville, when the Cumberland River overflowed its banks. Repairs were made, and the Opry itself remained uninterrupted. Over the course of the summer of 2010, the broadcast temporarily originated from alternate venues in Nashville, with Ryman Auditorium hosting the majority of the shows. Other venues included TPAC War Memorial Auditorium, another former Opry home; TPAC's Andrew Jackson Hall; Nashville Municipal Auditorium; Allen Arena at Lipscomb University; and Two Rivers Baptist Church.\nMuch of the auditorium's main floor seating, the backstage areas, and the entire stage\u2014including the six foot inlaid circle of wood from Ryman's stage\u2014was underwater during the flood. While the Grand Ole Opry House's stage was replaced, the Ryman circle was restored and again placed at center stage in the Grand Ole Opry House before shows resumed. The renovations following the flood also resulted in an updated and much-expanded backstage area, including the construction of more dressing rooms and a performer's lounge. The Opry returned to the Grand Ole Opry House on September 28, 2010, in a special edition of the Opry entitled \"Country Comes Home\" that was televised live on Great American Country.\nCOVID-19 pandemic response.\nThe Opry closed its doors to spectators and trimmed its staff in March 2020 as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic in Tennessee but continued to air weekly episodes on radio and television, relying on advertising revenue to remain solvent. The Opry resumed allowing spectators on a limited basis in October, and resumed full operations in May 2021. Due to the restrictions, the show did not move to the Ryman Auditorium in November 2020 as was customary. The Winter Ryman residency did not resume in 2021\u201322, partly due to scheduling conflicts from Ryman concerts postponed during the pandemic closure.\nThe Opry livestreams were celebrated by viewers as something to look forward to during the pandemic, with the majority of viewers being under lockdown. According to Pollstar, Opry Live was the number one most-watched livestream series in 2020 across all genres and received more than fifty million viewers from over fifty countries throughout the year, with two individual episodes (Vince Gill/Reba McEntire and Brad Paisley/Carrie Underwood) placing at numbers nine and ten respectively in the top ten. President of Opry Entertainment Scott Bailey explained that \"as the stewards of the Grand Ole Opry, it was never a question of if the Opry would play on, but how could it provide a safe and much-needed source of comfort during what has been an extraordinary year around the world. We are proud of this tremendous result and the numbers of viewers who have tuned in, not only for what it has meant for Circle, but also for what it says about the country music genre and country music fans. On behalf of all of us at the Grand Ole Opry and Opry Entertainment, I'd like to thank the artist community, industry and music lovers around the world for their continued support\".\nAfter seven months of performing without a live audience, in October 2020, the Opry kicked off its 95th anniversary by welcoming back 500 guests to the Opry House \u2013 and so began a month-long celebration of the Opry, country music, its artists, and its fans.\nThe Grand Ole Opry celebrated its 5,000th Saturday night show on October 30, 2021, with performances by country superstars and Opry members such as Garth Brooks, Trisha Yearwood, Darius Rucker, Vince Gill, Chris Young and several others.\nCurrent.\nNBCUniversal and Atairos acquired a combined 30% stake in the \"Grand Ole Opry\" and its parent company Opry Entertainment Group in 2022. The crossover allows for NBCUniversal's television outlets, including NBC, to carry several \"Opry\" television specials.\nA memorial concert was held for longtime member Loretta Lynn a few weeks after Lynn's death in October 2023; the concert featured performances by George Strait (who himself has only appeared once, in 1982, on the Opry radio show), Tanya Tucker, Wynonna, and several other artists. Thousands of Lynn's friends, family, and fans were in attendance at the Opry House.\nThe Opry unveiled a new, upgraded stage with all-new, advanced audio technology \u2013 the first major updates to the set in over two decades \u2013 in February 2023. Opry NextStage, a program that spotlights a select number of up-and-coming country artists each year, began bringing younger and more diverse acts to the Opry stage in 2019. Artists from more genres like folk, Americana, gospel, blues, and Southern rock frequently appear on the show. In 2022, Opry management invited two new comedians \u2013 Henry Cho (the Opry's first Asian American member) and Gary Mule Deer \u2013 to become Opry members.\nOpry 100.\nThe Opry celebrated its 100th birthday with a concert special hosted by Blake Shelton which featured over 50 of the Opry's living members in attendance. \"\" aired on NBC on March 19, 2025 and streamed simultaneously on Peacock. The Opry also celebrated by traveling overseas for the very first time, with a show taking place at the Royal Albert Hall in London on September 26 featuring Opry members Luke Combs, Carly Pearce, Ashley McBryde, Marty Stuart, and Darius Rucker, plus local acts Mumford &amp; Sons and Breabach.\nOn the night of the 100th anniversary of the show's debut, the Opry held a special live broadcast for radio, which it simulcast on its social media accounts. 26 Opry members, several of whom had not appeared on the television special, were featured on the special episode, which chronicled the program's history and featured lesser-emphasized aspects of the Opry's history including instrumental fiddling, gospel, square dancers, Western and bluegrass bands.\nBroadcasts.\nThe \"Grand Ole Opry\" is broadcast live on WSM at 7 p.m. CT on Saturday nights, changed from a previous time start of 6:30. A similar program, \"Friday Night Opry\", airs live on Friday nights. From February through December, \"Tuesday Night Opry\" is also aired live. Wednesday shows are typically presented in the summer months, while an \"Opry Country Classics\" program sporadically airs on Thursdays, devoted solely to older artists. Additional Christmas-themed shows, entitled \"Opry Country Christmas\", began production during the 2021 holiday season.\nThe Opry provides a fourteen-piece house band for performers should they not have a band of their own.\nThe Opry can also be heard live on \"Willie's Roadhouse\" on channel 59 on Sirius XM Satellite Radio, and the program streams on WSM's website. ABC broadcast the \"Grand Ole Opry\" as a monthly series from 1955 to 1956, and PBS televised annual live performances from 1978 to 1981. In 1985, The Nashville Network, co-owned by Gaylord, began airing an edited half-hour version of the program as \"Grand Ole Opry Live.\" The show moved to Country Music Television, also owned by Gaylord, where it expanded to an hour, and then to the Great American Country (GAC) cable network, which no longer televised its \"Opry Live\" show after both networks channel drifted towards generic Southern lifestyle programming. Circle, a new over-the-air digital subchannel network operated by Gray Television and Ryman Hospitality Properties, resumed telecasting the \"Opry\" as its flagship program when it launched in 2020, and former WSM radio sister station WSMV-DT5 is the network's flagship station. Initially simulcasting the radio version, since 2021, the television \"Opry Live\" has been pre-recorded live to tape telecasts of recent \"Opry\" shows (the show's time slot often coincides with intermission and less demographic-friendly radio segments such as square dancing and audience participation bits). Circle ended its over-the-air operations at the end of 2023, with \"Opry Live\" being moved to syndication. RFD-TV carries reruns of Opry telecasts under the title \"Opry Encore\".\nSky Arts simulcasts \"Opry Live\" in the United Kingdom.\nMembership.\nRegular performers at the Grand Ole Opry can be inducted into the organization as a member. Opry management, when it decides to induct a new member, directs an existing member to publicly ask them to join, usually during a live episode; an induction ceremony happens several weeks later, where the inductee is presented with a trophy and gives an acceptance speech. As the Opry is a running series, membership in the show's cast must be maintained throughout an artist's career, through frequent performances, and expires when the performer dies. Only once has a member been inducted posthumously: Keith Whitley, who was scheduled to be invited three weeks after his death in May 1989, was retroactively classified as a member in October 2023. Duos and groups remain members until all members have died; following the death of a member, the others maintain Opry membership. More recent protocols have allowed performers who are incapacitated or retired (such as Barbara Mandrell, Jeanne Pruett, Stu Phillips and Ricky Van Shelton) to maintain Opry membership until they die. Randy Travis has maintained his Opry membership largely through non-singing appearances since his 2013 stroke, while Loretta Lynn was granted similar accommodation from 2017 until her 2022 death. The Opry maintains a wall of fame listing every member of the Opry in the show's history. Receiving Opry membership is considered an honor that is similar in prestige to a Hall of Fame induction, with the caveat that a number of prominent country musicians never received it. When Don Schlitz was inducted on August 30, 2022, he became the first-ever member of the Opry inducted for his songwriting and not as a performer, having begun regular appearances only after Travis's incapacitation, performing songs he had written for Travis and for non-Opry member Kenny Rogers. The Opry also has a history of inviting comedians to join the cast, though none were invited to join between Jerry Clower's induction in 1973 and when Henry Cho and Gary Mule Deer became members in 2023. Following the death of Jeannie Seely in August 2025, there are 74 active members, plus the Opry Square Dancers, who enjoy \"sui generis\" membership status and open every Saturday show.\nControversies.\nIn April 1963, Opry management mandated that members had to perform no less than 26 shows a year in order to maintain their membership. WSM decreased the number of those required performances to 20 in January 1964, and the minimum number was 12 in 2000. Although the minimum number of performances has been reduced over the years, artists offered membership are expected to display their dedication to the Opry with frequent attendance.\nAnother controversy raged for years over permissible instrumentation, especially the use of drums and electrically amplified instruments. The earliest years of the program featured entirely instrumental string bands and harmonicas; vocalists were not featured on the program until the late 1930s. Some purists were appalled at the prospect; traditionally, a string bass provided the rhythm component in country music, and percussion instruments were seldom used (and then generally limited to hambone and folk instruments such as the spoons). Electric amplification, new in the beginning days of the Opry, was regarded as the province of popular music and jazz in the 1940s. Although the Opry allowed electric guitars and steel guitars by World War II, the restrictions against drums and horns continued, causing a conflict when Bob Wills and Pee Wee King defied the show's ban on drums. Wills openly flouted the rule. King, who performed at the Ryman in 1945 after Franklin Delano Roosevelt's death, did not technically defy the ban. He did not use his drums on the Opry, but this particular Saturday night, the Opry was cancelled due to FDR's death. He and his band were asked to perform their theater show (with their drummer) because a number of fans showed up assuming the Opry would go on. It took years after that before drums became commonly accepted at the Opry; as late as 1967, an item in \"Billboard\" claimed that \"[a] full set of drums was used on the 'Grand Ole Opry' for the first time in history when Jerry Reed performed last week. Jerry's drummer, Willie Akerman, was allowed to use the entire set during his guest performance there.\"\nStonewall Jackson, an Opry member since 1956, sued the Opry management in 2007 alleging that manager Pete Fisher was trying to purge older members of the Opry from its membership and committing age discrimination. Jackson settled the lawsuit in 2008 and resumed appearing on the program until retiring in 2012.\nIn early 2022, Morgan Wallen performed on the Grand Ole Opry alongside Ernest. This move was criticized, as Wallen had been taped less than a year prior shouting a racial slur, and the Opry had previously made stances against racism on social media. In response to the latter, music writer Holly G. founded the Black Opry as a means of raising awareness of black artists in country music.\nCommercialization.\nThe company has enforced its trademark on the name \"Grand Ole Opry\", with trademark registrations in the United States and in numerous countries around the world. It has taken court action to limit use of the word \"Opry\"\u2014not directly trademarked\u2014to members of the Opry and products associated with or licensed by it and to discourage use of the word in ways that would imply a connection to the Grand Ole Opry. In late 1968, for instance, WSM sued Opry Records, a record label that was independent of WSM, and the court decided that \"the record is replete with newspaper and magazine articles and clippings which demonstrate conclusively that the term 'Opry', standing alone as defendant has used it, is constantly used in country and western music circles in referring to plaintiff's 'Grand Ole Opry'\". The court also stated \"the defendant has appropriated, at its peril, the dominant or salient term in the plaintiff's mark, a term which identified the 'Grand Ole Opry' in the mind of the public many years before the inception of 'Opry Records'\u2014the name adopted by defendant\".\nIn another case, the Trademark Trial and Appeal Board granted summary judgment that the term \"Opry\" is a generic term (and thus no more protected than the words \"Grand\" or \"Ole\"), but the Federal Circuit court reversed this decision. As recently as 2009, the Trademark Trial and Appeal Board granted judgment against Texas Opry House, LLC, which had filed a trademark application for TEXAS OPRY HOUSE.\nIn 2004, the \"Grand Ole Opry\" sold naming rights to its first \"presenting sponsor\", Cracker Barrel. Insurance company Humana became a sponsor in September 2007, was the presenting sponsor by no later than January 2010, and still holds that top sponsorship level as of May 2023.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "60590", "revid": "50213637", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60590", "title": "Bluegrass music", "text": "Genre of American roots music and sub-genre of country music\nBluegrass music is a genre of American roots music that developed in the 1940s in the Appalachian region of the United States. The genre derives its name from the band Bill Monroe and the Blue Grass Boys. Bluegrass has roots in African American genres like blues and jazz and North European genres, such as Irish ballads and dance tunes. Unlike country, it is traditionally played exclusively on acoustic instruments such as the fiddle, mandolin, banjo, guitar and upright bass. It was further developed by musicians who played with Monroe, including 5-string banjo player Earl Scruggs and guitarist Lester Flatt. Bill Monroe once described bluegrass music as, \"It's a part of Methodist, Holiness and Baptist traditions. It's blues and jazz, and it has a high lonesome sound.\"\nBluegrass features acoustic stringed instruments and emphasizes the off-beat. The off-beat can be \"driven\" (played close to the previous bass note) or \"swung\" (played farther from the previous bass note). Notes are anticipated, in contrast to laid-back blues where notes are behind the beat; this creates the higher energy characteristic of bluegrass. In bluegrass, as in most forms of jazz, one or more instrumentalists take a turn playing the melody and improvising around it, while the others perform accompaniment; this is especially typified in tunes called breakdowns. This is in contrast to old-time music, where all instrumentalists play the melody together, or one instrument carries the lead throughout while the others provide accompaniment. Breakdowns are often characterized by rapid tempos and unusual instrumental dexterity, and sometimes by complex chord changes.\nCharacteristics.\nInstrumentation.\n The violin (also known as the fiddle), five-string banjo, guitar, mandolin, and upright bass (string bass) are often joined by the resonator guitar (also referred to as a Dobro) and (occasionally) harmonica or Jew's harp. This instrumentation originated in rural dance bands and is the basis on which the earliest bluegrass bands were formed.\nThe fiddle, made by Italians and first used in sixteenth century Europe, was one of the first instruments to be brought into America. It became popular due to its small size and versatility. Fiddles are also used in country, classical, cajun, and old time music.\nBanjos were brought to America through the African slave trade. They began receiving attention from white Americans when minstrel shows incorporated the banjo as part of their acts. The \"clawhammer\", or two finger style playing, was popular before the Civil War. Now, however, banjo players use mainly the three-finger picking style made popular by banjoists such as Earl Scruggs.\nGuitars are used primarily for rhythmic purposes. Other instruments may provide a solo on top of the guitar during breaks, guitarists may also provide these solos on occasion. The instrument originates from eighteenth century Spain, but there were no American-made models until the C.F. Martin Company started to manufacture them in the 1830s. The guitar is now most commonly played with a style referred to as flatpicking, unlike the style of early bluegrass guitarists such as Lester Flatt, who used a thumb pick and finger pick.\nBassists almost always play pizzicato, occasionally adopting the \"slap-style\" to accentuate the beat. A bluegrass bass line is generally a rhythmic alternation between the root and fifth of each chord, with occasional walking bass excursions.\nInstrumentation has been a continuing topic of debate. Traditional bluegrass performers believe the \"correct\" instrumentation is that used by Bill Monroe's band, the Blue Grass Boys (guitar, mandolin, fiddle, banjo, and bass). Departures from the traditional instrumentation have included dobro, accordion, harmonica, piano, autoharp, drums, electric guitar, and electric versions of other common bluegrass instruments, resulting in what has been referred to as \"new grass.\" Despite this debate, even Monroe himself was known to experiment with instrumentation; he once even used a string orchestra, choir, and pre-recorded bird-song track.\nVocals.\nApart from specific instrumentation, a distinguishing characteristic of bluegrass is vocal harmony featuring two, three, or four parts, often with a dissonant or modal sound in the highest voice (see modal frame), a style described as the \"high, lonesome sound\". Commonly, the ordering and layering of vocal harmony is called the \"stack\". A standard stack has a baritone voice at the bottom, the lead in the middle (singing the main melody) and a tenor at the top, although stacks can be altered, especially where a female voice is included. Alison Krauss and Union Station provide a good example of a different harmony stack with a baritone and tenor with a high lead, an octave above the standard melody line, sung by the female vocalist. However, by employing variants to the standard trio vocal arrangement, they were simply following a pattern existing since the early days of the genre.\nBoth the Stanley Brothers and the Osborne Brothers employed the use of a high lead with the tenor and baritone below it. The Stanleys used this technique numerous times in their recordings for both Mercury and King records. This particular stack was most famously employed by the Osborne Brothers who first employed it during their time with MGM records in the latter half of the 1950s. This vocal arrangement would become the trademark of the Osbornes' sound with Bobby's high, clear voice at the top of the vocal stack. Additionally, the Stanley Brothers also utilized a high baritone part on several of their trios recorded for Columbia records during their time with that label (1949\u20131952). Mandolin player Pee Wee Lambert sang the high baritone above Ralph Stanley's tenor, both parts above Carter's lead vocal. This trio vocal arrangement was variously used by other groups as well; even Bill Monroe employed it in his 1950 recording of \"When the Golden Leaves Begin to Fall\". In the 1960s, Flatt and Scruggs often added a fifth part to the traditional quartet parts on gospel songs, the extra part being a high baritone (doubling the baritone part sung in the normal range of that voice; E.P. Tullock [aka Cousin Jake] normally providing the part, though at times it was handled by Curly Seckler).\nThemes.\nBluegrass tunes often take the form of narratives on the everyday lives of the people whence the music came. Aside from laments about loves lost, interpersonal tensions and unwanted changes to the region (e.g., the visible effects of mountaintop coal mining), bluegrass vocals frequently reference the hardscrabble existence of living in Appalachia and other rural areas with modest financial resources. Some protest music has been composed in the bluegrass style, especially concerning the vicissitudes of the Appalachian coal mining industry. Railroading has also been a popular theme, with ballads such as \"Wreck of the Old 97\" and \"Nine Pound Hammer\" (from the legend of John Henry).\nHistory.\nCreation.\nBluegrass as a distinct musical form developed from elements of old-time music and traditional music in the Appalachian region of the United States. The Appalachian region was where many Scottish American immigrants settled, bringing with them the musical traditions of their homelands. Hence the sounds of jigs and reels, especially as played on the fiddle, were innate to the developing style. Black musicians, meanwhile, brought the iconic banjo to Appalachia. Much later, in 1945, Earl Scruggs would develop a three-finger roll on the instrument which allowed a rapid-fire cascade of notes that could keep up with the driving tempo of the new bluegrass sound.\nSettlers from Britain and Ireland arrived in Appalachia during the 18th century and brought with them the musical traditions of their homelands. These traditions consisted primarily of English and Scottish ballads\u2014which were essentially unaccompanied narrative\u2014and dance music, such as reels, which were accompanied by a fiddle. Many older bluegrass songs come directly from the British Isles. Several Appalachian bluegrass ballads, such as \"Pretty Saro\", \"Pretty Polly\", \"Cuckoo Bird\", and \"House Carpenter\", come from England and preserve the English ballad tradition both melodically and lyrically. Some bluegrass fiddle songs popular in Appalachia, such as \"Leather Britches\" and \"Soldier's Joy\", have Scottish roots. The dance tune \"Cumberland Gap\" may be derived from the tune that accompanies the Scottish ballad \"Bonnie George Campbell\".\nThe music now known as bluegrass was frequently used to accompany a rural dancing style known as buckdancing, flatfooting, or clogging. As the bluegrass sound spread to urban areas, listening to it for its own sake increased, especially after the advent of sound recording. In 1948, what would come to be known as bluegrass emerged as a genre within the post-war country/western-music industry, a period of time characterized now as the golden era or wellspring of \"traditional bluegrass\". From its earliest days, bluegrass has been recorded and performed by professional and amateur musicians alike. Although amateur bluegrass musicians and trends such as \"parking-lot picking\" are too important to be ignored, it is touring musicians who have set the direction of the style. Radio stations dedicated to bluegrass have also proved influential in advancing the evolution of the style into distinctive subgenres.\nClassification.\nBluegrass was initially included in the category of folk music and later changed to hillbilly. In 1948, bluegrass was placed under the country and western heading for radio airplay charting. All four of the seminal bluegrass authors \u2013 Artis, Price, Cantwell, and Rosenberg \u2013 described bluegrass music in detail as originating in style and form, in one form or another, between the 1930s and mid-1940s. However, the term \"bluegrass\" did not appear formally to describe the music until the late 1950s and did not appear in Music Index until 1965. The first entry in Music Index mentioning \"bluegrass music\" directed the reader to \"see Country Music; Hillbilly Music\". Music Index maintained this listing for bluegrass music until 1986. The first time bluegrass music had its own entries in Music Index was in 1987.\nThe topical and narrative themes of many bluegrass songs are highly reminiscent of folk music. Many songs that are widely considered to be bluegrass are in reality older works legitimately classified as folk or old-time music that are performed in the bluegrass style. The interplay between bluegrass and folk forms has been academically studied. Folklorist Neil Rosenberg, for example, shows that most devoted bluegrass fans and musicians are familiar with traditional folk songs and old-time music and that these songs are often played at shows, festivals, and jams.\nOrigin of name.\n\"Bluegrass\" is a common name given in America for the grass of the \"Poa\" genus, the most famous being Kentucky bluegrass. A large region in central Kentucky is sometimes called the Bluegrass region (although this region is west of the hills of Kentucky). Exactly when the word \"bluegrass\" was adopted is not certain, but is believed to be in the late 1950s. It was derived from the name of the seminal Blue Grass Boys band, formed in 1939 with Bill Monroe as its leader. Due to this lineage, Bill Monroe is frequently referred to as the \"father of bluegrass\".\nThe bluegrass style of music dates from the mid-1940s. In 1948, the Stanley Brothers recorded the traditional song \"Molly and Tenbrooks\" in the Blue Grass Boys' style, arguably the point in time that bluegrass emerged as a distinct musical form. Monroe's 1946 to 1948 band, which featured guitarist Lester Flatt, banjoist Earl Scruggs, fiddler Chubby Wise and bassist Howard Watts (also known as \"Cedric Rainwater\")\u00a0\u2013 sometimes called \"the original bluegrass band\"\u00a0\u2013 created the definitive sound and instrumental configuration that remains a model to this day. By some arguments, while the Blue Grass Boys were the only band playing this music, it was just their unique sound; it could not be considered a musical style until other bands began performing in a similar fashion. In 1967, the banjo instrumental \"Foggy Mountain Breakdown\" by Flatt and Scruggs was introduced to a worldwide audience as a result of its frequent use in the movie \"Bonnie and Clyde\". But the functionally similar old-time music genre was long-established and widely recorded in the period of the film's events and later CD was released.\nRalph Stanley commented about the origins of the genre and its name.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Oh, (Monroe) was the first. But it wasn't called bluegrass back then. It was just called old-time mountain hillbilly music. When they started doing the bluegrass festivals in 1965, everybody got together and wanted to know what to call the show, y'know. It was decided that since Bill was the oldest man, and was from the bluegrass state of Kentucky and he had the Blue Grass Boys, it would be called 'bluegrass.'\nSubgenres and recent developments.\nTraditional bluegrass.\nTraditional bluegrass emphasizes the traditional elements and form of the genre, as laid out by Bill Monroe and his Blue Grass Boys band in the late 1940s. Traditional bluegrass musicians play folk songs, tunes with simple traditional chord progressions, exclusively on acoustic instruments, although it is common practice to amplify acoustic instruments during stage performances before larger audiences. In most traditional bluegrass bands, the guitar rarely takes the lead, instead acting as a rhythm instrument, one notable exception being gospel-based songs. Melodies and lyrics tend to be simple, often in the key of G, and a I-IV-V chord pattern is common. In traditional bluegrass, instrumental breaks are typically short and played between sections of a song, conventionally originating as a variation on the song's melody. Also common are breakdowns, an instrumental form that features a series of breaks, each played by a different instrument. Particularly since the 1990s, a number of younger groups have attempted to revive the sound and structure of traditional bluegrass, a trend that has been dubbed \"neo-traditional bluegrass.\"\nProgressive bluegrass.\nThe group the Country Gentlemen is credited with starting the progressive bluegrass movement with their 1960 album \"Country Songs, Old and New\", combining traditional ballads such as \"The Little Sparrow\", \"Weeping Willow\" and \"Ellen Smith\" with traditional bluegrass instrumentation and \"bouncy\" mandolin and banjo parts distinct from those of traditional players such as Monroe and Scruggs.\nDue to the exposure traditional bluegrass received alongside mainstream country music on radio and televised programs such as the Grand Ole Opry, a wave of young and not exclusively Southern musicians began replicating the genre's format on college campuses and in coffeehouses amidst the American folk music revival of the early 1960s. These artists often incorporated songs, elements and instruments from other popular genres, particularly rock and roll. Banjoist Earl Scruggs of Flatt and Scruggs had shown progressive tendencies since the group's earliest days, incorporating jazz-inspired banjo and bass duets and complex chord progressions that extended the genre's original rigid, conservative structure. In the late 1960s, Scruggs experimented on duets with saxophonist King Curtis and added songs by the likes of counterculture icon Bob Dylan to the group's repertoire, while bandmate Lester Flatt, a traditionalist, opposed these changes, resulting in the group's breakup in 1969.\nNew Grass Revival began utilizing electric instrumentation alongside songs imported from other genres to great popularity in the 1970s and 1980s, and the term \"newgrass\" became synonymous with \"progressive bluegrass\". It continued to evolve though the '80s and '90s, moving closer to folk and rock in some quarters and closer to jazz in others, while festivals such as the Telluride Bluegrass Festival, RockyGrass in Lyons, Colorado, and MerleFest in Wilkesboro, North Carolina began to attract acts from outside the bluegrass tradition, merging the bluegrass community with other popular music scenes across America.\nFollowing the death of Jerry Garcia, who began his career playing bluegrass, and the dissolution of the Grateful Dead, the blossoming \"jam band\" scene that followed in their wake embraced and included many groups that performed progressive bluegrass styles that included extended, exploratory musical improvisation, often called \"jamgrass\". This style began to define many such acts whose popularity has grown into the 21st century, such as Leftover Salmon, the String Cheese Incident, Yonder Mountain String Band, the Infamous Stringdusters, Railroad Earth, Greensky Bluegrass and Billy Strings. In recent years, groups like the Punch Brothers, the Jon Stickley Trio and Nickel Creek have developed a new form of progressive bluegrass which includes highly arranged pieces resembling contemporary classical music played on bluegrass instruments. These bands feature complicated rhythms, chord schemes, and harmonics combined with improvised solos. At the same time, several popular indie folk and folk rock bands such as the Avett Brothers, Mumford &amp; Sons and Trampled by Turtles have incorporated rhythmic elements and instrumentation from the bluegrass tradition into their popular music arrangements, as has the Branson-based band the Petersens.\nInternational bluegrass.\nWhile originating in the United States, Bluegrass as a genre has expanded beyond the borders of the United States and become an internationally appreciated art form. Bluegrass associations now exist worldwide. One such association, the International Bluegrass Music Association (IBMA), was formed in 1985 and presents annual awards. In 2012, the critically acclaimed Dutch-language Belgian film, \"The Broken Circle Breakdown\", featured Flemish musicians performing bluegrass music central to the story.\nInternational bluegrass groups include Hayde Bluegrass Orchestra and Ila Auto from Norway; Rautakoura and Steve 'n' Seagulls from Finland; Druh\u00e1 Tr\u00e1va and Poutn\u00edci from the Czech Republic (home of the subgenre, Czech bluegrass); Hutong Yellow Weasels and The Randy Abel Stable from China; Heartbreak Hill and Foggy Hogtown Boys from Canada; the U.K.'s The Beef Seeds, Southern Tenant Folk Union, and Police Dog Hogan; and Australia's Flying Emus, Mustered Courage, and Rank Strangers.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "60591", "revid": "14926857", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60591", "title": "Piano player", "text": "Piano player may refer to:\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "60592", "revid": "42342156", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60592", "title": "Datasaab", "text": "Datasaab was the computer division of, and later a separate company spun off from, aircraft manufacturer Saab in Link\u00f6ping, Sweden.\nHistory.\nIts history dates back to December 1954, when Saab got a license to build its own copy of BESK, an early Swedish computer design using vacuum tubes, from Matematikmaskinn\u00e4mnden (the Swedish governmental board for mathematical machinery). This clone was completed in 1957 ( )\u00a0(1957) and was named SARA. Its computing power was needed for design calculations for the next generation jet fighter Saab 37 Viggen.\nIntending to develop a navigational computer to place in an airplane, a team led by Viggo Wentzel came up with an all transistorized prototype computer named D2, completed in 1960, which came to define the company's activities in the following two decades. This development followed two lines. The main purpose was the development of a navigational computer for Viggen. A spinoff was the production of a line of civilian mini and mainframe computers for the commercial market.\nThe military navigational computer CK37 was completed in 1971 and used in Viggen.\nThe first civilian model D21 (1962) was sold to several countries and some 30 units were built. After that, several versions with names like D22 (1966), D220, D23, D5, D15, and D16 were developed. When the Swedish government needed 20 computers in the 1960s to calculate taxes, an evaluation between Saab's and IBM's machines proved Saab's better. Later the D5s were used to set up the first and largest bank terminal system for the Nordic banks, a system which was partly in use until the late 1980s. In 1975, the D23 system was seriously delayed and the solution was to spin off the large and medium systems to a joint marketing/services company with Sperry UNIVAC called Saab-Univac. Eventually Sperry would take full ownership of Saab-UNIVAC once it had completed the conversion of the Saab Mainframe customer base to the 1100 series.\nIn 1971, technologies from Standard Radio &amp; Telefon AB (SRT) and Saab were combined to form Stansaab AS, a joint venture that also included the state-owned Swedish Development Company. The company's primary focus was systems for real-time data applied to commercial and aviation applications.\nIn 1978, Stansaab merged with the Datasaab division of Saab-Scania to become Datasaab AB. It was later owned by Ericsson, Nokia and ICL.\nWhen Intel sued the competitor UMC for patent infringement over technologies including microcode updates of processors and different parts of the processor working asynchronously, UMC could point to an awarded paper describing how these technologies had been used in the D23 already in 1972. Since Intel's patents were from 1978, that paper would prove prior art and imply that the patents never should have been granted at all. The case was later dropped.\nThe academic computer society Lysator at Link\u00f6ping University was founded in 1973 when a donation of an old used D21 was arranged. The company's history has been documented by members of its veteran society, \"Datasaabs V\u00e4nner\" (\"Friends of Datasaab\"), founded in 1993 to document and spread information about the computer history of Sweden, with focus on the region of Link\u00f6ping and Datasaab. The society has documented the Datasaab history in five books, and documents and pictures of computer systems and products developed and produced by Datasaab are presented at the society homepage. Since 2004 many Datasaab computers are exhibited at the IT-ceum computer museum in Link\u00f6ping.\nAfter a series of mergers, the name Datasaab became connected with an incident of illegal technology transfer to the Soviet Union in the late 1970s. A 1973 bid for tender for a civilian air traffic control system at the airports in Moscow, Kyiv, and Mineralnye Vody was won by Swedish supplier Stansaab. A contract between Stansaab and Aeroflot was signed in September 1975. However, parts of the delivered system relied on components from the US, for which the Swedes couldn't get the necessary export licenses. So they bought U.S. components, relabeled them and smuggled them to Moscow using Soviet diplomats. Datasaab separated from Saab in 1978 and joined Stansaab in a new company, Datasaab AB.\nAllegedly the air traffic control system did support the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan in December 1979. The smuggling operation was uncovered in October 1980, known as \"the Datasaab affair\" (\"Datasaabaff\u00e4ren\"). In early 1981, Datasaab was acquired by Ericsson and became its computing division Ericsson Information Systems. In April 1984 Ericsson was fined US$3.12 million for breach of U.S. export controls, and agreed to pay.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "60594", "revid": "49089944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60594", "title": "Alamosa, Colorado", "text": "Home-rule city and seat of Alamosa County, Colorado, USA\nAlamosa is the home rule city that is the county seat of Alamosa County, Colorado, United States. Alamosa is located along the Rio Grande. The city population was 9,806 in the 2020 United States census. The city is the commercial center of the San Luis Valley in south-central Colorado, and is the home of Adams State University.\nHistory.\nThe Alamosa, Colorado, post office opened on March 12, 1878, and the Town of Alamosa was incorporated on August 12, 1878. The town was established by the Denver and Rio Grande Railroad and quickly became an important rail center. Alamosa was the terminus of the D&amp;RG until 1881, when the line was extended to Monte Vista. The railroad had an extensive construction, repair, and shipping facility in Alamosa for many years and headquartered its remaining narrow-gauge service here with trackage reaching many points throughout southwest Colorado and northern New Mexico. Alamosa County was created on March 8, 1913, with Alamosa as its first and only seat.\nAlamosa is now a notable tourist town with many nearby attractions, including the Great Sand Dunes National Park and Preserve, Colorado Gators Reptile Park, and the Rio Grande Scenic Railroad. The town hosts \"Summer Fest on the Rio\" which occurs the first weekend in June, the Early Iron car show over the Labor Day weekend, and \"Weekends on the Rio\" on various Sundays throughout the summer The city takes its name from the Spanish adjective \"Alamosa\", meaning \"of cottonwood\", for the cottonwood forests which grow along the Rio Grande and throughout town.\nGeography.\nAlamosa is located at the junction of U.S. Routes 160 and 285. At the 2020 United States census, the city had a total area of including of water.\nAlamosa is located along the Rio Grande in the San Luis Valley, in the highest general agricultural land in the United States. Elevation is about in Alamosa with peaks over within of town in the Sangre de Cristo Range.\nAlamosa is the gateway city to the Great Sand Dunes National Park and Preserve.\nClimate.\nAlamosa features a cold desert climate (K\u00f6ppen \"BWk\") with long, cold winters and warm summers, and dry weather year-round. The normal monthly mean temperature ranges from in January to in July. Annual precipitation is only , with the months of July through September being the wettest. The aridity depresses normal seasonal (July through June of the following year) snowfall to .\nThe altitude and dryness of the air cause day\u2013night temperature differences to be severe year-round, averaging throughout the year. There was a long-term annual average of 227 days per year with a minimum of or less. In the 1981\u20132010 period, there was an average of 46\u00a0nights with minima at or below .\nOn July 10, 2020, Alamosa made weather history by measuring a record low temperature and a record high temperature in less than 12 hours.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\n2020 census.\nAs of the 2020 United States census, there were 9,806 people, 3,828 households, and 1,935 families residing in the city.\n2014.\nAccording to city-data.com from 2014 there were 9,531 people, 2,974 households, and 1,769 families residing in the city. The population density was . There were 3,215 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the city was 44.5% White, 2.6% Black or African American, 2.20% Native American, 1.7% Asian, 1.3% Pacific Islander, 0.3% from other races, and 0.9% from two or more races. 49.00% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.\nThere were 2,974 households, out of which 32.0% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 40.5% were married couples living together, 14.6% had a female householder with no husband present, and 40.5% were non-families. 33.7% of all households were made up of individuals, and 11.0% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.36 and the average family size was 3.04.\nIn the city, the population was spread out, with 24.4% under the age of 18, 21.8% from 18 to 24, 24.8% from 25 to 44, 18.1% from 45 to 64, and 10.9% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 28 years. For every 100 females, there were 91.4 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 89.1 males.\nThe median income for a household in the city was $29,593, and the median income for a family was $33,017. Males had a median income of $27,100 versus $22,671 for females. The per capita income for the city was $15,405. About 18.1% of families and 25.0% of the population were below the poverty line, including 30.4% of those under age 18 and 17.0% of those age 65 or over.\nGovernment.\nAlamosa is a home rule municipality like many other Colorado towns. The city council has six members, four elected from wards and two at large. The council has authority to make, change, and repeal laws and ordinances. The city elects a mayor-at-large on a non-partisan ballot. The current mayor of Alamosa is Ty Coleman.\nEducation.\nAlamosa Public Schools are part of the Alamosa School District RE-11J, and include Alamosa Elementary School, Ortega Middle School, and Alamosa High School. Robert Alejo is the Superintendent of Schools.\nAdams State University, founded in 1921 as a teacher's college, offers both undergraduate and graduate programs. Graduate level programs emphasize teaching and education, art, history and business with many of the courses available online. In 2015, the college reached an all-time high enrollment of 3,701 students. The university's location in Alamosa, with an elevation of about 7,800\u00a0ft above sea level, attracts many athletes (especially runners) to the school's athletic program. In 2014, ASU added a cycling program.\nThe schools in Alamosa were the subject to the educational segregation lawsuit, \"Maestas vs. George H. Shone\".\nInfrastructure.\nTransportation.\nAlamosa is on the Rio Grande River, which is crossed by two auto bridges, one pedestrian bridge and one rail bridge in town. Auto traffic is served by U.S. Highway 160 running east and west and U.S. Highway 285 and State Highway 17 running north and south. Alamosa is served by the Colorado Pacific Rio Grande Railroad and Bustang. The local airport is San Luis Valley Regional Airport. Alamosa is part of Colorado's Bustang network. It is on the Alamosa-Pueblo Outrider line.\nFacilities.\nAlamosa is the shopping center for the San Luis Valley and has several national and regional stores. There are a number of fast food restaurants, two medical clinics, and a regional hospital, San Luis Valley Regional Medical Center.\nAdams State University is located in Alamosa. ASU is a four-year, state-supported university founded in 1921 and offering degrees in several fields including business and education.\nTrinidad State College has a campus situated in Alamosa. They offer 2-year degrees in gunsmithing, aquaculture, cosmetology, welding and nursing, as well as traditional arts and sciences classes like English, physics and chemistry.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "60595", "revid": "1308313975", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60595", "title": "John Beaglehole", "text": "New Zealand historian\nJohn Cawte Beaglehole (13 June 1901 \u2013 10 October 1971) was a New Zealand historian whose greatest scholastic achievement was the editing of James Cook's three journals of exploration, together with the writing of an acclaimed biography of Cook, published posthumously. \nHe had a lifelong association with Victoria University College, which became Victoria University of Wellington, and after his death it named the archival collections after him.\nEarly life and career.\nJohn Cawte Beaglehole was born on 13 June 1901, in Wellington, New Zealand, the second son of David Ernest Beaglehole, a clerk, and his wife Jane (n\u00e9e Butler). John had one elder brother (Geoffrey) and two younger brothers (Keith and Ernest). Ernest Beaglehole became a psychologist and ethnologist. John was educated at Mount Cook School and Wellington College before being enrolled at Victoria University College, Wellington of the University of New Zealand, which later became an independent university, and where he subsequently spent most of his academic career. After his graduation, he was awarded a scholarship to study at the London School of Economics, and left for England in 1926.\nAfter three years of post-graduate study Beaglehole obtained his PhD with a thesis on British colonial history. At this time he was much influenced by left-wing teachers, especially R. H. Tawney and Harold Laski, and on returning to New Zealand he found it difficult to obtain an academic post owing to his radical views. For a time he had various jobs including a spell as a Workers' Educational Association lecturer, and had time to develop other enthusiasms including civil rights issues, writing poetry, and music, an interest inherited from his mother. In 1932 he took a temporary position as a lecturer in history at Auckland University College, but within months the position was abolished in a retrenchment by the college council. Many believed the decision was due more to the college's reaction to Beaglehole's reputation (albeit exaggerated) for radicalism. His academic career finally took off in 1934 after the publication of his first major book, \"The Exploration of the Pacific\", after which he developed his specialist interest in James Cook. He became lecturer, later professor, at the Victoria University College.\nHe married Elsie Mary Holmes on 17 February 1930, and they had three sons.\nEditing Cook's journals.\nBeaglehole became known internationally for his work on Cook's journals, which brought out his great gifts as historian and editor. It was not all desk work among the archives \u2013 he also travelled widely in Cook's wake, from Whitby to Tahiti, to Tonga and to the New Hebrides. The four volumes of the journals that emerged between 1955 and 1967 were subsidised by the New Zealand government, which also set up a special research post for their author. The sheer size of these tomes, each of them approaching 1,000 pages, may seem disconcerting at first sight, but they are enlivened by Beaglehole's stylish and often witty introductions, intended to set the journals in their contexts. \nAs well as Cook's own journals Beaglehole also printed, either entire or in lengthy extracts, the journals of several of Cook's colleagues on the voyages. The introductions themselves, together with copious footnotes, reveal the breadth of his erudition. They cover many topics, ranging from the structure of Polynesian society to oceanography, navigation, cartography, and much else.\nMany of the zoological and botanical notes for Beaglehole's work on James Cook's three voyages were provided by Dr Averil Margaret Lysaght.\nCook's journals themselves had never before been comprehensively and accurately presented to the public, and to do so required enormous research since copies and fragments of the journals and related material were scattered in various archives in London, Australia and New Zealand. For his edition, Beaglehole sought out the various surviving holographs in Cook's own hand in preference to copies by his clerks on board ship, and others. For the first voyage, the voyage of the \"Endeavour\", he used mainly the manuscript journal held in the National Library of Australia at Canberra. This came to light only in 1923, when the heirs of a Teesside ironmaster, Henry Bolckow, put it up for sale. Bolckow had purchased this manuscript at an earlier auction, in 1868, but had not made his ownership widely known, and consequently it was assumed for many years that no such holograph existed. For the second voyage Beaglehole used two other partial journals in Cook's hand, both of which had the same early history as the \"Endeavour\" journal. \nAll three had probably once been owned by Cook's widow, and sold by a relation of hers at the 1868 auction. The difference was that the two partial journals from the second voyage were then purchased by the British Museum and not by Bolckow, and hence had long been available for public consultation. And for the third voyage Beaglehole's main source was a journal written, and much revised, by Cook up to early January 1779, a month before he died. What happened to the final month's entries, which must certainly have been made, is uncertain. This, too, is today in the British Library, the successor to the British Museum as a manuscript repository.\nAll students of Cook owe an enormous debt to Beaglehole for his all-encompassing editorship. So much so, in fact, that today it is difficult to view the subject of Cook except through Beaglehole's perspective. Some recent biographies of Cook have tended to be little else than abbreviated versions of Beaglehole. Nevertheless, it is also clear that Beaglehole\u2019s work is, by and large, a continuation of the long tradition of Cook idealisation, a tradition from which post-Beaglehole scholarship has started to diverge. For Beaglehole, Cook was an heroic figure who practically could do no wrong, and he is scathing about those contemporaries of Cook who ever ventured to criticise his hero, such as Alexander Dalrymple, the geographer, and Johann Reinhold Forster, who accompanied Cook on the second voyage. Recent research has to some extent rehabilitated both Dalrymple and Forster.\nHonours and awards.\nIn the 1958 Queen's Birthday Honours, Beaglehole was appointed a Companion of the Order of St Michael and St George, for services in the fields of historical research and literature. During his last decade, Beaglehole was showered with honorary degrees from universities at home and abroad and other distinctions. Perhaps the most prestigious was the award in 1970 of the British Order of Merit. He was only the second New Zealander ever to receive this award, the first being the nuclear physicist Ernest Rutherford.\nIn 1969 he was awarded the Mueller Medal by the Australian and New Zealand Association for the Advancement of Science.\nLater life and death.\nJust before he died in 1971 Beaglehole was in the process of revising his detailed and authoritative biography of Cook, which was subsequently prepared for publication by his son Tim, who was Chancellor and Emeritus Professor at Victoria.\nArchival collections at Victoria University.\nBeaglehole's \"alma mater\", the Victoria University of Wellington, named its archival collections after him, in the reading room of which is displayed his portrait, by W.A. Sutton. The J.C. Beaglehole Room, as it is known, was moved into a completely new space in 2011.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "60598", "revid": "19404073", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60598", "title": "Golden, Colorado", "text": "City in Colorado, United States\nGolden is a home rule city that is the county seat of Jefferson County, Colorado, United States. The city population was 20,399 at the 2020 United States census. Golden lies along Clear Creek at the base of the Front Range of the Rocky Mountains. Founded during the Pike's Peak gold rush on June 16, 1859, the mining camp was originally named Golden City in honor of Thomas L. Golden. Golden City served as the capital of the provisional Territory of Jefferson from 1860 to 1861, and capital of the official Territory of Colorado from 1862 to 1867. In 1867, the territorial capital was moved about east to Denver City. Golden is now a part of the Denver\u2013Aurora\u2013Lakewood, CO Metropolitan Statistical Area and the Front Range Urban Corridor.\nThe Colorado School of Mines, offering programs in engineering and science, is located in Golden. It is also home to the National Earthquake Information Center, on the campus of Mines; and the National Renewable Energy Laboratory, a federally-funded science institution. Additionally, Coors Brewing Company, CoorsTek, Spyderco, Software Bisque, American Mountaineering Center, and Colorado Railroad Museum are located in the city. It is the birthplace of the Jolly Rancher, a candy bought out by the Hershey Foods Corporation, and home to Yeti Cycles. Western showman William F. \"Buffalo Bill\" Cody is buried nearby on Lookout Mountain.\nHistory.\nEstablished during the Pike's Peak Gold Rush, Golden City quickly became a leading economic and political center of the region. Its geographic location made it a center of trade between the gold fields to the west and settlements to the east. Golden City was established on June 16, 1859, along Clear Creek west of Denver. The city is named after Thomas L. Golden. Other important businessmen and prospectors like William A.H. Loveland and George West were among the first people to settle in Golden.\nBy the end of 1860, Golden City had been popularly elected the seat of Jefferson County and was capital of the provisional Jefferson Territory. As drafted in the territorial constitution, the capital of the Jefferson Territory was initially proposed to be Golden, then with a population of 700, as a result of its proximity to mountain mining towns, and greater ability to hold a congressional quorum than had Denver. Golden City was temporarily removed from the status of territory capital as a result of an act passed on November 5, 1861, by the territorial government.\nColorado City, a small town to the south of Denver, became the new temporary territorial capital, but saw only one short event at this location. This status was quickly revoked, however, as on August 4, 1862, the territorial government voted formally to move back to Golden.\nWhile the town lost much of its populace and leading citizenry during the Civil War for several reasons (ranging from military to economic), Golden City became capital of the federally recognized Colorado Territory on August 2, 1862, continuing as such until 1867.\nBetween 1862 and the early 1870s a fierce railroad competition developed between Denver, to the east, and Golden. By the mid-1860s, Golden held a functionally honorific status as the territorial capital, rather than serving as the primary source of territorial power. Denver, the increasingly larger and more-developed city, was the focused core of important territorial occasions, with the Governor residing in Denver, and territorial legislative meetings occurring there as well. The Territorial Supreme Court, however, met in Golden throughout its tenure as the capital due to the Justices' decision in \"Bruce v. House\" whereby the court struck down a special law passed by the legislature directing the court to meet at Denver on the basis that the superseding Organic Act creating Colorado Territory directed the court to meet at the legal capital. From late 1866 through 1867 the legislative and executive branches did return to Golden in part due to the falling out of newcomer Alexander Cummings with Denver, and the Territorial Library resided in Golden from 1867-1868. However, the citizens and supporters of Golden realized that a spur from Golden to the new transcontinental railroad, running through Cheyenne, Wyoming, to the north, was ultimately the only possibility for Golden to reemerge as the dominant heart of commerce in the territory. W.A.H. Loveland founded the Colorado Central Railroad on February 9, 1865, to do just this.\nWith Golden beginning talk of creating a railroad, prominent Denver residents raced to do the same. In an appeal to the residents of Denver, \"The Rocky Mountain News,\" which was based in Denver itself\",\" wrote an article imploring the citizens of Denver to vote to fund a railroad; \"If we vote $500,000 in bonds to the Denver Pacific railway all is well. If we defeat those bonds, all hope of a railroad for the next two years is gone... Gentlemen of Denver, what will you do? The fate of your city is in your own hands.\" The residents of Denver voted for the bonds, spurring construction of the Denver Pacific Railway. By 1869, the railroad race to Cheyenne was becoming less and less of a race, as the Denver Pacific Railway pulled ahead of the struggling Colorado Central Railroad. Realizing they were going to lose the race to Cheyenne, the Colorado Central began expanding west into mountain communities such as Georgetown, Black Hawk, and Central City, all areas founded on and focused in silver mining.\nGolden, having then sidetracked into servicing various close by mountain communities, continued to fall behind the pace set by the Denver railroad, and by 1870, officially lost the race to Cheyenne. However, The Colorado Central Railroad connected directly with Cheyenne seven years later, in 1877, but by that point, the race with Denver had been lost. Although Golden's Colorado Central Railroad offered a challenge to Denver's railroad, the better funded Denver Pacific Railway was able to connect to Cheyenne far more quickly than Golden, securing for Denver its long-term status as both capital and prominent city.\nGolden City became the \"Lowell of the West\", a regional center of trade and industry that boasted at various times three flour mills, five smelters, the first railroad into the Colorado mountains, the Coors Brewery, brick works, the only paper mill west of Missouri, clay and coal mines, and more. During the 1870s, it became home to three institutions of higher education, the Colorado University Schools, of which the Colorado School of Mines remains today. Golden was also home to an opera house and seven churches, including Colorado's third (Methodist) church, oldest Baptist church, likely oldest Christian (Disciples of Christ) church, and first Swedish immigrant (Lutheran) church. The town was home to sizable populations of German, Swiss, Swedish, Italian and Chinese immigrants; five immigrants became mayors of Golden.\nUntil the early 20th century, Golden maintained a small-town population of around 2,500 people. Several industries faded or were destroyed by tragic events, but others flourished to continue Golden's industrial legacy, including its brewing, brick making, clay mining and porcelain industries.\nGolden became even more connected through mass transit, with two trolley lines extending to Denver, while the movie theater gradually took the place of the opera house for downtown entertainment. Downtown revitalization efforts began in the 1920s with its first streetscape and ornamental lighting project and urban renewal on its north and east, anchored by new senior high and grade schools. The historic cultural tension between the city's north and south sides gradually eased, and the town successfully endured additional major economic depressions, including the Silver Crash of 1893 and the Great Depression. The School of Mines gained a worldwide academic reputation, Coors rapidly came to the forefront of the national and international brewing and ceramics industries, and the city modernized with a recreation center, paved streets and more.\nAfter World War II, Golden boomed, rapidly gaining population, size and economy. In 1959, the town nearly tripled in geographic size overnight when it annexed large properties to the south, including the new Magic Mountain theme park, one of the earliest entertainment attractions of its kind. A number of new subdivisions were built and public infrastructure was modernized, including new buildings for the senior high school, city hall, recreation center, library, museum and central fire and police stations. Also built were new downtown anchors, including department stores and grocery stores, several new church buildings, new county offices, and the Horizon Plan, which transformed the School of Mines.\nThe decline in the price of petroleum and near-simultaneous failure of several downtown anchors placed the central business district into recession in the 1980s. The 1990s saw the revitalization of the downtown through various initiatives, including its second streetscaping project in 1992. In 1993, the old Golden High School building was converted into the American Mountaineering Center, making Golden a research and education hub for mountaineering. The Coors Brewery had become the largest single-site brewery in the world, its porcelain subsidiary among the foremost of its kind, and Golden became home to the National Renewable Energy Laboratory.\nGeography.\nGolden lies just north of I-70 and west of Denver at the foot of the Rocky Mountains. It is situated between Lookout Mountain and the two Table Mountains, within a sheltered valley fed by Clear Creek. Clear Creek flows through town from the west, out of its canyon shared by US 6, and exits the valley it carved between North Table Mountain and South Table Mountain and in which is located the Coors Brewery.\nAt the 2020 United States census, the city had a total area of including of water.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAs of the census of 2010, there were 18,867 people, 7,394 households, and 3,985 families residing in the city. The population density was . There were 7,748 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the city was 90.6% White, 1.2% Black or African American, 0.6% Native American, 3.8% Asian, 0.1% Pacific Islander, 1.4% from other races, and 2.3% from two or more races. 8.2% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.\nThere were 7,394 households, out of which 23.7% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 43.4% were married couples living together, 7.2% had a female householder with no husband present, 3.3% had a male householder with no wife present, and 46.1% were non-families. 31.6% of all households were made up of individuals, and 3.2% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.24 and the average family size was 2.8.\nIn the city, the population was spread out, with 24.7% under the age of 20, 13% from 20 to 24, 27.5% from 25 to 44, 25% from 45 to 64, and 10% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 33.9 years. The population was 56.6% male and 43.4% female.\nAs of the census of 2000, the median income for a household in the city was $49,115, and the median income for a family was $67,414. Males had a median income of $41,822 versus $32,413 for females. The per capita income for the city was $25,257. About 3.5% of families and 11.3% of the population were below the poverty line, including 6.4% of those under age 18 and 7.6% of those age 65 or over.\nArts and culture.\nGolden is home to numerous museums, including the Golden History Museum &amp; Park, Rocky Mountain Quilt Museum, Colorado Railroad Museum, Colorado School of Mines Geology Museum, and the Bradford Washburn American Mountaineering Museum. There is also the Mother Cabrini Shrine.\nGolden is home to the Jefferson Symphony Orchestra, which performs seasonally at Bunker Auditorium in the Green Center at the Colorado School of Mines, and has performed continuously since 1953. The city is also home to the Foothills Art Center, an art exhibition venue originally housed in a historic church, now calls the historic Astor House home. Miners Alley Playhouse in downtown Golden, is a live theater which has performed there since 2001. The 150-year-old Buffalo Rose Bar and Grill is the longest-surviving Colorado gold rush-era business and remains a popular music venue for touring rock and blues bands.\nGolden has several annual events, including E-Days of the Colorado School of Mines in April (since 1927), the Golden Music Festival at Clear Creek History Park, Independence Day celebration sponsored by the Golden Lions Club (since 1972), the largest event of the year is Buffalo Bill Days in late July (since 1946); the Golden Fine Arts Festival in August (since 1990), and Olde Golden Christmas in November to December (since 1972).\nThe American Mountaineering Center is home to the American Alpine Club, The Colorado Mountain Club, and Outward Bound. The Henry S. Hall, Jr. American Alpine Club Library and Colorado Mountain Club Collection is the world's largest repository of mountaineering literature and is internationally known. The American Mountaineering Center is also home to the Bradford Washburn American Mountaineering Museum and hosts many programs and events each year. This premier facility and the town's location near plenty of world class rock climbing, skiing and mountaineering make Golden a center for mountaineering culture.\nThe city's thriving beer culture supports several microbreweries, including Golden City Brewery, Mountain Toad Brewing, Cannonball Creek Brewing Company, Barrels &amp; Bottles Brewery, Holidaily Brewing Company, Over Yonder Brewing and Ohm Brewing. Beer festivals in Golden include the UllrGrass beer festival every January, Goldenfest every September, and the Knock Your Boots Off Beer Tasting and Chili Cook-off every October.\nGolden is home to the headquarters and brewery of Coors Beer. Golden was where the beer company had its start, and it has kept its headquarters in the city ever since its founding in 1873. The brewery offers tours to the public. It is one of the leading employers in the Golden area, with 900 employees working full-time in the brewery.\nSports.\nGolden's competitive athletics go back for over 150 years and feature public school and collegiate teams and athletes. Golden High School competes in various sports in 5A competition in Colorado, and its football program dates as far back as the 1890s. The Colorado School of Mines competes primarily in NCAA Division II athletics in a variety of sports including football (dating to 1888), baseball and basketball.\nClear Creek is also home to a nationally renowned kayak course, and the city is home to the American Mountaineering Center and features noteworthy rock climbing, mountain biking, hiking, and hang gliding opportunities in close proximity. Golden has to date generated three Major League Baseball players, six Olympic competitors and three Olympic medalists.\nGovernment.\nGolden is a home rule municipality of the city form of statutory government in Colorado. Its government is a city council/city manager form of leadership which consists of a popularly elected mayor elected by the entire citizenry, two councilors each representing a district comprising one half of the city, and four councilors each representing a ward of which each district is divided into two. These seven members of the city council are each popularly elected from their ward/district/at large and they serve as the governing body of the city. The council hires and supervises the city manager, who hires and supervises the city staff, which handles the daily operations of the city.\nGolden was among the first municipally governed cities in Colorado and has one of the oldest continuously functioning governments in the state. To date Golden has held 99 popular elections for municipal officials since its first such election in 1860, including 92 regular elections and 7 special elections in 1860, 1879, 1882, 2005, 2006, 2008, and 2020.\nEducation.\nGolden, originally home to the second school in Colorado, is today part of the Jefferson County R-1 School District, which provides public education throughout Jefferson County, Colorado. The city has four elementary schools (Mitchell, Kyffin, Shelton, and Ralston Elementary) in the foothills to the west, one middle school (Bell Middle School), and Colorado's oldest senior high school (Golden High School.)\nIn higher education, Golden features the oldest public university in the state, the Colorado School of Mines, which can be found a few blocks south of downtown Golden, situated on a hill overlooking the city. Nearby is the Mountain Language Institute, an English language school providing classes both in Golden and online.\nInfrastructure.\nTransportation.\nCity streets.\nThe main part of Golden is laid out upon a historic street grid system running on an approximately northwest\u2013southeast axis, aligned with Clear Creek upon which the heart of the city was established. Most of these are paved streets with a total right of way, including area for sidewalks which in older areas are often separated by a landscaped strip from the street featuring beautiful and historic trees. The only historic street in the grid not named as a \"street\" is the main thoroughfare, Washington Avenue, an right of way featuring a downtown care streetscape with trees, planters, brick, flagstone and ornamental street lights. Golden's streets are generally numbered on the east\u2013west streets, and named on the north\u2013south streets, and are named after pioneers, American Indian tribes and trees. The streets of the southeasterly part of town are aligned with the Denver metropolitan street grid, which are aligned directly with the true directions of the compass, and they share the names of the Denver grid. Outlying subdivisions of Golden consist of their own, often curvilinear street systems, with varying degrees of connection to the rest of the city. Golden has several main thoroughfare street connections to the east which date to the Gold Rush times, including West 44th Avenue, West 32nd Avenue and South Golden Road.\nHighways.\nSince its beginning, Golden has been at a crossroads of major Colorado thoroughfares. Today Interstate 70 (I-70) runs through the southern part of the city, which connects to the northern terminus of SH 470 which runs to the south. U.S. Highway 6 (US\u00a06), which turns into 6th Avenue, is a historic thoroughfare (built in 1950) which runs east\u2013west through the southern part of the city then curves northward through the western part of Golden, ultimately arriving at the mouth of Clear Creek Canyon. State Highway 93 (SH\u00a093), which traces its roots to the 1860s, continues north through the western part of the city from the canyon and northward towards Boulder. SH\u00a058, which turns into Golden Freeway, bisects Golden on an east\u2013west route between 6th and 7th Streets, and ultimately joins to go up Clear Creek Canyon. West Colfax Avenue, the historic US\u00a040, runs on an approximately northeast\u2013southwest route through the southern end of the city and turns westward up Mt. Vernon Canyon and parallels I-70.\nMass transportation.\nGolden is part of the network of the Regional Transportation District which provides bus and light rail service throughout the Denver metropolitan area. Its bus routes 16, 16L, and GS connect Golden with other points of the Denver metropolitan area and Boulder. The West Corridor (W line) of the FasTracks light rail line, which parallels 6th Avenue into Golden to its terminal at the Station, opened to the public on April 26, 2013. This is a modern version of the historic trolley line that Golden interests spearheaded in the 1890s. At the same time the W Line opened, a Community Call-n-Ride bus launched in Golden, offering flexible service along with regular stops within the city itself. The new bus system was designed to complement the light rail, extending the transit service into the whole community, including the downtown corridor. Although passengers are no longer served by heavy rail, Golden continues to be served by railroad transportation for cargo, as it has been continuously since 1870. These lines are owned by the BNSF railroad and serve business interests in the northeastern end of the city. Within the Coors Brewery grounds it becomes the brewery's own in-house railroad.\nAirports.\nThe closest airport to Golden is nearby Rocky Mountain Metropolitan Airport, a general aviation air transport facility located in northeastern Jefferson County. Passenger traffic generally uses Denver International Airport in northeastern Denver.\nNotable people.\nLindsey Horan, captain of the United States women's national soccer team and professional footballer, is from Golden, Colorado and attended Golden High School.\nNotable individuals who were born in or have lived in Golden include engineer and historian Edward L. Berthoud, brewer Adolph Coors, photographer Gertrude K\u00e4sebier, and Gudy Gaskill, the driving force behind the creation of the Colorado Trail.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "60599", "revid": "50826305", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60599", "title": "Denver metropolitan area", "text": "Denver is the central city of a conurbation region in the U.S. state of Colorado. The conurbation includes one continuous region consisting of the six central counties of Adams, Arapahoe, Broomfield, Denver, Douglas, and Jefferson. The Denver region is part of the Front Range Urban Corridor and its metropolitan planning organization is the Denver Regional Council of Governments. The area is also referred to as Greater Denver.\nThe United States Office of Management and Budget has delineated the Denver\u2013Aurora\u2013Centennial, CO Metropolitan Statistical Area consisting of ten Colorado counties: the City and County of Denver, Arapahoe County, Jefferson County, Adams County, Douglas County, the City and County of Broomfield, Elbert County, Park County, Clear Creek County, and Gilpin County. The population, as of the 2020 Census, is 2,963,821, an increase of 16.5% since 2010.\nThe Office of Management and Budget also delineated the more extensive 12-county Denver\u2013Aurora\u2013Greeley, CO Combined Statistical Area comprising the Denver\u2013Aurora\u2013Centennial Metropolitan Statistical Area, the Boulder, CO Metropolitan Statistical Area, and the Greeley, CO Metropolitan Statistical Area.\nThe central part of the metropolitan statistical area (MSA) includes Denver and three immediately adjacent counties: Jefferson County to the west, Adams County to the north and east, and Arapahoe County to the south and east. The continuously urbanized area extends northwest into the City and County of Broomfield, bordering Jefferson and Adams counties, and south into Douglas County, adjoining Arapahoe County. Also included in the federally defined MSA are four rural counties: Elbert County on the southeastern prairie and Clear Creek, Gilpin, and Park counties in the Rocky Mountains.\nCounties.\nThe Denver\u2013Aurora\u2013Centennial Metropolitan Statistical Area comprises ten counties. The sortable table below includes the following information:\nMetropolitan area cities and towns.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\nPlaces with over 100,000 inhabitants.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nPlaces with 10,000 to 100,000 inhabitants.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nPlaces with fewer than 10,000 inhabitants.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nCommunities previously part of the Denver metro area.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nRegional cooperation.\nThe Denver Regional Council of Governments (DRCOG, pronounced Doctor Cog) is a regional planning and inter-governmental coordination organization in a nine-county region. The Scientific and Cultural Facilities District (SCFD) provides funding for scientific and cultural facilities in a seven-county region including:\nIn addition, the Regional Transportation District (RTD) provides mass transit, including a light rail system. In 2005 the RTD developed a twelve-year comprehensive plan, called \"FasTracks\", to build and operate rail transit lines and expand and improve bus service throughout the region.\nEconomy.\nThe most prosperous parts of the area are in the south and the northwest, while the most industrialized areas are in the northeast, specifically in the northern part of Denver proper and extending to areas such as Commerce City in Adams County.\nChanges in house prices for the area are publicly tracked on a regular basis using the Case\u2013Shiller index; the statistic is published by Standard &amp; Poor's and is also a component of S&amp;P's 10-city composite index of the value of the residential real estate market. The Denver MSA is also home to one of the fastest growing tech scenes outside of Silicon Valley in the country.\nElectricity is provided by Xcel Energy. Cable television is provided by Comcast.\nSports.\nThe following table shows sports teams in the Denver metropolitan area that average more than 12,000 fans per game:\nAir quality.\nThe center of the metropolitan area sits in a valley, the Denver Basin, and suffers from air pollution known colloquially as the \"brown cloud\", building up if the air is stagnant as it often is in the winter. Severity of pollution in this area has varied enormously over the years. In the late 1980s the area was frequently in violation of multiple National Ambient Air Quality Standards established by the United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). The Regional Air Quality Council (RAQC) was formed in 1989 to create plans to address the problem. Through a variety of measures the area's air quality was improved and in 2002 the EPA designated the area in compliance with all federal health-based air quality standards. Denver was the first major city in the United States to reach compliance with all six of these standards after previously violating five of them. Since then the EPA introduced a new standard for small particulates and made the existing ozone standard stricter. In 2003 the new ozone standard was frequently exceeded in the area and was occasionally exceeded as far away as Rocky Mountain National Park. The RAQC hopes to implement plans enabling the area to comply with the new standards by 2007.\nSister cities.\nThough Aurora, Brighton, Broomfield, Denver, Lakewood, and Longmont have their own individual sister city relationships, the Denver Regional Council of Governments (DRCOG) as a whole has a sister city relationship with the Baghdad Governorate of Iraq.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "60600", "revid": "63286", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60600", "title": "Barcode", "text": "Optical machine-readable representation of data\nA barcode or bar code is a method of representing data in a visual, machine-readable symbolic form. Initially, barcodes represented data by varying the widths, spacings and sizes of parallel lines. These barcodes, commonly referred to as linear or one-dimensional (1D), can be scanned by optical scanners known as barcode readers.\nLater, two-dimensional (2D) variants were developed, using rectangles, dots, hexagons and other patterns, called \"matrix codes\" or \"2D barcodes\", although they do not use bars in the traditional sense. Both can be read using purpose-built 2D optical scanners, which exist in a few different forms. Matrix codes can also be read by a digital camera connected to a microcomputer running software that takes a photographic image of the barcode and analyzes the image to deconstruct and decode the code. A mobile device with a built-in camera, such as a smartphone, can function as this type of barcode reader using specialized application software and is suitable for both 1D and 2D codes.\nThe barcode was invented by Norman Joseph Woodland and Bernard Silver and patented in the US in 1952. The invention was based on Morse code that was extended to thin and thick bars. However, it took over twenty years before this invention became commercially successful. UK magazine \"Modern Railways\" December 1962 pages 387\u2013389 record how British Railways had already perfected a barcode-reading system capable of correctly reading rolling stock travelling at with no mistakes. An early use of one type of barcode in an industrial context was sponsored by the Association of American Railroads in the late 1960s. Developed by General Telephone and Electronics (GTE) and called KarTrak ACI (Automatic Car Identification), this scheme involved placing colored stripes in various combinations on steel plates which were affixed to the sides of railroad rolling stock. Two plates were used per car, one on each side, with the arrangement of the colored stripes encoding information such as ownership, type of equipment, and identification number. The plates were read by a trackside scanner located, for instance, at the entrance to a classification yard, while the car was moving past. The project was abandoned after about ten years because the system proved unreliable after long-term use.\nBarcodes became commercially successful after they were adopted to automate supermarket checkout systems, a task for which they have become almost universal. The Uniform Grocery Product Code Council had chosen, in 1973, the barcode design developed by George Laurer. Laurer's barcode, with vertical bars, printed better than the circular barcode developed by Woodland and Silver. Their use has spread to many other tasks that are generically referred to as automatic identification and data capture (AIDC). The first successful system using barcodes was in the UK supermarket group Sainsbury's in 1972 using shelf-mounted barcodes which were developed by Plessey. In June 1974, Marsh supermarket in Troy, Ohio used a scanner made by Photographic Sciences Corporation to scan the Universal Product Code (UPC) barcode on a pack of Wrigley's chewing gum. QR codes, a specific type of 2D barcode, rose in popularity in the second decade of the 2000s due to the growth in smartphone ownership.\nOther systems have made inroads in the AIDC market, but the simplicity, universality and low cost of barcodes has limited the role of these other systems, particularly before technologies such as radio-frequency identification (RFID) became available after 2023.\nHistory.\nIn 1948, Bernard Silver, a graduate student at Drexel Institute of Technology in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, US overheard the president of the local food chain, Food Fair, asking one of the deans to research a system to automatically read product information during checkout. Silver told his friend Norman Joseph Woodland about the request, and they started working on a variety of systems. Their first working system used ultraviolet ink, but the ink faded too easily and was expensive.\nConvinced that the system was workable with further development, Woodland left Drexel, moved into his father's apartment in Florida, and continued working on the system. His next inspiration came from Morse code, and he formed his first barcode from sand on the beach. \"I just extended the dots and dashes downwards and made narrow lines and wide lines out of them.\" To read them, he adapted technology from optical soundtracks in movies, using a 500-watt incandescent light bulb shining through the paper onto an RCA935 photomultiplier tube (from a movie projector) on the far side. He later decided that the system would work better if it were printed as a circle instead of a line, allowing it to be scanned in any direction.\nOn 20 October 1949 Woodland and Silver filed a patent application for \"Classifying Apparatus and Method\", in which they described both the linear and bull's eye printing patterns, as well as the mechanical and electronic systems needed to read the code. The patent was issued on 7 October 1952 as US Patent 2,612,994. In 1951, Woodland moved to IBM and continually tried to interest IBM in developing the system. The company eventually commissioned a report on the idea, which concluded that it was both feasible and interesting, but that processing the resulting information would require equipment that was some time off in the future.\nIBM offered to buy the patent, but the offer was not accepted. Philco purchased the patent in 1962 and then sold it to RCA sometime later.\nCollins at Sylvania.\nDuring his time as an undergraduate, David Jarrett Collins worked at the Pennsylvania Railroad and became aware of the need to automatically identify railroad cars. Immediately after receiving his master's degree from MIT in 1959, he started work at GTE Sylvania and began addressing the problem. He developed a system called \"KarTrak\" using blue, white and red reflective stripes attached to the side of the cars, encoding a four-digit company identifier and a six-digit car number. Light reflected off the colored stripes was read by photomultiplier vacuum tubes.\nThe Boston and Maine Railroad tested the KarTrak system on their gravel cars in 1961. The tests continued until 1967, when the Association of American Railroads (AAR) selected it as a standard, automatic car identification, across the entire North American fleet. The installations began on 10 October 1967. However, the economic downturn and rash of bankruptcies in the industry in the early 1970s greatly slowed the rollout, and it was not until 1974 that 95% of the fleet was labeled. To add to its woes, the system was found to be easily fooled by dirt in certain applications, which greatly affected accuracy. The AAR abandoned the system in the late 1970s, and it was not until the mid-1980s that they introduced a similar system, this time based on radio tags.\nThe railway project had failed, but a toll bridge in New Jersey requested a similar system so that it could quickly scan for cars that had purchased a monthly pass. Then the US Post Office requested a system to track trucks entering and leaving their facilities. These applications required special retroreflector labels. Finally, Kal Kan asked the Sylvania team for a simpler (and cheaper) version which they could put on cases of pet food for inventory control.\nComputer Identics Corporation.\nIn 1967, with the railway system maturing, Collins went to management looking for funding for a project to develop a black-and-white version of the code for other industries. They declined, saying that the railway project was large enough, and they saw no need to branch out so quickly.\nCollins then quit Sylvania and formed the Computer Identics Corporation. As its first innovations, Computer Identics moved from using incandescent light bulbs in its systems, replacing them with helium\u2013neon lasers, and incorporated a mirror as well, making it capable of locating a barcode up to a meter (3 feet) in front of the scanner. This made the entire process much simpler and more reliable, and typically enabled these devices to deal with damaged labels, as well, by recognizing and reading the intact portions.\nComputer Identics Corporation installed one of its first two scanning systems in the spring of 1969 at a General Motors (Buick) factory in Flint, Michigan. The system was used to identify a dozen types of transmissions moving on an overhead conveyor from production to shipping. The other scanning system was installed at General Trading Company's distribution center in Carlstadt, New Jersey to direct shipments to the proper loading bay.\nUniversal Product Code.\nIn 1966 the National Association of Food Chains (NAFC) held a meeting on the idea of automated checkout systems. RCA, which had purchased the rights to the original Woodland patent, attended the meeting and initiated an internal project to develop a system based on the bullseye code. The Kroger grocery chain volunteered to test it.\nIn the mid-1970s the NAFC established the Ad-Hoc Committee for U.S. Supermarkets on a Uniform Grocery-Product Code to set guidelines for barcode development. In addition, it created a symbol-selection subcommittee to help standardize the approach. In cooperation with consulting firm, McKinsey &amp; Co., they developed a standardized 11-digit code for identifying products. The committee then sent out a contract tender to develop a barcode system to print and read the code. The request went to Singer, National Cash Register (NCR), Litton Industries, RCA, Pitney-Bowes, IBM and many others. A wide variety of barcode approaches was studied, including linear codes, RCA's bullseye concentric circle code, starburst patterns and others.\nIn the spring of 1971 RCA demonstrated their bullseye code at another industry meeting. IBM executives at the meeting noticed the crowds at the RCA booth and immediately developed their own system. IBM marketing specialist Alec Jablonover remembered that the company still employed Woodland, and he established a new facility in Research Triangle Park to lead development.\nIn July 1972 RCA began an 18-month test in a Kroger store in Cincinnati. Barcodes were printed on small pieces of adhesive paper, and attached by hand by store employees when they were adding price tags. The code proved to have a serious problem; the printers would sometimes smear ink, rendering the code unreadable in most orientations. However, a linear code, like the one being developed by Woodland at IBM, was printed in the direction of the stripes, so extra ink would simply make the code \"taller\" while remaining readable. So on 3 April 1973 the IBM UPC was selected as the NAFC standard. IBM had designed five versions of UPC symbology for future industry requirements: UPC A, B, C, D, and E.\nNCR installed a testbed system at Marsh's Supermarket in Troy, Ohio, near the factory that was producing the equipment. On 26 June 1974, a 10-pack of Wrigley's Juicy Fruit gum was scanned, registering the first commercial use of the UPC.\nIn 1971 an IBM team was assembled for an intensive planning session, threshing out, 12 to 18 hours a day, how the technology would be deployed and operate cohesively across the system, and scheduling a roll-out plan. By 1973, the team were meeting with grocery manufacturers to introduce the symbol that would need to be printed on the packaging or labels of all of their products. There were no cost savings for a grocery to use it, unless at least 70% of the grocery's products had the barcode printed on the product by the manufacturer. IBM projected that 75% would be needed in 1975.\nEconomic studies conducted for the grocery industry committee projected over $40\u00a0million in savings to the industry from scanning by the mid-1970s. Those numbers were not achieved in that time-frame and some predicted the demise of barcode scanning. The usefulness of the barcode required the adoption of expensive scanners by a critical mass of retailers while manufacturers simultaneously adopted barcode labels. Neither wanted to move first and results were not promising for the first couple of years, with \"Business Week\" proclaiming \"The Supermarket Scanner That Failed\" in a 1976 article.\nSims Supermarkets were the first location in Australia to use barcodes, starting in 1979.\nBarcode system.\nA barcode system is a network of hardware and software, consisting primarily of mobile computers, printers, handheld scanners, infrastructure, and supporting software. Barcode systems are used to automate data collection where hand recording is neither timely nor cost effective. Despite often being provided by the same company, Barcoding systems are not radio-frequency identification (RFID) systems. Many companies use both technologies as part of larger resource management systems.\nA typical barcode system consist of some infrastructure, either wired or wireless that connects some number of mobile computers, handheld scanners, and printers to one or many databases that store and analyze the data collected by the system. At some level there must be some software to manage the system. The software may be as simple as code that manages the connection between the hardware and the database or as complex as an ERP, MRP, or some other inventory management software.\nHardware.\nA wide range of hardware is manufactured for use in barcode systems by such manufacturers as Datalogic, Intermec, HHP (Hand Held Products), Microscan Systems, Unitech, Metrologic, PSC, and PANMOBIL, with the best known brand of handheld scanners and mobile computers being produced by Symbol, a division of Motorola.\nSoftware.\nSome ERP, MRP, and other inventory management software have built in support for barcode reading. Alternatively, custom interfaces can be created using a language such as C++, C#, Java, Visual Basic.NET, and many others. In addition, software development kits are produced to aid the process.\nIndustrial adoption.\nIn 1981 the United States Department of Defense adopted the use of Code 39 for marking all products sold to the United States military. This system, Logistics Applications of Automated Marking and Reading Symbols (LOGMARS), is still used by DoD and is widely viewed as the catalyst for widespread adoption of barcoding in industrial uses.\nUse.\nBarcodes are widely used around the world in many contexts. In stores, UPC barcodes are pre-printed on most items other than fresh produce from a grocery store. This speeds up processing at check-outs and helps track items and also reduces instances of shoplifting involving price tag swapping, although shoplifters can now print their own barcodes. Barcodes that encode a book's ISBN are also widely pre-printed on books, journals and other printed materials. In addition, retail chain membership cards use barcodes to identify customers, allowing for customized marketing and greater understanding of individual consumer shopping patterns. At the point of sale, shoppers can get product discounts or special marketing offers through the address or e-mail address provided at registration.\nBarcodes are widely used in healthcare and hospital settings, ranging from patient identification (to access patient data, including medical history, drug allergies, etc.) to creating SOAP notes with barcodes to medication management. They are also used to facilitate the separation and indexing of documents that have been imaged in batch scanning applications, track the organization of species in biology, and integrate with in-motion checkweighers to identify the item being weighed in a conveyor line for data collection.\nThey can also be used to keep track of objects and people; they are used to keep track of rental cars, airline luggage, nuclear waste, express mail, and parcels. Barcoded tickets (which may be printed by the customer on their home printer, or stored on their mobile device) allow the holder to enter sports arenas, cinemas, theatres, fairgrounds, and transportation, and are used to record the arrival and departure of vehicles from rental facilities etc. This can allow proprietors to identify duplicate or fraudulent tickets more easily. Barcodes are widely used in shop floor control applications software where employees can scan work orders and track the time spent on a job.\nBarcodes are also used in some kinds of non-contact 1D and 2D position sensors. A series of barcodes are used in some kinds of absolute 1D linear encoder. The barcodes are packed close enough together that the reader always has one or two barcodes in its field of view. As a kind of fiducial marker, the relative position of the barcode in the field of view of the reader gives incremental precise positioning, in some cases with sub-pixel resolution. The data decoded from the barcode gives the absolute coarse position. An \"address carpet\", used in digital paper, such as Howell's binary pattern and the Anoto dot pattern, is a 2D barcode designed so that a reader, even though only a tiny portion of the complete carpet is in the field of view of the reader, can find its absolute X, Y position and rotation in the carpet.\nMatrix codes can embed a hyperlink to a web page. A mobile device with a built-in camera might be used to read the pattern and browse the linked website, which can help a shopper find the best price for an item in the vicinity. Since 2005, airlines use an IATA-standard 2D barcode on boarding passes (Bar Coded Boarding Pass (BCBP)), and since 2008 2D barcodes sent to mobile phones enable electronic boarding passes.\nSome applications for barcodes have fallen out of use. In the 1970s and 1980s, software source code was occasionally encoded in a barcode and printed on paper (Cauzin Softstrip and Paperbyte are barcode symbologies specifically designed for this application), and the 1991 \"Barcode Battler\" computer game system used any standard barcode to generate combat statistics.\nArtists have used barcodes in art, such as Scott Blake's Barcode Jesus, as part of the post-modernism movement.\nSymbologies.\nThe mapping between messages and barcodes is called a \"symbology\". The specification of a symbology includes the encoding of the message into bars and spaces, any required start and stop markers, the size of the quiet zone required to be before and after the barcode, and the computation of a checksum.\nLinear symbologies can be classified mainly by two properties:\nSome symbologies use interleaving. The first character is encoded using black bars of varying width. The second character is then encoded by varying the width of the white spaces between these bars. Thus, characters are encoded in pairs over the same section of the barcode. Interleaved 2 of 5 is an example of this.\nStacked symbologies repeat a given linear symbology vertically.\nThe most common among the many 2D symbologies are matrix codes, which feature square or dot-shaped modules arranged on a grid pattern. 2D symbologies also come in circular and other patterns and may employ steganography, hiding modules within an image (for example, DataGlyphs).\nLinear symbologies are optimized for laser scanners, which sweep a light beam across the barcode in a straight line, reading a \"slice\" of the barcode light-dark patterns. Scanning at an angle makes the modules appear wider, but does not change the width ratios. Stacked symbologies are also optimized for laser scanning, with the laser making multiple passes across the barcode.\nIn the 1990s development of charge-coupled device (CCD) imagers to read barcodes was pioneered by Welch Allyn. Imaging does not require moving parts, as a laser scanner does. In 2007, linear imaging had begun to supplant laser scanning as the preferred scan engine for its performance and durability.\n2D symbologies cannot be read by a laser, as there is typically no sweep pattern that can encompass the entire symbol. They must be scanned by an image-based scanner employing a CCD or other digital camera sensor technology.\nBarcode readers.\nThe earliest, and still the cheapest, barcode scanners are built from a fixed light and a single photosensor that is manually moved across the barcode. Barcode scanners can be classified into three categories based on their connection to the computer. The older type is the RS-232 barcode scanner. This type requires special programming for transferring the input data to the application program. Keyboard interface scanners connect to a computer using a PS/2 or AT keyboard\u2013compatible adaptor cable (a \"keyboard wedge\"). The barcode's data is sent to the computer as if it had been typed on the keyboard.\nLike the keyboard interface scanner, USB scanners do not need custom code for transferring input data to the application program. On PCs running Windows the human interface device emulates the data merging action of a hardware \"keyboard wedge\", and the scanner automatically behaves like an additional keyboard.\nMost modern smartphones are able to decode barcode using their built-in camera. Google's mobile Android operating system can use their own Google Lens application to scan QR codes, or third-party apps like Barcode Scanner to read both one-dimensional barcodes and QR codes. Google's Pixel devices can natively read QR codes inside the default Pixel Camera app. Nokia's Symbian operating system featured a barcode scanner, while mbarcode is a QR code reader for the Maemo operating system. In Apple iOS 11, the native camera app can decode QR codes and can link to URLs, join wireless networks, or perform other operations depending on the QR Code contents. Other paid and free apps are available with scanning capabilities for other symbologies or for earlier iOS versions. With BlackBerry devices, the App World application can natively scan barcodes and load any recognized Web URLs on the device's Web browser. Windows Phone 7.5 is able to scan barcodes through the Bing search app. However, these devices are not designed specifically for the capturing of barcodes. As a result, they do not decode nearly as quickly or accurately as a dedicated barcode scanner or portable data terminal.\nQuality control and verification.\nIt is common for producers and users of bar codes to have a quality management system which includes verification and validation of bar codes. Barcode verification examines scanability and the quality of the barcode in comparison to industry standards and specifications. Barcode verifiers are primarily used by businesses that print and use barcodes. Any trading partner in the supply chain can test barcode quality. It is important to verify a barcode to ensure that any reader in the supply chain can successfully interpret a barcode with a low error rate. Retailers levy large penalties for non-compliant barcodes. These chargebacks can reduce a manufacturer's revenue by 2% to 10%.\nA barcode verifier works the way a reader does, but instead of simply decoding a barcode, a verifier performs a series of tests. For linear barcodes these tests are:\n2D matrix symbols look at the parameters:\nDepending on the parameter, each ANSI test is graded from 0.0 to 4.0 (F to A), or given a pass or fail mark. Each grade is determined by analyzing the scan reflectance profile (SRP), an analog graph of a single scan line across the entire symbol. The lowest of the 8 grades is the scan grade, and the overall ISO symbol grade is the average of the individual scan grades. For most applications a 2.5 (C) is the minimal acceptable symbol grade.\nCompared with a reader, a verifier measures a barcode's optical characteristics to international and industry standards. The measurement must be repeatable and consistent. Doing so requires constant conditions such as distance, illumination angle, sensor angle and verifier aperture. Based on the verification results, the production process can be adjusted to print higher quality barcodes that will scan down the supply chain.\nBar code validation may include evaluations after use (and abuse) testing such as sunlight, abrasion, impact, moisture, etc.\nBarcode verifier standards.\nBarcode verifier standards are defined by the International Organization for Standardization (ISO), in ISO/IEC 15426-1 (linear) or ISO/IEC 15426-2 (2D). The current international barcode quality specification is ISO/IEC 15416 (linear) and ISO/IEC 15415 (2D). The European Standard EN 1635 has been withdrawn and replaced by ISO/IEC 15416. The original U.S. barcode quality specification was ANSI X3.182. (UPCs used in the US \u2013 ANSI/UCC5). As of 2011 the ISO workgroup JTC1 SC31 was developing a Direct Part Marking (DPM) quality standard: ISO/IEC TR 29158.\nBenefits.\nIn point-of-sale management, barcode systems can provide detailed up-to-date information on the business, accelerating decisions and with more confidence. For example:\nBesides sales and inventory tracking, barcodes are very useful in logistics and supply chain management.\nBarcode scanners are relatively low cost and extremely accurate compared to key-entry, with only about 1 substitution error in 15,000 to 36\u00a0trillion characters entered. The exact error rate depends on the type of barcode.\nTypes of barcodes.\nLinear barcodes.\nA first generation, \"one dimensional\" barcode that is made up of lines and spaces of various widths or sizes that create specific patterns.\n2D barcodes.\n2D barcodes consist of bars, but use both dimensions for encoding.\nMatrix (2D) codes.\nA \"matrix code\" or simply a \"2D code\", is a two-dimensional way to represent information. It can represent more data per unit area. Apart from dots various other patterns can be used.\nIn popular culture.\nIn architecture, a building in Lingang New City by German architects Gerkan, Marg and Partners incorporates a barcode design, as does a shopping mall called \"Shtrikh-kod\" (Russian for \"barcode\") in Narodnaya ulitsa (\"People's Street\") in the Nevskiy district of St. Petersburg, Russia.\nIn media, in 2011, the National Film Board of Canada and ARTE France launched a web documentary entitled \"Barcode.tv\", which allows users to view films about everyday objects by scanning the product's barcode with their iPhone camera.\nIn professional wrestling, the WWE stable D-Generation X incorporated a barcode into their entrance video, as well as on a T-shirt.\nIn video games, the protagonist of the \"Hitman\" video game series has a barcode tattoo on the back of his head; QR codes can also be scanned in a side mission in \"Watch Dogs\".\nThe 2018 videogame \"Judgment\" features QR Codes that protagonist Takayuki Yagami can photograph with his phone camera. These are mostly to unlock parts for Yagami's Drone.\nInteractive Textbooks were first published by \"Harcourt College Publishers to Expand Education Technology with Interactive Textbooks.\"\nDesigned barcodes.\nSome companies integrate custom designs into barcodes on their consumer products without impairing their readability.\nOpposition.\nSome have regarded barcodes to be an intrusive surveillance technology. Some Christians, pioneered by a 1982 book \"The New Money System 666\" by Mary Stewart Relfe, believe the codes hide the number 666, representing the \"Number of the beast\". Old Believers, a separation of the Russian Orthodox Church, believe barcodes are the stamp of the Antichrist. Television host Phil Donahue described barcodes as a \"corporate plot against consumers\".\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "60602", "revid": "37108273", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60602", "title": "210 BC", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 210 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Marcellus and Laevinus (or, less frequently, year 544 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 210 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy place.\nChina.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "60603", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60603", "title": "188 BC", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 188 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Messalla and Salinator (or, less frequently, year 566 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 188 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "60604", "revid": "10951369", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60604", "title": "189 BC", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 189 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Nobilior and Vulso (or, less frequently, year 565 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 189 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy place.\nAsia Minor.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "60605", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60605", "title": "Dust storm", "text": "Meteorological phenomenon common in arid and semi-arid regions\nA dust storm, also called a sandstorm, is a meteorological phenomenon common in arid and semi-arid regions. Dust storms arise when a gust front or other strong wind blows loose sand and dirt from a dry surface. Fine particles are transported by saltation and suspension, a process that moves soil from one place and deposits it in another. These storms can reduce visibility, disrupt transportation, and pose serious health risks. Over time, repeated dust storms can reduce agricultural productivity and contribute to desertification. \nThe arid regions of North Africa, the Middle East, Central Asia and China are the main terrestrial sources of airborne dust. It has been argued that poor management of Earth's drylands, such as neglecting the fallow system, are increasing the size and frequency of dust storms from desert margins and changing both the local and global climate, as well as impacting local economies.\nThe term \"sandstorm\" is used most often in the context of desert dust storms, especially in the Sahara Desert, or places where sand is a more prevalent soil type than dirt or rock, when, in addition to fine particles obscuring visibility, a considerable amount of larger sand particles are blown closer to the surface. The term \"dust storm\" is more likely to be used when finer particles are blown long distances, especially when the dust storm affects urban areas.\nCauses.\nAs the force of dust passing over loosely held particles increases, particles of sand first start to vibrate, then to move across the surface in a process called saltation. As they repeatedly strike the ground, they loosen and break off smaller particles of dust which then begin to travel in suspension. At wind speeds above that which causes the smallest to suspend, there will be a population of dust grains moving by a range of mechanisms: suspension, saltation and creep.\nA study from 2008 finds that the initial saltation of sand particles induces a static electric field by friction. Saltating sand acquires a negative charge relative to the ground which in turn loosens more sand particles which then begin saltating. This process has been found to double the number of particles predicted by previous theories.\nParticles become loosely held mainly due to a prolonged drought or arid conditions, and high wind speeds. Gust fronts may be produced by the outflow of rain-cooled air from an intense thunderstorm. Or, the wind gusts may be produced by a dry cold front: that is, a cold front that is moving into a dry air mass and is producing no precipitation\u2014the type of dust storm which was common during the Dust Bowl years in the U.S. Following the passage of a dry cold front, convective instability resulting from cooler air riding over heated ground can maintain the dust storm initiated at the front.\nIn desert areas, dust and sand storms are most commonly caused by either thunderstorm outflows, or by strong pressure gradients which cause an increase in wind velocity over a wide area. The vertical extent of the dust or sand that is raised is largely determined by the stability of the atmosphere above the ground as well as by the weight of the particulates. In some cases, dust and sand may be confined to a relatively-shallow layer by a low-lying temperature inversion. In other instances, dust (but not sand) may be lifted as high as . Dust storms are a major health hazard.\nDrought and wind contribute to the emergence of dust storms, as do poor farming and grazing practices by exposing the dust and sand to the wind. Wildfires can lead to dust storms as well.\nOne poor farming practice which contributes to dust storms is dryland farming. Particularly poor dryland farming techniques are intensive tillage or not having established crops or cover crops when storms strike at particularly vulnerable times prior to revegetation. In a semi-arid climate, these practices increase susceptibility to dust storms. However, soil conservation practices may be implemented to control wind erosion.\nPhysical and environmental effects.\nA sandstorm can transport and carry large volumes of sand unexpectedly. Dust storms can carry large amounts of dust, with the leading edge being composed of a wall of thick dust as much as high. Dust and sand storms which come off the Sahara Desert are locally known as a simoom or simoon. The \"haboob\" is a sandstorm prevalent in the region of Sudan around Khartoum, with occurrences being most common in the summer.\nThe Sahara desert is a key source of dust storms, particularly the Bod\u00e9l\u00e9 Depression and an area covering the confluence of Mauritania, Mali, and Algeria. Sahara dust is frequently emitted into the Mediterranean atmosphere and transported by the winds sometimes as far north as central Europe and Great Britain.\nSaharan dust storms have increased approximately 10-fold during the half-century since the 1950s, causing topsoil loss in Niger, Chad, northern Nigeria, and Burkina Faso. In Mauritania there were just two dust storms a year in the early 1960s; there are about 80 a year since 2007, according to English geographer Andrew Goudie, professor at the University of Oxford. Levels of Saharan dust coming off the east coast of Africa in June 2007 were five times those observed in June 2006, and were the highest observed since at least 1999, which may have cooled Atlantic waters enough to slightly reduce hurricane activity in late 2007.\nDust storms have also been shown to increase the spread of disease across the globe. Bacteria and fungus spores in the ground are blown into the atmosphere by the storms with the minute particles and interact with urban air pollution.\nShort-term effects of exposure to desert dust include immediate increased symptoms and worsening of the lung function in individuals with asthma, increased mortality and morbidity from long-transported dust from both Saharan and Asian dust storms suggesting that long-transported dust storm particles adversely affects the circulatory system. Dust pneumonia is the result of large amounts of dust being inhaled.\nProlonged and unprotected exposure of the respiratory system in a dust storm can also cause silicosis, which, if left untreated, will lead to asphyxiation; silicosis is an incurable condition that may also lead to lung cancer. There is also the danger of keratoconjunctivitis sicca (\"dry eyes\") which, in severe cases without immediate and proper treatment, can lead to blindness.\nEconomic impact.\nDust storms cause soil loss from the drylands, and worse, they preferentially remove organic matter and the nutrient-rich lightest particles, thereby reducing agricultural productivity. Also, the abrasive effect of the storm damages young crop plants. Dust storms also reduce visibility, affecting aircraft and road transportation.\nDust can also have beneficial effects where it deposits: Central and South American rainforests get significant quantities of mineral nutrients from the Sahara; iron-poor ocean regions get iron; and dust in Hawaii increases plantain growth. In northern China as well as the mid-western U.S., ancient dust storm deposits known as loess are highly fertile soils, but they are also a significant source of contemporary dust storms when soil-securing vegetation is disturbed.\nOn Mars.\nDust storms are not limited to Earth and have also been known to form on Mars. These dust storms can extend over larger areas than those on Earth, sometimes encircling the planet, with wind speeds as high as . However, given Mars's much lower atmospheric pressure (roughly 1% that of Earth's), the intensity of Mars storms could never reach the hurricane-force winds experienced on Earth. Martian dust storms are formed when solar heating warms the Martian atmosphere and causes the air to move, lifting dust off the ground. The chance for storms is increased when there are great temperature variations like those seen at the equator during the Martian summer.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "60606", "revid": "318802", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60606", "title": "Trichechidae", "text": "Family of mammals\nTrichechidae is a family of sirenians that includes all living manatees and several extinct genera. \nSystematics.\nTrichechidae\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "60607", "revid": "26442336", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60607", "title": "211 BC", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 211 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Maximus and Maximus (or, less frequently, year 543 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 211 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy place.\nParthia.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;"}
{"id": "60608", "revid": "6941696", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60608", "title": "186 BC", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 186 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Albinus and Philippus (or, less frequently, year 568 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 186 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy place.\nChina.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "60609", "revid": "39471746", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60609", "title": "187 BC", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 187 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Lepidus and Flaminius (or, less frequently, year 567 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 187 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy place.\nEgypt.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "60610", "revid": "2273576", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60610", "title": "Trichechus", "text": ""}
{"id": "60611", "revid": "19376353", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60611", "title": "University of Florida", "text": "Public university in Gainesville, Florida, US\nThe University of Florida (Florida or UF) is a public land-grant research university in Gainesville, Florida, United States. It is a senior member of the State University System of Florida. The university traces its origins to 1853 and has operated continuously on its Gainesville campus since September 1906.\nAfter the Florida state legislature's creation of performance standards in 2013, the Florida Board of Governors designated the University of Florida as a \"preeminent university\". The University of Florida is one of three members of the Association of American Universities in Florida and is classified among \"R1: Doctoral Universities \u2013 Very high research spending and doctorate production\".\nThe university is accredited by the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools (SACS). It is the third largest U.S. public university by student population and is the fifth largest single-campus university in the United States with 54,814 students enrolled in fall 2023. The University of Florida is home to 16 academic colleges and more than 150 research centers and institutes. It offers multiple graduate professional programs\u2014including business administration, engineering, law, dentistry, medicine, pharmacy and veterinary medicine\u2014on one contiguous campus and administers 123 master's degree programs and 76 doctoral degree programs in 87 schools and departments. The university's seal is also the seal of the state of Florida, which is on the state flag, though in blue rather than multiple colors.\nThe University of Florida's intercollegiate sports teams, the Florida Gators, compete in National Collegiate Athletic Association (NCAA) Division I and the Southeastern Conference (SEC). As of 2021,[ [update]] University of Florida students and alumni have won 143 Olympic medals, including 69 gold medals.\nHistory.\nOrigins.\nThe modern University of Florida traces its origins to 1853, when the East Florida Seminary, the oldest of its four predecessor institutions, was founded in 1853 as the East Florida Seminary in Ocala, Florida. The seminary was Florida's first state-supported institution of higher learning and operated until 1861 with the outbreak of the American Civil War. In 1866, the East Florida Seminary reopened in Gainesville on the grounds of the Gainesville Academy, a small private college that had closed during the war.\nThe second precursor to the University of Florida was Florida Agricultural College (FAC), the state's first land-grant college under the Morrill Act, established in Lake City in 1884. The Florida Legislature, looking to expand FAC's curriculum beyond agricultural and engineering offerings, changed the school's name to the \"University of Florida\" for the 1903\u20131904 academic year. This name was in use for two years.\n\"University of the State of Florida\".\nIn 1905, the Florida Legislature passed the Buckman Act, which reorganized the state's publicly supported institutions of higher education. Under the act, Florida's six state-supported institutions were merged to form the State University System of Florida under the newly established Florida Board of Control. Four institutions were combined to create a new \"University of the State of Florida\" for white men: the University of Florida at Lake City (formerly Florida Agricultural College), the East Florida Seminary in Gainesville, the St. Petersburg Normal and Industrial School in St. Petersburg, and the South Florida Military College in Bartow.\nThe Buckman Act also created two other institutions segregated by race and gender: Florida Female College (later the Florida State College for Women and eventually Florida State University) for white women and the State Normal School for Colored Students (later Florida A&amp;M) for African-American men and women, both in Tallahassee.\nThe Buckman Act did not specify where the new University of the State of Florida would be located. The City of Gainesville, led by its mayor William Reuben Thomas, campaigned to be the site of the new university, with its primary competitor being Lake City. After a brief but intense period of lobbying, the Board of Control selected Gainesville on July 6, 1905, and funds were allocated for the construction of a new campus on the western edge of the town. However, because the facilities in Gainesville would not be ready to accept students for several months, the new university was housed in the former campus of Florida Agricultural College in Lake City during the 1905\u20131906 academic year. Former FAC president Andrew Sledd was chosen to be the first president of the University of the State of Florida.\nThe University of the State of Florida's first semester in Gainesville began on September 26, 1906, with an enrollment of 102 students. Two buildings had been completed at the time: Buckman Hall, named after the primary author of the law that created the university, and Thomas Hall, named after the mayor of Gainesville who had led the successful effort to bring the school to town. Both structures were designed by William A. Edwards, who designed many of the university's original buildings in the Collegiate Gothic style in his role as lead architect for Florida's Board of Control.\nDuring his term, first university president Andrew Sledd often clashed with key members of the Board of Control over his insistence on rigorous admissions requirements, which his detractors claimed was unreasonably impeding the growth of enrollment. Sledd resigned over these issues in 1909.\nGrowth, mascots, and establishment of colleges.\nFlorida State College for Women president Albert Murphree was named UF's second president before the 1909\u20131910 academic year, which was also when the school's name was simplified from the \"University of the State of Florida\" to the \"University of Florida\". Murphree oversaw a reorganization of the university that included the establishment of several colleges, beginning with colleges of law, engineering, and liberal arts and sciences by 1910. Murphree was also instrumental in the founding of the Florida Blue Key leadership society and in building total enrollment from under 200 to over 2000. He is the only University of Florida president honored with a statue on campus.\nThe alligator became the school's informal mascot when a local vendor designed and sold school pennants imprinted with the animal, which is very common in lakes in and around Gainesville and throughout the state. The 'gator was a popular choice, and the university's sports teams had officially adopted the nickname by 1911. The school colors of orange and blue were also officially established in 1911, though the reasons for the choice are unclear. The most likely rationale was that they are a combination of the colors of the university's two largest predecessor institutions, as the East Florida Seminary used orange and black while Florida Agricultural College used blue and white. The older schools' colors may have been an homage to early Scottish and Ulster-Scots Presbyterian settlers of north central Florida, whose ancestors were originally from Northern Ireland and the Scottish Lowlands.\nIn 1924, the Florida Legislature mandated women of a \"mature age\" (at least twenty-one years old) who had completed sixty semester hours from a \"reputable educational institution\" be allowed to enroll during regular semesters at the University of Florida in programs that were unavailable at Florida State College for Women. Before this, only the summer semester was coeducational, to accommodate women teachers who wanted to further their education during the summer break. Lassie Goodbread-Black from Lake City became the first woman to enroll at the University of Florida, in the College of Agriculture in 1925.\nMurphree died in 1928 and John J. Tigert was named UF's third president. Early in his tenure, Tigert helped organize the semi-independent University Athletic Association to plan the construction of Florida Field and operate the school's athletic programs. Disgusted by the under-the-table payments being made by universities to athletes, Tigert established the grant-in-aid athletic scholarship program in the early 1930s, which was the genesis of the modern athletic scholarship plan used by the National Collegiate Athletic Association.\nInventor and educator Blake R. Van Leer was hired as Dean to launch new engineering departments and scholarships. Van Leer also managed all applications for federal funding, chaired the Advanced Planning Committee per Tigert's request. These efforts included consulting for the Florida Emergency Relief Administration throughout the 1930s.\nPost World War II.\nBeginning in 1946, there was dramatically increased interest among male applicants who wanted to attend the University of Florida, mostly returning World War II veterans who could attend college under the GI Bill of Rights (Servicemen's Readjustment Act). Unable to immediately accommodate this increased demand, the Florida Board of Control opened the Tallahassee Branch of the University of Florida on the campus of Florida State College for Women in Tallahassee. By the end of the 1946\u201347 school year, 954 men were enrolled at the Tallahassee Branch. The following semester, the Florida Legislature returned the Florida State College for Women to coeducational status and renamed it Florida State University. These events also opened up all of the colleges that comprise the University of Florida to female students. Florida Women's Hall of Fame member Maryly Van Leer became the first woman to receive from the University of Florida a master's degree in engineering.\nAfrican-American students were allowed to enroll starting in 1958. From its inception until 1958, only white students were allowed to study at the University of Florida. In 1958, George H. Starke became the first Black student.\nStarting in the late 1950s, University of Florida faculty and students were monitored and interrogated by the Florida Legislative Investigation Committee, also known as the Johns Committee, with the goal of exposing homosexual behavior at the university. University president J. Wayne Reitz cooperated with the investigation, which caused at least 15 faculty and 50 students to leave or be forced out of the university after the committee targeted them. The committee's work culminated in the publication of a report called \"Homosexuality and Citizenship in Florida\" in 1964. The Johns Committee is considered a late extension of McCarthyism and the Lavender Scare.\nRapid campus expansion began in the 1950s and continues today. The Carleton Auditorium, Century Tower, Little Hall, Beaty Towers, the Constans Theatre, Library West, and the Reitz Student Union were all completed during this period. Shands Hospital opened in 1958 along with the University of Florida College of Medicine to join the established College of Pharmacy. The J. Wayne Reitz Union, the student union of the University of Florida, was completed in 1967. The union was named in honor of J. Wayne Reitz, the fifth president of the university, who served from 1955 to 1967. Library West was constructed in 1967 and was originally designated as the \"Graduate Research Library.\" Library East (now Smathers Library) was at the same time designated as the undergraduate library.\nNational and international prominence.\nIn 1985, the University of Florida was invited to join the Association of American Universities.\nDuring President Bernie Machen's tenure and with the backing of the University of Florida Board of Trustees, a significant policy shift was announced in 2009 for the university. This shift involved reducing the number of undergraduate students and reallocating financial and academic resources toward graduate education and research initiatives.\nThe University of Florida is one of three Florida public universities, along with Florida State University and the University of South Florida, to be designated as a \"preeminent university\" by Florida senate bill 1076, enacted by the Florida legislature and signed into law by the governor in 2013. As a result, the preeminent universities receive additional funding to improve the academics and national reputation of higher education within the state of Florida.\nIn 2017, the University of Florida achieved a notable milestone by becoming the first university in the state of Florida to rank among the top ten best public universities according to U.S. News. In 2017, University President Kent Fuchs unveiled a plan to recruit 500 new faculty members to elevate the university's ranking among the top five best public universities. The majority of these new hires are concentrated in STEM fields. In 2018, 230 faculty members were hired, with the remaining 270 faculty positions expected to be filled by the fall of 2019.\nIn the 2025 fiscal year, the University of Florida received more than $1.33 billion in annual sponsored research expenditures.\nAcademic freedom controversy.\nIn October 2021, three professors filed a federal lawsuit against UF, claiming they were barred from testifying in a voting rights lawsuit against Florida secretary of state Laurel Lee and Governor Ron DeSantis. The university claimed that testifying against the state would be \"adverse to the university\u2019s interests as a state of Florida institution,\" igniting controversy over alleged inappropriate political influence at the university, interference in academic freedom, and violation of the professors' First Amendment rights. Earlier in the year, the chairman of UF's Board of Trustees, Morteza Hosseini, reportedly pushed the university to hire Joseph Ladapo, a controversial doctor known for his support of DeSantis's COVID-19 policies and promotion of COVID misinformation. Hosseini is a major Republican Party donor and DeSantis adviser.\nThe reports prompted investigations by the U.S. House Subcommittee on Civil Rights and Civil Liberties, the UF Faculty Senate, and UF's accrediting body, the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools (SACSCOC). Further reporting in November 2021 revealed that the university had prohibited at least five more professors from offering expertise in legal cases, including a professor of pediatric medicine who was not allowed to offer expert testimony in a case related to masking of children during the COVID pandemic, a measure supported by medical experts but opposed by Governor DeSantis.\nIn response to the allegations, UF's administration appointed a task force to \"review the university's conflict of interest policy and examine it for consistency and fidelity\" and reversed its decision to bar professors from testifying, stating that they were permitted to testify pro bono on their own time. The recommendations of the task force were accepted by UF president Kent Fuchs in late November 2021. However, a December 2021 report from the UF Faculty Senate deepened the controversy, citing external pressure and a widespread fear of reprisal if faculty promoted unpopular viewpoints and alleging that course titles on racial topics were edited, faculty were advised against criticizing Governor DeSantis or his policies, and medical researchers were compelled to destroy data related to the COVID pandemic.\nAcademics.\nUndergraduate admissions.\nThe 2022 annual ranking of \"U.S. News &amp; World Report\" categorizes the University of Florida as \"most selective.\" For the Class of 2027 (enrolled fall 2023), Florida's acceptance rate was 24.0%. Of those accepted, 6,612 enrolled, a yield rate (the percentage of accepted students who choose to attend the university) of 43.1%.\nFlorida's freshman retention rate is 97%, with 89% going on to graduate within six years.\nThe Fall 2023 incoming freshman class had an average 1390 SAT score, and a 31 ACT score. 3% of these students were foreign nationals, while 49% were White Americans, 22% were Hispanic Americans, 14% were Asian Americans, and 6% were Black Americans.\nThe University of Florida is a college-sponsor of the National Merit Scholarship Program and sponsored 288 Merit Scholarship awards in 2020. In the 2020\u20132021 academic year, 342 freshman students were National Merit Scholars. The university is need-blind for domestic applicants.\nIn 2007, the University of Florida joined the University of Virginia, Harvard University, the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, and Princeton University in announcing the discontinuation of early decision admissions to foster economic diversity in their student bodies. These universities assert early decision admissions forces students to accept an offer of admission before evaluating the financial aid offers from multiple universities. The university's single application deadline is November 1.\nTuition and scholarships.\nFor the 2018\u201319 academic year, tuition and fees were $6,381 for in-state undergraduate students, and $28,658 for out-of-state undergraduate students. Tuition for online courses is lower and for graduate courses is higher.\nThe Lombardi Scholars Program, created in 2002 and named in honor of the university's ninth president John V. Lombardi, is a merit scholarship for Florida students. The scholarship offers $2,700 a semester for eight to ten semesters.\nThe J. Wayne Reitz Scholars Program, created in 1997 and named in honor of the university's fifth president J. Wayne Reitz, is a leadership and merit-based scholarship for Florida students. Its yearly $2,500 stipend may be renewed for up to three years.\nThe Machen Florida Opportunity Scholars Program was created in 2005. This is a full grant and scholarship financial aid package designed to help new, low-income UF students that are the first to attend college in their families. Every year, 300 scholarships are awarded to incoming freshmen with an average family income of $18,408.\nThe Alec Courtelis Award is given annually at the International Student Academics Awards Ceremony. The award is given to international students, in recognition of their academic excellence and outstanding contribution to the university and community. Louise Courtelis established the Alec Courtelis Award in honor of husband, a successful businessman and former chairman of the Florida Board of Regents in 1996.\nEnrollment.\nAccording to the Jewish Telegraphic Agency, UF has \"the largest Jewish student body in the US.\" It is estimated that 18% of UF undergraduate and graduate students identify as Jewish compared to around 2% of the United States population.\nA 2014 social mobility report conducted by \"The New York Times\" found that 48% of UF undergraduate students came from families with incomes above the 80th percentile (&gt;$110,000 (2015 USD)), while 6% came from families in the bottom 20th percentiles (&lt;$20,000 (2015 USD)). The same report also indicates that 30% of the student body came from families from the top 10% of households, and 3% came from the top 1%.\nIn 2016, the university had 5,169 international students. According to the Annual Admissions Report conducted by UF in 2019, roughly 17% of the incoming freshman class was entering from outside of Florida. The majority of freshmen starting at the University of Florida come from urban backgrounds with the biggest demographic hailing from South Florida cities; the metropolitan areas of Tampa, Orlando, and Jacksonville historically form a significant share of the incoming class as well. New York and New Jersey are the biggest feeder states outside of Florida.\nThe University of Florida is ranked second overall in the United States for the number of bachelor's degrees awarded to African-Americans, and third overall for Hispanics. The university ranks fifth in the number of doctoral degrees awarded to African-Americans, and second overall for Hispanics, and third in number of professional degrees awarded to African-Americans, and second overall for Hispanics. The university offers multiple graduate programs\u2014including engineering, business, law and medicine\u2014on one contiguous campus, and coordinates 123 master's degree programs and 76 doctoral degree programs in 87 schools and departments.\nRankings.\nIn its 2021 edition, \"U.S. News &amp; World Report\" \"(USN&amp;WR)\" ranked the University of Florida as tied for the fifth-best public university in the United States, and tied for 28th overall among all national universities, public and private.\nMany of the University of Florida's graduate schools have received top-50 national rankings from \"U.S. News &amp; World Report\" with the school of education 25th, Florida's Hough School of Business 25th, Florida's Medical School (research) tied for 43rd, the Engineering School tied for 45th, the Levin College of Law tied for 31st, and the Nursing School tied for 24th in the 2020 rankings.\nFlorida's graduate programs ranked for 2020 by \"USN&amp;WR\" in the nation's top 50 were audiology tied for 26th, analytical chemistry 11th, clinical psychology tied for 31st, computer science tied for 49th, criminology 19th, health care management tied for 33rd, nursing-midwifery tied for 35th, occupational therapy tied for 17th, pharmacy tied for 9th, physical therapy tied for 10th, physician assistant tied for 21st, physics tied for 37th, psychology tied for 39th, public health tied for 37th, speech-language pathology tied for 28th, statistics tied for 40th, and veterinary medicine 9th.\nThe 2018 \"Academic Ranking of World Universities\" list assessed the University of Florida as 86th among global universities, based on overall research output and faculty awards. In 2017, \"Washington Monthly\" ranked the University of Florida 18th among national universities, with criteria based on research, community service, and social mobility. The lowest national ranking received by the university from a major publication comes from Forbes which ranked the university 68th in the nation in 2018. This ranking focuses mainly on net positive financial impact, in contrast to other rankings, and generally ranks liberal arts colleges above most research universities.\nUniversity of Florida received the following rankings by The Princeton Review in its 2020 \"Best 380 Colleges\" Rankings: 13th for Best Value Colleges without Aid, 18th for Lots of Beer, and 42nd for Best Value Colleges. It also was named the number one vegan-friendly school for 2014, according to a survey conducted by PETA.\nOn Forbes' 2016 list of Best Value Public Colleges, UF was ranked second. It was also ranked third on Forbes' Overall Best Value Colleges Nationwide. The University of Florida is ranked among The Best Colleges in America in 2022 and positioned #8 on Money.com\u2019s list.\nColleges and academic divisions.\nThe University of Florida is the flagship university of the state and it has 16 different colleges. UF has more than 150 research centers, service centers, education centers, bureaus, and institutes offering more than 100 undergraduate majors and 200 graduate degrees.\nThese colleges include:\nHonors program.\nThe University of Florida has an honors program; during application to the university, students must apply separately to the Honors Program and show significant academic achievement to be accepted. There are over 100 courses offered exclusively to students in this program. In 2023, 14,089 students applied for 1,778 available seats. The Honors Program also offers housing for freshman in the Honors Village Residential Complex. The program also offers special scholarships, internships, research, and study abroad opportunities.\nCareer placement.\nThe University of Florida Career Resource Center is in the Reitz Student Union. Its mission is to assist students and alumni who are seeking career development, career experiences, and employment opportunities. These services involve on and off-campus job interviews, career planning, assistance in applying to graduate and professional schools, and internship and co-op placements. The Career Resource Center offers workshops, information sessions, career fairs, and advisement on future career options. Staff also counsel students and alumni regarding resumes and portfolios, interviewing tactics, cover letters, job strategies and other potential leads for finding employment in the corporate, academic and government sectors.\nThe Princeton Review ranked the Career Resource Center as the best among 368 ranked universities in career and job placement services in 2010, and fourth overall in 2011.\nResearch.\nThe university spent over $1.33 billion on research and development in 2025, ranking it within the nation's Top 25 public and private universities.\nAccording to a 2019 study by the university's Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, the university contributed $16.9 billion to Florida's economy and was responsible for over 130,000 jobs in the 2017\u201318 fiscal year. Royalty and licensing income includes the glaucoma drug Trusopt, the sports drink Gatorade, and the Sentricon termite elimination system.\nResearch includes diverse areas such as health-care and citrus production (the world's largest citrus research center). In 2002, Florida began leading six other universities under a $15 million NASA grant to work on space-related research during a five-year period. The university's partnership with Spain helped to create the world's largest single-aperture optical telescope in the Canary Islands (the cost was $93 million). Plans are also under way for the University of Florida to construct a research facility in collaboration with the Burnham Institute for Medical Research that will be in the center of University of Central Florida's Health Sciences Campus in Orlando, Florida. Research will include diabetes, aging, genetics and cancer.\nThe University of Florida also houses one of the world's leading lightning research teams. The university is also host to a nuclear research reactor known for its Neutron Activation Analysis Laboratory. In addition, the University of Florida was the first American university to receive a European Union grant to house a Jean Monnet Centre of Excellence.\nThe University of Florida manages or has a stake in numerous notable research centers, facilities, institutes, and projects\nResearch facilities.\nAs of 2012[ [update]], the University of Florida had more than $750 million in new research facilities recently completed or under construction, including the Nanoscale Research Facility, the Pathogens Research Facility and the Biomedical Sciences Building. Additionally, Innovation Square, a 24/7 live/work/play research environment being developed along Southwest Second Avenue between the University of Florida campus and downtown Gainesville, recently broke ground and plans to open next fall. The university's Office of Technology Licensing will relocate to Innovation Square, joining Florida Innovation Hub, a business \"super-incubator\" designed to promote the development of new high-tech companies based on the university's research programs. Innovation Square will include retail space, restaurants and local businesses, and residential space.\nParticipation in the Large Hadron Collider.\nA team of UF physicists has a leading role in one of the two major experiments planned for the Large Hadron Collider, a -long, $5 billion, super-cooled tunnel outside Geneva, Switzerland. More than 30 university physicists, postdoctoral associates, graduate students and now undergraduates are involved in the collider's Compact Muon Solenoid (CMS) experiment, one of its two major experiments. About 10 are stationed in Geneva. The group is the largest from any university in the U.S. to participate in the CMS experiment. The UF team designed and oversaw development of a major detector within the CMS. The detector, the Muon system, is intended to capture subatomic particles called muons, which are heavier cousins of electrons. Among other efforts, UF scientists analyzed about 100 of the 400 detector chambers placed within the Muon system to be sure they were functioning properly. Scientists from the University of Florida group played a central role in the discovery of the Higgs particle. The bulk of the UF research was funded by the U.S. Department of Energy.\nPartnership with Zhejiang University.\nIn July 2008, the University of Florida teamed up with the Zhejiang University to research sustainable solutions to the Earth's energy issues. Overall a Joint Research Center of Clean Sustainable Energy among the Florida Institute for Sustainable Energy, at UF, and the State Key Lab of Clean Energy Utilization and the Institute for Thermal Power Engineering, at Zhejiang University will collaborate to work on this pressing issue.\nThe International Center for Lightning Research and Testing.\nFlorida has more lightning than any other U.S. state. UF sponsors the International Center for Lightning Research and Testing (ICLRT), which occupies over at the Camp Blanding Army National Guard Base, about northeast of UF's campus in Gainesville, Florida. One of their primary research tools is lightning initiation from overhead thunderclouds, using the triggered lightning rocket-and-wire technique. Small sounding rockets, connected to long copper wires, are fired into likely lightning storm cumulonimbus clouds. When the rocket\u2014or its wire\u2014is struck by lightning, the passing of the high-voltage lightning strike down the wire vaporizes it as the lightning travels to the ground. Undergraduate and graduate research in UF's Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering's Lightning Research Group is used to increase new fundamental knowledge about lightning-based phenomena.\nUF Health.\nUniversity of Florida Health has two campuses: Gainesville and Jacksonville. It includes two teaching hospitals and two specialty hospitals, as well as the colleges of Dentistry, Medicine, Nursing, Pharmacy, Public Health and Health Professions, and Veterinary Medicine, including a large animal hospital and a small animal hospital. The system also encompasses six UF research institutes: the Clinical and Translational Science Institute, the Evelyn F. and William L. McKnight Brain Institute, the Genetics Institute, the UF Health Cancer Center, the Institute on Aging and the Emerging Pathogens Institute. UF Health is the only academic health center in the United States with six health-related colleges on a single, contiguous campus.\nPatient-care services are provided through the private, not-for-profit UF Health Shands family of hospitals and programs. UF Health Shands Hospital in Gainesville includes UF Health Shands Children's Hospital and UF Health Shands Cancer Hospital. The specialty hospitals, UF Health Shands Rehab Hospital and UF Health Shands Psychiatric Hospital, are also in Gainesville. UF Health Jacksonville is the system's northeast Florida center.\nUF Health has a network of outpatient rehabilitation centers, UF Health Rehab Centers, and two home-health agencies, UF Health Shands HomeCare; as well as more than 80 UF physician outpatient practices in north central and northeast Florida. UF Health is affiliated with the Veterans Affairs hospitals in Gainesville and North Florida/South Georgia.\nIn all, more than 7,000 students are enrolled in all six UF Health colleges (as of 2021). The Evelyn F. and William L. McKnight Brain Institute is also part of the Health Science Center and is the most comprehensive program of its kind in the world. The institute comprises 300 faculty members from 10 colleges, and 51 departments campus-wide.\nThe University of Florida is a winner of the National Institutes of Health Clinical and Translational Science Award and member of the NIH national consortium of medical research institutions.\nIn December 2018 Expertscape recognized it as #4 in the world for expertise in Diabetes Mellitus Type 1.\nUF Health Jacksonville.\nUF Health Jacksonville is an academic health center with three UF colleges, Medicine, Nursing and Pharmacy, as well as a network of primary and specialty care centers in northeast Florida and southeast Georgia.\nUF Health Cancer Center at Orlando Health.\nIn 2010, Orlando Health and UF Health teamed up to form joint clinical programs in the areas of pediatrics, neuroscience, oncology, women's health, transplantation and cardiovascular medicine. The partnership provides undergraduate and graduate medical residency and fellowship training opportunities at Orlando Health, and will allow Orlando Health physicians and patients to be part of clinical trials through UF's clinical research program.\nUF Health Cancer Center at Orlando Health launched in January 2014. The center focuses on developing safe, individualized molecular-based targeted oncology therapies to improve patient outcomes in Florida. The joint oncology program offers clinical trial collaborations and comprehensive cancer services customized to the patient by combining physicians and the collective strengths of UF Health and Orlando Health.\nCampus.\nThe University of Florida campus encompasses over . The campus is home to many notable structures, such as Century Tower, a carillon tower in the center of the historic district. Other notable facilities include the Health Science Center, Steve Spurrier-Florida Field at Ben Hill Griffin Stadium, Smathers Library, Phillips Center for the Performing Arts, Harn Museum, University Auditorium, O'Connell Center, and The Hub.\nThe Reitz Union.\nThe J. Wayne Reitz Union is the student union of the University of Florida, located on Museum Road on the university campus in Gainesville, Florida, United States. The union was named in honor of J. Wayne Reitz, the fifth president of the university, who served from 1955 to 1967. The building, which was originally completed in 1967, contains dining facilities, meeting rooms, offices, a computer lab, a game room, an outdoor amphitheater, retail stores, a movie theater and a hotel.\nOn February 1, 2016, it was reopened after an extensive renovation and expansion. The of new space includes support space for student organizations, new lounges, study spaces, a game room, an arts and crafts center and dance studios.\nHistoric sites.\nA number of the University of Florida's buildings are historically significant. The University of Florida Campus Historic District comprises 19 buildings and encompasses approximately . Two buildings outside the historic district, the old WRUF radio station (now the university police station) and Norman Hall (formerly the P.K. Yonge Laboratory School), are also listed on the historic register. The buildings on the U.S. National Register of Historic Places for their architectural or historic significance are:\nLibraries.\nGeorge A. Smathers Libraries.\nThe George A. Smathers Libraries at the University of Florida is one of the largest university library systems in the United States. The George A. Smathers Libraries has a collection of over 6 million+ print volumes, 1.5 million digital books, 1,000+ databases, approximately 150 thousand print/digital journals, and over 14 million digital pages\nCollections cover virtually all disciplines and include a wide array of formats\u2014from books and journals to manuscripts, maps, and recorded music. An increasing number of the collections are digital and are accessible on the Internet from the library web page or the library catalog. The George A. Smathers Libraries support all academic programs except those served by the Levin College of Law.\nRenovations.\nIn 2006, Library West went through a $30 million renovation that doubled capacity. This facility is now better equipped to handle the information technology students need to complete their studies. Such progress is represented by its state-of-the-art Information Commons, which offers production studios, digital media computing areas, and a presentation area.\nLawton Chiles Legal Information Center.\nThe Levin College of Law's students, faculty, and guests are served by Lawton Chiles Legal Information Center.\nMuseums.\nThe Florida Museum of Natural History, established in 1891, is one of the country's oldest natural history museums and was officially chartered by the state of Florida. This facility is dedicated to understanding, preserving and interpreting biological diversity and cultural heritage. In over 100 years of operations, the Florida Museum of Natural History has been housed in several buildings, from the Seagle Building to facilities at Dickinson Hall, Powell Hall, and the Randell Research Center.\nIn 2000 the McGuire Center for Lepidoptera and Biodiversity was opened after a generous donation from University of Florida benefactors. The McGuire Center houses a collection of more than six million butterfly and moth specimens, making it one of the largest collections of Lepidoptera in the world, rivaling the Natural History Museum in London, England.\nThe Samuel P. Harn Museum of Art, established in 1990, is also at the University of Florida on the southwest part of campus. This facility is one of the largest university art museums in the South, the Harn has more than 7,000 works in its permanent collection and an array of temporary exhibitions. The museum's permanent collections focus on Asian, African, modern and contemporary art, as well as photography. The university sponsors educational programs at the museum including films, lectures, interactive activities, and school and family offerings. In October 2005 the Harn expanded by more than with the opening of the Mary Ann Harn Cofrin Pavilion, which includes new educational and meeting areas and the Camellia Court Cafe, the first eatery for visitors of the Cultural Plaza.\nPerforming arts and music.\nPerforming arts venues at the University of Florida include the Curtis M. Phillips Center for the Performing Arts, the University Auditorium, Constans Theatre, the Baughman Center, and performances at the O'Connell Center. The mission is to provide an unparalleled experience where performing artists create and share knowledge to serve the student body, faculty, and staff at the university; Gainesville residents; and visitors to North Central Florida.\nThe University Auditorium was founded in the mid-1920s and is home to the Anderson Memorial Organ. The auditorium has a concert stage and can seat up to 843 patrons. The venue is suitable for musical concerts, special lectures, convocations, dance concerts, and pageants.\nThe Phillips Center for the Performing Arts was founded in 1992 and is a performing arts theatre. The Phillips Center is on the western side of campus, and hosts established and emerging national and international artists on the main stage, as well as the annual Miss University of Florida pageant and performances by the University of Florida's original student-run dance company, Floridance. The Phillips Center consists of a 1,700-seat proscenium hall and the 200-seat Squitieri Studio Theatre.\nConstans Theatre was founded in 1967 and is a performing arts venue next to the J. Wayne Reitz Union. Constans Theatre serves as a venue for musical concerts, theater, dance, and lectures, and is a sub-venue of the Nadine McGuire Pavilion and Dance Pavilion.\nThe Baughman Center was founded in 2000 and serves as a venue for small musical and performing arts events. The facility consists of two buildings next to Lake Alice on the western portion of campus. The main building is a pavilion, the other is a administrative building. The Baughman Center can accommodate up to 96 patrons.\nSustainability.\nIn 2005, the University of Florida became a Certified Audubon Cooperative Sanctuary for environmental and wildlife management, resource conservation, environmental education, waste management, and outreach.\nThrough long-term environmental initiatives, the University of Florida created an Office of Sustainability in 2006. Their mission is to improve environmental sustainability in many areas on campus. They have stated their goals are to produce zero waste by 2015 and to achieve Carbon Neutrality by 2025. Recently the university appointed a new sustainability director. Florida received a \"B+\" grade on the 2009 College Sustainability Report Card for its environmental and sustainability initiatives. In 2009, \"B+\" was the second highest grade awarded by the Sustainable Endowments Institute.\nStudent life.\nPaCE.\nLaunched in 2015, the Pathway to Campus Enrollment (PaCE) program offers an alternative route for students who meet the University of Florida's standard freshman admission requirements, in response to high demand and limited on-campus space. The program is available for select majors, and students complete transition requirements specific to their chosen major before beginning on-campus courses. Through PaCE, students are required to complete at least 60 credit hours, including all prerequisite and transition requirements, before moving to on-campus learning. Of those credits, at least 15 must be completed through UF Online, and students must spend a minimum of two semesters in the online format. The University of Florida admitted 2,420 students to PaCE for the class of 2021.\nInnovation Academy.\nThe Innovation Academy (IA) at the University of Florida is a program that allows students to integrate a focus on innovation, creativity, leadership, and entrepreneurship with their chosen major. Students participate in spring and summer semesters on campus, which allows them to pursue internships, study abroad opportunities, and other experiential learning programs during the fall. The program offers more than 25 majors, all of which include a common minor in Innovation, and is designed to provide students with interdisciplinary training that complements their primary field of study. IA aims to prepare students for careers in emerging fields and leadership roles by combining practical experience with academic study in innovation and entrepreneurship.\nGreek Life.\nGreek life is a prominent component of student life at the University of Florida, with approximately 5,200 undergraduate students, or about 15 percent of the student body, participating in fraternities or sororities. The university currently hosts 25 fraternities and 18 sororities, many of which are affiliated with national organizations and governed by councils including the Interfraternity Council, Panhellenic Council, National Pan-Hellenic Council, and Multicultural Greek Council. Some fraternity chapters predate the university's relocation to Gainesville, with the first chapters chartered in 1884 at one of UF's predecessor institutions in Lake City. Members often reside in chapter houses or participate in university-recognized living communities, and recruitment occurs according to formalized spring and fall periods. UF's Greek system is notable within the Southeastern Conference for its size and level of student involvement, reflecting the broader prominence of fraternities and sororities in the region.\nDance Marathon at UF.\nDance Marathon at UF is an annual 26.2-hour event benefiting the patients of University of Florida Health Shands Children's Hospital in Gainesville, Florida. Each year, more than 800 students stay awake and on their feet to raise money and awareness for Children's Miracle Network Hospitals. In the 23 years of Dance Marathon at UF's existence, more than $15 million has been donated, making it the most successful student-run philanthropy in the southeastern United States. In 2017, DM at UF raised a record total of $2,724,324 for UF Health Shands Children's Hospital, becoming the second most successful Dance Marathon in the nation.\nReserve Officer Training Corps.\nThe University of Florida Reserve Officer Training Corps is the official officer training and commissioning program at the University of Florida. Officially founded in 1905, it is one of the oldest such programs in the nation.\nThe Reserve Officer Training Corps offers commissions for the United States Army, United States Navy, United States Marine Corps, and the United States Air Force. The unit is one of the oldest in the nation, and is at Van Fleet Hall.\nHousing.\nThe University of Florida provides over 9,200 students with housing in residence halls and complexes on the eastern and western sides of campus.\nRecreation and fitness on campus.\nThe University of Florida's Department of Recreational Sports (RecSports) includes operation of two lake-front parks at Lake Wauburg, group fitness, personal and small group training, massage therapy, intramural sports, 51 competitive sports clubs, two world-class indoor fitness and recreation facilities, four campus pools, outdoor rock climbing, an adventure travel recreation program, campus fields and facilities, a skate park and staff development services for over 700 students who are employed by the department's programs.\nRecSports manages the University of Florida Southwest Recreation Center, a state-of-the-art facility with six indoor basketball courts, a split-level cardio room, personal training studio, massage therapy rooms, strength and conditioning area and a social lounge with a smoothie bar. Other campus facilities operated by RecSports include the Student Recreation &amp; Fitness Center.\nOutside of RecSports, campus recreation options include an arts and crafts center, bowling alley and game room\u2014all in the J. Wayne Reitz Union, and the Mark Bostick Golf Course. The campus also contains nature trails, open spaces, small ponds, picnic areas, shady nooks and an wildlife sanctuary. The UF Scientific Diver Development Program provides SCUBA training for students interested in pursuing a career involving underwater research.\nStudent government.\nThe University of Florida Student Government is the governing body of students who attend the University of Florida, representing the university's nearly 60,000 undergraduate, graduate and professional students. The university's student government operates on a yearly $22.5 million budget (2023-2024 fiscal year), one of the largest student government budgets in the United States, and the money is allocated by the Budget and Appropriations Committee of the Student Senate. The student government was established in 1909 and consists of executive, judicial and unicameral legislative branches.\nAlma mater.\nMilton Yeats composed University of Florida's alma mater in 1925.\nCampus and area transportation.\nThe university campus is served by nine bus routes of the Gainesville Regional Transit System (RTS). Students, faculty, and staff with university-issued ID cards are able to use the system for no additional fee. RTS also provides other campus services, including Gator Aider (during football games), S.N.A.P, and Later Gator nighttime service.\nThe Gainesville region and the university are served by the Gainesville Regional Airport, which is in northeast Gainesville and has daily flights to Dallas, Atlanta, and Charlotte.\nStudent media.\nThe University of Florida community includes six major student-run media outlets and companion Web sites.\nVarious other journals and magazines are published by the university's academic units and student groups, including the Bob Graham Center-affiliated Florida Political Review and the literary journal \"Subtropics\". In 2023, the social media app TikTok was banned from use across all Florida state universities.\n \"For individual articles on the Florida Gators team in each sport, see the table at right.\"\nAthletics.\nThe University of Florida's intercollegiate sports teams, known as the \"Florida Gators,\" compete in National Collegiate Athletic Association (NCAA) Division I primarily in the Southeastern Conference (SEC). The Gators compete in nine men's sports and twelve women's sports.\nFor the 2014\u201315 school year, the University Athletic Association budgeted more $100 million for its sports teams and facilities. Since 1987\u201388, the Gators have won twenty-three of the last twenty-six SEC All-Sports Trophies, recognizing Florida as the best overall athletics program in the SEC. Florida is the only program in the nation to finish among the nation's top ten in each of the last thirty national all-sports standings and is the only SEC school to place 100 or more student-athletes on the Academic Honor Roll each of the last fifteen years.\nThe Florida Gators have won forty-nine national team championships, forty-four of which are NCAA championships. Florida Gators athletes have also won 367 NCAA championships in individual sports events. Florida is the only Division I program to have won three or more titles in both men's basketball (2006, 2007, 2025) and football (1996, 2006, 2008), as well as the only Division I program to hold both the men's basketball title and football title simultaneously in the modern era.\nFootball.\nThe University of Florida fielded its first official varsity football team in the fall of 1906, when the university held its first classes on its new Gainesville campus. Since then, the Florida Gators football team has played in 40 bowl games, won three consensus national championships and eight Southeastern Conference (SEC) championships, produced 89 first-team All-Americans, 45 National Football League (NFL) first-round draft choices, and three Heisman Trophy winners.\nThe Gators won their first post-season game on January 1, 1953, beating Tulsa 14\u201313 in Jacksonville, Florida. The Gators' first major bowl win was the 1967 Orange Bowl in which coach Ray Graves and Heisman Trophy quarterback Steve Spurrier led the Gators to a 27\u201312 victory over the Georgia Tech Yellow Jackets.\nIn the 1980s, Gators football coach Charlie Pell became the target of disdain by University of Miami football coach Howard Schnellenberger and Florida State football coach Bobby Bowden, who equally despised Pell because of his notoriously bad attitude. Their mutual hatred of Pell made the Hurricanes-Seminoles rivalry earn the nickname of \"The Friendly Rivalry.\"\nIn 1990, Spurrier returned to his alma mater as its new head coach, and spurred the Gators to their first six official SEC football championships. The Gators, quarterbacked by their second Heisman Trophy winner, Danny Wuerffel, won their first national championship in 1996 with a 52\u201320 victory over Florida State Seminoles in the Sugar Bowl. In 2006, Urban Meyer coached the Gators to a 13\u20131 record, capturing their seventh SEC Championship, and defeating the top-ranked Ohio State Buckeyes 41\u201314 for the BCS National Championship. In 2008, the Gators' third Heisman-winning quarterback, Tim Tebow, led them in a 24\u201314 BCS Championship Game victory over the Oklahoma Sooners for the team's third national championship.\nSince 1930, the Gators' home field has been Florida Field at Ben Hill Griffin Stadium, which seats 88,548 fans. The stadium is popularly known as \"The Swamp\".\nBasketball.\nCenter Neal Walk is the only Gator to have had his number retired by the basketball team. The Florida Gators men's basketball team has also gained national recognition over the past 20 years. The Gators went to the Final Four of the 1994 NCAA tournament under coach Lon Kruger, and coach Billy Donovan led the Gators back to the NCAA Final Four in 2000, losing to the Michigan State Spartans in the final. Under Donovan, the Gators won their first Southeastern Conference (SEC) tournament championship in 2005, beating the Kentucky Wildcats. After repeating as SEC tournament champions in 2006, the Gators won their first basketball national championship, defeating the UCLA Bruins 73\u201357 in the final game of the NCAA basketball tournament.\nThe Gators beat the Arkansas Razorbacks 77\u201356 to win their third consecutive SEC tournament title in 2007. Florida defeated Ohio State 84\u201375 to again win the NCAA basketball tournament championship.\nUnder Head Coach Todd Golden, the Florida Gators won their fifth SEC championship, beating Tennessee 86\u201377. The Gators then went on to win their third NCAA tournament, beating Houston 65\u201363.\nThe Gators play their home games in the Exactech Arena at the Stephen C. O'Connell Center. The 10,133-seat multi-purpose indoor arena was completed in 1980 and underwent massive renovations during the 2016\u201317 season. The arena is popularly known as the \"O'Dome\".\nOlympics.\nSince 1968, 163 Gator athletes and 13 Florida coaches have represented 37 countries in the Olympic Games, winning 50 Olympic gold medals, 28 silver medals and 30 bronze medals through the 2012 Summer Olympics. The list of University of Florida alumni who are Olympic gold medalists includes Brad Wilkerson (baseball); Delisha Milton-Jones (basketball); Steve Mesler (bobsled); Heather Mitts and Abby Wambach (soccer); Theresa Andrews, Catie Ball, Tracy Caulkins, Matt Cetlinski, Conor Dwyer, Geoff Gaberino, Nicole Haislett, Mike Heath, David Larson, Ryan Lochte, Anthony Nesty, Dara Torres, Mary Wayte, Caeleb Dressel, and Martin Zubero (swimming); and Kerron Clement, Dennis Mitchell, Frank Shorter, Christian Taylor and Bernard Williams (track and field).\nNotable people.\nNotable alumni.\nAs of August 2018 the University of Florida has 545,165 alumni. Over 57,000 are dues-paying members of the University of Florida Alumni Association. Florida alumni live in every state and more than 100 foreign countries. Florida alumni include two Nobel Prize winners, nine NASA astronauts, ten U.S. Senators, forty-two U.S. Representatives, eight U.S. ambassadors, eleven state governors, eleven state Supreme Court justices, and over fifty federal court judges. Florida graduates have served as the executive leaders of such diverse institutions as the U.S. Marine Corps and the National Organization for Women.\nNotable faculty.\nAwards won by University of Florida faculty members include a Fields Medal and an Abel Prize in Mathematics, Albert Einstein Medal, ICTP Dirac Medal, Sakurai Prize, Frank Isakson Prize, Oliver E. Buckley Condensed Matter Prize, James C. McGroddy Prize for New Materials and a few Special Breakthrough Prizes for collaborators who made important contributions for the success LIGO's discovery of gravitational wave in Physics, numerous Pulitzer Prizes, and NASA's top award for research, and the Smithsonian Institution's conservation award. There are more than sixty eminent scholar endowed faculty chairs, and more than fifty faculty elections to the National Academy of Sciences, Engineering, or Arts and Sciences, the Institute of Medicine or a counterpart in a foreign nation. More than two dozen faculty are members of the National Academies of Science and Engineering and the Institute of Medicine or counterpart in a foreign nation.\nIn popular culture.\nThe University of Florida has been portrayed in several books, movies and television shows. In addition, the University of Florida campus has been the backdrop for a number of different books and movies.\nGatorade.\nRobert Cade, a professor in the university's College of Medicine, was the leader of the research team that invented the sports drink Gatorade as a hydration supplement for the Florida Gators football team in 1965\u201366.\nGatorade was created in 1965, by a team of scientists at the University of Florida College of Medicine, including Robert Cade, Dana Shires, Harry James Free, and Alejandro de Quesada. Following a request from Florida Gators football head coach Ray Graves, Gatorade was created to help athletes by acting as a replacement for body fluids lost during physical exertion. Like many of the sports drinks that pre-dated it by decades, such as Lucozade, the earliest version of the beverage consisted of a mixture of water, sodium, sugar, potassium, phosphate, and lemon juice. Ten players on the University of Florida football team tested the first version of Gatorade during practices and games in 1965, and the tests were deemed successful. On the other hand, star quarterback Steve Spurrier said, \"I don't have any answer for whether the Gatorade helped us be a better second-half team or not... We drank it, but whether it helped us in the second half, who knows?\" Nonetheless, the football team credited Gatorade as having contributed to their first Orange Bowl win over the Georgia Tech Yellow Jackets in 1967, at which point the drink gained traction within the athletic community. Yellow Jackets coach Bobby Dodd, when asked why his team lost, replied: \"We didn't have Gatorade. That made the difference.\"\nThe University of Florida researchers initially considered naming their product \"Gator-Aid\", but eventually settled on \"Gatorade\".\nSatellite facilities.\nThe university maintains a number of facilities apart from its main campus. The J. Hillis Miller Health Science Center also has a teaching hospital at UF Health at Jacksonville, which serves as the Jacksonville campus for the university's College of Medicine, College of Nursing, and College of Pharmacy. A number of residencies are also offered at this facility. The university's College of Pharmacy also maintains campuses in Orlando and Jacksonville. The College of Dentistry maintains clinics in Hialeah, Naples, and St. Petersburg.\nThe university's Warrington College of Business established programs in South Florida in 2004, and recently built a facility in Sunrise, Florida. The Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences has extensions in each of the 67 counties in Florida, and 13 research and education centers with 19 locations throughout the state. In 2005, the university established the Beijing Center for International Studies in Beijing that offers research facilities, offices, and degree opportunities.\nExplanatory notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "60613", "revid": "50912557", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60613", "title": "Jacksonville, Florida", "text": "City in Florida, United States\nJacksonville ( ) is the most populous city proper in the U.S. state of Florida, located on the Atlantic coast of northeastern Florida. It is the county seat of Duval County, with which the city consolidated in 1968. It is the tenth-most populous U.S. city and the largest city in the Southeast, with a population of 949,611 at the 2020 census (estimated at over 1 million in 2024). The Jacksonville metropolitan area, at over 1.76 million residents, is the fourth-largest metropolitan area in Florida and 38th-largest in the United States. City-county consolidation greatly increased Jacksonville's official population and extended its boundaries, placing most of Duval County's population within the new municipal limits; Jacksonville grew to . It is the largest city by total area, land and water, in the contiguous United States.\nJacksonville straddles the St. Johns River in the First Coast region of northeastern Florida, about south of the Georgia state line ( to the urban core/downtown) and north of Miami. The Jacksonville Beaches communities lie along the adjacent Atlantic coast. The area was originally inhabited by the Timucua. During Spanish rule, several missions were established in the Jacksonville area; the most prominent locally was San Juan del Puerto on present-day Fort George Island, which served the Mocama Timucua. In 1564, the French founded the short-lived Fort Caroline near the mouth of the St. Johns River. During the brief period of British rule (1763\u20131783), a settlement developed at a narrow point on the river where cattle crossed, known as \"Wacca Pilatka\" to the Seminole and \"Cow Ford\" to the British. In 1822, a year after Spain ceded Florida to the United States under the Adams\u2013On\u00eds Treaty, in exchange for U.S. recognition of Spanish sovereignty in Texas, a platted town was established there and named for Andrew Jackson, the first military governor of the Florida Territory and the seventh president of the United States.\nHarbor improvements since the late 19th century have made Jacksonville a major military and civilian deep-water port. Its riverine location facilitates Naval Station Mayport, Naval Air Station Jacksonville, the U.S. Marine Corps Blount Island Command, and the Port of Jacksonville (JAXPORT), Florida's largest seaport by volume. Jacksonville's military bases and the nearby Naval Submarine Base Kings Bay form the third largest military presence in the United States. Significant factors in the local economy include services such as banking, insurance, healthcare and logistics. As with much of Florida, tourism is important to the Jacksonville area, particularly tourism related to golf with the PGA Tour headquarters located in nearby Ponte Vedra Beach. People from Jacksonville are known as Jacksonvillians and, informally, as Jaxsons or Jaxons (both derived from Jax, the shortened nickname for the city).\nHistory.\nEarly history.\nThe area of the modern city of Jacksonville has been inhabited for thousands of years. On Black Hammock Island in the national Timucuan Ecological and Historic Preserve, a University of North Florida team discovered some of the oldest remnants of pottery in the United States, dating to 2500 BCE.\nFor most of the period from 1565 to 1821\u2014aside from a brief British interlude (1763\u20131783)\u2014the region formed part of Spanish Florida, administered from St. Augustine. In the 16th century, the beginning of the historical era, the region was also inhabited by the Mocama, a coastal subgroup of the Timucua people. At the time of European contact, all Mocama villages in present-day Jacksonville were part of the powerful chiefdom known as the Saturiwa, centered around the mouth of the St. Johns River. One early French map shows a village called \"Ossachite\" at the site of what is now downtown Jacksonville; this may be the earliest recorded name for that area.\nIn 1562, French Huguenot explorer Jean Ribault charted the St. Johns River, calling it the River of May because that was the month of his discovery. Ribault erected a stone column at his landing site near the river's mouth, claiming the newly discovered land for France. In 1564, Ren\u00e9 Goulaine de Laudonni\u00e8re established one of the first European settlements on the St. Johns River, Fort Caroline, near the main village of the Saturiwa.\nPhilip II of Spain ordered Pedro Men\u00e9ndez de Avil\u00e9s to protect the interests of Spain by attacking the French at Fort Caroline. On September 20, 1565, a Spanish force from the nearby Spanish settlement of St. Augustine attacked Fort Caroline, and killed nearly all the French soldiers defending it. The Spanish renamed the fort as \"San Mateo\" and, following the expulsion of the French, St. Augustine became the most important European settlement in Florida. The location of Fort Caroline is subject to debate, but a reconstruction of the fort was established in 1964 along the St. Johns River.\nSpain ceded Florida to Britain in 1763 under the Treaty of Paris following the Seven Years' War (the French and Indian War in North America). The British built the King's Road from St. Augustine to Georgia, crossing the St. Johns River at \"Wacca Pilatka\", the \u201cCow Ford\u201d, used for moving cattle. They promoted plantation cash crops, sugarcane, indigo, and fruits, along with lumber exports, and land grants drew settlers from England, Georgia, South Carolina, and Bermuda, forming Florida\u2019s first English-speaking communities. British courts introduced common law, including trial-by-jury, habeas corpus, and county government.\nAfter the British defeat in the American Revolutionary War, Britain returned control of the territory to Spain in 1783 via the Peace of Paris.\nFounding and 19th century.\nAfter Spain ceded the Florida Territory to the United States in 1821, American settlers on the north side of the Cow Ford decided to plan a town, laying out the streets and plats. They named the town Jacksonville, after celebrated war hero and first Territorial Governor (later U.S. president) Andrew Jackson. Led by Isaiah D. Hart, residents wrote a charter for a town government, which the Florida Legislative Council approved on February 9, 1832.\nDuring the American Civil War, Duval County produced several units that fought for the Confederate States Army. At least two were raised out of Jacksonville: the Jacksonville Light Infantry, a militia unit formed in 1859, and the Duval County Cow Boys, mustered in during the summer of 1861. Both units fought as part of the 3rd Florida Infantry. The St. John's Greys, the Milton Artillery, and Company H of 1st Florida Cavalry Regiment were also all formed by men from Jacksonville.\nJacksonville was also a key supply point for hogs and cattle shipped from Florida to feed the Confederate forces. The city was blockaded by Union forces, who gained control of nearby Fort Clinch. Though no battles were fought in Jacksonville proper, the city changed hands several times between Union and Confederate forces. In the Skirmish of the Brick Church in 1862, Confederates won their first victory in the state. However, Union forces captured a Confederate position at the Battle of St. Johns Bluff, and occupied Jacksonville in 1862. Slaves escaped to freedom in Union lines. In February 1864 Union forces left Jacksonville and confronted a Confederate Army at the Battle of Olustee, going down to defeat.\nUnion forces retreated to Jacksonville and held the city for the remainder of the war. In March 1864 a Confederate cavalry confronted a Union expedition in the Battle of Cedar Creek. Warfare and the long occupation left the city disrupted after the war.\nDuring Reconstruction and the Gilded Age, Jacksonville and nearby St. Augustine became popular winter resorts for the rich and famous. Visitors arrived by steamboat and later by railroad. President Grover Cleveland attended the Sub-Tropical Exposition in the city on February 22, 1888, during his trip to Florida. This highlighted the visibility of the state as a worthy place for tourism. The city's tourism, however, was dealt major blows in the late 19th century by yellow fever outbreaks. Extending the Florida East Coast Railway further south drew visitors to other areas. From 1893 to 1938, Jacksonville was the site of the Florida Old Confederate Soldiers and Sailors Home; it operated a nearby cemetery.\n20th and 21st centuries.\n1900 to 1939.\nOn May 3, 1901, downtown Jacksonville was ravaged by a fire that started as a kitchen fire. Spanish moss at a nearby mattress factory was quickly engulfed in flames and enabled the fire to spread rapidly. In a mere eight hours, it swept through 146 city blocks, destroyed over 2,000 buildings, left about 10,000 homeless and killed seven residents. The Confederate Monument in Hemming Park was one of the few landmarks to survive the fire. Governor William Sherman Jennings declared martial law and sent the state militia to maintain order; on May 17, municipal authority resumed. It is said the glow from the flames could be seen in Savannah, Georgia, and the smoke plumes seen in Raleigh, North Carolina. Known as the \"Great Fire of 1901\", it was one of the worst disasters in Florida history and the largest urban fire in the southeastern United States. Architect Henry John Klutho was a primary figure in the reconstruction of the city. The first multi-story structure built by Klutho was the Dyal-Upchurch Building in 1902. The St. James Building, built on the previous site of the St. James Hotel that burned down, was built in 1912 as Klutho's crowning achievement.\nIn the 1910s, northern film studios headquartered in New York City, Philadelphia, and Chicago were attracted to Jacksonville's warm climate, exotic landscapes, excellent rail access, and cheap labor. More than 30 silent film studios were established over the decade, earning Jacksonville the title of \"Winter Film Capital of the World\". However, the emergence of Hollywood as a major film production center ended the city's film industry. One movie studio site, Norman Studios, remains in Arlington; it has been converted to the Jacksonville Silent Film Museum at Norman Studios.\nDuring this time, Jacksonville also became a banking and insurance center, with companies such as Barnett Bank, Atlantic National Bank, Florida National Bank, Prudential, Gulf Life, Afro-American Insurance, Independent Life and American Heritage Life thriving in the business district. The Walker Business College was opened c.\u20091916 in Jacksonville and advertised that it was the largest African American business school in the United States.\n1940 to 1979.\nDuring World War II, The U.S. Navy became a major employer and economic force, constructing three Navy bases in the city, while the U.S. Marine Corps established Blount Island Command.\nJacksonville, like most large cities in the United States, suffered from many negative effects of rapid urban sprawl after World War II. The construction of federal highways essentially subsidized development of suburban housing, and wealthier, better established residents moved to newer housing in the suburbs. After World War II, the government of the city of Jacksonville began to increase spending to fund new public building projects in the postwar economic boom. Mayor W. Haydon Burns' \"Jacksonville Story\" resulted in the construction of a new city hall, civic auditorium, public library and other projects that created a sense of civic pride. Development of suburbs led to a growing middle class who lived outside the urban core. An increasing proportion of residents in Jacksonville's urban core had a higher than average rate of poverty, especially as businesses and jobs also migrated to the suburbs.\nGiven the postwar migration of residents, businesses, and jobs, the city's tax base declined. It had difficulty funding education, sanitation, and traffic control within the city limits. In addition, residents in unincorporated suburbs had difficulty obtaining municipal services, such as sewage and building code enforcement. In 1958, a study recommended the city of Jacksonville begin annexing outlying communities to create the needed larger geographic tax base to improve services throughout the county. Voters outside the city limits rejected annexation plans in six referendums between 1960 and 1965.\nOn August 27, 1960, a white mob attacked civil rights demonstrators in Hemming Park with clubs. The police largely stood by.\nIn 1962, a federal court ordered the city to prepare a plan for integration of public schools, in accordance with the ruling of the Supreme Court in \"Brown v. Board of Education\" (1954). A study found schools were in poor condition and poorly equipped.\nOn December 29, 1963, the Hotel Roosevelt fire killed 22 people, the highest one-day death toll in Jacksonville. On September 10, 1964, Hurricane Dora made landfall near St. Augustine, causing major damage to buildings in North Florida. Hurricane Dora was the first recorded hurricane to make a direct hit to North Florida.\nIn the mid-1960s, corruption scandals arose among city and some county officials, who were mainly part of a traditional white Democratic network that had dominated politics for the decades since the disenfranchisement of most African Americans at the turn of the 20th century which effectively hollowed out the Republican Party. After a grand jury was convened to investigate, 11 officials were indicted and more were forced to resign.\nIn 1963 the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools threatened to withdraw accreditation of area schools in a year because of \"instructional deficiencies\". But voters refused to approve new taxes to improve school conditions. In late 1963, Duval County was spending $299 per student compared to the state average spending of $372 per student. In 1964 all 15 of Duval County's public high schools lost their accreditation. This added momentum to proposals for government reform.\nJacksonville Consolidation, led by J. J. Daniel and Claude Yates, began to win more support during this period, from both inner-city blacks, who wanted more involvement in government after passage of the Voting Rights Act of 1965, that provided federal oversight and enforcement of their right to vote, and whites in the suburbs, who wanted more services and more control over the central city. Lower taxes, increased economic development, unification of the community, better public spending, and effective administration by a more central authority were all cited as reasons for a new consolidated government.\nWhen a consolidation referendum was held in 1967, 65% of voters approved the plan. On October 1, 1968, the city and county governments merged to create the Consolidated City of Jacksonville. Fire, police, health &amp; welfare, recreation, public works, and housing &amp; urban development were all combined under the new government. In honor of the occasion, then-Mayor Hans Tanzler posed with actress Lee Meredith behind a sign marking the new border of the \"Bold New City of the South\" at Florida 13 and Julington Creek. The consolidation created a 900-square-mile entity.\n1980 to present.\nTommy Hazouri supported passage of environmental regulations and reduced pollution odor during his single term as mayor, which began in 1987.\nEd Austin was elected as mayor in 1991. His most lasting contribution is the River City Renaissance program, a $235\u00a0million bond issued in 1993 by the city of Jacksonville which funded urban renewal and revamped the city's historic downtown neighborhoods. Austin oversaw the city's purchase and refurbishing of the St. James Building, which is now used as Jacksonville's city hall. He was mayor in 1993 when Jacksonville was awarded its National Football League franchise, the Jacksonville Jaguars. They are the only major sports franchise in the city, making Jacksonville one of only two markets (the other one being Green Bay), and the only major city, to have a single sports franchise, and for that franchise to be an NFL team.\nThe Better Jacksonville Plan, promoted as a \"blueprint for Jacksonville's future\" and approved by Jacksonville voters in 2000, authorized a half-penny sales tax. This generated most of the revenue required for the $2.25\u00a0billion package of major projects, which have included road and infrastructure improvements, environmental preservation, targeted economic development, and new or improved public facilities.\nIn 2005, Jacksonville hosted Super Bowl XXXIX, which was seen by an estimated 86 million viewers.\nThe first notable retail cryptocurrency transaction involving physical goods was paid on May 22, 2010, by exchanging 10,000 bitcoins for two pizzas delivered from a Papa John's in Jacksonville, Florida. Laszlo Hanyecz, who lives in Jacksonville, created a thread on an online forum offering the bitcoins to anyone who would order him two pizzas. Jeremy Sturdivant, a user from England, accepted the offer and had the pizzas sent to Hayecz's home. The 10,000 Bitcoins were worth about US$40 at the time. A plaque was mounted on the wall of the restaurant commemorating the day, with the declaration that Jacksonville is the \"Home of the first Bitcoin purchase.\" This event marks May 22 as \"Bitcoin Pizza Day\" for crypto-fans.\nThe city has suffered damage in natural disasters. In October 2016, Hurricane Matthew caused major flooding and damage to Jacksonville, Jacksonville Beach, Atlantic Beach and Neptune Beach, the first such damage in the area since 2004. In September 2017, Hurricane Irma caused record-breaking floods in Jacksonville, with a severity not seen since 1846.\nAs has been typical of other metropolitan areas across the country, suburban growth has continued around Jacksonville, where large areas of land were available for development, drawing more residents, businesses and jobs from the city. This has resulted in further demographic changes. The city's largest ethnic group, non-Hispanic white, declined from 75.8% of the population in 1970 to 55.1% by 2010.\nGeography.\nTopography.\nAccording to the United States Census Bureau, the city has a total area of , making Jacksonville the largest city in land area in the contiguous United States; of this, 86.66% () is land and 13.34% () is water. Jacksonville completely surrounds the town of Baldwin. Nassau County lies to the north, Baker County lies to the west, and Clay and St. Johns counties lie to the south. Jacksonville has a coast on the Atlantic Ocean with the Jacksonville Beaches. The city developed along both sides of the St. Johns River. The Trout River, a major tributary of the St. Johns River, is entirely within Jacksonville.\nSoil composition is primarily sand and clay rather than limestone, so few sinkholes develop; however, deep, large diameter sinkholes do occur.\nArchitecture.\nThe architecture of Jacksonville varies in style. Few structures in the city center predate the Great Fire of 1901. The city is home to one of the largest collections of Prairie School style buildings outside the Midwest. Following the Great Fire of 1901, Henry John Klutho came to influence generations of local designers with his works by both the Chicago School, championed by Louis Sullivan, and the Prairie School of architecture, popularized by Frank Lloyd Wright. Jacksonville is also home to a notable collection of Mid-Century modern architecture. Local architects Robert C. Broward, Taylor Hardwick, and William Morgan adapted a range of design principles, including International style, Brutalism, Futurism and Organicism, all applied with an American interpretation generally referred to today as Mid-century modern design. The architecture firms of Reynolds, Smith &amp; Hills (RS&amp;H) and Kemp, Bunch &amp; Jackson (KBJ) have also contributed a number of important works to the city's modern architectural movement.\nJacksonville's early predominant position as a regional center of business left an indelible mark on the city's skyline. Many of the earliest skyscrapers in the state were constructed in Jacksonville, dating to 1902. The city last held the state height record from 1974 to 1981. The tallest building in Downtown Jacksonville's skyline is the Bank of America Tower, constructed in 1990 as the Barnett Center. It has a height of and includes 42 floors. Other notable structures include the 37-story 1 Independent Square (with its distinctive flared base making it the defining building in the Jacksonville skyline), originally built in 1972\u20131974 by the Independent Life and Accident Insurance Company, and the 28-floor Riverplace Tower. When this tower was completed in 1967, it was the tallest precast, post-tensioned concrete structure in the world.\nNeighborhoods.\nThere are more than 500 neighborhoods within Jacksonville's vast area. These include Downtown Jacksonville and its surrounding neighborhoods, including LaVilla, Brooklyn, Riverside and Avondale, Springfield, Eastside, and San Marco. Additionally, greater Jacksonville is traditionally divided into several amorphous areas, comprising large parts of Duval County. These are Northside, Westside, Arlington, Southside, as well as the Jacksonville Beaches.\nFour municipalities have retained their own governments since consolidation; these are Baldwin and the three Jacksonville Beaches towns of Atlantic Beach, Neptune Beach, and Jacksonville Beach. Four of Jacksonville's neighborhoods, Avondale, Ortega, Springfield, and Riverside, have been identified as U.S. historic districts and are in the National Register of Historic Places.\nClimate.\nAccording to the K\u00f6ppen climate classification, Jacksonville has a humid subtropical climate (Cfa), with hot humid summers, and warm to mild and drier winters. Seasonal rainfall is concentrated in the warmest months from May through September, when brief but intense downpours with thunder and lightning are common, while the driest months are from November through April. Rainfall averages around a year.\nNormal monthly mean temperatures range from in January to in July; high temperatures average throughout the year.\nThe city of Jacksonville usually averages only about 10 to 15 nights at or below freezing. Such cold weather is usually short-lived. The coldest temperature recorded at Jacksonville International Airport was on January 21, 1985. Jacksonville has recorded four days with measurable snow since 1911, most recently a one-inch (2.5\u00a0cm) snowfall in December 1989, flurries in December 2010, and 1/10 of an inch (0.25 cm) of snow in January, 2025.\nJacksonville has only received one direct hit from a hurricane since 1871. The rarity of direct strikes is attributed to chance. However, the city has experienced hurricane or near-hurricane conditions more than a dozen times due to storms crossing the state from the Gulf of Mexico to the Atlantic Ocean, or passing to the north or south in the Atlantic and brushing past the area. The strongest effect on Jacksonville was from Hurricane Dora in 1964, the only recorded storm to hit the First Coast with sustained hurricane-force winds. The eye crossed St. Augustine with winds that had just barely diminished to , making it a strong Category 2 on the Saffir-Simpson Scale. In 1979, Hurricane David passed offshore by , bringing winds around . Hurricane Floyd in 1999 caused damage mainly to Jacksonville Beach; the Jacksonville Beach pier was severely damaged and later demolished.\nIn 2004, Jacksonville was inundated by Hurricane Frances and Hurricane Jeanne, which made landfall south of the area, and suffered minor damage from Tropical Storm Bonnie, which spawned a minor tornado. Jacksonville also suffered damage from 2008's Tropical Storm Fay, which crisscrossed the state, bringing parts of Jacksonville under darkness for four days. Fay damaged, but did not destroy, the Jacksonville Beach pier that was rebuilt after Floyd. On May 28, 2012, Jacksonville was hit by Tropical Storm Beryl, packing winds up to , which made landfall near Jacksonville Beach. Hurricane Matthew passed to the east with winds of 110 miles per hour. It caused storm surge, extensive flooding of the Atlantic Ocean and St. Johns River, and wind damage; the storm knocked out power for 250,000 people. In 2017, Hurricane Irma passed to the west with winds. It caused severe storm surge and flooding, passing the flood record of Hurricane Dora in 1964.\nParks.\nThe City of Jacksonville has a unique park system, with various lands operated by the National Park Service, Florida State Parks and the City of Jacksonville Department of Parks and Recreation. Jacksonville operates the largest urban park system in the United States, providing facilities and services at more than 337 locations on more than throughout the city. A number of parks provide access for people to boat, swim, fish, sail, jetski, surf and waterski.\nNational parks.\nThe Timucuan Preserve is a U.S. National Preserve comprising over of wetlands and waterways. It includes natural and historic areas such as the Fort Caroline National Memorial and the Kingsley Plantation, the oldest standing plantation in the state.\nState parks.\nThere are several state parks within the city limits of Jacksonville, these include Amelia Island State Park, Big Talbot Island State Park, Fort George Island Cultural State Park, George Crady Bridge Fishing Pier State Park, Little Talbot Island State Park, Pumpkin Hill Creek Preserve State Park and Yellow Bluff Fort Historic State Park.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAlthough incorporated in 1832, Jacksonville did not appear in the U.S. Census for the first time until 1850, when it recorded a population of only 1,045.\n2010 and 2020 census.\nIn the 2020 United States census, there were 949,611 people, 348,809 households, and 213,174 families living in Jacksonville.\nIn the 2010 United States census, there were 821,784 people, 311,064 households, and 197,888 families living in Jacksonville.\nIn 2020, Jacksonville was the most populous city in Florida and the eleventh most populous city in the United States.\nIn 2010, those of Hispanic or Latino ancestry accounted for 7.7% of Jacksonville's population. Of these, 2.6% identified as Puerto Rican, 1.7% as Mexican, and 0.9% as Cuban.\nIn 2010, those of African ancestry accounted for 30.7% of Jacksonville's population, which includes African Americans. Out of the 30.7%, 1.8% identified as Sub-Saharan African, 1.4% as West Indian or Afro-Caribbean American (0.5% Haitian, 0.4% Jamaican, 0.1% Other or Unspecified West Indian, 0.1% Bahamian, 0.1% Barbadian), and 0.6% as Black Hispanics.\nIn 2010, those of non-Hispanic white European ancestry accounted for 55.1% of Jacksonville's population. Of these, 10.4% identified as ethnic German, 10.2% as Irish, 8.8% as English, 3.9% as Italian, 2.2% as French, 2.0% as Scottish, 2.0% as Scotch-Irish, 1.7% Polish, 1.1% Dutch, 0.6% Russian, 0.5% Norwegian, 0.5% Swedish, 0.5% Welsh, and 0.5% as French Canadian.\nIn 2010, those of Asian ancestry accounted for 4.3% of Jacksonville's population. Out of the 4.3%, 1.8% were Filipino, 0.9% were Indian, 0.6% Other Asian, 0.5% Vietnamese, 0.3% Chinese, 0.2% Korean, and 0.1% were Japanese.\nIn 2010, 6.7% of the population identified as of American ancestry, regardless of race or ethnicity. In 2010, 0.9% were of Arab ancestry.\nAs of 2010[ [update]], there were 311,064 households, out of which 11.8% were vacant. 23.9% of households had children under the age of 18 living with them, 43.8% were married couples, 15.2% had a female householder with no husband present, and 36.4% were non-families. 29.7% of all households were made up of individuals, and 7.9% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.55 and the average family size was 3.21. 23.9% of the population were aged under 18, 10.5% were aged from 18 to 24, 28.5% from 25 to 44, 26.2% from 45 to 64, and 10.9% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 35.5 years. For every 100 females, there were 94.1 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 91.3 males.\nIn 2010, the median income for a household in the county was $48,829, and the median income for a family was $59,272. Males had a median income of $42,485 versus $34,209 for females. The per capita income for the county was $25,227. About 10.5% of families and 14.3% of the population were below the poverty line, including 20.4% of those under age 18 and 9.9% of those aged 65 or over.\nIn 2010, 9.2% of the county's population was foreign born, with 49.6% being naturalized American citizens. Of foreign born residents, 38.0% were born in Latin America, 35.7% born in Asia, 17.9% were born in Europe, 5.9% born in Africa, 1.9% in North America, and 0.5% were born in Oceania.\nIn 2010, 87.1% of Jacksonville's population age five and over spoke only English at home. 5.8% of the population spoke Spanish at home. About 3.3% spoke other Indo-European languages at home. About 2.9% spoke Asian languages or Pacific Islander languages/Oceanic languages at home. The remaining 0.9% of the population spoke other languages at home. In total, 12.9% spoke another language other than English.\n2000 census.\nIn 2000, speakers of English as a first language accounted for 90.60% of all residents. Those who spoke Spanish made up 4.13%, Tagalog 1.00%, French 0.47%, Arabic 0.44%, German 0.43%, Vietnamese 0.31%, Russian 0.21% and Italian 0.17% of the population.\nEthnicities.\nJacksonville has the largest Albanian American community in Florida, with 3,812 Albanians who lived within it, or 24.93% of all Albanian Americans in Florida. Nationally the city has the 3rd most Albanian Americans, behind Philadelphia and New York City.\nAs of 2010, Jacksonville had Florida's largest Filipino American community, with 25,033 in the metropolitan area in the 2010 Census. Much of Jacksonville's Filipino community served in or has ties to the United States Navy.\nIn 2000, Jacksonville had the country's tenth-largest Arab American population, with a population of 5,751 in the 2000 United States Census.\nReligion.\nJacksonville has a diverse religious population. The largest religious group is Protestant. According to the Association of Religion Data Archives (ARDA), in 2010 the Jacksonville metropolitan area had an estimated 365,267 Evangelical Protestants, 76,100 Mainline Protestants, and 56,769 Black Protestants, though figures for the latter were incomplete. There were around 1,200 Protestant congregations in various denominations. Notable Protestant churches include Bethel Baptist Institutional Church and First Baptist Church, whose congregations separated after the Civil War and which are the city's oldest Baptist churches. Each has become very large. The Episcopal Diocese of Florida has its see at St. John's Cathedral; the current building was completed in 1906.\nJacksonville is part of the Roman Catholic Diocese of St. Augustine, which covers seventeen counties in North Florida. ARDA estimated 133,155 Catholics attending 25 parishes in the Jacksonville metropolitan area in 2010. The Basilica of the Immaculate Conception in Jacksonville, defined as a minor basilica in 2013, was added to the National Register of Historic Places in 1992.\nThere are also two Eastern Catholic parishes, one of the Syriac Catholic Church and one of the Maronite Church. In 2010 there were 2,520 Eastern Orthodox Christians, representing four churches in the Eastern Orthodox communion, as well as congregations of Syriac Orthodox, Armenian Apostolic, Ethiopian Orthodox, and Coptic Orthodox Christians.\nARDA estimated 14,886 members of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (LDS Church) and 511 Unitarian Universalists in 2010. There were an estimated 8,581 Muslims attending seven mosques, the largest being the Islamic Center of Northeast Florida. The Jewish community, which numbered 6,028 in 2010, is largely centered in the neighborhood of Mandarin. There are five Orthodox, two Reform, two Conservative, and one Reconstructionist synagogues. The Rohr Jewish Learning Institute teaches courses for the community.\nARDA estimated 4,595 Hindus, 3,530 Buddhists and 650 Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00eds in the Jacksonville area in 2010.\nEconomy.\nJacksonville's location on the St. Johns River and the Atlantic Ocean proved instrumental to the growth of the city and its industry. Jacksonville has a sizable deepwater port, which helps make it a leading port in the U.S. for automobile imports, as well as the leading transportation and distribution hub in the state. The strength of the city's economy lies in its broad diversification. While the area once had many thriving dairies, such as Gustafson's Farm and Skinner Dairy, this aspect of the economy has declined over time. The area's economy is balanced among distribution, financial services, biomedical technology, consumer goods, information services, manufacturing, insurance, and other industries.\nJacksonville is home to the headquarters of four Fortune 500 companies: CSX Corporation, Fidelity National Financial, Fidelity National Information Services and Southeastern Grocers. Interline Brands is based in Jacksonville and is owned by The Home Depot. Other notable companies based in Jacksonville or with a large presence include Florida Blue, Swisher International Group, BOA Merrill Lynch, Fanatics, Crowley Maritime, Web.com, Firehouse Subs and Deutsche Bank. Naval Air Station Jacksonville, SW of downtown, employs more than 25,000 people.\nTourism.\nIn 2008, Jacksonville had 2.8\u00a0million visitors who stayed overnight, spending nearly $1\u00a0billion. A study by Research Data Services of Tampa quantified the importance of tourism. The total economic impact was $1.6\u00a0billion and supported nearly 43,000 jobs, 10% of the local workforce.\n\"Visit Jacksonville\" is the official marketing organization for tourism in Duval County. Their report on FY2024 showed that the city had more than 8 million visitors who spent in excess of $4 billion. A majority visited relatives and/or friends, and 4 out of 5 expected to return. Just under half paid for their accommodations with a significant percentage coming from Florida, including Orlando and Tampa, or Atlanta and New York.\nVisitor spending had almost a $7.4 billion impact on the economy of Jacksonville, supporting approximately 57,000 area jobs and $2.8 billion in wages. The visitor's contribution to local taxes saved every Jacksonville household about $540 from their tax bill. Officials expect that new attractions, such as the $1.4 billion \"Stadium of the Future\" will increase those numbers.\nBanking and financial services.\nJacksonville has long had a regional legacy in banking and finance. Locally headquartered Atlantic National Bank, Florida National Bank and Barnett Bank dominated the industry in Florida from the turn of the 20th century through the 1980s, before all being acquired in a national wave of mergers and acquisitions throughout the entire financial sector. Acquired by NationsBank in 1997, Barnett Bank was the last of these banks to succumb to acquisition, and at the time was the largest banking merger in U.S. history. The city still holds distinction nationally and internationally, boasting two Fortune 500 financial services companies, Fidelity National Financial and FIS, FIS being well recognized as a global leader in financial technology. Headquartered on the banks of the St. Johns River in Downtown Jacksonville, EverBank holds the title of largest bank in the state by deposits. The city is home to other notable financial services institutions including Ameris Bancorp, Atlantic Coast Financial, Black Knight Financial Services, MedMal Direct Insurance Company, US Assure, Jax Federal Credit Union, and VyStar Credit Union. The city is also home to the Jacksonville Branch of the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta.\nJacksonville's financial sector has benefited from a rapidly changing business culture, as have other Sunbelt cities such as Atlanta, Tampa, and Charlotte. In a concept known as nearshoring, financial institutions are shifting operations away from high-cost addresses such as Wall Street, and have shifted some trading functions to Jacksonville. With relatively low-cost real estate, easy access by planes to New York City, high quality of life, and 19,000 financial sector employees, Jacksonville has become an option for relocating staff.\nDeutsche Bank's growth in the city is an example of such change. Jacksonville is the site of Deutsche Bank's second largest U.S. operation; only New York City is larger. They also are an example of a business that has moved operations to the suburbs. Other institutions with a notable presence in Jacksonville include Macquarie Group, Bank of America, Wells Fargo, JPMorgan Chase, Citi, Citizens Property Insurance, Fidelity Investments, Ally Financial and Aetna.\nLogistics.\nJacksonville is a rail, air, and highway focal point and a busy port of entry, with Jacksonville International Airport, ship repair yards and extensive freight-handling facilities. Lumber, phosphate, paper, cigars and wood pulp are the principal exports; automobiles and coffee are among imports. The city's manufacturing base provides 4.5% of local jobs, versus 8.5% nationally.\nAccording to \"Forbes\" magazine in 2007, Jacksonville ranked third among the top ten U.S. cities as destinations for jobs. Jacksonville was ranked as the tenth-fastest growing city in the U.S.\nTo emphasize the city's transportation business and capabilities, the Jacksonville Regional Chamber of Commerce filed \"Jacksonville America's Logistics Center\" as a trademark on November 9, 2007. It was formally registered on August 4, 2009. Cornerstone began promoting the city as \"Jacksonville: America's Logistics Center\" in 2009. Signs were added to the existing city limit markers on Interstate 95.\nThe Port of Jacksonville, a seaport on the St. Johns River, is a large component of the local economy. Approximately 50,000 jobs in Northeast Florida are related to port activity and the port has an economic impact of $2.7\u00a0billion in Northeast Florida: The three maritime shippers who ship to Puerto Rico are all headquartered in Jacksonville: TOTE Maritime, Crowley Maritime, and Trailer Bridge.\nCecil Commerce Center is on the site of the former Naval Air Station Cecil Field, which closed in 1999 following the 1993 Base Realignment and Closure (BRAC) decision. Covering a total area of , it was the largest military base in the Jacksonville area. The parcel contains more than 3% of the total land area in Duval County (). The industrial and commercial-zoned center offers mid to large-size parcels for development; it has excellent transportation and utility infrastructure, including the third-longest runway in Florida.\nMedia and technology.\n\"The Florida Times-Union\" is the major daily broadsheet newspaper in the State of Florida, headquartered in Jacksonville. Jacksonville.com is its official website. The \"Jacksonville Daily Record\" is also a daily broadsheet newspaper specialized for the business and legal communities. Weekly papers include the \"Jacksonville Business Journal\", an American City Business Journals publication focused on business news, \"Folio Weekly\", the city's chief alternative weekly, and \"The Florida Star\" and the \"Jacksonville Free Press\", two weeklies catering to African Americans. \"Jax4Kids\", a monthly newspaper, caters to parents. \"EU Jacksonville\" is a monthly entertainment magazine. \"The Coastal\" is also a local magazine that is only online that also publishes a quarterly paper edition.\nWhen it comes to broadcast media, as of 2023, Jacksonville was considered the 47th-largest local television market in the United States. Despite its large population, Jacksonville has always been a small-to-medium-sized market because of population trends towards suburban and once-traditionally rural areas around Duval County, Florida. They are served by television stations affiliated with major American networks including but not limited to: WTLV 12 (NBC) and its sister station WJXX 25 (ABC), WJAX-TV 47 (CBS) and WFOX-TV 30 (Fox; with MyNetworkTV/MeTV on DT2), which operates WJAX-TV under a joint sales and shared services agreement, WJCT 7 (PBS), and WCWJ 17 (CW). WJXT 4, WCWJ's sister station, is a former longtime CBS affiliate that turned independent in 2002.\nJacksonville is also considered, after 2017, the 46th-largest local radio market in the U.S. and is also dominated by two of the largest media groups in the United States that also dominates the American radio industry, including the following: Cox Radio and iHeartMedia. The dominant AM radio station in terms of ratings - or households to use an industry term tuning in, is WOKV 690AM, which is also the flagship station for the Jacksonville Jaguars. In May 2013, WOKV began simulcasting on 104.5 FM as WOKV FM. There are two radio stations currently broadcasting, after 2017, primarily contemporary American (U.S. Based) Pop music, and they are the following: WAPE 95.1 which has somewhat dominated this niche for over 20 years but had competition originally based out of Atlanta, Georgia and Los Angeles, California linked to Ryan Seacrest. And more recently has been challenged to a certain extent by WKSL 97.9 FM (KISS FM).\nFor other popular genres of music, this would be WJBT 93.3 (The Beat) which is a mostly gangster-oriented Hip-Hop/R&amp;B station and 96.9 The Eagle WJGL which is mostly a Classical or Hard Rock station, while its HD subchannel WJGL-HD2 operates an Urban CHR format under the moniker Power 106.1. WPLA 107.3 is its competitor specializing in Contemporary Rock music under the moniker \"107.3 Planet Radio.\" And moreover, WEZI 102.9 is considered another competitor that specializes in Alternative R&amp;B or Adult Contemporary that is often branded as \"Easy 102.9\" along with 96.1 WEJZ branded as \"96.1 WEJZ\", WHJX \"Hot 106.5\" specializing in urban adult contemporary, and WQIK 99.1 simply specializing in traditional country or Americana as well as WGNE-FM 99.9, and WJCT 89.9 lastly being the local National Public Radio affiliate. Moreover, a Christian Contemporary alternative would be WJKV 90.9 FM that is also an Educational Media Foundation K-LOVE outlet.\nMilitary and defense.\nJacksonville is home to three U.S. naval facilities. Together with the nearby Naval Submarine Base Kings Bay, Jacksonville is the third-largest naval complex in the country. Only Norfolk, Virginia and San Diego, California are bigger. The United States military is the largest employer in Jacksonville and its total economic impact is approximately $6.1\u00a0billion annually. Several veterans' service organizations are also headquartered in Jacksonville, including Wounded Warrior Project.\nNaval Air Station Jacksonville is a military airport south of the central business district. Approximately 23,000 civilian and active-duty personnel are employed on the base. There are 35 operational units/squadrons assigned there. Support facilities include an airfield for pilot training, and a maintenance depot capable of tasks ranging from changing a tire to intricate micro-electronics, or total engine disassembly. Also on-site is a Naval Hospital, a Fleet Industrial Supply Center, a Navy Family Service Center, and recreational facilities.\nNaval Station Mayport is a Navy Ship Base that is the third-largest fleet concentration area in the U.S. Mayport has a busy harbor capable of accommodating 34 ships, and an runway capable of handling any aircraft used by the Department of Defense. Until 2007, it was home to the aircraft carrier , which locals called \"Big John\". In January 2009, the Navy committed to stationing a nuclear-powered carrier at Mayport when the official \"Record of Decision\" was signed. The port will require approximately $500\u00a0million in facility enhancements to support the larger vessel, which took several years to complete. The carrier was projected to arrive in 2019; however, an amphibious group was sent before the carrier.\nBlount Island Command is a Marine Corps Logistics Base whose mission is to support the Maritime Prepositioning Force (MPF). This provides for rapid deployment of personnel to link up with pre-positioned equipment and supplies embarked aboard forward-deployed Maritime Prepositioning Ships (MPS).\n, a nuclear-powered , is a U.S. Navy ship named for the city. The ship's nickname is \"The Bold One\" and Pearl Harbor is her home port.\nThe Florida Air National Guard is based at Jacksonville International Airport.\nCoast Guard Sector Jacksonville is on the St. Johns River next to Naval Station Mayport. Sector Jacksonville controls operations from Kings Bay, Georgia, south to Cape Canaveral. CGC \"Kingfisher\", CGC \"Maria Bray\", and CGC \"Hammer\" are stationed at the Sector. Station Mayport is co-located with Sector Jacksonville and includes response boats, and motor lifeboats.\nCulture.\nLeisure and entertainment.\nThroughout the year, many annual events of various types are held in Jacksonville. In sports, the annual Gate River Run has been held annually since March 1977. It has been the U.S. National road race Championship since 1994 and is the largest race of its distance in the country with over 13,000 runners, spectators, and volunteers, making it Jacksonville's largest participation sporting event. In college football, the Gator Bowl is held on or around New Year's Day each year. It has been continuously held since 1946. Also, the Florida\u2013Georgia game (also known as the \"World's Largest Outdoor Cocktail Party\"), the annual college football game between the rival Florida Gators and Georgia Bulldogs has been held in Jacksonville almost yearly since 1933. For six days in July the Jacksonville Kingfish Tournament is held for fishermen of all skills. With $500,000 of prizes up for grabs, up to 1000 boats participate with almost 30,000 spectators watching. Jacksonville is also home of River City Pride which is Northeast Florida's largest Gay Pride parade. The parade and festivities usually take place over the course of the weekend, usually the first or second weekend in October in Jacksonville's Riverside neighborhood. The first pride parade was held in 1978.\nA number of cultural events are also held in Jacksonville. The Jacksonville Jazz Festival, held downtown, is the second largest jazz festival in the nation, while \"Springing the Blues\", one of the oldest and largest blues festivals, has been held in Jacksonville Beach since 1990. The World of Nations Celebration has been held in Metropolitan Park since 1993, and features a number of events, food and souvenirs from various countries.\nThe Art Walk, a monthly outdoor art festival formerly on the first Wednesday of each month, was sponsored by Downtown Vision, Inc, an organization which works to promote artistic talent and venues on the First Coast. This Art Walk - renowned and attracted many art lovers and traditional artists alike participating from New York City and Los Angeles, California, used to be held at Hemming Plaza (now James Weldon Johnson Park) prior to 2017 before it was reduced in size and character, resembling somewhat like Central Park in New York City, and is now selectively held at MOCA at UNF indoors, in downtown Jacksonville after 2017.\nJacksonville is home to many breweries and a growing number of distilleries. Other events include the Blessing of the Fleet held in March since 1985 and the Greater Jacksonville Agricultural Fair in November at the Jacksonville Fairgrounds and Exposition Center featuring games, rides, food, entertainment and livestock exhibition. Riverside Arts Market (RAM), an outdoor arts-and-crafts market on the Riverwalk, occurs every Saturday under the canopy of the Fuller Warren Bridge. Holiday celebrations include the Freedom, Fanfare &amp; Fireworks celebration on July 4, the lighting of Jacksonville's official Christmas tree at the James Weldon Johnson Park on the day after Thanksgiving and the Jacksonville Light Parade of boats the following day.\nThe VyStar Veterans Memorial Arena, opened in 2003, is a 16,000-seat multi-purpose arena featuring live sporting events that houses the Jacksonville Sports Hall of Fame. It is linked to Theatre Jacksonville and Players by the Sea, both non-profit theater companies, and attracts national and prominent local live theater performances. It replaced the outdated Jacksonville Coliseum, built in 1960 and demolished on June 26, 2003. Daily's Place is an amphitheater adjacent to EverBank Field and regularly hosts concerts. The Jacksonville Zoo and Gardens has the second largest animal collection in the state. The zoo features elephants, lions, and jaguars, with an exhibit, \"Range of the Jaguar\", hosted by the former owners of the Jacksonville Jaguars, Delores and Wayne Weaver. It also has a multitude of reptile houses, free flight aviaries, and many other animals.\nTheatre Jacksonville, a once prominent non-profit and for-profit theatrical production company, was organized in 1919 as the \"Little Theatre\" and is one of the oldest continually producing community theaters in the United States. Alhambra Theater &amp; Dining, opened in 1967 in Jacksonville as the Alhambra Dinner Theatre, is the oldest continually operated dinner theater in the United States. There are a number of other community theaters in Jacksonville, such as \"Players by the Sea\" near Jacksonville Beach, the 5 &amp; Dime Theatre Co. in downtown Jacksonville, the Murray Hill Art Center was reopened in February 2012, and is operated by the Art League of Jacksonville, a nonprofit organization dedicated to arts education. The center is in the historic Murray Hill area and offers community arts classes.\nJacksonville has two fully enclosed shopping malls. The oldest is the Regency Square Mall, which opened in 1967 and is on former sand dunes in the Arlington area. The other is The Avenues Mall. It opened in 1990 on the Southside at the intersection of I-95 and U.S. 1. There is a third indoor mall in the metropolitan area, The Orange Park Mall, but it is just outside of Jacksonville in Orange Park, Florida, in Clay County.\nThe St. Johns Town Center opened in 2005, on the south side of Jacksonville. River City Marketplace opened in 2006, on the north side of Jacksonville. Both of these are \"open-air\" malls, with a mix of stores but not contained under the same roof.\nLiterature, film and television.\nA handful of significant literary works and authors are associated with Jacksonville and the surrounding area. Perhaps the most important is James Weldon Johnson, who moved North and was influential in the Harlem Renaissance. In 1920 he also became the first African American to lead the NAACP civil rights organization. His first success as a writer was the poem \"Lift Ev'ry Voice and Sing\" (1899), which his brother Rosamond Johnson set to music; the song became unofficially known as the \"Negro National Anthem\".\nAlready famous for having written \"Uncle Tom's Cabin\" (1852), northern writer Harriet Beecher Stowe published \"Palmetto Leaves\" in 1873. A travel guide and memoir about her winters in the town of Mandarin, Florida, it was one of the first guides written about Florida and stimulated the state's first boom in the 1880s of tourism and residential development.\nJacksonville embraced the movies. Sun-Ray Cinema, also known as the 5 Points Theatre and Riverside Theatre, opened in 1927. It was the first theater in Florida equipped to show the new \"talking pictures\" and the third nationally. It is in the Five Points section of town and was renamed as the \"Five Points Theater\" in 1949.\nThe Florida Theatre, also opened in 1927, is in downtown Jacksonville and is one of only four remaining high-style movie palaces that were built in Florida during the Mediterranean Revival architectural boom of the 1920s. Since that time, Jacksonville has been chosen by a number of film and television studios for location shooting. Notable motion pictures that have been partially or completely shot in Jacksonville since the silent film era include the classic thriller, \"Creature from the Black Lagoon\" (1954).\nSince the late 20th century, the city has attracted numerous film companies, which shot \"The New Adventures of Pippi Longstocking\" (1988), \"Brenda Starr\" (1989), \"G.I. Jane\" (1997), \"The Devil's Advocate\" (1997), \"Ride\" (1998), \"Why Do Fools Fall in Love\" (1998), \"Forces of Nature\" (1999), \"Tigerland\" (2000), \"Sunshine State\" (2002), \"Basic\" (2003), \"The Manchurian Candidate\" (2004), \"Lonely Hearts\" (2006), \"Moving McAllister\" (2007), \"The Year of Getting to Know Us\" (2008), \"The Ramen Girl\" (2008) and \"Like Dandelion Dust\" (2009).\nNotable television series or made-for-television films that have been partially or completely shot in Jacksonville include \"Inherit the Wind\" (1988), \"Orpheus Descending\" (1990), \"Saved by the Light\" (1995), \"The Babysitter's Seduction\" (1996), \"First Time Felon\" (1997), \"Safe Harbor\" (2009), \"Recount\" (2008), \"American Idol\" (2009), and \"Ash vs Evil Dead\" (2015).\nMuseums and art galleries.\nThe Cummer Museum of Art and Gardens is an art museum in Jacksonville's Riverside neighborhood. It was founded in 1961, following the death of Ninah Mae Holden Cummer, who bequeathed her art collection, house and gardens to the museum. Its galleries display one of the world's three most comprehensive collections of Meissen porcelain, as well as large collections of American, European, and Japanese art. The grounds contain two acres of Italian and English gardens begun by Ninah Cummer.\nThe Museum of Contemporary Art Jacksonville (MOCA Jacksonville) is a contemporary art museum funded and operated as a \"cultural resource\" of the University of North Florida. Tracing its roots to the formation of Jacksonville's Fine Arts Society in 1924, it opened its current facility in 2003 next to the Main Library downtown. The museum features eclectic permanent and traveling exhibitions, and a collection of over 700 works.\nThe Museum of Science &amp; History (MOSH), in downtown's Southbank Riverwalk, specializes in science and local history exhibits. It features a main exhibit that changes quarterly, plus three floors of nature exhibits, an extensive exhibit on the history of Northeast Florida, a hands-on science area, and the area's only astronomy theater, the Bryan Gooding Planetarium.\nKingsley Plantation is a historic plantation built in 1798. The house of Zephaniah Kingsley, barn, kitchen, and slave cabins have been preserved.\nAlexander Brest, founder of Duval Engineering and Contracting Co., was the benefactor for the Alexander Brest Museum and Gallery on the campus of Jacksonville University. The exhibits are a diverse collection of carved ivory, Pre-Columbian artifacts, Steuben glass, Chinese porcelain and cloisonn\u00e9, Tiffany glass, Boehm porcelain, and rotating exhibits of the work of local, regional, national and international artists.\nThree other art galleries are at educational institutions in town. Florida State College at Jacksonville has the Kent Gallery on their westside campus and the Wilson Center for the Arts at their main campus. The University Gallery is on the campus of the University of North Florida.\nThe Jacksonville Karpeles Manuscript Library Museum is a branch of the world's largest private collection of original manuscripts and documents. The museum in Jacksonville is in a 1921 neoclassical building on the outskirts of downtown. In addition to document displays, an antique-book library has numerous volumes dating from the late 19th century.\nThe Catherine Street Fire Station building is on the National Register of Historic Places; it was relocated to Metropolitan Park in 1993. It houses the Jacksonville Fire Museum and features more than 500 artifacts, including an 1806 hand pumper.\nThe LaVilla Museum opened in 1999 and features a permanent display of African-American history. In addition, the art exhibits are changed periodically.\nThe city has several outstanding historical properties, some of which have been adapted to new uses. These include the Klutho Building, the Old Morocco Temple Building, the Palm and Cycad Arboretum, and the Prime F. Osborn III Convention Center, originally built as Union Station train depot. The Jacksonville Historical Society showcases two restoration projects: the 1887 St. Andrews Episcopal Church and the 1879 Merrill House, both near the sports complex.\nThe Jacksonville Naval Museum opened in 2022 with the museum ship USS \"Orleck\" as its centerpiece. This museum gives tribute to the city's naval history.\nMusic.\nThe Ritz Theatre, opened in 1929, is in the LaVilla neighborhood of the northern part of Jacksonville's downtown. The Jacksonville music scene was active in the 1930s in LaVilla, which was known as \"Harlem of the South\". Black musicians from across the country visited Jacksonville to play standing room only performances at the Ritz Theatre and the \"Knights of Pythias Hall\". Cab Calloway, Duke Ellington, Ella Fitzgerald, and Louis Armstrong were a few of the legendary performers who appeared. After his mother died when he was 15, Ray Charles lived with friends of his mother while he played piano at the Ritz for a year, before moving on to fame and fortune. The Ritz Theatre was rebuilt, and reopened in October 1999.\nThe Jacksonville Jazz Festival has been held for than 40 years. It takes place over the three-day Memorial Day weekend, and includes the Jacksonville Jazz Piano Competition.\nDuring the 1960s, the Classics IV was the most successful pop rock band from Jacksonville. Southern Rock was defined by the Allman Brothers Band, which formed in 1969 in Jacksonville. Lynyrd Skynyrd achieved near cult status and inspired Blackfoot, Molly Hatchet and .38 Special, all successful in the 1970s. The 1980s were a quiet decade for musical talent in Jacksonville.\nThe Times-Union Center for the Performing Arts consists of three distinct halls: the \"Jim &amp; Jan Moran Theater\", a venue for touring Broadway shows; the \"Jacoby Symphony Hall\", home of the Jacksonville Symphony Orchestra; and the \"Terry Theater\", intended for small shows and recitals. The building was originally erected as the Civic Auditorium in 1962 and underwent a major renovation and construction in 1996.\nThe next local group to achieve national success was the nu metal band Limp Bizkit, formed in 1994. Other popular acts from Jacksonville were hip hop acts 95 South, 69 Boyz, and the Quad City DJ's. The bands Inspection 12, Cold, and Yellowcard were also well known and had a large national following. After 2000, additional rock bands such as Fit For Rivals, Burn Season, Evergreen Terrace, Shinedown, The Red Jumpsuit Apparatus, Electric President, and Black Kids attained national attention for various hit songs and albums. In the 2010\u201320s, further urban developments resulted in numerous hip hop recording artists emerging from the city, some of whom have reached mainstream notability and signed to major labels. These include Nardo Wick (signed to RCA Records), SpotemGottem (signed to Geffen Records), YK Osiris (signed to Def Jam Recordings), Trap Beckham (also signed to Def Jam), and KaMillion. Prior, Mase of Bad Boy Records fame was the only rapper to achieve such success hailing from the city.\nSports.\nJacksonville is home to one major league sports team, the Jacksonville Jaguars of the National Football League (NFL). The Jaguars joined the NFL as an expansion team in the 1995 season; they play their home games at TIAA Bank Field. In 2005, Jacksonville hosted Super Bowl XXXIX. The PGA Tour, which organizes the main professional golf tournaments in the U.S., is headquartered in the suburb of Ponte Vedra Beach, where it holds The Players Championship every year.\nIn 2022, the United Soccer League announced the launch of a new USL Championship franchise in Jacksonville, led by venture capitalist Ricky Caplin and former Heisman Trophy winner Tim Tebow. In May 2023, the JAXUSL group was also awarded a conditional franchise in the newly formed USL Super League, a fully professional women's soccer league intended to rival the NWSL.\nJacksonville is also home to several minor league-level teams. The Jacksonville Jumbo Shrimp, a Triple-A baseball team, have played in Jacksonville continuously since 1970 and have consistently been near the top of their league in attendance. The Jacksonville Sharks, who began play in 2010, were the champions of the Arena Football League's ArenaBowl XXIV in 2011 and now play in the Indoor Football League. The Jacksonville Axemen are a semi-professional rugby league team founded in 2006, and now play in the USA Rugby League. The Jacksonville Armada FC is a soccer team that began play in the North American Soccer League (NASL) in 2015. In 2023, they transitioned to MLS Next Pro as an independent club. The Jacksonville Icemen is a minor league ice hockey team in the ECHL that began play in the 2017\u201318 season. The team plays its home games at VyStar Veterans Memorial Arena. The Jacksonville 95ers is a team in The Basketball League (TBL) that has played at Edward Waters University since 2024.\nAll Elite Wrestling (AEW) is a professional wrestling promotion based in Jacksonville and a competitor of WWE.\nCollege sports, especially college football, are popular in Jacksonville. The city hosts the Florida\u2013Georgia game, an annual college football game between the University of Florida and the University of Georgia and the TaxSlayer Gator Bowl, a post-season college football bowl game. Jacksonville's two universities compete in NCAA Division I: the University of North Florida Ospreys and the Jacksonville University Dolphins, both in the Atlantic Sun Conference.\nGovernment and politics.\nGovernment.\nIn 1968 Jacksonville and Duval County consolidated their governments in the Jacksonville Consolidation. This eliminated a separate county executive or legislature, and supplanted these positions with the Mayor of Jacksonville and the City Council of the City of Jacksonville, respectively. Because of this, voters who live \"outside\" of the city limits of Jacksonville but \"inside\" Duval County may vote in elections for these positions and run for them. In 1995, John Delaney, a resident of Neptune Beach within Duval County, was elected as mayor of the city of Jacksonville.\nJacksonville is organized under the city charter and provides for a \"strong\" mayor\u2013council form of city government. The Mayor of Jacksonville is elected to four-year terms and serves as the head of the government's executive branch. The Jacksonville City Council comprises nineteen members, fourteen representing single-member electoral districts of roughly equal populations, and five elected for at-large seats. The mayor oversees most city departments, though some are independent or quasi-independent. Law enforcement is provided by the Jacksonville Sheriff's Office, headed by an elected sheriff; public schools are overseen by Duval County Public Schools, and several services are provided by largely independent authorities. The mayor holds veto power over all resolutions and ordinances made by the city council and also has the power to hire and fire the heads of various city departments.\nAs before the consolidation, some government services are operated independently of city and county authority. In accordance with Florida law, the elected school board has nearly complete autonomy. Jacksonville also has several quasi-independent government agencies which only nominally answer to the consolidated authority, including electric authority, port authority, transportation authority, housing authority and airport authority. The main environmental and agricultural body is the Duval County Soil and Water Conservation District, which works closely with other area, state, and federal agencies.\nThe Jacksonville Housing Authority (JHA) is the quasi-independent agency responsible for public housing and subsidized housing in Jacksonville. The Mayor and City Council of Jacksonville established the JHA in 1994 to create a community service-oriented, public housing agency with innovative ideas and a different attitude. The primary goal was to provide safe, clean, affordable housing for eligible low and moderate income families, the elderly, and persons with disabilities. The secondary goal was to provide effective social services, work with residents to improve their quality of life, encourage employment and self-sufficiency, and help residents move out of assisted housing. To that end, JHA works with HabiJax to help low and moderate income families to escape the public housing cycle and become successful, productive, homeowners and taxpayers.\nPolitics.\nThe present mayor is Donna Deegan, who assumed office on July 1, 2023. Deegan's predecessor was Lenny Curry.\nMost of the city lies in the Florida's 4th congressional district, and is represented by Republican Aaron Bean. Most of central Jacksonville is in the 5th district, represented by Republican John Rutherford. \nIn 2010, Duval County's crime rate was 5,106 per 100,000 people, according to the Florida Department of Law Enforcement. The county's murder rate had been the highest among Florida's counties with a population of 500,000 or more for eleven years as of 2009, leading to widespread discussion in the community about how to deal with the problem. In 2010, Duval County's violent crime rate decreased by 9.3% from the previous year, with total crime decreasing 7.3%, putting the murder rate behind that of Miami-Dade County.\nJacksonville and Duval County historically maintained separate police agencies: the Jacksonville Police Department and Duval County Sheriff's Office. As part of consolidation in 1968, the two merged, creating the Jacksonville Sheriff's Office (JSO). The JSO is headed by the elected Sheriff of Jacksonville, currently T. K. Waters. \nThe sheriff's office is responsible for law enforcement and corrections in the county. Likewise the Jacksonville Fire and Rescue Department became the consolidated city/county agency.\nHowever, the cities of Jacksonville Beach, Atlantic Beach and Neptune Beach each retained responsibility for their own policing. As of November 23, 2021, the Jacksonville Beach Fire Department became the last agency to merge with Jacksonville Fire and Rescue.\nEducation.\nPrimary and secondary education.\nPublic primary and secondary schools in Jacksonville and Duval County are administered by Duval County Public Schools, which is governed by an elected, seven-member Duval County School Board. In the 2009\u20132010 school year, the district enrolled 123,000 students. It administers 172 total schools, including 103 elementary schools, 25 middle schools, 19 high schools, three K\u20138 schools, and one 6\u201312 school, as well as 13 charter schools and a juvenile justice school program. Of these, 62 are designated magnet schools.\nThree of Jacksonville's high schools, Stanton College Preparatory School, Darnell-Cookman School of the Medical Arts and Paxon School for Advanced Studies regularly appear at the top of \"Newsweek\" magazine's annual list of the country's top public high schools, coming in respectively at #3, #7, and #8 in the 2010 edition. Five other schools, Douglas Anderson School of the Arts (#33), Mandarin High School (#97), Duncan U. Fletcher High School (#205), Sandalwood High School (#210), and Englewood High School (#1146) were also included in the list.\nThe Roman Catholic Diocese of St. Augustine operates a number of Catholic schools in Jacksonville, including two high schools, Bishop Kenny High School and Bishop John J. Snyder High School. Other private schools in Jacksonville include Arlington Country Day School, the Bolles School, Trinity Christian Academy, and the Episcopal School of Jacksonville.\nColleges and universities.\nJacksonville is home to a number of institutions of higher education. The University of North Florida (UNF), opened in 1972, is a public institution and a member of the State University System of Florida. Jacksonville University (JU) is a private institution founded in 1934. Edward Waters University (EWU), established in 1866, is the oldest college in Jacksonville and the state's oldest historically black college. Florida State College at Jacksonville (FSCJ) is a state college and a member of the Florida College System, offering two-year associate's degrees as well as some four-year bachelor's degrees. The University of Florida has its second campus of the J. Hillis Miller Health Science Center in Jacksonville.\nOther colleges and universities in Jacksonville include Trinity Baptist College, and Jones College. Also in the area are St. Johns River State College, a state college with campuses in Clay, St. Johns, and Putnam Counties, and Flagler College in St. Augustine. The Mayo Clinic College of Medicine and Science also offers educational programs from its Mayo Clinic Jacksonville campus.\nPublic libraries.\nThe Jacksonville Public Library began when May Moore and Florence Murphy started the Jacksonville Library and Literary Association in 1878. The Association was populated by various prominent Jacksonville residents and sought to create a free public library and reading room for the city.\nOver the course of 127 years, the system has grown from that one room library to become one of the largest in the state. The Jacksonville library system includes the Main Library and 20 branches, ranging in size from the West Regional Library to smaller neighborhood libraries like Westbrook and Eastside. The Library annually receives nearly four million visitors and circulates over six\u00a0million items. Nearly 500,000 library cards are held by area residents.\nOn November 12, 2005, the new Main Library opened to the public, replacing the 40-year-old Haydon Burns Library. The largest public library in the state, the opening of the new main library marked the completion of an unprecedented period of growth for the system under the Better Jacksonville Plan. The new Main Library offers specialized reading rooms, public access to hundreds of computers and public displays of art, an extensive collection of books, and special collections ranging from the African-American Collection to the recently opened Holocaust Collection.\nInfrastructure.\nTransportation.\nRoadways and bridges.\nThere are seven bridges over the St. Johns River at Jacksonville. They include (starting from furthest downstream) the Napoleon Bonaparte Broward Bridge (Dames Point) (which carries Interstate 295 Eastern Beltway traffic), the John E. Mathews Bridge, the Isaiah D. Hart Bridge, the John T. Alsop Jr. Bridge (Main Street), the St. Elmo W. Acosta Bridge, the Fuller Warren Bridge (which carries I-95 traffic) and the Henry Holland Buckman Bridge (which carries I-295 North/South traffic). Also, next to the Acosta Bridge is a large jackknife railroad bridge built in the 1920s by Henry Flagler's FEC Railroad.\nBeginning in 1953, tolls were charged on the Hart, Mathews, Fuller Warren and Main Street bridges to pay for bridge construction, renovations and many other highway projects. As Jacksonville grew, toll plazas created bottlenecks and caused delays and accidents during rush hours. In 1988, Jacksonville voters chose to eliminate toll collection and replace the revenue with a \u00bd cent local sales tax increase. In 1989, the toll booths were removed.\nInterstate\u00a010 (I-10) and I-95 intersect in Jacksonville, forming the busiest freeway interchange in the region with 200,000 vehicles each day. I-10 ends at this intersection (the other end being in Santa Monica, California). Additionally, State Road\u00a0202 (J. Turner Butler Boulevard) provides freeway access to the Jacksonville beaches from I-95 on the Southside.\nI-95 has a bypass route, I-295, which encircles the downtown area. The major freeway interchange at I-295 and SR\u00a0202 was finally completed on December 24, 2008. SR\u00a09B was completed in late 2019, and connects I-295's southeast corner to the Bayard Area. The SR\u00a09B freeway will be called I-795 when it is completed. U.S. Highway\u00a01 (U.S.\u00a01) and US\u00a017 travel through the city from the south to the north, and US\u00a023 enters the city running concurrently with U.S.\u00a01. In downtown, U.S.\u00a023 splits from U.S.\u00a01 and quickly runs to its southern terminus.\nThe eastern terminus of U.S.\u00a090 is in nearby Jacksonville Beach near the Atlantic Ocean.\nU.S.\u00a023's other end is in Mackinaw City, Michigan.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSeveral regional transportation projects have been undertaken in recent years to deal with congestion on Jacksonville freeways. A $152 million project to create a high-speed interchange at the intersection of Interstates 10 and 95 began in February 2005, after the conclusion of Super Bowl XXXIX. Construction was expected to take nearly six years with multiple lane flyovers and the requirement that the interchange remain open throughout the project. The previous configuration used single lane, low speed, curved ramps which created backups during rush hours and contributed to accidents.\nAlso, construction of SR 9B (future Interstate 795), is currently underway.\nTransit system.\nThe Jacksonville Skyway is an automated people mover connecting Florida State College at Jacksonville downtown campus, the Northbank central business district, Convention Center, and Southbank locations. The system includes 8 stops connected by two lines. The existing train is a UMIII monorail built by Bombardier. The guideway consists of concrete beams which rest atop an unusually large support structure not used in most monorail systems. Maximum speed for the train is .\nA monorail was first proposed in the 1970s as part of a mobility plan hoping to attract interest from the Urban Mass Transit Administration's Downtown Peoplemover Program. The initial study was undertaken by the Florida Department of Transportation and Jacksonville's planning department, who took the Skyway project to the Jacksonville Transportation Authority (JTA) in 1977. Following further development and a final 18-month feasibility study, the UMTA selected Jacksonville as one of seven cities to receive federal funding for an automated people mover. Two other related projects are Miami's Metromover and Detroit's People Mover. UMTA's approved plan called for the construction of a Phase I system to be built in three segments.\nModal characteristics.\nIn 2014, the Jacksonville was among the top large cities ranked by percentage of commuters who drove to work alone (80 percent). According to the 2016 American Community Survey, 80 percent of city of Jacksonville residents commuted in single-occupancy vehicles, 8.6 percent carpooled, 2.6 percent used public transportation, and 2.7 percent walked. All other forms of transportation combined for 1.7 percent of the commuter modal share, while 4.5 percent worked out of the home.\nSome patterns of car ownership are similar to national averages. In 2015, 8.3 percent of city of Jacksonville households lacked a car, which increased slightly to 8.7 percent in 2016. The national average was 8.7 percent in 2016. Jacksonville averaged 1.62 cars per household in 2016, compared to a national average of 1.8.\nRail.\nAmtrak, the national passenger rail system, provides daily service from the Jacksonville Amtrak Station on Clifford Lane in the northwest section of the city. Two trains presently stop there, the \"Silver Meteor\" and \"Silver Star\" (temporarily replaced by the \"Floridian\"). Jacksonville was also served by the thrice-weekly \"Sunset Limited\" and the daily \"Silver Palm\". Service on the \"Silver Palm\" was cut back to Savannah, Georgia in 2002. The \"Sunset Limited\" route was truncated at San Antonio, Texas as a result of the track damage in the Gulf Coast area caused by Hurricane Katrina on August 28, 2005. Service on the \"Sunset Limited\" was restored as far east as New Orleans by late October 2005.\nJacksonville is the headquarters of two significant freight railroads. CSX Transportation, owns a large building on the downtown riverbank that is a significant part of the skyline. Florida East Coast Railway also call Jacksonville home. The Jacksonville Port Terminal Railroad is also based in Jacksonville. Norfolk Southern's Valdosta District also serves Jacksonville.\nAirports.\nJacksonville is served by Jacksonville International Airport (), north of downtown, with 82 departures a day to 27 nonstop destination cities. Airports in Jacksonville are managed by the Jacksonville Aviation Authority (JAA). Smaller aircraft use Jacksonville Executive at Craig Airport () in Arlington, Herlong Recreational Airport () on the Westside, and Cecil Airport (), at Cecil Commerce Center. The state of Florida has designated Cecil Airport a space port, allowing horizontal lift spacecraft to use the facility.\nSeaports.\nPublic seaports in Jacksonville are managed by the Jacksonville Port Authority, known as JAXPORT. Four modern deepwater () seaport facilities, including America's newest cruise port, make Jacksonville a full-service international seaport. In FY2006, JAXPORT handled 8.7\u00a0million tons of cargo, including nearly 610,000 vehicles, which ranks Jacksonville second in the nation in automobile handling, behind only the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey.\nThe 20 other maritime facilities not managed by the Port Authority move about 10 million tons of additional cargo in and out of the St. Johns River. In terms of total tonnage, the Port of Jacksonville ranks 40th nationally; within Florida, it is third behind Tampa and Port Everglades.\nIn 2003, the JAXPORT Cruise Terminal opened, providing cruise service for 1,500 passengers to Key West, Florida, the Bahamas, and Mexico via Carnival Cruise Lines ship \"Celebration\", which was retired in April 2008. For almost five months, no cruises originated from Jacksonville until September 20, 2008, when the cruise ship \"Fascination\" departed with 2,079 passengers. In fiscal year 2006, there were 78 cruise ship sailings with 128,745 passengers. A JaxPort spokesperson said in 2008 that they expect 170,000 passengers to sail each year.\nJacksonville Fire and Rescue operates a fleet of three fireboats. Its vessels are called on to fight approximately 75 fires per year.\nThe Mayport Ferry connects the north and south ends of State Road A1A between Mayport and Fort George Island, and is the last active ferry in Florida. The state of Florida transferred responsibility for ferry operations to JAXPORT on October 1, 2007.\nUtilities.\nBasic utilities in Jacksonville (water, sewer, electric) are provided by JEA (formerly the Jacksonville Electric Authority). According to Article 21 of the \"Jacksonville City Charter\":\nJEA is authorized to own, manage and operate a utilities system within and outside the City of Jacksonville. JEA is created for the express purpose of acquiring, constructing, operating, financing and otherwise have plenary authority with respect to electric, water, sewer, natural gas and such other utility systems as may be under its control now or in the future.\nPeople's Gas is Jacksonville's natural gas provider. Comcast is Jacksonville's local cable provider. AT&amp;T (formerly BellSouth) is Jacksonville's local phone provider, and their U-Verse service offers TV, internet, and VoIP phone service to customers served by fiber-to-the-premises or fiber-to-the-node using a VRAD. The city has a successful recycling program with separate pickups for garbage, yard waste and recycling. Collection is provided by several private companies under contract to the City of Jacksonville.\nHealth.\nMajor players in the Jacksonville health care industry include St. Vincent's HealthCare, Baptist Health and UF Health Jacksonville for local residents. Additionally, Nemours Children's Clinic and Mayo Clinic Jacksonville each draw patients regionally.\nThe TaxExemptWorld.com website, which compiles Internal Revenue Service data, reported that in 2007, there are 2,910 distinct, active, tax exempt/non-profit organizations in Jacksonville which, excluding Credit Unions, had a total income of $7.08\u00a0billion and assets of $9.54\u00a0billion.\nThere are 333 charitable organizations with assets of over $1\u00a0million. The largest share of assets was tied to Medical facilities, $4.5\u00a0billion. The problems of the homeless are addressed by several non-profits, including the Sulzbacher Center and the Clara White Mission.\nSister cities.\nJacksonville's sister cities are:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nIn 2000, Sister Cities International awarded Jacksonville the Innovation Arts &amp; Culture Award for the city's program with Nantes.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "60621", "revid": "69423", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60621", "title": "Dobro", "text": "American guitar brand\nDobro () is an American brand of resonator guitars owned by Gibson and manufactured by its subsidiary Epiphone. The term \"dobro\" is also used as a generic term for any wood-bodied, single-cone resonator guitar.\nThe Dobro was originally a guitar manufacturing company founded by the Dopyera brothers as the Dobro Manufacturing Company. Their guitar design, with a single outward-facing resonator cone, was introduced to compete with the patented inward-facing tricone and biscuit designs produced by the National String Instrument Corporation. The Dobro name appeared on other instruments, notably electric lap steel guitars and solid body electric guitars and on other resonator instruments such as Safari resonator mandolins.\nHistory.\nThe roots of the Dobro story can be traced to the 1920s when Slovak immigrant John Dopyera, instrument repairman and inventor, and musician George Beauchamp were searching for more volume for Beauchamp's guitars. Dopyera built an ampliphonic (or \"resonator\") for Beauchamp, which was patented in December 1929. In mid-1929, Dopyera left the National String Instrument Corporation to start the Dobro Manufacturing Company along with his brothers Rudy and Ed, and Vic Smith. National continued operating under Beauchamp, Barth et al. \"Dobro\" is both a contraction of 'Dopyera brothers' and a word meaning 'good' in their native Slovak, but also in many other Slavic languages. An early company motto was \"Dobro means good in any language.\" In 1930, the Dobro company name was changed to Dobro Corporation, Ltd., with additional capital provided by Louis and Robert Dopyera. Dobro was, during this period, a competitor of National.\nThe Dobro was the third resonator guitar design by Dopyera, but the second to enter production. Unlike his earlier tricone design, which had three ganged inward-facing resonator cones, the Dobro had a single outward-facing cone, with its concave surface facing up. The Dobro company described this as a bowl-shaped resonator.\nThe Dobro was louder than the tricone and cheaper to produce. In Dopyera's opinion, the cost of manufacture had priced the resonator guitar beyond the reach of many players. His failure to convince his fellow directors at National String Instrument Corporation to produce a single-cone version was a motivating factor for leaving.\nSince National had applied for a patent on an inward-facing single cone (US patent 1808756), Dopyera developed a design that reversed its direction: the guitar's bridge rested on an eight-legged cast aluminum spider sitting on the perimeter of the cone (US patent 1896484), rather than on the apex of the cone as it did in the National design.\nIn the following years, both Dobro and National built a wide variety of metal- and wood-bodied single-cone guitars, while National also continued with the tricone for a time. Both companies sourced many components from National director Adolph Rickenbacher, and John Dopyera remained a major shareholder in National. By 1932, the Dopyera brothers had gained control of both National and Dobro, which they merged to form the National-Dobro Company. By the 1940s, National-Dobro had been purchased by Valco. Valco ceased production of Dobro-branded guitars after World War II; however, the Dopyera brothers continued to manufacture resonator guitars under various other brand names.\nIn 1964, the Dopyera brothers revived the Dobro brand name. They sold the name to Semie Moseley in 1966. In 1970, the Dopyeras' Original Musical Instrument Company (OMI) yet again reacquired the Dobro name. In 1993, the Gibson Guitar Corporation acquired OMI along with the Dobro name. The company became Gibson's Original Acoustic Instruments division, and production was moved to Nashville in 2000. As of February\u00a02012[ [update]], Dobros were manufactured by Gibson subsidiary Epiphone. As of January\u00a02023[ [update]], Dobros were not listed on Epiphone's website.\nThe Dobro was first introduced to country music by Bashful Brother Oswald, who played dobro with Roy Acuff starting in January 1939.\nThe first and second prototypes of the Dobro created by the brothers reside at the invention's birthplace of Taft, California, in a museum about the town's oil production history.\nOn June 19, 2019, a 1933 Dobro Resonator Guitar Model 27, owned by David Gilmour, was sold at auction for a record $112,500.\nEpiphone Dobros.\nExisting and past models of resonator guitars manufactured by the Gibson Company are:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "60622", "revid": "48422813", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60622", "title": "Sextus Varius Marcellus", "text": "Syrian-born Roman nobleman and politician (c. 165 \u2013 c. 215)\nSextus Varius Marcellus (c. 165 \u2013 c. 215) was a Roman aristocrat and politician from the province of Syria. He was the legal father of the emperor Elagabalus.\nFamily and career.\nLittle is known about the origins of Marcellus, other than he was born and raised in the city of Apamea in Syria. Marcellus was a Roman citizen from the Equestrian order.\nMarcellus had a long and distinguished political career. He was present at the Secular Games in Rome in 204. From 200 to 205, like Gaius Julius Avitus Alexianus, Marcellus did not serve in a significant Roman military or political position, probably due to Roman emperor Lucius Septimius Severus views about him being influenced by the Praetorian prefect Gaius Fulvius Plautianus. When Plautianus was killed in 205, Marcellus' career was able to move ahead.\nFrom 205 to about 207, Marcellus was a Procurator for the Roman aqueducts in Rome, a position usually given to Romans of Senatorial rank, not from the Equestrian class. Marcellus was paid about 100,000 sesterces per year.\nMarcellus proved his worth and capabilities in his position to Emperor Severus and his family. In 208 the emperor promoted him to Procurator of Roman Britain and in this position he was responsible for gathering taxes for Rome. He earned 200,000 sesterces in this role. Later he was promoted by the emperor to managing the finances of Roman Britain earning 300,000 sesterces.\nIn 211 after the death of Lucius Septimius Severus, his sons Caracalla and Publius Septimius Geta succeeded their father on the Roman throne. Caracalla recalled Marcellus from Roman Britain to Rome and briefly placed him in the roles of Praefectus urbi and Praetorian prefect. He was later admitted into the Senate and, soon after, became \"praefectus\" of the military treasury. He later became governor of Numidia and held this post until his death.\nMarriage and children.\nMarcellus married the Syrian Roman noblewoman Julia Soaemias Bassiana who was the first daughter of the powerful Syrian nobles Julia Maesa and Gaius Julius Avitus Alexianus. The maternal aunt of Soaemias was the Roman empress Julia Domna; her maternal uncle-in-marriage was the Roman emperor Lucius Septimius Severus; her maternal cousins were the Roman emperors Caracalla and Publius Septimius Geta and she was the maternal aunt of the Roman emperor Alexander Severus. Through marriage, Marcellus was related both to the Severan dynasty of the Roman Empire and the royal family of Emesa, Syria.\nTheir marriage may have taken place in 192 or 194, or even perhaps around 200. Marcellus and Soaemias' marriage may have been arranged to strengthen Lucius Septimius Severus' position in the Roman East.\nSoaemias and Marcellus bore the following children who were born and raised in Rome:\nEpigraphic evidence.\nInscriptional evidence has survived on Marcellus. After his death in c. 215, his wife Julia Soaemias Bassiana and their two sons, dedicated to him a tombstone which was found in Velletri, not far from Rome. The tombstone has two preserved bilingual inscriptions in Latin and Greek, which were first published at Rome in 1765. The inscriptions reveal his political career, his various titles, designations and distinctions he received. The tombstone of Marcellus is known to scholars as CIL http:// which can be found in the Octagonal Court in the Vatican Museums and reads:\nTo Sextus Varius Marcellus\nprocurator centenarius of the water supply, procurator ducenarius of Britain, procurator \ntrecenarius of the private purse, acting as praetorian prefect and praefectus urbi,\nsenator, prefect of the military treasury, commander of the Third legion Augusta, \ngovernor of Numidia,\nhas Julia Soaemias Bassiana, daughter of Gaius, with her children, \n[dedicated this] to her husband and dearest father.\nMarcellus was known in dedicating an inscription to Bel in Vasio (Vaison) in Gaul. The bilingual inscription which is in Greek and Latin on an altar, dedicated by him is honoring Bel in remembrance of the oracles given to him in Apamea.\nPosthumous honour.\nThe Baths of Varius (\"Thermae Varianae\") in Rome were named in honor of Marcellus and his second son by the Legio XIII Gemina.\nThe Circus Varianus was also named after his family.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "60623", "revid": "9203640", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60623", "title": "Marcus Aurelius Antoninus", "text": ""}
{"id": "60625", "revid": "11555324", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60625", "title": "July 5, 2002", "text": ""}
{"id": "60626", "revid": "43682176", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60626", "title": "Lester Flatt", "text": "American singer-songwriter (1914\u20131979)\nLester Raymond Flatt (June 19, 1914 \u2013 May 11, 1979) was an American singer, bluegrass guitarist, and mandolinist, best known for his collaboration with banjo picker Earl Scruggs in the duo Flatt and Scruggs.\nFlatt's career spanned multiple decades, breaking out as a member of Bill Monroe's band during the 1940s and including multiple solo and collaboration works exclusive of Scruggs. He first reached a mainstream audience through his performance on \"The Ballad of Jed Clampett\", the theme for the network television series \"The Beverly Hillbillies\", in the early 1960s.\nBiography.\nFlatt was born in Duncan's Chapel, Overton County, Tennessee, United States, to Nannie Mae Haney and Isaac Columbus Flatt. In 1943, he played mandolin and sang tenor in The Kentucky Pardners, the band of Bill Monroe's older brother Charlie. He first came to prominence as a member of Bill Monroe's Blue Grass Boys in 1945 and played a thumb-and-index guitar style that was in part derived from the playing of Charlie Monroe and Clyde Moody. In 1948, he started a band with fellow Monroe alumnus Earl Scruggs, and for the next 20 years, Flatt and Scruggs and the Foggy Mountain Boys were one of the most successful bands in bluegrass. When they parted ways in 1969, Flatt formed a new group, the Nashville Grass, hiring many of the Foggy Mountain Boys. He continued to record and perform with that group until his death in 1979. His role as rhythm guitarist and vocalist in each of these seminal ensembles helped define the sound of traditional bluegrass music. His solid guitar playing and rich lead voice are unmistakable in hundreds of bluegrass standards. He is also remembered for his library of compositions.\nDeath and legacy.\nFlatt died of heart failure in Nashville, Tennessee, at the age of 64.\nHe was posthumously inducted into the Country Music Hall of Fame in 1985 along with Scruggs. Flatt was also posthumously inducted as an inaugural member of the International Bluegrass Music Hall of Honor in 1991.\nLester's hometown of Sparta, Tennessee, held a bluegrass festival in his honor for a number of years, before being discontinued a few years prior to the death of the traditional host, resident Everette Paul England; Lester Flatt Memorial Bluegrass Day remains part of the annual Liberty Square Celebration held in Sparta.\nFlatt and Scruggs were ranked No. 24 on CMT's 40 Greatest Men of Country Music in 2003.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "60627", "revid": "88809", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60627", "title": "Earl Scruggs", "text": "American musician (1924\u20132012)\nEarl Eugene Scruggs (January 6, 1924\u00a0\u2013 March 28, 2012) was an American musician noted for popularizing a three-finger banjo picking style, now called \"Scruggs style\", which is a defining characteristic of bluegrass music. His three-finger style of playing was radically different from the traditional way the five-string banjo had previously been played. This new style of playing became popular and elevated the banjo from its previous role as a background rhythm instrument to featured solo status. He popularized the instrument across several genres of music.\nScruggs played in Bill Monroe's band, the Blue Grass Boys. \"Bluegrass\" eventually became the name for an entire genre of country music. Despite considerable success with Monroe, performing on the Grand Ole Opry and recording classic hits such as \"Blue Moon of Kentucky\", Scruggs resigned from the group in 1948 because of their exhausting touring schedule. Fellow band member Lester Flatt resigned as well, and he and Scruggs later paired up in the duo Flatt and Scruggs. Scruggs's banjo instrumental \"Foggy Mountain Breakdown\" was recorded in December 1949 and released in March 1950. The song became an enduring hit. The song experienced a rebirth of popularity to a younger generation when it was featured in the 1967 film \"Bonnie and Clyde\". The song won two Grammy Awards and, in 2005, was selected for the Library of Congress' National Recording Registry of works of unusual merit.\nFlatt and Scruggs brought bluegrass music into mainstream popularity in the early 1960s with their country hit \"The Ballad of Jed Clampett\", the theme music for the television sitcom \"The Beverly Hillbillies\"\u2014the first Scruggs recording to reach number one on the Billboard charts. Over their 20-year association, Flatt and Scruggs recorded over 50 albums and 75 singles. The duo broke up in 1969, chiefly because, while Scruggs wanted to switch styles to fit a more modern sound, Flatt was a traditionalist who opposed the change and believed doing so would alienate a fan base of bluegrass purists. Although each of them formed a new band to match their visions, neither of them ever regained the success they had achieved as a team.\nScruggs received four Grammy awards, a Grammy Lifetime Achievement Award and a National Medal of Arts. He became a member of the International Bluegrass Music Hall of Fame and was given a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame. In 1985, Flatt and Scruggs were inducted together into the Country Music Hall of Fame and named, as a duo, number 24 on CMT's \"40 Greatest Men of Country Music\". Scruggs was awarded a National Heritage Fellowship by the National Endowment for the Arts, the highest honor in the folk and traditional arts in the United States. Four works by Scruggs have been placed in the Grammy Hall of Fame. After Scruggs's death in 2012 at age 88, the Earl Scruggs Center was founded in Shelby, North Carolina, near his birthplace with the aid of a federal grant and corporate donors. The center is a $5.5 million facility that features the musical contributions of Scruggs and serves as an educational center providing classes and field trips for students.\nEarly life.\nEarl Scruggs was born January 6, 1924, in the Flint Hill community of Cleveland County, North Carolina, a small community just outside of Boiling Springs, about 10 miles west of Shelby. His father, George Elam Scruggs, was a farmer and a bookkeeper who died of a protracted illness when Earl was four years old. Upon his father's death, Scruggs's mother, Georgia Lula Ruppe (called Lula), was left to take care of the farm and five children, of which Earl was the youngest.\nThe family members all played music. The father played an open back banjo using the frailing technique, though as an adult Earl had no recollection of his father's playing. Mrs. Scruggs played the pump organ. Earl's siblings, older brothers Junie and Horace and older sisters Eula Mae and Ruby, all played banjo and guitar. Scruggs recalled a visit to his uncle's home at age six to hear a blind banjo player named Mack Woolbright, who played a finger-picking style and had recorded for Columbia Records. It made an impression on Scruggs, who said, \"He'd sit in the rocking chair, and he'd pick some and it was just amazing. I couldn't imagine\u2014he was the first, what I call a good banjo player.\" Scruggs then took up the instrument\u2014he was too small to hold it at first and improvised by setting his brother Junie's banjo beside him on the floor. He moved it around depending on what part of the neck he was playing. After his father's death, Scruggs seemed to take solace in playing music, and when not in school or doing farm chores, spent nearly every spare moment he had practicing. His first radio performance was at age 11 on a talent scout show. Because his father had died, Scruggs was deferred from military service in World War II so he could support his mother.\nDevelopment.\nScruggs is noted for popularizing a three-finger banjo-picking style now called \"Scruggs style\" that has become a defining characteristic of bluegrass music. Prior to Scruggs, most banjo players used the frailing or clawhammer technique, which consists of holding the fingers bent like a claw and moving the entire hand in a downward motion so that the strings are struck with the back of the middle fingernail. This motion is followed by striking the thumb on a single string. The three-finger style of playing is radically different from frailing; the hand remains stationary and only the fingers and thumb move, somewhat similar to classical guitar technique. Scruggs style also involves using picks on three digits \"(see photo)\", each plucking individual strings\u2014downward with the thumb, then upward with the index and middle finger in sequence. When done skillfully and in rapid sequence, the style allows any digit (though usually the thumb) to play a melody, while the other two digits play arpeggios of the melody line. The use of picks gives each note a louder percussive attack, creating an exciting effect, described by \"The New York Times\" as \"like thumbtacks plinking rhythmically on a tin roof\". This departure from traditional playing elevated the banjo to become more of a solo instrument\u2014a promotion from its former role of providing background rhythm or serving as a comedian's prop\u2014and popularized the instrument in several genres of music.\nEarl Scruggs did not invent three-finger banjo playing; in fact, he said the three-finger style was the most common way to play the five-string banjo in his hometown in western North Carolina. An early influence was a local banjoist, DeWitt \"Snuffy\" Jenkins, who plucked in a finger style. According to banjoist and historian Tony Trischka, \"Jenkins came about as close as one could to Scruggs style without actually playing it\". At age ten, when Scruggs first learned the technique, he recalled that he was at home in his room after a quarrel with his brother. He was idly playing a song called \"Reuben\" and suddenly realized that he was playing with three fingers, not two. \"That excited me to no end\", he later recalled, and said he ran through the house repeatedly yelling \"I've got it\". From there he devoted all his free time to perfecting his timing and to adding syncopation and variations to it. Controversy exists as to the actual origin of three-finger picking style. Don Reno, an eminent banjo player who also played this style and who knew Scruggs at that young age, described Scruggs's early playing as similar to that of Snuffy Jenkins. Scruggs, however, consistently referred to it as his own, saying that he adapted to it \"a syncopated roll that was quite different.\" On the subject, John Hartford said, \"Here's the way I feel about it. Everybody's all worried about who invented the style and it's obvious that three finger banjo pickers have been around a long time\u2014maybe since 1840. But it's my feeling that if it wasn't for Earl Scruggs, you wouldn't be worried about who invented it.\"\nWith Bill Monroe and the Blue Grass Boys.\nAt age 15, Scruggs played in a group called The Morris Brothers for a few months, but quit to work in a factory making sewing thread in the Lily Textile Mill near his home in North Carolina. He worked there about two years, earning 40 cents an hour, until the draft restriction for World War II was lifted in 1945, at which time he returned to music, performing with \"Lost John Miller and his Allied Kentuckians\" on WNOX in Knoxville. About this time an opening to play with Bill Monroe became available.\nBill Monroe, 13 years older than Scruggs, was prominent in country music at the time. His career started with the \"Monroe Brothers\", a duo with his brother Charlie. Bill sang the high tenor harmony parts, a sound called \"high lonesome\", for which he became noted. The brothers split up in 1938 and Bill, a native of \"the Bluegrass State\" of Kentucky, formed a new group called Bill Monroe and the Blue Grass Boys. They first played on the Opry in 1939 and soon became a popular touring band featuring a vocalist named Lester Flatt. The name \"bluegrass\" stuck and eventually became the eponym for this entire genre of country music and Monroe became known as \"the father of bluegrass\".\nWhen Scruggs was 21, Monroe was looking for a banjo player for his group, because David \"Stringbean\" Akeman was quitting. At the time, banjo players often functioned in the band as comedians, and the instrument was often held as a prop\u2014their clawhammer playing was almost inaudible. Monroe, along with band member Lester Flatt, auditioned several banjo players who had the same traditional playing style as Akeman. When Scruggs auditioned for them at the Tulane Hotel in Nashville, Flatt said, \"I was thrilled. It was so different! I had never heard that kind of banjo picking.\" Scruggs joined Monroe in late 1945, earning $50 a week. After they accepted Scruggs as one of the Blue Grass Boys, the roster consisted of Bill Monroe (vocals/mandolin), Lester Flatt (guitar/vocals), Earl Scruggs (banjo), Chubby Wise (fiddle), and Howard Watts (stage name Cedric Rainwater) on bass. This group of men became the prototype of what a bluegrass band would become.\nWith Monroe and Lester Flatt, Scruggs performed on the Grand Ole Opry and in September 1946 recorded the classic hit \"Blue Moon of Kentucky\"; a song that was designated by the Library of Congress to be added to the National Recording Registry, and later added to the Grammy Hall of Fame. The work schedule was heavy in Monroe's band. They were playing a lot of jobs in movie theaters all over the south, riding in a 1941 Chevrolet from town to town, doing up to six shows a day and not finishing up until about eleven at night. Lester Flatt said, \"It wasn't anything to ride two or three days in a car. We didn't have buses like we do now, and we never had our shoes off\". The self-imposed rule was to always get back in time to play the Grand Ole Opry in Nashville each Saturday night. Scruggs said of Monroe that \"Bill would never let the music go down no matter how tired we were. If a man would slack off, he would move over and get that mandolin up close on him and get him back up there\". Despite the group's success, Scruggs decided the demands were too great. He was single at the time, and the brief few hours on Saturdays that he made it home, it was just to pack his suitcase at the Tulane Hotel where he lived alone, then repeat the cycle\u2014he had done this for two years. He turned in his resignation, planning to go take care of his mother in North Carolina. Flatt had also made up his mind to leave, but he had not told anyone. He later gave his two-week notice, but, before the notice was up, the bass player Howard Watts announced that he was leaving too. Despite Monroe's pleading, they left the band. Monroe thought Flatt and Scruggs had a secret understanding, but both men denied it. Monroe did not speak to either one for 20 years thereafter, a feud well known in country music circles.\nFlatt and Scruggs.\nIn 1948, Lester Flatt and Earl Scruggs formed the duo Flatt and Scruggs and chose the name \"the Foggy Mountain Boys\" for their backing band. The name came from a song by the Carter Family called \"Foggy Mountain Top\" that the band used as a theme song at the time. Flatt later acknowledged that they consciously tried to make their sound different from Monroe's group. In the spring of 1949, their second Mercury recording session yielded the classic \"Foggy Mountain Breakdown\", released on 78 RPM phonograph records that were in use at the time. In the mid-1950s, they dropped the mandolin and added a Dobro, played by Buck \"Uncle Josh\" Graves. Previously, Scruggs had performed something similar, called \"Bluegrass Breakdown\" with Bill Monroe, but Monroe had denied him songwriting credit for it. Later, Scruggs changed the song, adding a minor chord, thus creating \"Foggy Mountain Breakdown\". The song contains a musical oddity: Flatt plays an E major chord against Scruggs's E minor. When asked about the dissonance years later, Scruggs said he had tried to get Flatt to consistently play a minor there to no avail; he said he eventually became used to the sound and even fond of it. The song won a Grammy and became an anthem for many banjo players to attempt to master. The band routinely tuned its instruments a half-step higher than standard tuning in those days to get more brightness or pop to the sound, returning to standard pitch in the 1960s.\nThe popularity of \"Foggy Mountain Breakdown\" resurged years later when it was featured in the 1967 film \"Bonnie and Clyde\", which introduced the song to a younger generation of fans. Scruggs received a phone call from the show's producer and star, Warren Beatty, first asking Scruggs to write a song for the movie. Soon Beatty called back saying that he wanted to use the existing vintage Mercury recording of \"Foggy Mountain Breakdown\", and rejected the argument that it was recorded 18 years prior at a radio station with no modern enhancements. The film was a hit, called by the \"Los Angeles Times\" \"a landmark film that helped usher in a new era in American filmmaking\". In 2005, the song was selected for the Library of Congress's National Recording Registry of works of unusual merit.\nIn October 1951, the band recorded \"Earl's Breakdown\" which featured a technique where Scruggs would manually de-tune the second and third strings of the banjo during a song using a cam device he had made to attach to the instrument, giving the surprise effect of a downward string bend. He and his brother Horace had experimented with it when they were growing up. Scruggs had drilled some holes in the peghead of his banjo to install the device and chipped the pearl inlay. He covered the holes with a piece of metal, which can be seen on the album cover of \"Foggy Mountain Jamboree\". The technique became popular and led to improvement of the design (without drilling holes) by Bill Keith who then manufactured Scruggs-Keith Tuners. The original tuners Scruggs made and used are now in a museum display at the Earl Scruggs Center in Shelby, North Carolina.\nIn 1953, Martha White Foods sponsored the band's regular early morning radio shows on WSM in Nashville, where the duo sang the company's catchy bluegrass jingle written by Pat Twitty. About this time, country music television shows, on which Flatt and Scruggs appeared regularly, went into syndication, vastly increasing the group's exposure. Despite the group's increasing popularity and fan mail, WSM did not allow Flatt and Scruggs to become members of the Grand Ole Opry at first. According to \"Tennessean\" writer Peter Cooper, Bill Monroe was in opposition and worked behind the scenes to keep Flatt and Scruggs off the Opry to the extent of having petitions made against their membership. In 1955 Martha White Foods' CEO Cohen E. Williams intervened by threatening to pull all of his advertising from WSM unless the band appeared on the Opry in the segment sponsored by his company. As years went by, the band became synonymous with Martha White to the extent that the advertising jingle became a hit, and the band rarely played a concert without it. Fans shouted requests for them to play it, even at Carnegie Hall.\nOn September 24, 1962, the duo recorded \"The Ballad of Jed Clampett\" for the TV show \"The Beverly Hillbillies\". Sung by Jerry Scoggins, the theme song became an immediate country music hit and was played at the beginning and end of each episode of the series. The song went to number one on the Billboard country chart, a first for any bluegrass recording. The song spent 20 weeks on that chart; it also reached nmuber 44 on Billboard's pop chart. The television show was also a huge hit, broadcast in 76 countries around the world. In Queens, New York a five-year-old boy named B\u00e9la Fleck heard the Jed Clampett theme on television. Fleck said, \"I couldn't breathe or think; I was completely mesmerized.\" He said it awakened a deeply embedded predisposition that \"was just in there\" to learn how to play the banjo. Flatt and Scruggs appeared in several episodes as family friends of the fictional Clampetts. In their first appearance (season 1, episode 20), they portray themselves in the show and perform both the theme song and \"Pearl, Pearl, Pearl\". That song went to number eight on the country chart in 1963. Scruggs published an instruction book entitled \"Earl Scruggs and the Five String Banjo\" in 1968. It received a Gold Book Award by the publisher, Peer-Southern Corporation when it sold over a million copies. Over their 20-year association, Flatt and Scruggs recorded over 50 albums and 75 single records and featured over 20 different musicians as \"Foggy Mountain Boys\"\u2014side men backing the duo.\nBy the end of the 1960s, Scruggs was getting bored with repetition of the classic bluegrass fare. By now, his sons were professional musicians, and he was caught up in their enthusiasm for more contemporary music. He said, \"I love bluegrass music, and still like to play it, but I do like to mix in some other music for my own personal satisfaction, because if I don't, I can get a little bogged down and a little depressed\". Scruggs also wanted to play concerts in venues that normally featured rock and roll acts. Columbia Records executives told Flatt and Scruggs that they intended to try a new producer, Bob Johnston, instead of their long-time producer Don Law. Johnston had produced Bob Dylan's records. This new association produced \"Changin' Times\", \"Nashville Airplane\", and \"The Story of Bonnie and Clyde\" albums. Flatt was not happy with some of this material\u2014he didn't like singing Bob Dylan songs and refused to perform them, saying \"I can't sing Bob Dylan stuff, I mean. Columbia has got Bob Dylan, why did they want me?\". Even the success of the \"Bonnie and Clyde\" album was not enough to prevent their breakup in 1969. After the split, Flatt formed a traditional bluegrass group with Curly Seckler and Marty Stuart called The Nashville Grass, and Scruggs formed the Earl Scruggs Revue with his sons.\nNeither Flatt nor Scruggs spoke to each other for the next ten years\u2014until 1979 when Flatt was in the hospital. Scruggs made an unannounced visit to his bedside. The two men talked for more than an hour. Even though Flatt's voice was barely above a whisper, he spoke of a reunion. Scruggs answered yes, but told Flatt they would talk when he was better. Flatt said, \"It came as quite a surprise and made me feel good.\" However, Flatt never recovered and died May 11, 1979. Historian Barry Willis, speaking of the meeting, said \"Earl gave Lester his flowers while he was still living.\" (He was referring to a 1957 Flatt and Scruggs recording of \"Give Me My Flowers While I'm Still Living\".)\nEarl Scruggs Revue.\nIn early 1969, Scruggs formed the Earl Scruggs Revue, consisting of two of his sons, Randy (guitar) and Gary (bass) and later Vassar Clements (fiddle), Josh Graves (Dobro) and Scruggs's youngest son, Steve (drums). On November 15, 1969, Scruggs performed live with the newly formed group on an open-air stage in Washington, D.C. at the Moratorium to End the War in Vietnam. Scruggs was one of the few bluegrass or country artists to give support to the anti-war movement. The Earl Scruggs Revue gained popularity on college campuses, live shows and festivals and appeared on the bill with acts like Steppenwolf, The Byrds and James Taylor. They recorded for Columbia Records and made frequent network television appearances though the 1970s. Their album \"I Saw the Light with a Little Help from my Friends\" featured Linda Ronstadt, Arlo Guthrie, Tracy Nelson, and the Nitty Gritty Dirt Band. This collaboration sparked enthusiasm by the latter to make the album \"Will the Circle be Unbroken\". Earl and Louise Scruggs made phone calls to eminent country stars like Roy Acuff and \"Mother\" Maybelle Carter to get them to participate in this project to bring a unique combination of older players with young ones. Bill Monroe refused to participate saying he had to remain true to the style he pioneered, and this \"is not bluegrass\" The album became a classic, and was selected for the Library of Congress' National Recording Registry of works of unusual merit.\nScruggs had to retire from the road in 1980 because of back problems, but the Earl Scruggs Revue did not part ways until 1982. Despite the group's commercial success, they were never embraced by bluegrass or country music purists. Scruggs remained active musically and released \"The Storyteller and the Banjoman\" with Tom T. Hall in 1982, and a compilation album \"Top of the World\" in 1983. In 1994, Scruggs teamed up with Randy Scruggs and Doc Watson to contribute the song \"Keep on the Sunny Side\" to the AIDS benefit album \"Red Hot + Country\". In 2001, Scruggs broke a 17-year personal album hiatus with the album \"Earl Scruggs and Friends\", featuring Elton John, Sting, Don Henley, Johnny Cash, Dwight Yoakam, Billy Bob Thornton, and Steve Martin. It includes the song \"Passin' Thru\", written by Johnny Cash and Randy Scruggs. He also released a live album \"The Three Pickers\" with Doc Watson and Ricky Skaggs, recorded in Winston-Salem in December 2002.\nBanjos.\nIn the late 1950s Scruggs met with Bill Nelson, one of the owners of the Vega Musical Instrument Company in Boston, to sign a contract to design and endorse a new banjo to be called \"The Earl Scruggs Model\". The company had made banjos since before 1912 and already had a Pete Seeger model. There would be four Scruggs models in the top-of-the-line banjos they produced. It was the first time a prominent bluegrass banjo player had played any brand other than a Gibson. Scruggs participated in Vega's marketing campaign that claimed that the banjo was constructed to Scruggs's design specifications, which was true, but the finished product fell short of his expectations. According to Scruggs's friend and fellow banjoist, Curtis McPeake, Scruggs never cared for it. McPeake stated, \"They were good banjos, they just wasn't [\"sic\"] what Earl wanted to play.\" Scruggs continued to perform and record using his Gibson Granada. The Vega company was sold to the C.F. Martin company in 1970, and the contract was dissolved.\nIn 1984, Gibson produced what Scruggs had wanted\u2014the Gibson \"Earl Scruggs Standard\", a replica of his personal 1934 Gibson Granada RB Mastertone banjo, number 9584-3. This banjo had been changed over its long existence and the only remaining original parts were the rim, the tone ring and the resonator (the wooden back of the instrument). The banjo was originally gold-plated, but the gold had long-since worn off and had been replaced with nickel hardware. Gibson elected to make the replica model nickel-plated as well, to look like Scruggs's own. Scruggs's actual 1934 model was previously owned by a series of influential players beginning with Snuffy Jenkins, who bought it for $37.50 at a pawn shop in South Carolina. Jenkins sold it to Don Reno, who sold it to Scruggs. When Scruggs acquired it, the instrument was in poor condition and he sent it to the Gibson Company for refurbishing, including a new fingerboard, pearl inlays, and a more slender neck. During this time Scruggs used his Gibson RB-3 for some of the Mercury recording sessions. Banjo enthusiasts have located the shipping records from Gibson to determine the exact dates the Granada Mastertone was missing on certain recordings.\nOn May 22, 2023, Scruggs's personal Gibson Granada Mastertone, heard on \"Foggy Mountain Breakdown\", was donated by the family to the Country Music Hall of Fame and Museum to become part of the permanent collection. A ceremony to celebrate the gift was attended by a host of bluegrass, Americana, and country music stars.\nLouise Scruggs.\nOn December 14, 1946, 19-year-old Anne Louise Certain attended the Grand Ole Opry in Nashville. She went backstage after the performance to meet some of the performers, including Scruggs, who had been with Bill Monroe's band about a year at that time. Scruggs and Certain began dating and fell in love. They were married about a year and a half later in April 1948. When Flatt and Scruggs formed the new group, Scruggs had done most of the bookings for the band, but being on the road for hours in a car and stopping at a phone booth to communicate with venues, often at odd hours, was difficult. Louise had a business aptitude and began helping by doing the phone work. She eventually became the booking agent and ultimately the group's manager, Nashville's first woman to become prominent in that role. Her acumen and skills in the job were prescient. She turned the band into TV personalities and helped propel them into what today would be called rock stars, touring with Joan Baez and performing at the prestigious Newport Folk Festival. She recruited noted artist Thomas B. Allen, who had done covers for \"The New Yorker\" and \"Sports Illustrated\", to create cover illustrations for 17 of the group's albums. She helped market the group to younger audiences at college campuses and arranged a live album to be recorded at Carnegie Hall. Earl Scruggs said, \"What talent I had never would have peaked without her. She helped shape music up as a business, instead of just people out picking and grinning.\" Louise died from complications of respiratory disease on February 2, 2006, at age 78, six years before her husband. In 2007, The Country Music Hall of Fame created The Louise Scruggs Memorial Forum, an annual event to honor a music industry business leader.\nPersonal life.\nIn 1955, Scruggs received word that his mother, Lula, had suffered a stroke and heart attack in North Carolina. The only flight available from Nashville involved such a series of connecting cities that it was not feasible to fly. Scruggs and his wife, with sons Gary and Randy, decided to drive all night from Nashville to see her when they were involved in an automobile accident just east of Knoxville about 3 a.m. October 2. Their car was hit by a drunk driver, a Fort Campbell soldier who had pulled out from a side road into their path, then fled the scene after the collision. The children were not hurt, but Earl suffered a fractured pelvis and dislocations of both hips, which would plague him for years, and Louise had been thrown into the windshield, receiving multiple lacerations. They were flown to a Nashville hospital where Scruggs remained hospitalized for about two months. He received thousands of letters from well-wishers. He returned to music in January 1956, about four months after the injury, but after working a week or so, one of the hips collapsed, and he returned to the hospital for a metal hip to be implanted. Seven years later, the other hip required similar surgery. The first metal hip lasted for some 40 years, but eventually failed, requiring a total hip replacement in October 1996, when he was age 72. While still in the recovery room after this hip operation, Scruggs suffered a heart attack; he was returned to the operating room later the same day for quintuple coronary bypass surgery. Despite the dire circumstances, he recovered and returned to his musical career.\nScruggs was involved in a solo plane crash in October 1975. He was flying his 1974 Cessna Skyhawk II aircraft home to Nashville around midnight from a performance of the Earl Scruggs Revue in Murray, Kentucky. On his landing approach he was enveloped in dense fog and overshot the runway at Cornelia Fort Airpark in Nashville and the plane flipped over. The automatic crash alert system in the plane did not function, and Scruggs remained without help for five hours. He crawled about 150 feet from the wreckage with a broken ankle, broken nose, and facial lacerations, afraid that the plane might catch fire. His family was driving home from the same concert and was unaware of the crash, but his niece became worried when he did not arrive. She called police at about 4 a.m., and they went to the airport, where they heard Scruggs's cries for help from a field near the runway. He recovered, but was in a wheelchair for a few weeks, including for the premiere of the Scruggs documentary \"Banjoman\" at the Kennedy Center.\nSteve Scruggs, Earl's youngest son, was the drummer for the Earl Scruggs Revue at one point. He died in September 1992 of a self-inflicted gun shot after killing his wife, according to prosecutor Dent Moriss. Middle son Randy Scruggs, guitarist and music producer, died after a short illness on April 17, 2018, at the age of 64. Eldest son Gary Scruggs, also a musician, songwriter and music producer, died December 1, 2021, at age 72.\nEvery January for many years, Scruggs's birthday was celebrated by a party at his home on Franklin Road in Nashville. After a buffet dinner, guests would gather in the living room for an informal \"pickin' party\" where some of country music's best known stars would sing and play with no one around but family and close friends. The attendees over the years included Tom T. Hall, B\u00e9la Fleck, Travis Tritt, Vince Gill, Tim O'Brien, Emmylou Harris, Mac Wiseman, Marty Stuart, Porter Wagoner, Bill Anderson, Jerry Douglas, Josh Graves and many others. At Scruggs's 80th birthday party in 2004, country singer Porter Wagoner said, \"Earl is to the five-string banjo what Babe Ruth was to baseball. He is the best there ever was and the best there ever will be.\"\nAt age 88, Earl Scruggs died from natural causes on the morning of March 28, 2012, in a Nashville hospital. His funeral was held on Sunday, April 1, 2012, at the Ryman Auditorium in Nashville, Tennessee, and was open to the public. He was buried at Spring Hill Cemetery in a private service.\nThe Earl Scruggs Center.\nThe Earl Scruggs Center opened January 11, 2014\u2014a $5.5 million, 100,000 square foot facility located in the court square of Shelby, North Carolina, at the renovated county courthouse. It showcases the musical contributions of Scruggs, the most eminent ambassador of the music of that region, and features a museum and a life-sized statue of Scruggs at a young age. The center received a $1.5 million economic development grant from the U.S. Department of Commerce and also funds from corporate donors. It serves as an educational center providing classes and field trips for students. The opening was celebrated by a sold-out concert by Vince Gill, Travis Tritt, Sam Bush, and others.\nOn January 6, 2024, on what would have been Scruggs's 100th birthday, a memorial concert was held at Nashville's Ryman Auditorium to benefit the Scruggs Center. At the concert, three dozen noted bluegrass artists, including Jerry Douglas, B\u00e9la Fleck, Sam Bush, The Earls of Leicester, Del McCoury, Sierra Hull and Jeff Hanna performed until nearly midnight.\nSelected discography.\nEarly singles.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "60628", "revid": "38469862", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60628", "title": "Gniezno", "text": "City in Greater Poland Voivodeship, Poland\nGniezno ( ; ) is a city in central-western Poland, about east of Pozna\u0144. Its population in 2021 was 66,769, making it the sixth-largest city in the Greater Poland Voivodeship. The city is the administrative seat of Gniezno County (\"powiat\").\nOne of the Piast dynasty's chief cities, it was the first historical capital of Poland in the 10th century and early 11th century, and afterwards remained one of the main cities of the historic region of Greater Poland. Gniezno is the seat of the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Gniezno, the country's oldest archdiocese, founded in 1000, and its archbishop is the primate of Poland, making the city the country's ecclesiastical capital. The Gniezno Cathedral is one of the most historically important churches in Poland, and as such is a designated Historic Monument of Poland. Other sights include the Old Town and the Museum of the Origins of the Polish State.\nGeography.\nGniezno is one of the historic centers of the Greater Poland region, the cradle of the Polish state. Like Rome, Gniezno was founded on seven hills, including the Lech Hill, which is the location of the Gniezno Cathedral, and the Panie\u0144skie Hill, which is the location of the \"Rynek\" (Market Square). Five lakes are located within the city limits: Winiary, Jelonek, \u015awi\u0119tokrzyskie, Koszyk, Zacisze.\nHistory.\nThere are archaeological traces of human settlement since the late Paleolithic. Early Slavonic settlements on Lech Hill and Maiden Hill are dated to the 8th century. At the beginning of the 10th century this was the site of several places sacred to the Slavic religion. The ducal stronghold was founded just before 940 on Lech Hill, and surrounded by some fortified suburbs and open settlements.\nLegend of Lech, Czech and Rus.\nAccording to the Polish version of a legend, three brothers went hunting together but each of them followed a different prey and eventually they all traveled in different directions. Rus went to the east, \u010cech headed to the west to settle on the \u0158\u00edp Mountain rising up from the Bohemian hilly countryside, while Lech traveled north. There, while hunting, he followed his arrow and suddenly found himself face-to-face with a fierce, white eagle guarding its nest from intruders. Seeing the eagle against the red of the setting sun, Lech took this as a good omen and decided to settle there. He named his settlement Gniezno (from Polish \"gniazdo\" \u2013 'nest') in commemoration and adopted the White Eagle as his coat-of-arms. The white eagle remains a symbol of Poland to this day, and the colors of the eagle and the setting sun are depicted in Poland's coat of arms, as well as its flag, with a white stripe on top for the eagle, and a red stripe on the bottom for the sunset. According to \"Wielkopolska Chronicle\" (13th century), Slavs are descendants of Pan, a Pannonian prince. He had three sons \u2013 Lech (the youngest), Rus, and \u010cech (the oldest), who decided to settle west, north, and east.\nCradle of the Polish state.\nAround 940 Gniezno, being an important pagan cult center, became one of the main fortresses of the early Piast rulers, along with aforementioned fortresses at Giecz, Kruszwica, Pozna\u0144, Kalisz, \u0141\u0119czyca, Ostr\u00f3w Lednicki, P\u0142ock, W\u0142oc\u0142awek, and others. Archeological excavations on Lech Hill in 2010 discovered an 11th-century tomb by the foundations of St. George's church, near the remains of a pagan burial mound discovered earlier on the hill. Discoveries indicate that Lech Hill could have been the burial place of rulers even before the baptism of Mieszko I of Poland. After the adoption of Christianity by Mieszko I, his son Boles\u0142aw I the Brave deposited the remains of Saint Adalbert in a church, newly built on the Hill, to underline Gniezno's importance as the religious centre and capital of his kingdom.\nCongress of Gniezno.\nIt is here that the Congress of Gniezno took place in the year 1000, during which Boles\u0142aw I the Brave, Duke of Poland, received Holy Roman Emperor Otto III. The emperor and the Polish duke celebrated the foundation of the Polish ecclesiastical province (archbishopric) in Gniezno, along with newly established bishoprics in Ko\u0142obrzeg for Pomerania; Wroc\u0142aw for Silesia; Krak\u00f3w for Lesser Poland in addition to the bishopric in Pozna\u0144 for western Greater Poland, which was established in 968.\nRoyal coronation site.\nThe 10th-century Gniezno Cathedral witnessed the royal coronations of Boles\u0142aw I in 1024 and his son Mieszko II Lambert in 1025. The cities of Gniezno and nearby Pozna\u0144 were captured, plundered and destroyed in 1038 by the Bohemian duke Bretislav I, which pushed the next Polish rulers to move the Polish capital to Krak\u00f3w. The archepiscopal cathedral was reconstructed by the next ruler, Boles\u0142aw II the Generous, who was crowned king here in 1076.\nIn the next centuries Gniezno evolved as a regional seat of the eastern part of Greater Poland, and in 1238 municipal autonomy was granted by the duke W\u0142adys\u0142aw Odonic. Gniezno was again the coronation site in 1295 and 1300.\nRegional site of Greater Poland.\nAfter an administrative reform Gniezno, as a royal city, became a county seat within the Kalisz Voivodeship (since the early 14th century till 1768). It was destroyed again by the Teutonic Knights' invasion in 1331. The city was soon rebuilt during the reign of King Casimir III the Great, while during the reign of King W\u0142adys\u0142aw II Jagie\u0142\u0142o, in 1419, the status of \"the capital of Christianity in Poland\" was confirmed after the archbishops of Gniezno were given the title of Primate of Poland. Trade flourished in Gniezno, four large annual fairs took place, in which merchants from various Polish cities and European countries took part. Crafts also developed, and Gniezno remained one of the major cities of Poland until the mid-17th century, even despite fires of 1515 and 1613.\nIt was devastated during the Swedish invasion wars of the 17th\u201318th centuries and by a plague in 1708\u20131710. All this caused depopulation and economic decline, but the city was soon revived during the 18th century to become the capital of the Gniezno Voivodeship within the larger Greater Poland Province in 1768. Gniezno remained one of the main cultural centres of the Polish Kingdom. The 11th Polish Infantry Regiment and 1st Polish National Cavalry Brigade were stationed there in 1790 and 1792, respectively.\nLate modern period.\nGniezno was annexed by the Kingdom of Prussia in the 1793 Second Partition of Poland and renamed \"Gnesen\", becoming part of the province of South Prussia. During the Ko\u015bciuszko Uprising, the Polish army under General Jan Henryk D\u0105browski liberated the town on 22 August 1794 and defeated a Prussian Army north of Gnesen near Labischin (\u0141abiszyn) on 29 September 1794. But because of Ko\u015bciuszko's defeat at the Battle of Maciejowice he gave up his plan to winter in Bromberg (Bydgoszcz) and moved through Thorn (Toru\u0144) and retreated to central Poland. Thus, the Prussians retook it on 7 December 1794. During the Napoleonic Wars there was an uprising against Prussian rule. The French appeared in Gnesen in November 1806, and following General Jan Henryk Dabrowski's order issued to all towns and cities and country property owners to provide recruits for the organizing Polish forces, Gnesen initially provided 60 recruits who participated in the battles of 1806\u201307. The 9th Polish Infantry Regiment was formed in Gniezno in 1806. Consequently, the town, once again as \"Gniezno\", was included within the Duchy of Warsaw, but upon the defeat of Napoleon in Russia in 1812 it was occupied by the Russian army and was returned to Prussia in the 1815 Congress of Vienna. Gnesen was subsequently governed within Kreis Gnesen of the Grand Duchy of Posen and the later Province of Posen. It was an important centre of Polish resistance against Germanisation policies, various Polish organizations and publishing houses were located there. In 1857, Jews accounted for 27 percent of the population, which number decreased by emigration to more developed towns of Germany to 14.5 percent in 1871.\nIn 1903, amid school strikes elsewhere in Prussian Poland, Prussian authorities arrested 50 Polish children and teachers in Gnesen on charges of high treason. They were accused of studying Polish culture and of \"conspiring against the well-being of the Prussian State\".\nFollowing the Greater Poland Uprising (1918\u20131919) and the Treaty of Versailles the town became part of the Second Polish Republic and reverted to its original name of Gniezno. 31 Polish insurgents from the city died in the Greater Poland Uprising. Its citizen-soldiers joined the Polish army fighting the Bolsheviks during the Polish\u2013Soviet War. The first Polish folk high school was established in the present-day district of Dalki in 1921.\nWorld War II.\nDuring the invasion of Poland, which started World War II, Gniezno was captured by Germans troops on 11 September 1939. On 26 October 1939 it was annexed into Nazi Germany as part of Reichsgau Wartheland. During the German occupation, local Poles were subjected to arrests, expulsions and mass executions. The Germans murdered several hundred inhabitants, and more than 10,000 inhabitants of the city and county were expelled to the General Government in the more-eastern part of German-occupied Poland or imprisoned in Nazi concentration camps. A transit camp for Poles expelled from the region and a forced labour subcamp of the Stalag XXI-D prisoner-of-war camp were operated in the city. Kidnapped Polish 12-year-old children were enslaved as forced labour in the city's vicinity. In late 1940 at the Dziekanka (\"Tiegenhof\" in German) psychiatric institute near Gniezno, 1172 patients were evacuated and then killed. Again in late 1940 hundreds of patients were gassed in gas van by the Lange Commando, a sub-unit of Einsatzkommando 2. Despite this, Gniezno remained a center of Polish resistance, including the \"Tajna Organizacja Narodowa\" (Secret National Organization), which was founded in the city itself. Its commander Maksymilian Sikorski was eventually imprisoned in concentration camps.\nAfter the city was seized by the Red Army on January 21, 1945, the Soviets fought the Polish underground and deported its members deep into the Soviet Union. The city itself was not seriously damaged during the war, however, in 1940, the Germans demolished the monument of King Boles\u0142aw I the Brave, which was rebuilt after the war. The city was subsequently restored to Poland, although with a Soviet-installed communist regime, which stayed in power until the Fall of Communism in the 1980s.\nPost-war period.\nIn August 1980, employees of local factories joined the nationwide anti-communist strikes, which led to the foundation of the Solidarity organization, which played a central role in the end of communist rule in Poland. In 1979 and 1997, Pope John Paul II visited Gniezno. During the second visit, celebrations took place on the millennial anniversary of the death of St. Adalbert with the participation of presidents of seven Central European countries and 280,000 pilgrims from Poland and the world. In 2000, the millennial anniversary of the Congress of Gniezno was celebrated and on this occasion the Sejm was held in Gniezno, the only one held outside of Warsaw in recent decades.\nArchbishops of Gniezno.\nGniezno's Roman Catholic archbishop is traditionally the Primate of Poland (\"Prymas Polski\"). After the partitions of Poland the see was often combined with others, first with Pozna\u0144 and then with Warsaw. In 1992 Pope John Paul II reorganized the Polish hierarchy and the city once again had a separate bishop. Cardinal J\u00f3zef Glemp, who had been archbishop of Gniezno and Warsaw and retained Warsaw, was designated to remain Primate until his retirement, but afterward the Archbishop of Gniezno, at present Wojciech Polak, would again be Primate of Poland.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSights.\nThe landmarks of Gniezno include:\nSports.\nThe city's most popular sports club is motorcycle speedway team Start Gniezno. The annual speedway Boles\u0142aw Chrobry Tournament is held in Gniezno. The city's main football club is Mieszko Gniezno.\nThe E11 European long distance path for hikers passes through Gniezno.\nTwin towns \u2013 sister cities.\nGniezno is twinned with:\nFormer twin towns:\nIn March 2022, Gniezno severed its ties with the Russian city of Sergiyev Posad as a response to the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "60630", "revid": "49598191", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60630", "title": "Country Music Hall of Fame and Museum", "text": "The Country Music Hall of Fame and Museum in Nashville, Tennessee, is one of the world's largest museums and research centers dedicated to the preservation and interpretation of American country music. Chartered in 1964, the museum has amassed one of the world's most extensive musical collections.\nHistory of the museum.\nThe Country Music Hall of Fame and Museum is the world's largest repository of country music artifacts. Early in the 1960s, as the Country Music Association's (CMA) campaign to publicize country music was accelerating, CMA leaders determined that a new organization was needed to operate a country music museum and related activities beyond CMA's scope as simply a trade organization. Toward this end, the nonprofit Country Music Foundation (CMF) was chartered by the state of Tennessee in 1964 to collect, preserve, and publicize information and artifacts relating to the history of country music. Through CMF, industry leaders raised money with the effort of CMA Executive Director Jo Walker-Meador to build the Country Music Hall of Fame and Museum, which opened on April 1, 1967. The original building was a barn-shaped structure located at the head of Music Row, erected on the site of a small Nashville city park. This hall of fame was modeled after the National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum in Cooperstown, New York. At this point, artifacts began to be displayed and a small library was begun in a loft above one of the museum's galleries.\nEarly in the 1970s, the basement of the museum building was partially complete, and library expansion began, embracing not only recordings, but also books and periodicals, sheet music and songbooks, photographs, business documents, and other materials. At the outset, CMA staff had run the museum, but by 1972, the museum (already governed by its own independent board of directors) acquired its own small staff.\nBuilding expansion took place in 1974, 1977, and 1984 to store and display the museum's growing collection of costumes, films, historic cars, musical instruments, and other artifacts. An education department was created to conduct ongoing programs with Middle Tennessee schools; an oral history program was begun; and a publications department was launched to handle books, as well as the \"Journal of Country Music.\"\nCurrent museum.\nTo become more accessible, the Country Music Hall of Fame and Museum moved to a new, facility in the heart of downtown Nashville's arts and entertainment district in May 2001. In 2014, the museum unveiled a $100\u00a0million expansion, doubling its size to 350,000 square feet of galleries, archival storage, education classrooms, retail stores, and special event space.\nIn the museum's core exhibition, \"Sing Me Back Home: A Journey Through Country Music,\" visitors are immersed in the history and sounds of country music. The story is revealed through artifacts, photographs, text panels, recorded sound, vintage video, and interactive touchscreens. \"Sing Me Back Home\" is enhanced by rotating limited-engagement exhibits. The ACM Gallery and the Dinah and Fred Gretsch Family Gallery features artifacts from today's country stars and a series of technology-enhanced activities. The ACM Gallery houses the annual exhibition, \"American Currents: State of Music\", which chronicles country music's most recent past.\nIn addition to the galleries, the museum has the 776-seat CMA Theater, the Taylor Swift Education Center, and multi-purpose event rental spaces. Other historic properties of the Country Music Hall of Fame and Museum include one of the country's oldest letterpress print shop Hatch Show Print (located inside the museum) and Historic RCA Studio B (located on Music Row), Nashville's oldest surviving recording studio, where recordings by Country Music Hall of Fame members Elvis Presley, Dolly Parton, Waylon Jennings, and many others were made.\nThe Country Music Hall of Fame and Museum has developed multiple platforms to make its collection accessible to a wider audience. From weekly instrument demonstrations to its flagship songwriting program for schools, https://, the museum offers an aggressive schedule of educational and family programs. The museum also operates CMF Records, a Grammy-winning re-issue label (\"The Complete Hank Williams\" and \"Night Train to Nashville: Music City Rhythm &amp; Blues, 1945\u20131970)\"; and CMF Press, a publishing imprint that has released books in cooperation with Vanderbilt University Press and other major trade publishing houses.\nThe Hall of Fame Rotunda features a mural, \"The Sources of Country Music\", by Thomas Hart Benton. It was Benton's final work; as he died in his studio while completing it.\nThe Country Music Hall of Fame.\nFor a professional in the country music field, membership in the Country Music Hall of Fame, is the highest honor the genre can bestow. An invitation can be extended to performers, songwriters, broadcasters, musicians, and executives in recognition of their contributions to the development of country music. The hall of fame honor was created in 1961 by the Country Music Association (CMA); the first inductees were Hank Williams, Jimmie Rodgers, and Fred Rose. Roy Acuff, the first living artist to join the Hall of Fame, was elected in 1962. The most recent inductees (class of 2025) are Tony Brown, June Carter Cash, and Kenny Chesney.\nOver the Hall of Fame's history, the number of new members inducted each year has varied from one to twelve (no nominee was inducted in 1963, no candidate having received sufficient votes). Election to the Country Music Hall of Fame is solely the prerogative of the CMA. New members, elected annually by a panel of industry executives chosen by the CMA, are inducted formally during the Medallion Ceremony, part of the annual reunion of Country Music Hall of Fame members hosted by the Country Music Hall of Fame and Museum. The Country Music Hall of Fame\u00ae and Museum is a 501(c)(3) non-profit educational organization and does not participate in the election.\nBas-relief portraits (similar to that in the Baseball Hall of Fame in New York) cast in bronze honoring each Hall of Fame member were originally displayed at the Tennessee State Museum in downtown Nashville until the Country Music Hall of Fame and Museum opened its own building in April 1967; in this barn-roofed facility at the head of Music Row, the bronze plaques formed a special exhibit. Through a licensing agreement with the CMA, the Museum exhibits the bronze plaques commemorating membership in a space and fashion befitting the honor.\nThe Museum collection.\nThe museum's collections document country music from its folk roots through today. Artifacts and archival materials not on exhibit are housed in the museum's 46,000 square foot secure, climate-controlled collections storage rooms and in the Frist Library and Archives, located on museum's third floor. The collection includes: \nArchitecture and design.\nThe downtown building was designed by Nashville's Tuck-Hinton Architectural Firm with Seab Tuck as the project architect. When viewed from the air, the building forms a massive bass clef. The point on the sweeping arch of the building suggests the tailfin of a 1959 Cadillac sedan. The building's front windows resemble piano keys. The tower on top of the Rotunda that extends down the Hall of Fame is a replica of the distinctive diamond-shaped WSM radio tower, which was originally built in 1932 just south of Nashville and is still in operation.\nThe Rotunda itself is replete with symbolic architectural elements. For example, the exterior of this cylindrical structure can be viewed variously as a drum kit, a rural water tower, or grain silo. The four disc tiers of the Rotunda's roof evoke the evolution of recording technology\u2014the 78, the vinyl LP, the 45, and the CD. Stone bars on the Rotunda's outside wall symbolize the notes of the Carter Family's classic song \"Will the Circle Be Unbroken\", while the title of the song rings the interior of the structure. The Hall of Fame member's plaques housed within the Rotunda are reminiscent of notes on a musical staff.\nSolid, earthy materials native to the Mid-South\u2014wood, concrete, steel, and stone\u2014were used in the building's construction as a reminder of the music's strong roots in the lives of working Americans. Georgia yellow pine adorns the floors of the Conservatory and is also found in the Hall of Fame Rotunda the Ford Theater. Crab Orchard Stone from the East Tennessee mountains lend a homey, rustic touch to the Conservatory's \"front porch\" atmosphere and is also found on the Rotunda's walls. The large steel beams supporting the Conservatory's glass ceiling and walls conjure up images of rural railroad bridges. In another transportation metaphor, the cascading water along the Grand Staircase calls to mind the mighty rivers that have inspired so much of our nation's music and have physically connected musicians in various regions of the nations.\nMusical symbolism continues within the museum galleries. Hardwood floors, curtain-like exhibit-case fronts, and low hanging lights suspended by cables create the backstage atmosphere of the Third Floor. Similarly, modular exhibit stations and vinyl floors evoke a recording studio environment on the Second Floor.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "60631", "revid": "41195652", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60631", "title": "Are (unit)", "text": ""}
{"id": "60633", "revid": "25511559", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60633", "title": "Dmitri Mendeleev", "text": "Russian chemist (1834\u20131907)\nDmitri Ivanovich Mendeleev ( ; 8 February\u00a0[O.S. 27 January]\u00a01834\u00a0\u2013 2 February\u00a0[O.S. 20 January]\u00a01907) was a Russian chemist known for formulating the periodic law and creating a version of the periodic table of elements. He used the periodic law not only to correct the then-accepted properties of some known elements, such as the valence and atomic weight of uranium, but also to predict the properties of three elements that were yet to be discovered (germanium, gallium, and scandium).\nEarly life.\nMendeleev was born in the village of Verkhnie Aremzyani, near Tobolsk in Siberia, to Ivan Pavlovich Mendeleev (1783\u20131847) and Maria Dmitrievna Mendeleeva (n\u00e9e Kornilieva) (1793\u20131850). Ivan worked as a school principal and a teacher of fine arts, politics and philosophy at the Tambov and Saratov gymnasiums. Ivan's father, Pavel Maximovich Sokolov, was a Russian Orthodox priest from the Tver region. As per the tradition of priests of that time, Pavel's children were given new family names while attending the theological seminary, with Ivan getting the family name Mendeleev after the name of a local landlord.\nMaria Kornilieva came from a well-known family of Tobolsk merchants, founders of the first Siberian printing house who traced their ancestry to Yakov Korniliev, a 17th-century posad man turned a wealthy merchant. In 1889, a local librarian published an article in the Tobolsk newspaper where he claimed that Yakov was a baptized Teleut, an ethnic minority known as \"white Kalmyks\" at the time. Since no sources were provided and no documented facts of Yakov's life were ever revealed, biographers generally dismiss it as a myth. In 1908, shortly after Mendeleev's death, one of his nieces published \"Family Chronicles. Memories about D. I. Mendeleev\" where she voiced \"a family legend\" about Maria's grandfather who married \"a Kyrgyz or Tatar beauty whom he loved so much that when she died, he also died from grief\". This, however, contradicts the documented family chronicles, and neither of those legends is supported by Mendeleev's autobiography, his daughter's or his wife's memoirs. Yet some Western scholars still refer to Mendeleev's supposed \"Mongol\", \"Tatar\", \"Tartarian\" or simply \"Asian\" ancestry as a fact.\nMendeleev was raised as an Orthodox Christian, his mother encouraging him to \"patiently search divine and scientific truth\". His son Ivan would later inform that Mendeleev had departed from the Church and embraced a form of \"romanticized deism\".\nMendeleev was the youngest of 17 siblings, of whom \"only 14 stayed alive to be baptized\" according to Mendeleev's brother Pavel, meaning the others died soon after their birth. The exact number of Mendeleev's siblings differs among sources and is still a matter of some historical dispute. Unfortunately for the family's financial well-being, his father became blind and lost his teaching position. His mother was forced to work and she restarted her family's abandoned glass factory. At the age of\u00a013, after the passing of his father and the destruction of his mother's factory by fire, Mendeleev attended the Gymnasium in Tobolsk.\nIn 1849, his mother took Mendeleev across Russia from Siberia to Moscow with the aim of getting Mendeleev enrolled at the Moscow University. The university in Moscow did not accept him. The mother and son continued to Saint Petersburg to the father's alma mater. The now poor Mendeleev family relocated to Saint Petersburg, where he entered the Main Pedagogical Institute in 1850. After graduation, he contracted tuberculosis, causing him to move to the Crimean Peninsula on the northern coast of the Black Sea in 1855. While there, he became a science master of the 1st Simferopol Gymnasium. In 1857, he returned to Saint Petersburg with fully restored health.\nBetween 1859 and 1861, he worked on the capillarity of liquids and the workings of the spectroscope in Heidelberg. Later in 1861, he published a textbook named \"Organic Chemistry\". This won him the Demidov Prize of the Petersburg Academy of Sciences.\nOn 4 April 1862, he became engaged to Feozva Nikitichna Leshcheva, and they married on 27 April 1862 at Nikolaev Engineering Institute's church in Saint Petersburg (where he taught).\nMendeleev became a professor at the Saint Petersburg Technological Institute and Saint Petersburg State University in 1864, and 1865, respectively. In 1865, he became a Doctor of Science for his dissertation \"On the Combinations of Water with Alcohol\". He achieved tenure in 1867 at St. Petersburg University and started to teach inorganic chemistry while succeeding Voskresenskii to this post; by 1871, he had transformed Saint Petersburg into an internationally recognized center for chemistry research.\nPeriodic table.\nIn 1863, there were 56 known elements, with a new element being discovered at a rate of approximately one per year. Other scientists had previously identified periodicity of elements. John Newlands described a Law of Octaves, noting their periodicity according to relative atomic weight in 1864, publishing it in 1865. His proposal identified the potential for new elements such as germanium. The concept was criticized, and his innovation was not recognized by the Society of Chemists until 1887. Another person to propose a periodic table was Lothar Meyer, who published a paper in 1864 describing 28 elements classified by their valence, but with no predictions of new elements.\nAfter becoming a teacher in 1867, Mendeleev wrote \"Principles of Chemistry\" (), which became the definitive textbook of its time. It was published in two volumes between 1868 and 1870, and Mendeleev wrote it as he was preparing a textbook for his course. This is when he made his most important discovery. As he attempted to classify the elements according to their chemical properties, he noticed patterns that led him to postulate his periodic table; he claimed to have envisioned the complete arrangement of the elements in a dream:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I saw in a dream a table where all elements fell into place as required. Awakening, I immediately wrote it down on a piece of paper, only in one place did a correction later seem necessary.\nUnaware of the earlier work on periodic tables going on in the 1860s, he made the following table:\nBy adding additional elements following this pattern, Mendeleev developed his extended version of the periodic table. On 6 March 1869, he made a formal presentation to the Russian Chemical Society, titled \"The Dependence between the Properties of the Atomic Weights of the Elements\", which described elements according to both atomic weight (now called \"relative atomic mass\") and valence. This presentation stated that\nMendeleev published his periodic table of all known elements and predicted several new elements to complete the table in a Russian-language journal. Only a few months after, Meyer published a virtually identical table in a German-language journal. Mendeleev has the distinction of accurately predicting the properties of what he called ekasilicon, ekaaluminium and ekaboron (germanium, gallium and scandium, respectively).\nMendeleev also proposed changes in the properties of some known elements. Prior to his work, uranium was supposed to have valence 3 and atomic weight about 120. Mendeleev realized that these values did not fit in his periodic table, and doubled both to valence 6 and atomic weight 240 (close to the modern value of 238).\nFor his predicted three elements, he used the prefixes of eka, dvi, and tri (Sanskrit one, two, three) in their naming. Mendeleev questioned some of the currently accepted atomic weights (they could be measured only with a relatively low accuracy at that time), pointing out that they did not correspond to those suggested by his Periodic Law. He noted that tellurium has a higher atomic weight than iodine, but he placed them in the right order, incorrectly predicting that the accepted atomic weights at the time were at fault. He was puzzled about where to put the known lanthanides, and predicted the existence of another row to the table which were the actinides which were some of the heaviest in atomic weight. Some people dismissed Mendeleev for predicting that there would be more elements, but he was proven to be correct when Ga (gallium) and Ge (germanium) were found in 1875 and 1886 respectively, fitting perfectly into the two missing spaces.\nBy using Sanskrit prefixes to name \"missing\" elements, Mendeleev may have recorded his debt to the Sanskrit grammarians of ancient India, who had created theories of language based on their discovery of the two-dimensional patterns of speech sounds (exemplified by the \u015aivas\u016btras in P\u0101\u1e47ini's Sanskrit grammar). Mendeleev was a friend and colleague of the Sanskritist Otto von B\u00f6htlingk, who was preparing the second edition of his book on P\u0101\u1e47ini at about this time, and Mendeleev wished to honor P\u0101\u1e47ini with his nomenclature.\nThe original draft made by Mendeleev would be found years later and published under the name \"Tentative System of Elements.\"\nDmitri Mendeleev is often referred to as the Father of the Periodic Table. He called his table or matrix, \"the Periodic System\".\nLater life.\nIn 1876, he became obsessed with Anna Ivanovna Popova and began courting her; in 1881 he proposed to her and threatened suicide if she refused. His divorce from Leshcheva was finalized one month after he had married Popova (on 2 April) in early 1882. Even after the divorce, Mendeleev was technically a bigamist; the Russian Orthodox Church required at least seven years before lawful remarriage. His divorce and the surrounding controversy contributed to his failure to be admitted to the Russian Academy of Sciences (despite his international fame by that time). His daughter from his second marriage, Lyubov, became the wife of the famous Russian poet Alexander Blok. His other children were son Vladimir (a sailor, he took part in the notable Eastern journey of Nicholas\u00a0II) and daughter Olga, from his first marriage to Feozva, and son Ivan and twins from Anna.\nThough Mendeleev was widely honored by scientific organizations all over Europe, including (in 1882) the Davy Medal from the Royal Society of London (which later also awarded him the Copley Medal in 1905), he resigned from Saint Petersburg University on 17 August 1890. He was elected a Foreign Member of the Royal Society (ForMemRS) in 1892, and in 1893 he was appointed director of the Bureau of Weights and Measures, a post which he occupied until his death.\nMendeleev also investigated the composition of petroleum, and helped to found the first oil refinery in Russia. He recognized the importance of petroleum as a feedstock for petrochemicals. He is credited with a remark that burning petroleum as a fuel \"would be akin to firing up a kitchen stove with bank notes\".\nMendeleev was nominated for Nobel Prize in Chemistry for the last three years of his life, 1905, 1906 and 1907 in 9 nominations.\nIn 1905, Mendeleev was elected a member of the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences and received three nominations. The following year he received four nominations and the Nobel Committee for Chemistry recommended to the Swedish Academy to award the Nobel Prize in Chemistry for 1906 to Mendeleev for his discovery of the periodic system. He was also elected an International Member of the American Philosophical Society. The Chemistry Section of the Swedish Academy supported this recommendation. The academy was then supposed to approve the committee's choice, as it has done in almost every case. Unexpectedly, at the full meeting of the academy, a dissenting member of the Nobel Committee, Peter Klason, proposed the candidacy of Henri Moissan whom he favored. Svante Arrhenius, although not a member of the Nobel Committee for Chemistry, had a great deal of influence in the academy and also pressed for the rejection of Mendeleev, arguing that the periodic system was too old to acknowledge its discovery in 1906. According to the contemporaries, Arrhenius was motivated by the grudge he held against Mendeleev for his critique of Arrhenius's dissociation theory. After heated arguments, the majority of the academy chose Moissan by a margin of one vote. The two nominations of Mendeleev in 1907 were again frustrated by the absolute opposition of Arrhenius.\nIn 1907, Mendeleev died at the age of 72 in Saint Petersburg from influenza, just 6 days short of his 73rd birthday. His last words were to his physician: \"Doctor, you have science, I have faith,\" which is possibly a Jules Verne quote.\nOther achievements.\nMendeleev made other important contributions to science. The Russian chemist and science historian Lev Chugaev characterized him as\n\"a chemist of genius, first-class physicist, a fruitful researcher in the fields of hydrodynamics, meteorology, geology, certain branches of chemical technology (explosives, petroleum, and fuels, for example) and other disciplines adjacent to chemistry and physics, a thorough expert of chemical industry and industry in general, and an original thinker in the field of economy [...]\"\nMendeleev was one of the founders, in 1868, of the Russian Chemical Society. He worked on the theory and practice of protectionist trade and on agriculture.\nIn an attempt at a chemical conception of the aether, he put forward a hypothesis that there existed two inert chemical elements of lesser atomic weight than hydrogen. Of these two proposed elements, he thought the lighter to be an all-penetrating, all-pervasive gas, and the slightly heavier one to be a proposed element, \"coronium\".\nMendeleev devoted much study and made important contributions to the determination of the nature of such indefinite compounds as solutions.\nIn another department of physical chemistry, he investigated the expansion of liquids with heat, and devised a formula similar to Gay-Lussac's law of the uniformity of the expansion of gases, while in 1861 he anticipated Thomas Andrews' conception of the critical temperature of gases by defining the absolute boiling-point of a substance as the temperature at which cohesion and heat of vaporization become equal to zero and the liquid changes to vapor, irrespective of the pressure and volume.\nMendeleev is given credit for the introduction of the metric system to the Russian Empire.\nHe invented \"pyrocollodion\", a kind of smokeless powder based on nitrocellulose. This work had been commissioned by the Russian Navy, which however did not adopt its use. In 1892 Mendeleev organized its manufacture.\nMendeleev studied the origins of petroleum; he concluded that hydrocarbons are abiogenic and form deep within the earth \u2013 see Abiogenic petroleum origin.\nHe wrote: \"The capital fact to note is that petroleum was born in the depths of the earth, and it is only there that we must seek its origin.\"\nActivities beyond chemistry.\nBeginning in the 1870s, he published widely beyond chemistry, looking at aspects of Russian industry, and technical issues in agricultural productivity. He explored demographic issues, sponsored studies of the Arctic Sea, tried to measure the efficacy of chemical fertilizers, and promoted the merchant navy. He was especially active in improving the Russian petroleum industry, making detailed comparisons with the more advanced industry in Pennsylvania. Although not well-grounded in economics, he had observed industry throughout his European travels, and in 1891 he helped convince the Ministry of Finance to impose temporary tariffs with the aim of fostering Russian infant industries.\nIn 1889, he was elected as an honorary member of the Manchester Literary and Philosophical Society. The following year, 1890, he resigned his professorship at St. Petersburg University following a dispute with officials at the Ministry of Education over the treatment of university students. In 1892 he was appointed director of Russia's Central Bureau of Weights and Measures, and led the way to standardize fundamental prototypes and measurement procedures. He set up an inspection system, and introduced the metric system to Russia.\nHe debated against the scientific claims of spiritualism, arguing that metaphysical idealism was no more than ignorant superstition. He bemoaned the widespread acceptance of spiritualism in Russian culture, and its negative effects on the study of science.\nVodka myth.\nA very popular Russian story credits Mendeleev with setting the 40% standard strength of vodka. For example, Russian Standard vodka advertises: \"In 1894, Dmitri Mendeleev, the greatest scientist in all Russia, received the decree to set the Imperial quality standard for Russian vodka and the 'Russian Standard' was born\" Others cite \"the highest quality of Russian vodka approved by the royal government commission headed by Mendeleev in 1894\".\nIn fact, the 40% standard was already introduced by the Russian government in 1843, when Mendeleev was nine years old. It is true that Mendeleev in 1892 became head of the Archive of Weights and Measures in Saint Petersburg, and evolved it into a government bureau the following year, but that institution was charged with standardising Russian trade weights and measuring instruments, not setting any production quality standards. Also, Mendeleev's 1865 doctoral dissertation was entitled \"A Discourse on the combination of alcohol and water\", but it only discussed medical-strength alcohol concentrations over 70%, and he never wrote anything about vodka.\nCommemoration.\nA number of places and objects are associated with the name and achievements of the scientist.\nIn Saint Petersburg his name was given to D. I. Mendeleev Institute for Metrology, the National Metrology Institute, dealing with establishing and supporting national and worldwide standards for precise measurements. Next to it there is a monument to him that consists of his sitting statue and a depiction of his periodic table on the wall of the establishment.\nIn the Twelve Collegia building, now being the centre of Saint Petersburg State University and in Mendeleev's time \u2013 Head Pedagogical Institute \u2013 there is Dmitry Mendeleev's Memorial Museum Apartment with his archives. The street in front of these is named after him as Mendeleevskaya liniya (Mendeleev Line).\nIn Moscow, there is the D. Mendeleyev University of Chemical Technology of Russia.\nMendelevium, which is a synthetic chemical element with the symbol Md (formerly Mv) and the atomic number 101, was named after Mendeleev. It is a metallic radioactive transuranic element in the actinide series, usually synthesized by bombarding einsteinium with alpha particles.\nThe mineral mendeleevite-Ce, Cs6(Ce22Ca6)(Si70O175)(OH,F)14(H2O)21, was named in Mendeleev's honor in 2010. The related species mendeleevite-Nd, Cs6[(Nd,REE)23Ca7](Si70O175)(OH,F)19(H2O)16, was described in 2015.\nA large lunar impact crater Mendeleev, that is located on the far side of the Moon, also bears the name of the scientist.\nThe Russian Academy of Sciences has occasionally awarded a Mendeleev Golden Medal since 1965.\nOn 8 February 2016, Google celebrated Dmitri Mendeleev's 182nd Birthday with a doodle.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "60634", "revid": "28438", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60634", "title": "Dmitry Mendeleev", "text": ""}
{"id": "60635", "revid": "20483999", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60635", "title": "Glucose tolerance test", "text": "Medical test of how quickly glucose is cleared from the blood\nThe glucose tolerance test (GTT, not to be confused with GGT test) is a medical test in which glucose is given and blood samples taken afterward to determine how quickly it is cleared from the blood. The test is usually used to test for diabetes, insulin resistance, impaired beta cell function, and sometimes reactive hypoglycemia and acromegaly, or rarer disorders of carbohydrate metabolism. In the most commonly performed version of the test, an \"oral glucose tolerance test\" (OGTT), a standard dose of glucose is ingested by mouth and blood levels are checked two hours later. Many variations of the GTT have been devised over the years for various purposes, with different standard doses of glucose, different routes of administration, different intervals and durations of sampling, and various substances measured in addition to blood glucose.\nHistory.\nThe glucose tolerance test was first described in 1923 by Jerome W. Conn.\nThe test was based on the previous work in 1913 by A. T. B. Jacobson in determining that carbohydrate ingestion results in blood glucose fluctuations, and the premise (named the Staub-Traugott Phenomenon after its first observers H. Staub in 1921 and K. Traugott in 1922) that a normal patient fed glucose will rapidly return to normal levels of blood glucose after an initial spike, and will see improved reaction to subsequent glucose feedings.\nTesting.\nSince the 1970s, the World Health Organization and other organizations interested in diabetes agreed on a standard dose and duration.\nPreparation.\nThe patient is instructed not to restrict carbohydrate intake in the days or weeks before the test. The test should not be done during an illness, as results may not reflect the patient's glucose metabolism when healthy. A full adult dose should not be given to a person weighing less than 42.6\u00a0kg (94\u00a0lb), or the excessive glucose may produce a false positive result. Usually the OGTT is performed in the morning as glucose tolerance can exhibit a diurnal rhythm with a significant decrease in the afternoon. The patient is instructed to fast (water is allowed) for 8\u201312 hours prior to the tests. Medication such as large doses of salicylates, diuretics, anticonvulsants, and oral contraceptives affect the glucose tolerance test.\nSubstances measured and variations.\nIf renal glycosuria (sugar excreted in the urine despite normal levels in the blood) is suspected, urine samples may also be collected for testing along with the fasting and 2 hour blood tests.\nResults.\nFor gestational diabetes, the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG) recommends a two-step procedure, wherein the first step is a 50\u00a0g glucose dose. If after 1 hour the blood glucose level is more than 7.8\u00a0mmol/L (140\u00a0mg/dL), it is followed by a 100\u00a0g glucose dose. The diagnosis of gestational diabetes is then defined by a blood glucose level meeting or exceeding the cutoff values on at least two intervals, with cutoffs as follows:\nSample method.\nThe diagnosis criteria stated above by the World Health Organization (WHO) are for venous samples only (a blood sample taken from a vein in the arm). An increasingly popular method for measuring blood glucose is to sample capillary or finger-prick blood, which is less invasive, more convenient for the patient and requires minimal training to conduct. Though fasting blood glucose levels have been shown to be similar in both capillary and venous samples, postprandial blood glucose levels (those measured after a meal) can vary. The diagnosis criteria issued by the WHO are only suitable for venous blood samples. Given the increasing popularity of capillary testing, the WHO has recommended that a conversion factor between the two sample types be calculated, but as of 2017[ [update]] no conversion factor had been issued by the WHO, despite some medical professionals adopting their own. A 2020 study on pregnant women for gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM) found that 0-hour venous and capillary levels were similar, but that 2-hour samples were different. The authors compared their study with others, and concluded that capillary samples could be used for diagnosis of GDM during pregnancy using corrected cutoffs with acceptable accuracy in an antenatal care setting.\nVariations.\nA standard two-hour GTT (glucose tolerance test) is sufficient to diagnose or exclude all forms of diabetes mellitus at all but the earliest stages of development.\nLonger tests have been used for a variety of other purposes, such as detecting reactive hypoglycemia or defining subsets of hypothalamic obesity. Insulin levels are sometimes measured to detect insulin resistance or deficiency.\nThe GTT (glucose tolerance test) is of limited value in the diagnosis of reactive hypoglycemia, since normal levels do not preclude the diagnosis, abnormal levels do not prove that the patient's other symptoms are related to a demonstrated atypical OGTT, and many people without symptoms of reactive hypoglycemia may have the late low glucose.\nOral glucose challenge test.\nThe oral glucose challenge test (OGCT) is a short version of the OGTT, used to check pregnant women for signs of gestational diabetes. It can be done at any time of day, not on an empty stomach. The test involves 50\u00a0g of glucose, with a reading after one hour.\nLimitations of OGTT.\nThe OGTT does not distinguish between insulin resistance in peripheral tissues and reduced capacity of the pancreas beta-cells to produce insulin. The OGTT is less accurate than the hyperinsulinemic-euglycemic clamp technique (the \"gold standard\" for measuring insulin resistance), or the insulin tolerance test, but is technically less difficult. Neither of the two technically demanding tests can be easily applied in a clinical setting or used in epidemiological studies. HOMA-IR (homeostatic model assessment) is a convenient way of measuring insulin resistance in normal subjects, which can be used in epidemiological studies, but can give erroneous results for diabetic patients.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "60636", "revid": "46469005", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60636", "title": "Battle of Nineveh (627)", "text": "Battle during the Byzantine\u2013Sasanian War of 602\u2013628\nThe Battle of Nineveh was the climactic battle of the Byzantine\u2013Sasanian War of 602\u2013628.\nIn mid-September 627, Heraclius invaded Sasanian Mesopotamia in a surprising, risky winter campaign. Khosrow II appointed Rhahzadh as the commander of an army to confront him. Heraclius' G\u00f6kt\u00fcrk allies quickly deserted, while Rhahzadh's reinforcements did not arrive in time. In the ensuing battle, Rhahzadh was slain and the remaining Sasanian forces retreated.\nThe Byzantine victory later resulted in civil war in Persia, and for a period of time restored the (Eastern) Roman Empire to its ancient boundaries in the Middle East. The Sasanian civil war significantly weakened the Sasanian Empire, contributing to the Muslim conquest of Persia.\nPrelude.\nWhen Emperor Maurice was murdered by the usurper Phocas, Khosrow II declared war under the pretext of avenging his benefactor's death. While the Persians were successful over the course of earlier stages in the war, conquering much of the Levant, Egypt, and even some of Anatolia, the resurgence of Heraclius eventually led to the Persians' downfall. Heraclius' campaigns tilted the balance towards the Romans, forcing the Persians on the defensive. Allied with the Avars, the Persians attempted to take Constantinople, but were defeated.\nWhile the Siege of Constantinople was taking place, Heraclius allied with what Byzantine sources called the Khazars under Ziebel, who are identified with the Western Turkic Khaganate of the G\u00f6kt\u00fcrks led by Tong Yabghu, plying him with wondrous gifts and a promise of the reward of the porphyrogenita Eudoxia Epiphania. The Caucasus-based Turks responded by sending 40,000 of their men to invade the Caucasus in 626, inciting the Perso-Turkic war of 627\u2013629. Joint Byzantine and G\u00f6kt\u00fcrk operations were focused on besieging Tiflis.\nInvasion of Mesopotamia.\nmid-September 627, leaving Ziebel to continue the Siege of Tbilisi, Heraclius invaded the Persian Empire, this time with between 25,000 and 50,000 troops and 40,000 G\u00f6kt\u00fcrks. The G\u00f6kt\u00fcrks, however, quickly deserted him because of the strange winter conditions. Heraclius was tailed by Rhahzadh's army of 12,000, but managed to evade Rhahzadh and entered Mesopotamia (modern Iraq). Heraclius acquired food and fodder from the countryside, so Rhahzadh, following through countryside already stripped, could not easily find provisions for his soldiers and animals.\nOn 1 December, Heraclius crossed the Great Zab River and camped near the ruins of the capital of the former Assyrian Empire of Nineveh in Persian ruled Assyria/Assuristan. This was a movement from south to north, contrary to the expectation of a southward advance. However, this can be seen as a way to avoid being trapped by the Persian army in case of a defeat. Rhahzadh approached Nineveh from a different position. News that 3,000 Persian reinforcements were approaching reached Heraclius, forcing him to counteract. He gave the appearance of retreating from Persia by crossing the Tigris.\nField of battle.\nHeraclius had found a plain west of the Great Zab some distance from the ruins of Nineveh. This allowed the Byzantines to take advantage of their strengths in lances and hand-to-hand combat. Furthermore, fog reduced the Persian advantage in missile-shooting soldiers and allowed the Byzantines to charge without great losses from missile barrages. Walter Kaegi believes that this battle took place near Karamlays Creek.\nBattle.\nOn 12 December, Rhahzadh deployed his forces into three masses and attacked. Heraclius feigned retreat to lead the Persians to the plains before reversing his troops to the surprise of the Persians. After eight hours of fighting, the Persians suddenly retreated to nearby foothills. 6,000 Persians fell.\nNikephoros' \"Brief History\" tells that Rhahzadh challenged Heraclius to single combat. Heraclius accepted and killed Rhahzadh in a single thrust; two other challengers fought and also lost. The account of another Byzantine historian, Theophanes the Confessor, supports this. However, doubt has been cast on whether or not this actually occurred. In any case, Rhahzadh died at some point during the battle.\nThe 3,000 Persian reinforcements arrived too late for the battle.\nAftermath.\nThe victory at Nineveh was not total as the Byzantines were unable to capture the Persian camp. However, the victory was effective in preventing further Persian resistance.\nWith no Persian army left to oppose him, Heraclius' victorious army plundered Dastagird, Khosrow's palace, and gained tremendous riches while recovering 300 captured Byzantine/Roman standards accumulated over years of warfare. Khosrow had already fled to the mountains of Susiana to try to rally support for the defense of Ctesiphon. Heraclius could not attack Ctesiphon itself because the Nahrawan Canal was blocked by the collapse of a bridge.\nThe Persian army rebelled and overthrew Khosrow II, raising his son Kavad II, also known as Siroes, in his stead. Khosrow perished in a dungeon after suffering for five days on bare sustenance\u2014he was shot to death slowly with arrows on the fifth day. Kavad immediately sent peace offers to Heraclius. Heraclius did not impose harsh terms, knowing that his own empire was also near exhaustion. Under the peace treaty, the Byzantines regained all their lost territories, their captured soldiers, a war indemnity, and of great spiritual significance, the True Cross and other relics that were lost in Jerusalem in 614. The battle was the last conflict of the Roman\u2013Persian Wars.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "60637", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60637", "title": "Skene's gland", "text": "Glands located on the anterior wall of the vagina\nIn female human anatomy, Skene's glands or the Skene glands ( , also known as the lesser vestibular glands or paraurethral glands) are two glands located towards the lower end of the urethra. The glands are surrounded by tissue that swells with blood during sexual arousal, and secrete a fluid, carried by the Skene's ducts to openings near the urethral meatus, particularly during orgasm.\nStructure and function.\nThe Skene's glands' openings are located in the vestibule of the vulva, around the lower end of the urethra. The two Skene's ducts lead from the Skene's glands to the vulvar vestibule, to the left and right of the urethral opening, from which they are structurally capable of secreting fluid. Although there remains debate about the function of the Skene's glands, one purpose is to secrete a fluid that helps lubricate the urethral opening.\nSkene's glands produce a milk-like ultrafiltrate of blood plasma. The glands may be the source of female ejaculation, but this has not been proven. Because they and the male prostate act similarly by secreting prostate-specific antigen (PSA), which is an ejaculate protein produced in males, and prostatic acid phosphatase, some authors refer to the Skene's glands as the \"female prostate\". They are homologous to the male prostate (developed from the same embryological tissues), but the homology is still a matter of research. Female ejaculate may result from sexual activity for some women, especially during orgasm. In addition to PSA and acid phosphatase, Skene's gland fluid contains high concentrations of glucose and fructose.\nIn an amount of a few milliliters, fluid is secreted from these glands when stimulated from inside the vagina. Female ejaculation and squirting (secretion of large amounts of fluid) are believed by researchers to be two different processes. They may occur in combination during orgasm. Squirting alone is a sudden expulsion of liquid that at least partly comes from the bladder and contains urine, whereas ejaculation fluid includes a whitish transparent ejaculate that appears to come from the Skene's gland.\nClinical significance.\nDisorders of the Skene's glands may include:\nHistory.\nWhile the glands were first described in 1672 by Reinier de Graaf and by the French surgeon Alphonse Gu\u00e9rin (1816\u20131895), they were named after the Scottish gynaecologist Alexander Skene, who wrote about it in Western medical literature in 1880. In 2002, the term \"female prostate\" as a second term after \"paraurethral gland\" was added in \"Terminologia Histologica\" by the Federative International Committee on Anatomical Terminology. The 2008 edition notes that the term was introduced \"because of the morphological and immunological significance of the structure\".\nOther animals.\nHorses, dogs, sheep, and pigs are examples of other mammals that have these glands (minor vestibular glands).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "60638", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60638", "title": "Son of god", "text": ""}
{"id": "60639", "revid": "7181920", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60639", "title": "Paraurethral glands", "text": ""}
{"id": "60641", "revid": "20842734", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60641", "title": "List of Popes", "text": ""}
{"id": "60643", "revid": "29708111", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60643", "title": "PureBasic", "text": "Procedural computer programming language\nPureBasic is a commercially distributed procedural computer programming language and integrated development environment based on BASIC and developed by Fantaisie Software for Windows, Linux, macOS and Raspberry Pi. An Amiga version is available, although it has been discontinued and some parts of it are released as open-source. The first public release of PureBasic for Windows was on 17 December 2000. It has been continually updated ever since.\nPureBasic has a \"lifetime license model\". As cited on the website, the first PureBasic user (who registered in 1998) still has free access to new updates and this is not going to change.\nPureBasic compiles directly to IA-32, x86-64, arm32 and arm64, PowerPC or 680x0 instruction sets, generating small standalone executables and DLLs which need no runtime libraries beyond the standard system libraries. Programs developed without using the platform-specific application programming interfaces (APIs) can be built easily from the same source file with little or no modification.\nPureBasic supports inline assembly, allowing the developer to include FASM assembler commands within PureBasic source code, while using the variables declared in PureBasic source code, enabling experienced programmers to improve the speed of speed-critical sections of code. PureBasic supports and has integrated the OGRE 3D Environment. Other 3D environments such as the Irrlicht Engine are unofficially supported.\nSince version 6.00 (June 2022), in addition to compilation using ASM, PureBasic offers compilation with a C backend. This enables access to new platforms (e.g. Raspberry) and should make it easier to add new libraries in the future.\nProgramming language.\nCharacteristics.\nPureBasic is a native cross platform 32 bit and 64 bit BASIC compiler. Currently supported systems are Windows, Linux, macOS. The AmigaOS version is legacy and open-source. The compiler produces native executables and the syntax of PureBasic is simple and straightforward, comparable to plain C without the brackets and with native unicode string handling and a large library of built-in support functions. It can compile console applications, GUI applications, and DLL files.\nHello World example.\nThe following single line of PureBasic code will create a standalone x86 executable (4.5 KiB (4,608 bytes) on Windows version) that displays a message box with the text \"Hello World\".\n MessageRequester(\"Message Box\", \"Hello World\")\nAnd the following variant of the same code, which instead uses an inline Windows API call with no need for declarations or other external references, will create an even smaller 2.0 KiB (2,048 bytes) standalone x86 executable for Windows.\n MessageBox_(0, \"Hello World\", \"Message Box\", 0)\nThe following is a console version of the Hello World example.\n OpenConsole() ; Open a console window. \n Print(\"Hello, World!\")\n Delay(5000) ; Pause for 5 seconds\nProcedural programming.\nPureBasic is a \"Second generation BASIC\" language, with structured conditionals and loops, and procedure-oriented programming supported. The user is not required to use procedures, so a programmer may opt for a coding style which includes Goto, Gosub Label, and Return.\nBelow is a sample procedure for sorting an array, although SortArray is now a built-in function of PureBasic.\n Procedure bubbleSort(Array a(1))\n Protected i, itemCount, hasChanged\n itemCount = ArraySize(a())\n Repeat\n hasChanged = #False\n itemCount - 1\n For i = 0 To itemCount\n If a(i) &gt; a(i + 1)\n Swap a(i), a(i + 1)\n hasChanged = #True\n EndIf \n Next \n Until hasChanged = #False\n EndProcedure\nBelow is a sample program that displays a sizeable text editor with two menu items.\nOpenWindow(0, #PB_Ignore, #PB_Ignore, 800, 600, \"Simple Text Editor\", #PB_Window_SystemMenu | #PB_Window_MinimizeGadget | #PB_Window_MaximizeGadget | #PB_Window_SizeGadget)\nCreateMenu(0, WindowID(0))\nMenuItem(1, \"&amp;OK\")\nMenuItem(2, \"&amp;Cancel\")\nEditorGadget(0, 0, 0, 0, 0)\nSetGadgetFont(0, LoadFont(0, \"Courier New\", 10))\nRepeat\n Select WaitWindowEvent()\n Case #PB_Event_Menu\n Select EventMenu()\n Case 1: MessageRequester(\"OK clicked directly or with '&amp;' mnemonic.\", GetGadgetText(0))\n Case 2: Break\n EndSelect\n Case #PB_Event_SizeWindow: ResizeGadget(0, 0, 0, WindowWidth(0, #PB_Window_InnerCoordinate), WindowHeight(0, #PB_Window_InnerCoordinate))\n Case #PB_Event_CloseWindow: Break\n EndSelect\nForEver\nPureBasic does not escape double quotes in strings so these must be concatenated with Chr(34).\nObject-oriented programming.\nFred, the developer of PureBasic, has stated that PureBasic will never be object oriented. However, numerous users have created object oriented support systems.\nData types.\nVariable data type specified when you first use it (and optionally - in the future), and is separated from the name of the point. There is a set of basic types - .f, .d (float and double numbers), .b, .c, .w, .l, .q (integers - from single-byte and 8-byte), .s - strings.\nIn addition to basic types, the user can define the type of construction via\nStructure type_name\n field_name.type ; Single field. Perhaps the structures attachment.\n field_name[count].type ; Static arrays.\n ; Optional construction StructureUnion .. EndStructureUnion allows you\n ; to combine multiple fields into one area of memory\n ; that is sometimes required for the conversion types.\n StructureUnion\n type_name.type\n EndStructureUnion \nEndStructure\nVariables can be single (actually, standard variables), dynamic array (declared using the , a linked list (), an associative array (in new versions of language) ()\nForm Designer RAD.\nPureBasic has its own form designer to aid in the creation of forms for applications, but other third-party solutions are also available. The original non-integrated \"Visual Designer\" was replaced with a new integrated \"Form Designer\" on 14 Feb 2013.\nUser community.\nPureBasic provides an online forum for users to ask questions and share knowledge. On 17 february 2025 the English language forum had 6,484 members and contained 70,174 threads comprising 578,646 posts since 17 May 2002.\nNumerous code sharing sites show PureBasic is used to create tools and games in a fast and easy way, and share large amounts of open-source code.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "60644", "revid": "5286041", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60644", "title": "Peripheral", "text": "Auxiliary input/output device for a computer\nA peripheral device, or simply peripheral, is an auxiliary hardware device that a computer uses to transfer information externally. A peripheral is a hardware component that is accessible to and controlled by a computer but is not a core component of the computer. It can communicate with a computer through wired or wireless connections. Many modern electronic devices, such as Internet-enabled digital watches, video game consoles, smartphones, and tablet computers, have interfaces for use as a peripheral.\nMouses and keyboards became the standard for computer peripheral input devices in the 1970s, while memory storage devices continued to be developed in new ways. Output devices, such as monitors, began as cathode rays, before switching to LCD monitors in the 1980s.\nTypes.\nA peripheral can be categorized based on the direction in which information flows relative to the computer, and is usually categorised one of three ways: Input, output and storage.\nInput device.\nBroadly speaking, an input device converts incoming data into binary code, expressed through electrical signals, which is comprehensible to a computer. This includes not just user-inputted information such as instructions, but also potentially information about the environment, such as temperature or pressure. Input devices in turn can be categorized based on:\nExamples include a mouse, keyboard, scanner, game controller, microphone and webcam.\nOutput device.\nAn output device reverses the process of an input device, turning binary code for machines into comprehensible input for a user. A display device is the most common form of output device which presents output visually on computer screen. The output appears temporarily on the screen and can easily be altered or erased. With all-in-one PCs, notebook computers, hand held PCs and other devices; the term display screen is used for the display device. The display devices are also used in home entertainment systems, mobile systems, cameras and video game systems.\nDisplay devices form images by illuminating a desired configuration of Raster display devices are organized in the form of a 2-dimensional matrix with rows and columns. This is done many times within a second, typically 60, 75, 120 or 144 Hz on consumer devices.\nOther examples include a monitor, printer, headphones, and speakers.\nStorage device.\nMany external storage devices double as input/output devices, as in addition to storing information, they also need facilities for loading information on and off the memory (input), and showing the user what is being stored (output).\nExamples include: storage device (such as disk drive, solid-state drive, USB flash drive, memory card and tape drive), modem, router, gateway and network adapter\nHistory.\nOne of the earliest known computer peripherals to be made was the punched card, which was first introduced into computing in the late 1880s by Herman Hollerith, an American engineer. As a result, the punched card tabulator was invented, which was able to read the punch cards. In addition, it was the first computer peripheral to be mass-produced. In 1901, the introduction of the punched card also led to the creation of the Hollerith Type 001 Mechanical Card Punch, would become the basis of computer keyboards. The keypunch allowed operators to punch the digits 0-9, without the user having prior knowledge of the corresponding card codes.\nPunched tape was later used instead of punched cards as a computer peripheral, because of its lower cost, and higher storage capacity. Programs were written to punched tape using existing teleprinters, then were transferred to a reader so that a computer could load the program. The first documented computer to use punched tape as storage was the Zuse Z1, released in 1938 by German inventor Konrad Zuse. which was able to read source code on punched tape.\nIn the early 1950s, the UNISERVO I, created for the UNIVAC I computer, became the first commercially available magnetic tape drive. Magnetic tape drives have both the ability to read and write to magnetic tape. Magnetic tape is often used to backup or archive digital data for long periods of time, due to its higher cost efficiency compared to other storage mediums, and because it is not possible cannot both read and write to magnetic tape at the same time.\nIn 1956, the IBM 305 RAMAC was the first the first commercial computer to ship with a hard disk, the IBM Model 350. The IBM Model 350 was the first hard disk, and it had the ability to be randomly read and written to at any time. The hard drive was able to store 5 MB of storage. To achieve this, it used fifty magnetic disks, that were double sided and had a diameter of 24 inches each, spinning at 1200 RPM.\nIn the early 1960s, the RS-232 standard was developed by the Electronic Industries Association. The standard was designed on the belief that it would provide reliable connections, and to allow the interconnection of devices made by different manufacturers. The standard allowed devices to communicate via serial connections, using a D25 connector.\nPersonal computers began to be widespread from the 1970s onwards, and while the existing peripherals such as keyboards and mice became standard, new peripherals also began development, such as scanners and webcams.\nIBM began using semiconductor memory in 1970, which could store twice as much data as core memory. Flash memory was invented in 1984.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "60645", "revid": "5399", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60645", "title": "File storage", "text": ""}
{"id": "60646", "revid": "36904781", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60646", "title": "Tower Bridge", "text": "Bridge over the Thames in London, England\nTower Bridge is a Grade I listed combined bascule, suspension, and, until 1960, cantilever bridge in London, built between 1886 and 1894, designed by Horace Jones and engineered by John Wolfe Barry with the help of Henry Marc Brunel. It crosses the River Thames close to the Tower of London and is one of five London bridges owned and maintained by the City Bridge Foundation, a charitable trust founded in 1282.\nThe bridge was constructed to connect the 39% of London's population that lived east of London Bridge, equivalent to the populations of \"Manchester on the one side, and Liverpool on the other\", while allowing shipping to access the Pool of London between the Tower of London and London Bridge. The bridge was opened by Edward, Prince of Wales, and Alexandra, Princess of Wales, on 30 June 1894.\nThe bridge is in length including the abutments and consists of two bridge towers connected at the upper level by two horizontal walkways, and a central pair of bascules that can open to allow shipping. Originally hydraulically powered, the operating mechanism was converted to an electro-hydraulic system in 1972. The bridge is part of the London Inner Ring Road and thus the boundary of the London congestion charge zone, and remains an important traffic route with 40,000 crossings every day. The bridge deck is freely accessible to both vehicles and pedestrians, whereas the bridge's twin towers, high-level walkways, and Victorian engine rooms form part of the Tower Bridge Exhibition.\nTower Bridge has become a recognisable London landmark. It is sometimes confused with London Bridge, about upstream, which has led to a persistent urban legend about an American purchasing the wrong bridge.\nHistory.\nInception.\nBy the late 19th century, the population and commercial development in the East End of London was increasing, leading to demand for a new river crossing downstream of London Bridge. A traditional fixed bridge at street level could not be built because it would cut off access by sailing ships to the port facilities in the Pool of London between London Bridge and the Tower of London.\nA \"Special Bridge or Subway Committee\" chaired by Sir Albert Joseph Altman was formed in December 1875 to find a solution. On 7 December 1876, the Committee presented a report recommending a bridge or subway to the east of London Bridge should be constructed, funds permitting.\nMore than fifty designs were submitted, including one from civil engineer Sir Joseph Bazalgette, which was rejected because of a lack of sufficient headroom. None of the designs gained support and it was not until 24 July 1884 that the Bridge House Estates Committee brought forward a report that proposed \"a low level bridge, with mechanical opening or openings\" be built. Following a deputation from the Committee visiting Belgium, Holland, and Newcastle Bridge, a proposal was presented on 28 October 1884 to the Court of Common Council for a mechanical bridge built according to one of three models: Design A, a swing bridge; Design B, a variation of that swing bridge; and Design C a bascule bridge. Design C was recommended and a bill was prepared to present to Parliament.\nLegislation.\nThe act of Parliament authorising construction received royal assent on 14 August 1885 and is called the Corporation of London (Tower Bridge) Act 1885 (48 &amp; 49 Vict. c. cxcv). The act was specific about the design of what it (and contemporary media) named \"The Tower Bridge\", rather than just \"Tower Bridge\". Key stipulations were:\nBarry later noted that \"at one time it was intended that the new works should be made suitable for the mounting of guns and for military occupation.\" But that \"The latter idea was afterwards to a great extent discarded.\" However, the act provided for \"the senior officer commanding in the Tower [of London]...shall at all times have...the right to occupy the Tower Bridge.\"\nThe extent of the maritime trade conducted at this time between the site of Tower Bridge and London Bridge (a distance of approximately 0.5 miles) is demonstrated in Schedule B of the act which lists 11 active docks, quays and wharfs operating on the north side of the Thames, and 20 wharfs operating on the south side.\nTwo further acts of Parliament were required to extend the time allowed to complete the works. On 12 August 1889 the Corporation of London (Tower Bridge) Act 1889 received royal assent to extend the time allowed for construction by a further four years to 1893 and make various adjustments to neighbouring streets that had proved necessary. The work was not yet complete after those four years, and on 29 June 1893 the Corporation of London (Tower Bridge) Extension of Time Act 1893 received royal assent extending the time by a further year.\nConstruction.\nConstruction was funded by the City Bridge Foundation, a charity established in 1282 for maintenance of London Bridge that subsequently expanded to cover Tower Bridge, Blackfriars Bridge, Southwark Bridge and the Millennium Bridge.\nSir John Wolfe Barry was appointed engineer and Sir Horace Jones the architect (who, as the City Architect, was also one of the judges). Jones and Barry designed a bridge with two bridge towers built on piers. The central span was split into two equal bascules or leaves, which could be raised to allow river traffic to pass. The two side spans were suspension bridges, with rods anchored both at the abutments and through rods contained in the bridge's upper walkways.\nConstruction \u2013 overseen by Edward Cruttwell \u2013 started on 22 April 1886, with the foundation stone laid by the Prince of Wales on 21 June, and took eight years. The work was divided into eight contracts. Mr (later Sir) John Jackson won three of those contracts and was responsible for the northern approach to the bridge (which started in February 1887), the foundations of the piers and the abutments of the bridge (started February 1887), and the cast iron parapet for the northern approach (December 1887) at a total accepted tender cost of \u00a3189,732; Sir W. G. Armstrong, Mitchell, and Co. Ltd, was awarded the hydraulics contract for which they tendered \u00a385,232 (December 1887); Mr William Webster was responsible for the southern approach at \u00a338,383 (July 1888); Sir William Arrol &amp; Co. had the contract for the metalwork of the superstructure at \u00a3337,113 (May 1889), which amounted to about 12,100 tons; Messrs Perry &amp; Co won two contracts covering the masonry superstructure (May 1889), and paving and lighting (May 1892) for a total accepted tender of \u00a3179,455. The total accepted tender for the eight contracts was \u00a3830,005.\nOn average 432 people worked on the site, although at least 1,200 worked on its construction overall and received invitations to the entertainment provided for the workmen at its opening. Cruttwell was the resident engineer throughout the period of construction (and remained associated with the bridge until his death in 1933). He noted that there were \"only\" ten fatal accidents during the construction: four in sinking the foundations, one on the approaches, and the remaining five on the superstructure.\nTwo piers, containing over of concrete, were sunk into the riverbed to support the construction. The first caisson was started in September 1886 and it was not until January 1890 that both piers were complete. The reason for the long duration of the foundation works was the need to defer excavation of the second pier until the staging for the first pier had been removed to allow 160 feet of clear water-way for shipping.\nMore than of steel were used in the framework for the towers and walkways, which were then clad in Cornish granite and Portland stone to protect the underlying steelwork, and achieve the stipulation that the bridge should fit architecturally with the Tower of London.\nJones died in 1887, and Barry took over as architect. Barry later summarised the contributions to the construction of Tower Bridge: \"Mr Fyson, who undertook much of the preparation of the detailed drawings; Mr Stevenson, who had been his assistant with the architectural work; and...most of all...Mr Cruttwell, the Resident Engineer, and Mr Homfray, who superintended the machinery.\" Stevenson replaced Jones's original brick fa\u00e7ade with the more ornate Victorian Gothic style, which made the bridge a distinctive landmark and was intended to harmonise the bridge with the nearby Tower of London. The total cost of construction was \u00a31,184,000 (equivalent to \u00a3 in 2023).\nOpening.\nTower Bridge was officially opened on 30 June 1894 by the Prince and Princess of Wales. The opening ceremony was attended by the Lord Chamberlain, the Lord Carrington and the Home Secretary, H. H. Asquith. It was reported that \"few [pageants] have been more brilliant or will have a more abiding and historic interest\" than the opening of Tower Bridge in the history of the City of London, and it was a \"semi-State\" occasion.\nIn addition to the official opening, the City of London Corporation gave an \"entertainment\", at a cost of \u00a3300, to 1,200 workmen and their wives. Edward Cruttwell, who had been in charge of the building of the bridge from the beginning, presided. After dinner, each workman was presented with a commemorative pipe and packet of tobacco, and each workman's wife with a box of sweetmeats.\nAn Act of Parliament stipulated that a tug boat should be on station to assist vessels in danger when crossing the bridge, a requirement that remained in place until the 1960s.\nThe bridge connected Iron Gate, on the north bank of the river, with Horselydown Lane, on the south \u2013 now known as Tower Bridge Approach and Tower Bridge Road, respectively. Until the bridge was opened, the Tower Subway \u2013 to the west \u2013 was the shortest way to cross the river from Tower Hill to Tooley Street in Southwark. Opened in 1870, Tower Subway was among the world's earliest underground (\"tube\") railways, but it closed after just three months and was reopened as a tolled pedestrian foot tunnel. Once Tower Bridge was open, the majority of foot traffic transferred to using the bridge, as there was no toll to cross. Having lost most of its income, the tunnel was closed in 1898.\nThe high-level open-air walkways between the towers gained a reputation for prostitutes and pickpockets. Since they were only accessible by stairs, the walkways were seldom used by regular pedestrians and were closed in 1910. The walkway reopened in 1982 as part of the Tower Bridge Exhibition.\n20th century.\nAfter its opening, the City of London provided some funding to the police to pay for the policing of Tower Bridge, under an informal \"compact\". The Corporation of London (Blackfriars and other Bridges) Act 1906 (6 EdwVII c.clxxx) formally placed the bridge under the City of London's policing jurisdiction.\nDuring the Second World War, Tower Bridge was seen as a major transport link to the Port of London, and consequently was a target for enemy action. In 1940, the high-level span took a direct hit, severing the hydraulic mechanism and taking the bridge out of action. In April 1941, a parachute mine exploded close to the bridge, causing serious damage to the bascule, towers, and engine room. In 1942, a third engine was installed in case the existing ones were damaged by enemy action. It was a 150\u00a0hp horizontal cross-compound engine, built by Vickers Armstrong Ltd. at their Elswick works in Newcastle upon Tyne. It was fitted with a flywheel having a diameter and weighing 9 tons, and was governed to a speed of 30 rpm. The engine became redundant when the rest of the system was modernised in 1974 and was donated to the Forncett Industrial Steam Museum by the City of London Corporation.\nThe southern section of the bridge, in the London Borough of Southwark, was Grade I listed on 6 December 1949. The remainder of the bridge, in the London Borough of Tower Hamlets, was listed on 27 September 1973.\nOn 30 December 1952, a number 78 double-decker bus was crossing Tower Bridge. The process of stopping traffic when the bridge was getting raised failed while a relief watchman was on duty.\nThe bus was near the edge of the south bascule when it started to rise. Driver Albert Edward Gunter (1906\u20131968) made a split-second decision to accelerate the bus, clearing a 1.8 m (6 ft) drop onto the north bascule, which had not started to rise. The conductor broke his leg and twelve of the twenty passengers aboard received minor injuries. The driver was later rewarded with a \u00a310 bonus (about \u00a3246.81 in 2025) for his quick thinking.\nIn 1960, the upper bridges of the two pedestrian walkways that connected the two main towers were converted from being cantilever bridges, projecting horizontally out into space, to suspension bridges when suspension cables were added. This was to reinforce the strength of the walkways.\nIn 1974, the original operating mechanism was largely replaced by a new electro-hydraulic drive system, designed by Geoffrey Beresford Hartwell, of BHA Cromwell House, with the original final pinions driven by modern hydraulic motors.\nIn 1982, the Tower Bridge Exhibition opened, housed in the bridge's twin towers, the long-closed high-level walkways, and the Victorian engine rooms. The latter still houses the original steam engines and some of the original hydraulic machinery.\n21st century.\nThe bridge closed for a month in 2000 to repair the bascules and perform other maintenance. A computer system was installed to control the raising and lowering of the bascules remotely. However, the system proved unreliable, resulting in the bridge being stuck in the open or closed positions on several occasions during 2005 until its sensors were replaced.\nIn April 2008, authorities announced that the bridge would undergo a \u00a34\u00a0million refurbishment that would take four years to complete. The work entailed stripping existing paint down to bare metal and repainting in blue and white. Before this, the bridge's colour scheme dated from 1977, when it was painted red, white, and blue for Queen Elizabeth II's Silver Jubilee. Its colours were subsequently restored to blue and white. Each section was enshrouded in scaffolding and plastic sheeting to prevent the old paint falling into the Thames and causing pollution. Starting in mid-2008, contractors worked on a quarter of the bridge at a time to minimise disruption, but some road closures were inevitable. The completed work should stand for 25 years. The renovation of the walkway interior was completed in mid-2009. The renovation of the four suspension chains was completed in March 2010 using a state-of-the-art coating system requiring up to six different layers of paint. A lighting system based on RGB LED luminaires was installed, concealed within the bridge superstructure, and attached without drilling holes, owing to the bridge's Grade I listing.\nOn 8 July 2012, as part of the London Olympics, the west walkway was transformed into a Live Music Sculpture by the British composer Samuel Bordoli. Thirty classical musicians were arranged along the length of the bridge above the Thames behind the Olympic rings. The sound travelled backward and forwards along the walkway, echoing the structure of the bridge.\nFollowing the Olympics, the rings were removed from Tower Bridge and replaced by the emblem of the Paralympic Games for the 2012 Summer Paralympics.\nIn 2016, Tower Bridge was closed to all road traffic from 1 October to 30 December. This was to allow structural maintenance work to take place on the timber decking, lifting mechanism and waterproofing the brick arches on the bridge's approaches. During this, the bridge was still open to waterborne traffic. It was open to pedestrians for all but three weekends when a free ferry service was in operation.\nDesign.\nStructure.\nThe structure was originally designed by Horace Jones but his design had an arch instead of the current high-level footways. Concerns about ships' masts and rigging hitting the arch meant that his design faced objections and Jones \"began to think that the arched form must be given up\". It was at this point in 1885 that John Wolfe Barry partnered with Jones and developed the concept of the \"level soffit for the upper bridge\" which allowed the design to proceed as it stands today. Unusually, Tower Bridge was designed to include three types of bridge: the two spans from the shore to the piers are a suspension bridge; the central, opening span is a bascule bridge; and the high level walkways were cantilever bridges until converted to suspension bridges in 1960.\nThe main towers \"consist of a skeleton of steelwork, covered with a facing of granite and Portland stone, backed with brickwork on the inside faces.\" An octagonal steel column stands at each corner of each tower (119 feet 6 inches long). The smaller abutment towers were \"generally similar...though on a smaller scale.\" \"The total length of the bridge, including the abutments, is , and the length of the approaches are 1,260 feet on the north side, and 780 feet on the south side. The width of the bridge and approaches between the parapets is 60 feet, except across the opening span where it is 49 feet. The steepest gradients are 1 in 60 on the north side, and 1 in 40 on the south side.\"\nThe central span of between the towers is split into two equal bascules, or leaves, which project 100 feet out each and extend backwards 62 feet 6 inches within the face of each pier. The bascules, weighing about 1,070 tons each including ballast and paving, are counterbalanced to minimise the force required and allow raising in five minutes and have an arc of rotation of 82\u00b0 with the centre of the arc, or pivot point, being 13 feet 3 inches inside the face of each pier and 5 feet 7 inches beneath the surface of the roadway.\nThe two side spans are suspension bridges, each long, with the suspension rods anchored both at the abutments and through rods contained within the bridge's upper walkways. The pedestrian walkways are above the river at high tide and accessed by lifts and staircases. These walkways were designed as cantilever bridges for a distance from each tower of 55 feet, with girders bridging the 120 feet between the ends of the cantilevers.\nThe structure was designed to withstand wind pressures of 56 lb per square foot (), a design constraint introduced following the Tay Bridge disaster which had occurred just 15 years before the opening of Tower Bridge.\nThere is a chimney on the bridge that is painted to look like a lamppost. It was connected to a fireplace in a guardroom located in one of the bridge piers.\nHydraulic system.\nThe original raising mechanism was powered by pressurised water stored in six hydraulic accumulators. There were then two pairs of engines on each pier. Each pair consisted of a larger engine 8 \u00bd inches in diameter and a smaller one at 7 \u00bd inches. All eight engines had three cylinders. The reason for two pairs of engines on each pier was to build in redundancy. The machinery was \"equal to twice the requirements of the Board of Trade\", already very rigorous standards established following the Tay Bridge Disaster.\nThe system was designed and installed by Hamilton Owen Rendel while working for Armstrong, Mitchell and Company of Newcastle upon Tyne. Water at a pressure of was pumped into the accumulators by a pair of stationary steam engines. Each drove a force pump from its piston tail rod. The accumulators each comprise a ram which sits a very heavy weight to maintain the desired pressure.\nThe entire hydraulic system along with the gas lighting system was installed by William Sugg &amp; Co Ltd. The gas lighting was initially by open-flame burners within the lanterns, but was soon updated to the later incandescent system.\nIn 1974, the original operating mechanism was largely replaced by a new electro-hydraulic drive system, designed by BHA Cromwell House. The only remaining parts of the old system are the final pinions, which fit into the racks on the bascules and were driven by hydraulic motors and gearing. Oil is now used in place of water as the new hydraulic fluid.\nSignalling and control.\nOriginally, river traffic passing beneath the bridge was required to follow several rules and signals. Daytime control was provided by red semaphore signals, mounted on small control cabins on either end of both of the bridge piers. At night, coloured lights were used, in either direction, on both of the piers: two red lights to show that the bridge was closed, and two green to show that it was open. In foggy weather, a gong was sounded as well.\nVessels passing through the bridge were required to display signals. By day, a black ball at least in diameter was mounted high up where it could be seen. Night passage called for two red lights in the same position. Foggy weather required repeated blasts from the ship's steam whistle. If a black ball was suspended from the middle of each walkway (or a red light at night) this indicated that the bridge could not be opened. These signals were repeated about downstream, at Cherry Garden Pier, where boats needing to pass through the bridge had to hoist their signals/lights and sound their horn, as appropriate, to alert the bridge master.\nSome of the control mechanism for the signalling equipment has been preserved and is housed in the Tower Bridge's museum.\nTraffic.\nRoad.\nDuring the first twelve months after the opening of the bridge, the average stoppage of road traffic at each bridge lift was six minutes. The average number of vehicles crossing the bridge daily was about 8,000.\nTower Bridge is still a busy crossing of the Thames, used by more than 40,000 people (motorists, cyclists, and pedestrians) every day. The bridge is on the London Inner Ring Road, and is on the eastern boundary of the London congestion charge zone (drivers do not incur the charge by crossing the bridge).\nTo maintain the integrity of the structure, the City of London Corporation has imposed a speed restriction, and an weight limit on vehicles using the bridge. A camera system measures the speed of traffic crossing the bridge, using a number plate recognition system to send fixed penalty charges to speeding drivers.\nA second system monitors other vehicle parameters. Induction loops and piezoelectric sensors are used to measure the weight, the height of the chassis above ground level, and the number of axles of each vehicle, with drivers of overweight vehicles also receiving fixed penalty notices.\nPedestrian.\nPedestrians can walk across on the bascule bridge when it is down for auto and truck traffic. Ship traffic has priority, meaning traffic using the bascule bridge waits when the bridge opens for ships.\nFrom the outset in 1894, the high-level connection was a pedestrian route and was intended to allow pedestrian movement to continue while the bascule bridge was open for ship traffic. During the first twelve months after opening, the average number of pedestrians using the bridge was about 60,000 daily. The pedestrian walkways in each direction were changed to have glass floors in 2014. Lifts bring pedestrians up to and down from the high level pedestrian bridge. The upper walkways are part of the Tower Bridge Exhibition, which included a tour of how the bascule bridge works. Pedestrians can view the city from the bridge and through its upper walkway. There is a fee for the Tower Bridge Exhibition, tickets are needed.\nRiver.\nDuring the first twelve months after the opening of the bridge, the bascules were raised for the passage of vessels 6,160 times, an average of seventeen times daily. Now, the bascules are raised about a thousand times a year. River traffic is now much reduced, but it still takes priority over road traffic. Today, 24 hours' notice is required before opening the bridge, and opening times are published in advance on the bridge's website; there is no charge for vessels to open the bridge.\nCycling.\nTransport for London have proposed Cycle Superhighway 4 to run across Tower Bridge.\nTouring the bridge.\nThe Tower Bridge attraction is a display housed inside the bridge's towers, the high-level walkways, and the Victorian engine rooms. It uses films, photos, and interactive displays to explain why and how Tower Bridge was built. Visitors can access the original steam engines that once powered the bridge bascules, housed in Engine Rooms, underneath the south end of the bridge.\nThe attraction charges an admission fee. The entrance is from the ticket office on the west side of the North Tower, from where visitors can climb the stairs (or take a lift) to the high-level Walkways to cross to the South Tower. In the Towers and Walkways is interpretation about the history of the bridge. The Walkways also provide views over the city, the Tower of London and the Pool of London, and include two Glass Floors, where you can look down to see the road and River Thames below. From the South Tower, visitors can visit exit and follow the Blue Line to the Victorian Engine Rooms, with the original steam engines, which are situated in a separate building underneath the southern approach to the bridge.\nOf the 1,114 English visitor attractions tracked by Visit England, in 2019 Tower Bridge had 889,338 visitors and was the 34th most visited attraction in England, and the 17th most visited attraction that charged an admission fee. It is one of only three bridges in England tracked as a visitor attraction alongside the Clifton Suspension Bridge in Bristol and The Iron Bridge in Shropshire.\nReaction.\nAlthough Tower Bridge is an undoubted landmark, with the City of London calling it \"London's defining landmark\", some professional commentators in the early 20th century were critical of its aesthetics. \"It represents the vice of tawdriness and pretentiousness, and of falsification of the actual facts of the structure\", wrote Henry Heathcote Statham, while Frank Brangwyn stated that \"A more absurd structure than the Tower Bridge was never thrown across a strategic river\".\nBenjamin Crisler, the \"New York Times\" film critic, wrote in 1938: \"Three unique and valuable institutions the British have that we in America have not: Magna Carta, the Tower Bridge and Alfred Hitchcock.\" Architectural historian Dan Cruickshank selected Tower Bridge as one of his four choices for the 2002 BBC television documentary series \"Britain's Best Buildings\". The bridge and its surrounding landscape was depicted in an official BBC trailer for the 2021 Rugby League World Cup (in reference to London being one of the host cities).\nTower Bridge has been mistaken for the next bridge upstream, London Bridge. A popular urban legend is that in 1968, Robert P. McCulloch, the purchaser of the old London Bridge that was later shipped to Lake Havasu City in Arizona, believed that he was buying Tower Bridge. This was denied by McCulloch himself and has been debunked by Ivan Luckin, the vendor of the bridge.\nA partial replica of Tower Bridge has been built in the city of Suzhou in China. The replica differs from the original in having no lifting mechanism and four separate towers. The Suzhou replica was renovated in 2019, giving it a new look that differs from the original London design.\nTower Bridge is the emblem of the Greater London Scout Region of The Scout Association and features on the badges of the six London Scout counties.\nIncidents.\nOn 10 August 1912, the pioneering stunt pilot Francis McClean flew between the bascules and the high-level walkways in his Short Brothers S.33 floatplane. McClean became a celebrity overnight because of the stunt, and went on to fly underneath London Bridge, Blackfriars Bridge and Waterloo Bridge.\nOn 3 August 1922, a 13-year-old boy fell off a slipway next to the south side of Tower Bridge. A man jumped into the Thames to save him, but both were pulled under a barge by Butler's Wharf and drowned.\nIn December 1952, the bridge opened while a number 78 double-decker bus was crossing from the south bank. At that time, the gateman would ring a warning bell and close the gates when the bridge was clear before the watchman ordered the raising of the bridge. The process failed while a relief watchman was on duty. The bus was near the edge of the south bascule when it started to rise; driver Albert Gunter made a split-second decision to accelerate, clearing a gap to drop onto the north bascule, which had not yet started to rise. There were no serious injuries. Gunter was given \u00a310 (equivalent to \u00a3 in 2023) by the City Corporation to honour his act of bravery.\nOn 5 April 1968, a Royal Air Force Hawker Hunter FGA.9 jet fighter from No. 1 Squadron made an unauthorised flight through Tower Bridge. Unimpressed that senior staff was not going to celebrate the RAF's 50th birthday with a flypast, the pilot flew at low altitude down the Thames without authorisation, past the Houses of Parliament, and continued towards the bridge. He flew beneath the walkway, at an estimated . He was placed under arrest upon landing, and discharged from the RAF on medical grounds without the chance to defend himself at a court martial.\nOn 31 July 1973, a single-engined Beagle Pup was twice flown under the pedestrian walkway of Tower Bridge by 29-year-old stockbroker's clerk Peter Martin. Martin, who was on bail following accusations of stock market fraud, then \"buzzed\" buildings in the city before flying north towards the Lake District, where he died when his aircraft crashed some two hours later.\nIn May 1997, the motorcade of United States President Bill Clinton was divided by the opening of the bridge. The Thames sailing barge \"Gladys\", on her way to a gathering at St Katharine Docks, arrived on schedule and the bridge was opened for her. Returning from a Thames-side lunch at \"Le Pont de la Tour\" restaurant with UK Prime Minister Tony Blair, President Clinton was less punctual and arrived just as the bridge was rising. The bridge opening split the motorcade in two, much to the consternation of security staff. A spokesman for Tower Bridge is quoted as saying: \"We tried to contact the American Embassy, but they wouldn't answer the phone.\"\nOn 19 August 1999, Jef Smith, a Freeman of the City of London, drove a flock of two sheep across the bridge. He was exercising a claimed ancient permission, granted as a right to freemen, to make a point about the powers of older citizens and the way their rights were being eroded.\nBefore dawn on 31 October 2003, a Fathers 4 Justice campaigner climbed a tower crane near Tower Bridge at the start of a six-day protest dressed as Spider-Man. Fearing for his safety, and that of motorists should he fall, police cordoned off the area, closing the bridge and surrounding roads and causing widespread traffic congestion across the City and East London.\nOn 11 May 2009, six people were trapped and injured after a lift fell inside the north tower.\nOn 9 August 2021, the bridge remained open after a technical failure. The bridge had opened to let the Jubilee Trust Tall Ship through from 2 p.m. before getting stuck. The bridge was closed and reopened to traffic approximately 12 hours later.\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\nBooks.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nJournals.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nTelevision.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "60647", "revid": "96647", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60647", "title": "Netwide Assembler", "text": "Assembler for the Intel x86 architecture\n \nThe Netwide Assembler (NASM) is an assembler and disassembler for the Intel x86 architecture. It can be used to write 16-bit, 32-bit (IA-32) and 64-bit (x86-64) programs. It is considered one of the most popular assemblers for Linux and x86 chips.\nIt was originally written by Simon Tatham with assistance from Julian Hall. As of 2016[ [update]], it is maintained by a small team led by H. Peter Anvin. It is open-source software released under the terms of a simplified (2-clause) BSD license.\nFeatures.\nNASM can output several binary formats, including COFF, OMF, a.out, Executable and Linkable Format (ELF), Mach-O and binary file (.bin, binary disk image, used to compile operating systems), though position-independent code is supported only for ELF object files. It also has its own binary format called RDOFF.\nThe variety of output formats allows retargeting programs to virtually any x86 operating system (OS). It can also create flat binary files, usable to write boot loaders, read-only memory (ROM) images, and in various facets of OS development. It can run on non-x86 platforms (if NASM itself is compiled for that platform) as a cross assembler, such as PowerPC and SPARC, though it cannot generate programs usable by those machines.\nNASM uses a variant of Intel assembly syntax instead of AT&amp;T syntax. It also avoids features such as automatic generation of segment overrides (and the related ASSUME directive) used by MASM and compatible assemblers.\nDevelopment.\nNASM version 0.90 was released in October 1996.\nVersion 2.00 was released on 28 November 2007, adding support for x86-64 extensions. The development versions are not uploaded to SourceForge.net, but are checked into GitHub with binary snapshots available from the project web page.\nIn July 2009, as of version 2.07, NASM was released under the Simplified (2-clause) BSD license. Previously, because it was licensed under LGPL, it led to development of Yasm, a complete rewrite of under the New BSD License. Yasm offered support for x86-64 earlier than NASM. It also added support for GNU Assembler syntax.\nRDOFF.\nRelocatable Dynamic Object File Format (RDOFF) is used by developers to test the integrity of NASM's object file output abilities. It is based heavily on the internal structure of NASM, essentially consisting of a header containing a serialization of the output driver function calls followed by an array of sections containing executable code or data. Tools for using the format, including a linker and loader, are included in the NASM distribution.\nUntil version 0.90 was released in October 1996, NASM supported output of only flat-format executable files (e.g., COM files). In version 0.90, Simon Tatham added support for an object-file output interface, and for DOS .OBJ files for 16-bit code only.\nNASM thus lacked a 32-bit object format. To address this lack, and as an exercise to learn the object-file interface, developer Julian Hall put together the first version of RDOFF, which was released in NASM version 0.91.\nSince this initial version, there has been one major update to the RDOFF format, which added a record-length indicator on each header record, allowing programs to skip over records whose format they do not recognise, and support for multiple segments; RDOFF1 only supported three segments: \"text\", \"data\" and \"bss\" (containing uninitialized data).\nThe RDOFF format is strongly deprecated and has been disabled starting in NASM 2.15.04.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "60651", "revid": "205121", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60651", "title": "Blues music", "text": ""}
{"id": "60652", "revid": "1314582126", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60652", "title": "Lustre (mineralogy)", "text": "Manner in which light interacts with a crystal, rock, or mineral's surface\nLustre (Commonwealth English) or luster (American English; see spelling differences) is the way light interacts with the surface of a crystal, rock, or mineral. The word traces its origins back to the Latin \"lux\", meaning \"light\", and generally implies radiance, gloss, or brilliance. \nA range of terms are used to describe lustre, such as \"earthy\", \"metallic\", \"greasy\", and \"silky\". Similarly, the term \"vitreous\" (derived from the Latin for glass, \"vitrum\") refers to a glassy lustre. A list of these terms is given below.\nLustre varies over a wide continuum, and so there are no rigid boundaries between the different types of lustre. (For this reason, different sources can often describe the same mineral differently. This ambiguity is further complicated by lustre's ability to vary widely within a particular mineral species). The terms are frequently combined to describe intermediate types of lustre (for example, a \"vitreous greasy\" lustre).\nSome minerals exhibit unusual optical phenomena, such as asterism (the display of a star-shaped luminous area) or chatoyancy (the display of luminous bands, which appear to move as the specimen is rotated). A list of such phenomena is given below.\nCommon terms.\nAdamantine lustre.\nAdamantine minerals possess a superlative lustre, which is most notably seen in diamond. Such minerals are transparent or translucent, and have a high refractive index (of 1.9 or more). Minerals with a true adamantine lustre are uncommon, with examples including cerussite, zircon, and cubic zirconia.\nMinerals with a lesser (but still relatively high) degree of lustre are referred to as subadamantine, with some examples being garnet and corundum.\nDull lustre.\nDull (or earthy) minerals exhibit little to no lustre, due to coarse granulations which scatter light in all directions, approximating a Lambertian reflector. An example is kaolinite. A distinction is sometimes drawn between dull minerals and earthy minerals, with the latter being coarser, and having even less lustre.\nGreasy lustre.\nGreasy minerals resemble fat or grease. A greasy lustre often occurs in minerals containing a great abundance of microscopic inclusions, with examples including opal and cordierite, jadeite. Many minerals with a greasy lustre also feel greasy to the touch.\nMetallic lustre.\nMetallic (or splendent) minerals have the lustre of polished metal, and with ideal surfaces will work as a reflective surface. Examples include galena, pyrite and magnetite.\nPearly lustre.\nPearly minerals consist of thin transparent co-planar sheets. Light reflecting from these layers gives them a lustre reminiscent of pearls. Such minerals possess perfect cleavage, with examples including muscovite and stilbite.\nResinous lustre.\nResinous minerals have the appearance of resin, chewing gum or smooth-surfaced plastic. A principal example is amber, which is a form of fossilised resin.\nSilky lustre.\nSilky minerals have a parallel arrangement of extremely fine fibres, giving them a lustre reminiscent of silk. Examples include asbestos, ulexite and the satin spar variety of gypsum. A fibrous lustre is similar, but has a coarser texture.\nSubmetallic lustre.\nSubmetallic minerals have similar lustre to metal, but are duller and less reflective. A submetallic lustre often occurs in near-opaque minerals with very high refractive indices, such as sphalerite, cinnabar, anthracite, and cuprite.\nVitreous lustre.\nVitreous minerals have the lustre of glass. (The term is derived from the Latin for glass, \"vitrum\".) This type of lustre is one of the most commonly seen, and occurs in transparent or translucent minerals with relatively low refractive indices. Common examples include calcite, quartz, topaz, beryl, tourmaline and fluorite, among others.\nWaxy lustre.\nWaxy minerals have a lustre resembling wax. Examples include jade and chalcedony.\nOptical phenomena.\nAsterism.\nAsterism is the display of a star-shaped luminous area. It is seen in some sapphires and rubies, where it is caused by impurities of rutile. It can also occur in garnet, diopside and spinel.\nAventurescence.\nAventurescence (or aventurization) is a reflectance effect like that of glitter. It arises from minute, preferentially oriented mineral platelets within the material. These platelets are so numerous that they also influence the material's body colour. In aventurine quartz, chrome-bearing fuchsite makes for a green stone and various iron oxides make for a red stone.\nChatoyancy.\nChatoyant minerals display luminous bands, which appear to move as the specimen is rotated. Such minerals are composed of parallel fibres (or contain fibrous voids or inclusions), which reflect light into a direction perpendicular to their orientation, thus forming narrow bands of light. The most famous examples are tiger's eye and cymophane, but the effect may also occur in other minerals such as aquamarine, moonstone and tourmaline.\nColour change.\nColour change is most commonly found in alexandrite, a variety of chrysoberyl gemstones. Other gems also occur in colour-change varieties, including (but not limited to) sapphire, garnet, spinel. Alexandrite displays a colour change dependent upon light, along with strong pleochroism. The gem results from small-scale replacement of aluminium by chromium oxide, which is responsible for alexandrite's characteristic green to red colour change. Alexandrite from the Ural Mountains in Russia is green by daylight and red by incandescent light. Other varieties of alexandrite may be yellowish or pink in daylight and a columbine or raspberry red by incandescent light. The optimum or \"ideal\" colour change would be fine emerald green to fine purplish red, but this is rare.\nIridescence.\nIridescence is the 'play' or 'fire' of rainbow-coloured light caused by very thin regular structures or layers beneath the surface of a gemstone. Similar to a thin film of oil on water, these layers interfere with the rays of reflected light, reinforcing some colours and cancelling others. Iridescence is seen at its best in precious opal.\nSchiller.\nSchiller (German, literally \"shimmer\"), is the metallic iridescence originating from below the surface of a stone that occurs when light is reflected between layers of minerals. It is seen in moonstone and labradorite and is very similar to adularescence and aventurescence.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "60656", "revid": "29214748", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60656", "title": "Ashburn", "text": "Ashburn may refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "60657", "revid": "13728979", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60657", "title": "Andover", "text": "Andover may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nOther.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "60658", "revid": "44062", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60658", "title": "Benton", "text": "Benton may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "60659", "revid": "12723358", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60659", "title": "Collectable", "text": "Object regarded as having value or interest to a collector\nA collectable, collectible, or collector's item is any object regarded as being of value or interest to a collector. Collectable items are not necessarily monetarily valuable or uncommon. There are numerous types of collectables and terms to denote those types. An antique is a collectable that is old. A curio is something deemed unique, uncommon, or weird, such as a decorative item. A manufactured collectable is an item made specifically for people to collect.\nThe business of collectables.\nCreated to be collected.\nA manufactured collectable (often referred to as a contemporary collectable) is an item made specifically for people to collect. Examples of items commonly sold as collectables include plates, figurines, bells, graphics, steins, dolls, and art. Some companies that produce manufactured collectables are members of The Gift and Collectibles Guild.\nSpecial editions, limited editions and variants on these terms fall under the category of manufactured collectables and are used as a marketing incentive for various types of products. They were originally applied to products related to the arts\u2014such as books, prints or recorded music and films\u2014but are now used for cars, fine wine and many other collectables. A special edition typically includes extra material of some kind. A limited edition is restricted in the number of copies produced, although the number may be arbitrarily high.\nCollectables in commerce.\nManufacturers and retailers have used collectables in a number of ways to increase sales. One use is in the form of licensed collectables based on intellectual properties, such as images, characters and logos from literature, music, movies, radio, television, and video games. A large subsection of licensing includes advertising, brand name, and character collectibles. Another use of collectables in retail is in the form of prizes (items of nominal value packaged with or included in the price of a retail product at no additional cost) and premiums (items that can be \"purchased\" by redeeming coupons, boxtops, or proofs of purchase from the product along with a small fee to cover shipping and handling). Also, collectables have played an important role in tourism, in the form of souvenirs. Another important field of collecting that is also big business is memorabilia, which includes collectables related to a person, organization, event or media, including T-shirts, posters, and numerous other collectables marketed to fans; but also includes ephemera from historical, media, or entertainment events, items that were meant to be thrown away but were saved by fans and accumulated by collectors. Collectibles have become a huge market globally coupled with the rise in application of Non-Fungible Tokens (NFT) which are now used as a medium for digital collectibles sales. The collectables market size in 2020 was $360 billion with an estimated increase of 4% by 2028. Digital collectibles may become a reliable revenue stream for creators as NFTs evolve and spread.\nCollectables as investments.\nCollectables can be items of limited supply that are sought for a variety of reasons, including a possible increase in value. In a financial sense, collectables can be viewed as a hedge against inflation. Over time, their value can also increase as they become rarer due to loss, damage or destruction. One drawback to investing in collectables is the potential lack of liquidity, particularly for very obscure items. There is also a risk for fraud.\nDigital collecting.\nDigital collecting takes place in the blockchain, and it got popular at the end of 2020 with the NFT craze of 2020\u20132021. Collectors can buy, trade and exchange digital items (NFTs) usually associated with images or artworks. These items are usually bought using cryptocurrency, although many marketplaces have made it possible to purchase NFTs using standard credit cards as well. Just like in physical collecting, items can hold value due to different reasons, but they are not necessarily monetarily valuable, rare, uncommon or aesthetically pleasing. The Curio Cards, the Rare Pepe or the CryptoPunks are amongst the first cases of digital collectibles. Digital collecting also applies to digital artworks.\nHistory.\nThe urge to collect unusual and fascinating objects is primeval and not limited to humans. The bowerbird collects brightly colored objects such as shells, leaves, and flowers, which they place in, or around bowers. The pack rat is fond of using shiny objects in their nests.\nThe Renaissance Cabinet of Curiosities was an antecedent both of modern museums and modern collecting.\nThe earliest manufactured collectables were included as incentives with other products, such as cigarette cards in packs of cigarettes. Popular items developed a secondary market and sometimes became the subject of \"collectable crazes\". Eventually many collectable items came to be sold separately, instead of being used as marketing tools to increase the appeal of other products.\nTo encourage collecting, manufacturers often create an entire series of a given collectable, with each item differentiated in some fashion. Examples include sports cards depicting individual players, or different designs of Beanie Babies. Enthusiasts will often try to assemble a complete set of the available variations.\nCollector editions are another way of supporting collectables. They typically are produced in limited amount and contain additional content that can be valuable for a collector. This practice is mostly popular in video games.\nEarly versions of a product, manufactured in smaller quantities before its popularity as a collectable developed, sometimes command exorbitant premiums on the secondary market. Dolls and other toys made during an adult collector's childhood can command such premiums. Unless extremely rare or made as a one-of-a-kind in a mature market, collectables rarely prove to be a spectacular investment.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "60660", "revid": "15449111", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60660", "title": "Burbank", "text": "Burbank may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nOther.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "60661", "revid": "19839598", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60661", "title": "Carlisle (disambiguation)", "text": "Carlisle is a city in Cumbria, England.\nCarlisle may also refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "60662", "revid": "38479145", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60662", "title": "Cary", "text": "Cary may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "60663", "revid": "45012656", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60663", "title": "Varese", "text": "Varese ( , ; ; ; ; archaic ) is a city and \"comune\" in north-western Lombardy, northern Italy, north-west of Milan. The population of Varese in 2018 was 80,559.\nIt is the capital of the Province of Varese. The hinterland or exurban part of the city is called \"Varesotto\".\nGeography.\nThe city of Varese lies at the foot of Sacro Monte di Varese, part of the Campo dei Fiori mountain range, that hosts an astronomical observatory, as well as the Prealpino Geophysical Centre. The village which is in the middle of the mountain is called Santa Maria del Monte because of the medieval sanctuary, which is reached through the avenue of the chapels of the Sacred Mountain. Varese is situated on seven hills: the San Pedrino Hill, the Giubiano Hill, the Campigli Hill, the Sant'Albino Hill, the Biumo Superiore Hill, Colle di Montalbano (Villa Mirabello) and the Hill of Miogni. The city also looks over Lake Varese.\nClimate.\nVarese's winters are not significantly affected by the proximity of \"Lago Maggiore\" and the minor lakes surrounding it. In late autumn and winter, temperatures frequently fall below zero Celsius, even if just by a few degrees. This differentiates it from areas south of the city. As in other cities in the foothills of Lombardy, fog is an infrequent phenomenon. Varese is on average cooler than other cities of the Lombard Prealps, especially in winter. Varese is one of the rainiest cities in Italy, with an annual precipitation average of more than . Since the 1980s, snow has fallen less frequently, with the annual average going from 69\u00a0cm in 1967\u20131987 to 33\u00a0cm in 1988\u20132017.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;The city of Varese, like the province, has a very high immigrant population owing to both its economy (many multinational companies and the EU's Joint Research Centre in nearby Ispra) and its location (proximity to Milan makes it an ideal place for the latter city's workers).\nHistory.\nThis town has been known since the Early Middle Ages when it became officially a municipality. The population by 1848 was about 4000.\nIn 1859, Giuseppe Garibaldi confronted Austrian forces led by Field Marshal-Lieutenant Carl Baron Urban near Varese. Also, it was here where Alessandro Marchetti's Savoia-Marchetti SM.93 made his first test flights.\nIn the 20th century, thanks to the increase in population and to the improvement of its economy, the dimensions of this urban centre rose. During the 20th century, its economy flourished quickly, mainly in manufacturing, in the mechanical and electromechanical industry and textile industry. Varese was well known for the footwear industry.\nSymbols\nThe coat of arms of the City of Varese dates back to around 1347. On the wooden cover of the double copy of the Burgi et Castellatiae de Varisio Statutes, preserved in the municipal archive, the oldest example of a civic coat of arms is depicted: \"silver Samnite shield. with two corners of red, right and left on the head; all around closed by a black band\". The effigy of San Vittore has no crown. It is probably in the sixteenth century - as the Varese historian Luigi Borri believes in his work Documenti Varesini of 1891 - that the shield was surmounted by the marquis crown and the effigy of St. Victor, patron saint of the city.\nThe coat of arms was recognized by decree of the head of the government of 17 June 1941 and the banner was granted with the royal decree of 28 April 1941.\nTransport.\nThe road and rail infrastructure network that makes up the connection system of the city of Varese is powered by a lot of little streets and a double rail network, and by 74,000 high mobility vehicles. In particular, the major movements are incoming into Varese. In the average weekday over 113,000 vehicles enter Varese.\nThe most used form of transportation in Varese is the private vehicle, followed by the local public transport. The A8 motorway connects Varese with Milan. The city also has a Ring Road System: Varese's Ring Road consists of three roads currently in operation and one more under construction (North Ring Road). The currently operating roads of Varese's Ring Road System are the East Ring Road, a double lane road managed by ANAS; South Ring Road, a double lane highway managed by Autostrada Pedemontana Lombarda; North East Ring Road, a single lane road managed by ANAS.\nMany important national and provincial roads pass through Varese.\nThe entire rail network serving the capital is electrified. The city is served by three railway stations:\n- Varese FS, managed by Centostazioni and RFI SpA, Ferrovie Dello Stato Group: it is the first/last station of Suburban Line S5 of Milan Varese-Treviglio via Milan (operated by ATM-Trenord) and runs a high-frequency train to Milan and Porto Ceresio, toward Switzerland (operated by Trenord). In addition, Varese FS provides direct trains to Malpensa Airport, Como, Mendrisio and Lugano (Switzerland).\n- Varese Nord (in the city centre) and Varese Casbeno (in the neighbourhood of Casbeno), managed by FerrovieNord on Milan Cadorna-Saronno-Varese-Laveno line: train service is operated by Trenord.\nThe city has both an extensive city bus network (12 lines + 3 lines in the urban area) operated by Autolinee Varesine, and suburban bus services. International bus services are operated by Swiss Post Bus of line 523 that links Varese to Lugano and Mendrisio.\nIn Varese, there is also a funicular service on the Vellone-Sacro Monte funicular.\nThe nearest airfield is Varese-Venegono Airport (ICAO:LILN) located 10 km southeast of Varese. The nearest airport is Milan Malpensa Airport which provides most domestic and international flights. It is located 35 km south of the city.\nMain sights.\nThe city is home to the Sacro Monte di Varese ('the Sacred Mount of Varese'), a place of pilgrimage and worship. It is one of the Sacri Monti of Piedmont and Lombardy, included on the UNESCO World Heritage list.\nCivic buildings.\nVarese is rich in castles, many once pertaining to the Borromeo family. The historic centre of the city includes the Praetorian Palace and Villa Cagna, a residential complex that also hosts the Civic Music School of Varese.\nAfter the 19th century, it was enriched by villas and their surrounding gardens, many now open to visitors, including:\nIn the city centre, there is the Palazzo Estense with its gardens (built in the 17th century) and Villa Mirabello. Villa Mirabello, the seat of \"Museo Civico Archeologico\" (Civic Archaeological Museum), was built in the late 600s on the top of the hill which carries its name. This site is surrounded by a park which is set close to the park of Palazzo Estense. \nNatural areas.\nIn addition to numerous public parks of the city, often appurtenances of historic villas, there is the Park Luigi Zanzi in Schiranna, established in the sixties through a partial filling of the coast of Lake Varese. It is a large botanical garden located on the banks of Lake Varese, rich in numerous species of trees and birdlife that is partially sheltered in the reeds along the banks. Bathing beach in the summer, the park also offers the possibility of peaceful walks and cycling on the bike path.\nClose to the city of Varese is the Campo dei Fiori Regional Park, a natural reserve of over five thousand acres consisting of the massive mountain Campo dei Fiori and Mount Martica, separate from that valley Rasa which is the junction of Valcuvia and Olona valley. Once the peak of the Campo dei Fiori was characterized by extensive grassland, it became the historical destination of tourism of Varese and of Milan. Today is the spectacular blooms - which gave the name to the area - to be one of its main attractions. It is a very diverse place showing aspects of extreme interest, related both to the natural environment, both in history and culture, referring to a past full of events and traditions. There are small farming villages, monuments of rare beauty, cave systems and articulated a well-maintained network of trails: some passable, as well as on foot, on horseback and on bicycle. Inside the park are established six nature reserves enclosing environments most important and characteristic.\nEconomy.\nThe economy of Varese is mainly based on industry and, to a lesser extent, specialized agriculture; some famous Varese-based firms are:\nand many more as it is one of the most industrialised areas in Northern Italy.\nVarese is close to Malpensa International Airport, which serves the international traffic of Milan, Italy.\nEducation.\nVarese is home to a European School, the European School, Varese, which was established in 1960 for the children of European Union staff, who work mainly at one of the three institutes of the Joint Research Centre in nearby Ispra.\nIt is one of the two sites of the University of Insubria, located in the heart of the Garden City, and is hosting in the newly built Campus Bizzozero the faculties of Medicine, Economics, Natural Sciences etc.\nGorla Minore, a \"comune\" (municipality) in Varese, hosts the Catholic charter school, Collegio Rotondi, which was established in 1599.\nPeople.\nCycling.\nVarese has had a long and strong tradition of competitive cycling. It hosted the 1951 and 2008 World Road Cycling Championships.\nOne of the biggest events is the yearly Tre Valli Varesine, which usually takes place at the end of September beginning of October. Is a race that goes through the three varesinian valleys: the Valganna, Valcuvia and Valceresio.\nVarese has been home to numerous cyclists, including:\nSport.\nVarese is known for the basketball team Pallacanestro Varese which played 10 FIBA European Champions Cup finals in a row between 1970 and 1979, winning five titles. Two UCI Road World Championships were held in Varese, in 1951 and 2008.\nOther sports teams based in Varese include:\nInternational relations.\nVarese is twinned with:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "60664", "revid": "13810069", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60664", "title": "Carrollton", "text": "Carrollton is the name of some places in the United States of America:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "60665", "revid": "30162703", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60665", "title": "Clayton", "text": "Clayton may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "60666", "revid": "49222050", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60666", "title": "Dayton (disambiguation)", "text": "Dayton is a city in and the county seat of Montgomery County, Ohio, United States.\nDayton may also refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "60667", "revid": "1219", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60667", "title": "Georges Sand", "text": ""}
{"id": "60668", "revid": "6175", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60668", "title": "Englewood", "text": "Englewood is a corruption of Dutch Engelse woud (English woods or forest) &amp; \"Engelse buurt\", or \"English Neighborhood\", which originally referred to Englewood, New Jersey's status as one of the few English-speaking settlements in Dutch-speaking New Netherland. Today, the name may refer to:\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n Topics referred to by the same termThis page lists articles about distinct geographical locations with the same name. "}
{"id": "60669", "revid": "20166360", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60669", "title": "Edgewood", "text": "Edgewood may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "60670", "revid": "4842600", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60670", "title": "Lists of scientists", "text": "This article contains links to lists of scientists.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThis article includes . &lt;br&gt; If an [ internal link] incorrectly led you here, you may wish to change the link to point directly to the intended article."}
{"id": "60671", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60671", "title": "IBM 801", "text": "Experimental minicomputer by IBM\nThe 801 was an experimental central processing unit (CPU) design developed by IBM during the 1970s. It is considered to be the first modern RISC design, relying on processor registers for all computations and eliminating the many variant addressing modes found in CISC designs. Originally developed as the processor for a telephone switch, it was later used as the basis for a minicomputer and a number of products for their mainframe line. The initial design was a 24-bit processor; that was soon replaced by 32-bit implementations of the same concepts and the original 24-bit 801 was used only into the early 1980s.\nDuring the initial design the system was considered as a simple processor with limited functionality that would not compete with IBM's more complex systems like the System/370. But as they explored the concept using huge amounts of performance data collected from their customers, the team was able to demonstrate that the simple design was able to easily outperform even the most powerful classic CPU designs. Applying these same techniques to existing machines like the S/370, that is, ignoring the many complex opcodes in favour of doing everything it could in registers, doubled the performance of those systems as well. The complexity of these older designs actually led to slower and much more costly machines, spending considerable complexity implementing codes that were better left unused. This demonstrated the value of the RISC concept, and all of IBM's future systems were based on the principles developed during the 801 project.\nFor his work on the 801, John Cocke was recognized with several awards and medals, including the Turing Award in 1987, National Medal of Technology in 1991, and the National Medal of Science in 1994.\nHistory.\nOriginal concept.\nIn 1974, IBM began examining the possibility of constructing a telephone switch to handle one million calls an hour, or about 300 calls per second. They calculated that each call would require 20,000 instructions to complete, and when timing overhead and other considerations were added, such a machine required performance of about 12 MIPS. This would require a significant advance in performance; their current top-of-the-line machine, the IBM System/370 Model 168 of late 1972, offered about 3 MIPS.\nThe group working on this project at the Thomas J. Watson Research Center, including John Cocke, designed a processor for this purpose. To reach the required performance, they considered the sort of operations such a machine required and removed any that were not appropriate. This led to the removal of a floating-point unit for instance, which would not be needed in this application. More critically, they also removed many of the instructions that worked on data in main memory and left only those instructions that worked on the internal processor registers, as these were much faster to use and the simple code in a telephone switch could be written to use only these types of instructions. The result of this work was a conceptual design for a simplified processor with the required performance.\nThe telephone switch project was canceled in 1975, but the team had made considerable progress on the concept and in October IBM decided to continue it as a general-purpose design. With no obvious project to attach it to, the team decided to call it the \"801\" after the building they worked in. For the general-purpose role, as opposed to the dedicated telephone system, the team began to consider real-world programs that would be run on a typical minicomputer. IBM had collected enormous amounts of statistical data on the performance of real-world workloads on their machines and this data demonstrated that over half the time in a typical program was spent performing only five instructions: load value from memory, store value to memory, adding fixed-point numbers, comparing fixed-point numbers, and branching based on the result of those comparisons. This suggested that the same simplified processor design would work just as well for a general-purpose minicomputer as a special-purpose switch.\nRationale against use of microcode.\nThis conclusion flew in the face of contemporary processor design, which was based on the concept of using microcode. IBM had been among the first to make widespread use of this technique as part of their System/360 series. The 360s, and later the 370s, came in a variety of performance levels that all ran the same machine language code. On the high-end machines, many of these instructions were implemented directly in hardware, like a floating point unit, while low-end machines could instead simulate those instructions using a sequence of other instructions encoded in microcode. This allowed a single application binary interface to run across the entire lineup and allowed the customers to feel confident that if more performance was ever needed they could move up to a faster machine without any other changes.\nMicrocode allowed a simple processor to offer many instructions, which had been used by the designers to implement a wide variety of addressing modes. For instance, an instruction like codice_1 might have a dozen variations, one that adds two numbers in internal registers, one that adds a register to a value in memory, one that adds two values from memory, etc. This allowed the programmer to select the exact version they needed for any particular task. The processor would read that instruction and use microcode to break it into a series of internal instructions. For instance, adding two numbers in memory might be implemented by loading those two numbers from memory into registers, adding them, and then storing the sum back to memory. The idea of offering all possible addressing modes for all instructions became a goal of processor designers, the concept becoming known as an orthogonal instruction set.\nThe 801 team noticed a side-effect of this concept; when faced with the plethora of possible versions of a given instruction, compiler authors would usually pick a single version. This was typically the one that was implemented in hardware on the low-end machines. That ensured that the machine code generated by the compiler would run as fast as possible on the entire lineup. While using other versions of instructions might run even faster on a machine that implemented them in hardware, the complexity of knowing which one to pick on an ever-changing list of machines made this extremely unattractive, and compiler authors largely ignored these possibilities.\nAs a result, the majority of the instructions available in the instruction set were never used in compiled programs. And it was here that the team made the key realization of the 801 project:\nImposing microcode between a computer and its users imposes an expensive overhead in performing the most frequently executed instructions.\nMicrocode takes a non-zero time to examine the instruction before it is performed. The same underlying processor with the microcode removed would eliminate this overhead and run those instructions faster. Since microcode essentially ran small subroutines dedicated to a particular hardware implementation, it was ultimately performing the same basic task that the compiler was, implementing higher-level instructions as a sequence of machine-specific instructions. Simply removing the microcode and implementing that in the compiler could result in a faster machine.\nOne concern was that programs written for such a machine would take up more memory; some tasks that could be accomplished with a single instruction on the 370 would have to be expressed as multiple instructions on the 801. For instance, adding two numbers from memory would require two load-to-register instructions, a register-to-register add, and then a store-to-memory. This could potentially slow the system overall if it had to spend more time reading instructions from memory than it formerly took to decode them. As they continued work on the design and improved their compilers, they found that overall program length continued to fall, eventually becoming roughly the same length as those written for the 370.\nFirst implementations.\nThe initially proposed architecture was a machine with sixteen 24-bit registers and without virtual memory. It used a two-operand format in the instruction, so that instructions were generally of the form codice_2, as opposed to the three-operand format, codice_3. The resulting CPU was operational by the summer of 1980 and was implemented using Motorola MECL-10K discrete component technology on large wire-wrapped custom boards. The CPU was clocked at 66\u00a0ns cycles (approximately 15.15\u00a0MHz) and could compute at the fast speed of approximately 15\u00a0MIPS.\nThe 801 architecture was used in a variety of IBM devices, including channel controllers for their S/370 mainframes (such as the IBM 3090), various networking devices, and as a vertical microcode execution unit in the 9373 and 9375 processors of the IBM 9370 mainframe family. The original version of the 801 architecture was the basis for the architecture of the IBM ROMP microprocessor used in the IBM RT PC workstation computer and several experimental computers from IBM Research. A derivative of the 801 architecture with 32-bit addressing named \"Iliad\" was intended to serve as the primary processor of the unsuccessful Fort Knox midrange system project.\nLater modifications.\nHaving been originally designed for a limited-function system, the 801 design lacked a number of features seen on larger machines. Notable among these was the lack of hardware support for virtual memory, which was not needed for the controller role and had been implemented in software on early 801 systems that needed it. For more widespread use, hardware support was a must-have feature. Additionally, by the 1980s the computer world as a whole was moving towards 32-bit systems, and there was a desire to do the same with the 801.\nMoving to a 32-bit format had another significant advantage. In practice, it was found that the two-operand format was difficult to use in typical math code. Ideally, both input operands would remain in registers where they could be reused in subsequent operations. In the two-operand format, one of the two values was overwritten with the result, and it was often the case that one of the values had to be re-loaded from memory. By moving to a 32-bit format, the extra bits in the instruction words allowed an additional register to be specified, so that the output of such operations could be directed to a separate register. The larger instruction word also allowed the number of registers to be increased from sixteen to thirty-two, a change that had been obvious from the examination of 801 code. Despite the expansion of the instruction words from 24 to 32-bits, programs did not grow by the corresponding 33% due to avoided loads and saves due to these two changes.\nOther desirable additions include instructions for working with string data that was encoded in \"packed\" format with several characters in a single memory word, and additions for working with binary-coded decimal, including an adder that could carry across four-bit decimal numbers.\nWhen the new version of the 801 was run as a simulator on the 370, the team was surprised to find that code compiled to the 801 and run in the simulator would often run faster than the same source code compiled directly to 370 machine code using the 370's PL/I compiler. When they ported their experimental \"PL.8\" language back to the 370 and compiled applications using it, those applications ran as much as three times as fast as the PL/I versions. This was due to the compiler making RISC-like decisions about how the generated code uses the processor registers, thereby optimizing out as many memory accesses as possible. These were just as expensive on the 370 as the 801, but this cost was normally hidden by the simplicity of a single line of CISC code. The PL.8 compiler was much more aggressive about avoiding loads and saves, thereby resulting in higher performance even on a CISC processor.\nThe Cheetah, Panther, and America projects.\nIn the early 1980s, the lessons learned on the 801 were combined with those from the IBM Advanced Computer Systems project, resulting in an experimental processor called \"Cheetah\". Cheetah was a 2-way superscalar processor, which evolved into a processor called \"Panther\" in 1985, and finally into a 4-way superscalar design called \"America\" in 1986. This was a three-chip processor set including an instruction processor that fetches and decodes instructions, a fixed-point processor that shares duty with the instruction processor, and a floating-point processor for those systems that require it. Designed by the 801 team, the final design was sent to IBM's Austin office in 1986, where it was developed into the IBM RS/6000 system. The RS/6000 running at 25\u00a0MHz was one of the fastest machines of its era. It outperformed other RISC machines by two to three times on common tests, and easily outperformed older CISC systems.\nAfter the RS/6000, the company turned its attention to a version of the 801 concepts that could be efficiently fabricated at various scales. The result was the IBM POWER instruction set architecture and the PowerPC offshoot.\nRecognition.\nFor his work on the 801, John Cocke was awarded several awards and medals:\nMichael J. Flynn views the 801 as the first RISC.\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "60673", "revid": "13403767", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60673", "title": "Falmouth", "text": "Falmouth may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nShips.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "60674", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60674", "title": "Channel controller", "text": ""}
{"id": "60675", "revid": "31951", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60675", "title": "Fair Haven", "text": ""}
{"id": "60676", "revid": "13467261", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60676", "title": "DMA controller", "text": ""}
{"id": "60677", "revid": "1284085183", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60677", "title": "Fredonia", "text": "Fredonia may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "60678", "revid": "36085347", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60678", "title": "Goshen", "text": "The land of Goshen is the Hebrew name of an area in the Nile delta in Ancient Egypt.\nGoshen may also refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "60679", "revid": "50290396", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60679", "title": "Como", "text": "Como (, ; , or ; ) is a city and (municipality) in Lombardy, Italy. It is the administrative capital of the Province of Como. Nestled at the southwestern branch of the picturesque Lake Como, the city is a renowned tourist destination, celebrated for its stunning landscapes, artistic heritage, and cultural significance.\nIts prime location on the shores of Lake Como and its proximity to the majestic Alps has made Como a popular destination for tourists. The city boasts a rich collection of art, religious sites, verdant gardens, museums, theatres, public parks, and opulent palaces, including the iconic \"Duomo\", seat of the Diocese of Como; the Basilica of Sant'Abbondio; Villa Olmo; the public gardens with the Tempio Voltiano; the Teatro Sociale; the \"Broletto\", the city's medieval town hall; and the 20th-century Casa del Fascio, a landmark of modernist architecture.\nComo has been the birthplace of numerous notable historical figures, including the Roman poet Caecilius, mentioned by Catullus in the 1st century BC, the celebrated writers Pliny the Elder and Pliny the Younger, Pope Innocent XI, the pioneering scientist Alessandro Volta, inventor of the electric battery, Cosima Liszt, daughter of Franz Liszt and wife of Richard Wagner, and Antonio Sant'Elia, a futurist architect and key figure in the modern architectural movement.\nHistory.\nAncient Foundations.\nThe area around present-day Como has been settled since the Iron Age, when it was first occupied by the Celtic Orobii tribe. These people, according to Pliny the Elder and contemporary scholars, had connections with the Ancient Ligurians, a group culturally similar to the Celts. Settlement remains can still be found on the wooded hills southwest of the city, particularly in the Rebbio district. The Breccia and Prestino areas, along with neighboring San Fermo della Battaglia and Cavallasca, also show evidence of the Golasecca culture, dating back to the Iron Age. Later, a second Celtic migration brought Gaulish tribes, notably the Insubres, to the Como region.\nAround the 1st century BC, the Romans asserted their dominance over the territory. Although the original settlement was located in the hills, Julius Caesar ordered the town moved to its present lakeside location. He directed the draining of the marsh near the lake's southern tip and implemented a typical Roman grid plan for the walled city, with streets intersecting at right angles. The newly established town, named \"Novum Comum\", was granted the status of \"municipium\", a self-governing Roman city. In a significant archaeological find in September 2018, hundreds of gold coins dating to 474 AD were discovered in the basement of the former Cressoni Theater. These coins, minted during the reigns of Roman Emperors Honorius and others, were contained in a two-handled soapstone amphora, providing valuable insights into the late Roman era in the region.\nMedieval Era: From Lombard Rule to the Rise of the Commune.\nFollowing the fall of the Western Roman Empire, Como's history mirrored that of Lombardy, experiencing periods of control by the Goths, Byzantines, and later the Langobards. The Langobards, a Germanic people originating from Scandinavia, profoundly impacted the region after their arrival in the Po Valley in 568 AD under King Alboin. They established the Lombard Kingdom, initially encompassing Northern Italy and later expanding to include Tuscany and parts of Southern Italy. Under Lombard rule, Como prospered, largely due to the reconstruction of Queen Theudelind's road, a crucial trade route connecting Germany and the Italian Peninsula, enhancing Como's strategic and commercial importance.\nIn 774, Como surrendered to the invading Franks led by Charlemagne, becoming a significant center for trade. The Commune of Como emerged in the 11th century, evolving from an association of prominent families bound by treaty and oath. This communal structure, initially exclusive to noble families, broadened over time to include all free male citizens, strengthening Como's political independence and the authority of its bishop. The bishop became the de facto leader, while a citizen assembly convened in the \"Broletto\" (Town Hall), initially composed of nobles and later including representatives from guilds. The Commune established its own laws governing various aspects of urban life, from commerce and agriculture to law enforcement and taxation.\nThe Commune's territory encompassed the entire Diocese of Como, extending beyond the city itself to include a vast area including much of the modern Province of Como, Canton Ticino, and parts of Valtellina. Strategically positioned on Lake Como and benefiting from the Road of Queen Theudelind, Como rapidly grew into a wealthy and influential town.\nThis prosperity, however, led to rivalry with Milan. Milan's expansionist ambitions culminated in the Decennial War between Como and Milan (1118-1127). Despite initial Comaschi successes, Milan ultimately triumphed, devastating Como in 1127, sparing only churches. Despite this setback, Como's fortunes were revived by Frederick Barbarossa, who restored its independence and supported the rebuilding of its defenses, including town walls and the Baradello castle. Como remained aligned with the Ghibellines, even as other Lombard communes formed the pro-papal Lombard League. Emperor Frederick I formally recognized the Commune of Como in 1175, granting it significant autonomy.\nThe Rusca Lordship and Subsequent Periods.\nThe Ghibelline Rusca family rose to prominence in Como during the 13th and 14th centuries, vying for power with the Vitani family. They briefly established a lordship over Como and its territories, but ultimately, in 1335, Milan, under Azzone Visconti, reasserted control, annexing Como to the Duchy of Milan. Brief periods of independence followed, including the establishment of the \"Republic of Saint Abundius\" in 1447, but by 1450, Como was definitively incorporated into the Duchy of Milan under Francesco Sforza.\nSubsequently, Como's history was intertwined with the Duchy of Milan, experiencing French invasion, Spanish rule, and Austrian control until the Napoleonic era. Napoleon's rule lasted until 1815, after which Austrian dominion was reinstated following the Congress of Vienna. By 1848, Como's population reached 16,000. In 1859, with Giuseppe Garibaldi's arrival, Como became part of the newly unified Kingdom of Italy.\nIn the 20th century, Como witnessed a significant historical event at the end of World War II. Benito Mussolini, attempting to escape to Switzerland, was captured and executed by partisans in Giulino di Mezzegra, near Lake Como. In the 21st century, Como remains a vital city in Lombardy, economically linked to Milan and increasingly reliant on tourism.\nGeography.\nComo is strategically located at the southern end of the southwestern arm of Lake Como, approximately north of Milan. The city shares borders with Switzerland, specifically the Swiss \"communes\" of Chiasso and Vacallo, and the Italian \"comune\" of Blevio, Brunate, and several others. Major nearby cities include Varese, Lecco, and Lugano.\nClimate.\nAccording to the K\u00f6ppen climate classification, Como experiences a humid subtropical climate (\"Cfa\"). Historically, winters were colder with average daily temperatures often below freezing. While occasional frosts from the Siberian Anticyclone still occur, global warming has led to a gradual increase in average winter temperatures since the start of the 21st century, with a record high of 21 degrees Celsius (70\u00a0\u00b0F) recorded on January 27, 2024. Spring and autumn are generally mild and pleasant, while summers can be hot and humid. Strong winds are rare, though sudden foehn winds can occur. Air pollution can be a concern in winter due to cold air trapping pollutants. Rainfall is more frequent in spring, while summers are prone to thunderstorms and occasional violent hailstorms.\nAdministration.\nThe legislative body of Como is the City Council (\"Consiglio Comunale\"), composed of 32 councillors elected every five years through a proportional system, coinciding with the mayoral elections. The executive branch is the City Committee (\"Giunta Comunale\"), comprising 9 \"assessori\" (city ministers), each overseeing a specific department. The \"assessori\" are nominated and presided over by the directly elected Mayor (\"Sindaco\"). Since June 27, 2022, Alessandro Rapinese, an independent candidate leading the \"Rapinese Sindaco\" alliance, has served as the Mayor of Como.\nAdministrative Divisions: \"Frazioni\".\nAdministratively, Como is divided into nine \"\" (roughly equivalent to wards or districts):\nEconomy.\nHistorically, Como's economy was heavily reliant on industry, particularly its world-renowned silk production. In the early 1970s, Como's silk output surpassed that of China and Japan, establishing it as a global silk manufacturing hub. However, increased competition from Asian producers since the mid-1990s significantly reduced profit margins, leading to the closure of many small and medium-sized silk firms. As a result, manufacturing is no longer the dominant economic force. Como has become increasingly integrated into the Milan metropolitan area, with a significant portion of its workforce employed in the service industry. Many residents also commute to Swiss towns like Lugano and Mendrisio for employment in industry, healthcare, and hospitality, attracted by higher wages in Switzerland despite the daily commute.\nSince the late 1990s, tourism has become increasingly vital to Como's economy. Local businesses have shifted towards catering to tourists, with a proliferation of bars, restaurants, and hotels. In 2023, Como welcomed approximately 400,000 overnight visitors, establishing itself as a leading tourist destination in Lombardy. The city and Lake Como's popularity as filming locations for feature films, along with celebrity residents, has further boosted international tourism, making Como a sought-after destination since the early 2000s.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;Como's population grew steadily, reaching a peak of nearly 100,000 in the 1970s, coinciding with the peak of its manufacturing sector, particularly silk production. However, with the decline of manufacturing, the population decreased by approximately 20,000 until the early 21st century. Since then, the city's population has grown again, adding over six thousand residents, largely due to increased immigration from Asia, Eastern Europe, and North Africa. As of January 2023, the population was 83,700, with 12,000 (14%) being resident aliens. The population distribution by origin is as follows:\nTop 20 nationalities of resident aliens:\nCulture.\nMuseums and Cultural Institutions.\nComo is home to a diverse range of museums and cultural institutions, offering insights into its history, art, and industry:\nCuisine.\nComo's cuisine reflects Lombard traditions, with Polenta being a prominent dish, particularly during the colder months. This dish, made from corn and buckwheat flour, is typically served with hearty accompaniments like meat, game, cheese, or local fish. A regional specialty is \"Polenta e Misultin\", featuring grilled \"Alosa agone\" (a local lake fish) served alongside polenta.\nAnother local culinary highlight is \"Risotto con Filetti di Pesce Persico\" or \"Risotto al Pesce Persico\", a delicate risotto featuring fillets of perch, a fish native to Lake Como. This dish is typically prepared with white wine, onions, and butter, creating a flavorful and representative local specialty.\nPalio del Baradello: Reliving Medieval Como.\nThe annual \"Palio del Baradello\" medieval festival is a significant cultural event in Como. Held annually, the Palio commemorates the events of 1159 when Como allied with Holy Roman Emperor Frederick Barbarossa. The festival recreates the historical context of Frederick Barbarossa's alliance with Como against Milan and other Lombard communes in the 12th century.\nActors portray key historical figures such as Frederick Barbarossa, Henry the Lion, and Beatrice of Burgundy, while citizens don medieval costumes and participate in historical reenactments. The city is divided into its historical \"Borghi\" (wards), which compete in various medieval-themed games and contests throughout the festival.\nThe Palio culminates in a parade through Como, with participants in medieval attire, accompanied by animals, wagons, and siege engine replicas, creating a vibrant spectacle that attracts both locals and tourists.\nCity symbols.\nCoat of Arms.\nComo's heraldic achievement features a white cross on a red field, a symbol historically associated with the Ghibelline faction, representing the city's political allegiances in the medieval era. The earliest documented use of this emblem dates back to the 12th-century War between Como and Milan. The motto \"LIBERTAS\" (Freedom) was later added, believed to commemorate Como's periods of independence, particularly during the reign of Frederick Barbarossa. The crown atop the coat of arms, featuring five points and gemstones, was officially incorporated in 1819, when Como was designated a \"Royal Town\" by Emperor Francis I of Austria.\nFlag.\nComo's historical flag features the Cross of Saint John \u2013 a white cross on a red field \u2013 reflecting its ancient civic symbolism. A later iteration of the flag incorporated the motto \"LIBERTAS\" in the lower right corner, mirroring the heraldic achievement. This flag, a symbol of Como's historical identity and aspirations for freedom, is still displayed at the town hall (Palazzo Cernezzi).\nTransport.\nRail Network.\nComo is well-connected by rail, with the Servizio Ferroviario Regionale (Regional Railway Service) providing frequent train services to other major cities in Lombardy, operated by Trenord. The city is served by two main railway stations: Como San Giovanni, which also serves as a stop for international trains connecting Milan to Zurich and Basel, and Como Nord Lago. Five additional urban stations provide local rail access within the city.\nThe lakeside funicular railway offers a link between Como's city center and the mountain village of Brunate, providing panoramic views of Lake Como.\nBus and Taxi Services.\nComo's public transportation network includes an extensive bus system operated by ASF Autolinee, comprising 11 urban lines within the city and numerous extra-urban lines connecting Como to towns throughout the province. Ferrovie Nord Milano also operates bus services connecting Como to Varese. Taxi services are readily available throughout the city, licensed and regulated by the Municipality of Como.\nLake Ferry Services.\nNavigazione Laghi operates a comprehensive ferry service on Lake Como, with boats and hydrofoils connecting Como to most towns and villages along the lake's shores, providing both passenger and car ferry services.\nAir Travel Access.\nComo is located near several major airports, providing access to domestic and international air travel. Malpensa International Airport, Milano Linate, and Orio al Serio International Airport offer a wide range of scheduled flights. Lugano Airport, located in nearby Switzerland, primarily serves regional flights within Switzerland and charter destinations.\nAero Club Como: Seaplane Base.\nComo is home to the world's oldest seaplane operation, the https:// (ICAO code LILY). The Aero Club operates a fleet of seaplanes for flight training, scenic tours, and maintains a collection of historic seaplanes, including a restored 1935 Caproni Ca.100, offering aviation experiences on Lake Como.\nEducation, Healthcare, and Sports.\nComo hosts numerous high schools, the \"Giuseppe Verdi\" Conservatory of Music, the \"Aldo Galli\" Design School, the University of Insubria, and a campus of the Politecnico di Milano.\nHealthcare services are provided by three major hospitals in Como: Ospedale Sant'Anna, Ospedale Valduce, and Clinica Villa Aprica.\nComo's sporting scene includes clubs such as the ASDG Comense 1872 women's basketball team, a two-time EuroLeague Women champion, and Como 1907 football club. Lake Como offers numerous recreational activities, including sailing, windsurfing, and the annual Citt\u00e0 di Como Challenger tennis tournament, attracting international tennis talent. The Unione Sportiva Tavernola, a local amateur sports club, promotes community sports participation in Como's Tavernola neighborhood.\nTwin Cities.\nComo is twinned with the following cities, fostering international cultural and civic exchange:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "60680", "revid": "125972", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60680", "title": "Hammond", "text": "Hammond may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "60681", "revid": "44062", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60681", "title": "Hampton", "text": "Hampton may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nPlaces.\nUnited States.\n\"Listed alphabetically by state name\"\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "60682", "revid": "45733435", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60682", "title": "Mordecai Richler", "text": "Canadian writer (1931\u20132001)\nMordecai Richler (January 27, 1931\u00a0\u2013 July 3, 2001) was a Canadian writer from Montreal, Quebec. He is best known for his novels set in Montreal's Jewish community; including \"The Apprenticeship of Duddy Kravitz\" (1959) and \"Barney's Version\" (1997). His 1970 novel \"St. Urbain's Horseman\" and 1989 novel \"Solomon Gursky Was Here\" were nominated for the Booker Prize. He is also well known for the \"Jacob Two-Two\" fantasy series for children.\nIn addition to his fiction, Richler was a journalist, and his non-fiction writing included essays about the Jewish community in Canada, and about Canadian and Quebec nationalism. Richler's \"Oh Canada! Oh Quebec!\" (1992), a book version of an essay that originally appeared in \"The New Yorker\", generated considerable controversy.\nFor his literary and cultural contributions, Richler was awarded Companionship of the Order of Canada in 2001. He was also a two-time recipient of the Governor General's Award for Literature (1968 and 1971), and winner of the Giller Prize (1997). Charles Foran for \"Historica Canada\" called Richler \"without question one of Canada\u2019s greatest writers.\"\nBiography.\nEarly life and education.\nThe son of Lily (n\u00e9e Rosenberg) and Moses Isaac Richler, a scrap metal dealer, Richler was born on January 27, 1931, in Montreal, Quebec, and raised on St. Urbain Street in that city's Mile End area. Richler was fluent in English and Yiddish but had poor French. Richler graduated from Baron Byng High School and enrolled in Sir George Williams College (now Concordia University) to study but did not complete his degree. Years later, Richler's mother published an autobiography which discusses Mordecai's birth and upbringing, and the sometimes difficult relationship between them. Mordecai Richler's grandfather and Lily Richler's father was Rabbi Yehudah Yudel Rosenberg, a celebrated rabbi in both Poland and Canada, chief rabbi of Montreal, and a prolific author of many religious texts, as well as religious fiction and non-fiction works on science and history geared for religious communities.\nRichler's parents had had an arranged marriage which his mother deeply resented. She began an affair with a boarder in 1944 and divorced her husband, events which deeply upset the 12-year-old Richler.\nRichler moved to Paris at age nineteen, intent on following in the footsteps of a previous generation of literary exiles, the so-called Lost Generation of the 1920s, many of whom were from the United States. Richler considered his time in Paris studying and writing at his favourite caf\u00e9, the Mabillon on St. Germain des Pr\u00e9s, as the equivalent of university years.\nCareer.\nRichler returned to Montreal in 1952, working briefly at the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation, then moved to London in 1954. He published seven of his ten novels, as well as considerable journalism, while living in London.\nWorrying \"about being so long away from the roots of my discontent\", Richler returned to Montreal in 1972. He wrote repeatedly about the Anglophone community of Montreal and especially about his former neighbourhood, portraying it in multiple novels.\nMarriage and family.\nIn England, in 1954, Richler married Catherine Boudreau, nine years his senior. On the eve of their wedding, he met and was smitten by Florence Mann (n\u00e9e Wood), then married to Richler's close friend, screenwriter Stanley Mann.\nSome years later Richler and Mann both divorced their prior spouses and married each other, and Richler adopted her son Daniel. The couple had four other children together: Noah, Emma, Martha and Jacob. These events inspired his novel \"Barney's Version\".\nRichler died of cancer on July 3, 2001, in Montreal, aged 70.\nHe was also a second cousin of novelist Nancy Richler.\nJournalism career.\nThroughout his career, Richler wrote journalistic commentary, and contributed to \"The Atlantic Monthly\", \"Look\", \"The New Yorker\", \"The American Spectator\", and other magazines. In his later years, Richler was a newspaper columnist for \"The National Post\" and Montreal's \"The Gazette\". In the late 1980s and early 1990s, he authored a monthly book review for \"Gentlemen's Quarterly\".\nRichler was often critical of Quebec but of Canadian federalism as well. Another favourite Richler target was the government-subsidized Canadian literary movement of the 1970s and 1980s. Journalism constituted an important part of his career, bringing him income between novels and films.\n\"The Apprenticeship of Duddy Kravitz\".\nRichler published his fourth novel, \"The Apprenticeship of Duddy Kravitz\", in 1959. The book featured a frequent Richler theme: Jewish life in the 1930s and 40s in the neighbourhood of Montreal east of Mount Royal Park including St. Urbain Street and Saint Lawrence Boulevard (or Boulevard Saint Laurent, known colloquially as \"The Main\"). Richler wrote of the neighbourhood and its people, chronicling the hardships and disabilities they faced as a Jewish minority.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;To a middle-class stranger, it is true, one street would have seemed as squalid as the next. On each corner a cigar store, a grocery, and a fruit man. Outside staircases everywhere. Winding ones, wooden ones, rusty and risky ones. Here a prized lot of grass splendidly barbered, there a spitefully weedy patch. An endless repetition of precious peeling balconies and waste lots making the occasional gap here and there.\u2014\u200a\nFollowing the publication of \"Duddy Kravitz\", according to \"The Oxford Companion to Canadian Literature\", Richler became \"one of the foremost writers of his generation\".\nReception.\nMany critics distinguished Richler the author from Richler the polemicist. Richler frequently said his goal was to be an honest witness to his time and place, and to write at least one book that would be read after his death. His work was championed by journalists Robert Fulford and Peter Gzowski, among others. Admirers praised Richler for daring to tell uncomfortable truths; Michael Posner's oral biography of Richler is titled \"The Last Honest Man\" (2004).\nCritics objected to the way his journalistic writing was incorporated by him into his later novels, apparently seeing this as lazy or redundant. Richler's ambivalent attitude toward Montreal's Jewish community was captured in \"Mordecai and Me\" (2003), a book by Joel Yanofsky.\n\"The Apprenticeship of Duddy Kravitz\" was made into a film, for which Richler wrote the screenplay, and it was performed on stage in several live theatre productions in Canada and the United States.\nControversy.\nRichler had recurrent conflicts with members of the Quebec nationalist movement. In articles published between the late 1970s and the mid-1990s, Richler criticized Quebec's restrictive language laws and the rise of sovereigntism. Critics took particular exception to Richler's allegations of a long history of antisemitism in Quebec.\nSoon after the first election of the Parti Qu\u00e9b\u00e9cois (PQ) in 1976, Richler published \"Oh Canada! Lament for a divided country\" in the \"Atlantic Monthly\" to considerable controversy. In it, he claimed the PQ had borrowed the Hitler Youth song \"Tomorrow Belongs to Me\" from the musical \"Cabaret\" for their anthem \"\u00c0 partir d'aujourd'hui, demain nous appartient\" (which translates as \"From today, tomorrow belongs to us\"), though he later acknowledged his error on the song, blaming himself for having \"cribbed\" the information from an article by Irwin Cotler and Ruth Wisse published in the American magazine \"Commentary\". Richler apologized for the mistake and called it an \"embarrassing gaffe\".\nIn 1992 Richler published \"Oh Canada! Oh Quebec!: Requiem for a Divided Country\", which parodied Quebec's language laws. He commented approvingly on Esther Delisle's \"The Traitor and the Jew: Anti-Semitism and the Delirium of Extremist Right-Wing Nationalism in French Canada from 1929\u20131939\" (1992), about French-Canadian anti-Semitism in the decade before the start of World War II. \"Oh Canada! Oh Quebec!\" was criticized by the Quebec sovereigntist movement and to a lesser degree by other anglophone Canadians. His detractors claimed that Richler had an outdated and stereotyped view of Quebec society and that he risked polarizing relations between francophone and anglophone Quebecers. Sovereigntist Pierrette Venne, later elected as a Bloc Qu\u00e9b\u00e9cois MP, called for the book to be banned. Daniel Latouche compared the book to \"Mein Kampf\".\nNadia Khouri believes that there was a discriminatory undertone in the reaction to Richler, noting that some of his critics characterized him as \"not one of us\" or that he was not a \"real Quebecer\". She found that some critics had misquoted his work; for instance, in reference to the mantra of the entwined church and state coaxing females to procreate as vastly as possible, a section in which he said that Quebec women were treated like \"sows\" was misinterpreted to suggest that Richler thought they were sows. Qu\u00e9b\u00e9cois writers who thought critics had overreacted included Jean-Hugues Roy, \u00c9tienne Gignac, Serge-Henri Vici\u00e8re, and Dorval Brunelle. His defenders asserted that Mordecai Richler may have been wrong on certain specific points, but was certainly not racist nor anti-Qu\u00e9b\u00e9cois. Nadia Khouri acclaimed Richler for his courage and for attacking the orthodoxies of Quebec society. He has been described as \"the most prominent defender of the rights of Quebec's anglophones\".\nSome commentators were alarmed about the strong controversy over Richler's book, saying that it underlines and acknowledges the persistence of anti-Semitism among sections of the Quebec population. Richler received death threats; an anti-Semitic Francophone journalist yelled at one of his sons, \"[I]f your father was here, I'd make him relive the Holocaust right now!\" An editorial cartoon in \"L'actualit\u00e9\" compared him to Hitler. One critic controversially claimed that Richler had been paid by Jewish groups to write his critical essay on Quebec. His defenders believed this accusation was evoking old stereotypes of Jews. When leaders of the Jewish community were asked to dissociate themselves from Richler, the journalist Frances Kraft said that indicated that they did not consider Richler as part of the Quebec \"tribe\" because he was Anglo-speaking and Jewish.\nAbout the same time, Richler announced he had founded the \"Impure Wool Society,\" to grant the \"Prix Parizeau\" to a distinguished non-Francophone writer of Quebec. The group's name plays on the expression \"Qu\u00e9b\u00e9cois pure laine\", typically used to refer to Quebecker with extensive French-Canadian multi-generational ancestry (or \"pure wool\"). The prize (with an award of $3000) was granted twice: to Benet Davetian in 1996 for \"The Seventh Circle\", and David Manicom in 1997 for \"Ice in Dark Water\".\nIn 2010, Montreal city councillor Marvin Rotrand presented a 4,000-signature petition calling on the city to honour Richler on the 10th anniversary of his death with the renaming of a street, park or building in Richler's old Mile End neighbourhood. The council initially denied an honour to Richler, saying it would sacrifice the heritage of their neighbourhood. In response to the controversy, the City of Montreal announced it was to renovate and rename a bandstand, loosely termed a gazebo in media accounts, in his honour. For various reasons, the project stalled for several years but was completed in 2016. Richler has also been honoured with a mural and the renaming of a library.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "60683", "revid": "76", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60683", "title": "Reality enforcement", "text": ""}
{"id": "60684", "revid": "149211", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60684", "title": "Louis Ferdinand C\u00e9line", "text": ""}
{"id": "60685", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60685", "title": "Hammond Organ", "text": ""}
{"id": "60686", "revid": "44062", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60686", "title": "Nihilist (disambiguation)", "text": "A nihilist is person who subscribes to nihilism, the belief that existence has no objective meaning, purpose, or intrinsic value.\nNihilist may also refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "60687", "revid": "15934865", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60687", "title": "Anti-Semitist", "text": ""}
{"id": "60688", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60688", "title": "Jane Urquhart", "text": "Canadian novelist and poet\nJane Urquhart, LL.D (born June 21, 1949) is a Canadian novelist and poet. She is the internationally acclaimed author of seven award-winning novels, three books of poetry, and numerous short stories. \nUrquhart is well known for her evocative style, which blends historical and contemporary themes. Her first novel, \"The Whirlpool\" (1986), gained her international recognition. She became the first Canadian to win France's prestigious Prix du Meilleur Livre Etranger (Best Foreign Book Award). Her subsequent novels proved as successful: \"Away\" (1993) won the Trillium Award and was a national bestseller. Her fourth novel, \"The Underpainter\", won the Governor General's Literary Award in 1997. \"Some Other Garden,\" a collection of her best-known poetry, was published in 2000. \nEarly life.\nUrquhart was born June 21, 1949, in Little Longlac, a small mining town in northern Ontario. She is the daughter of a mining engineer, Walter Andrew Carter, and Marian Quinn. Quinn grew up on a farm with a large family of six brothers and one sister. After their marriage, the couple moved to Little Longlac for Carter's work. It was there that they had three children, Urquhart being the youngest and their only daughter.\nThe family's heritage made a lasting impact on Urquhart's writing. Her mother's Irish ancestors were immigrants who arrived in Canada in the mid nineteenth century during the Great Famine. Both of Urquhart's parents had witnessed the trials of World War I and World War II. With such a background, Urquhart's childhood was filled with the stories of Ireland and settlement in Canada. \"The women are the people who pass the stories down through the generations in any family,\" Urquhart says. \"Occasionally, one of the men would tell a story. When they did, it was a very exciting event, and it was often war-related. But the women were constantly gossiping. I've always been a great believer that gossip is not an evil thing. I see it as an investigation of human nature.\"\nEducation.\nUrquhart attended John Ross Robertson Public School until the end of Grade Seven, moving to Havergal College, a private school for girls, for grades eight to twelve. After that, she attended a junior college in B.C. for one semester before enrolling at the University of Guelph. In an interview, Urquhart recalls that very little of her childhood education touched on Canadian history or Canadian literature. \"We were very much a colony when I was in...school, and so the past as I knew it survived in a physical sort of way. It existed in barns and rail fences and Ontario Gothic farmhouses, old woodstoves.\" As a result, Urquhart developed a fascination with landscape which would carry throughout her entire collection of works. Following her semester in junior college, Urquhart went to the University of Guelph and earned a BA in 1971 in English literature. In 1973, she returned, this time to study art history, completing her second BA in 1976.\nPersonal life.\nIn 1968, Urquhart married Paul Keele who was then a student at the Ontario College of Art, and later at the Nova Scotia College of Art and design. Urquhart worked as an assistant to the information officer for the Royal Canadian Navy while Keele was still in school. Keele died in a car accident in 1973 when Urquhart was only 24. Keele's death spurred Urquhart to return to school: \"I wanted to study art history, partly to honour him and partly to be near a number of friends we had made while we lived in and around Guelph.\" The experience of loss at such a young age shaped Urquhart's writing, particularly \"Whirlpool\", whose protagonist was similarly a young widow. \"I think the fact that Paul died when he did, when we were both so young, allowed me to remember what it was like to experience such a devastating loss early in life, as my characters do in this book,\" she explains.\nIn 1976, Urquhart married the Canadian visual artist Tony Urquhart. At the time, Tony Urquhart had four children from a previous marriage, so the couple's early years together were filled with children and family life. Jane Urquhart speaks of the time: \"It was great...we were all sort of the same age...I'd had no experience with children so I had no experience with disciplining children which meant that I didn't know how to do it. I was the youngest in my family. And so my role in relation to them was never very clearly defined and, as a result, we were just able to develop kind of a friendship.\" The necessity of being at home, especially when her own daughter Emily was born in 1977, contributed to her writing, and she allowed herself to schedule writing time every day.\nUrquhart also owned an Irish-style cottage in McGillicuddy Reeks from 1996 to 2013 which she used as a writing retreat and an occasional home. The cottage, on the verge of Lake Ontario, was the place she spent many summer vacations while growing up. Urquhart now resides in South-Eastern Ontario. Her husband Tony Urquhart died in 2022.\nWorks.\nUrquhart is the author of seven internationally acclaimed novels including: \"The Whirlpool\" (entitled \"Niagara\" in France), the first Canadian book to win France's prestigious Prix du Meilleur livre etranger (Best Foreign Book Award); \"Changing Heaven\"; \"Away\", winner of the Trillium Award and a finalist for the prestigious International Dublin Literary Award; \"The Underpainter\", winner of the Governor General's Award and a finalist for the Rogers Communications Writers' Trust Fiction Prize; \"The Stone Carvers\", which was a finalist for the Giller Prize, the Governor General's Award, and long listed for the Man Booker Prize in 2001; \"A Map of Glass\", a finalist for a regional Commonwealth Writers' Prize for Best Book, and \"Sanctuary Line\", a finalist for the Giller Prize.\nShe is also the author of a collection of short fiction, \"Storm Glass\", and four books of poetry, \"I Am Walking in the Garden of His Imaginary Palace\", \"False Shuffles\", \"The Little Flowers of Madame de Montespan\", and \"Some Other Garden\". Her work, which is published in many countries, has been translated into numerous foreign languages. She also wrote the biography of Lucy Maud Montgomery for the Penguin Extraordinary Canadians series and is the editor of the most recent \"Penguin Book of Canadian Short Stories\", and she edited and introduced a collection of Alice Munro's love stories entitled \"No Love Lost\" for The New Canadian Library. Urquhart has received the Marian Engel Award and the Harbourfront Festival Prize, and is a Chevalier dans l'Ordre des Arts et des Lettres in France and is an Officer of the Order of Canada. \nUrquhart has received numerous honorary doctorates from Canadian universities, including the University of Toronto (2000), the Royal Military College (2007), and Carleton University, Ottawa (2016). She also has been writer-in-residence at the University of Ottawa and at Memorial University of Newfoundland, and, during the winter and spring of 1997, she held the Presidential Writer-in-Residence Fellowship at the University of Toronto. She has also given readings and lectures in Canada, Britain, Europe, the US, and Australia, has twice been a keynote speaker at the annual Canadian Congress of the Humanities, and has been on the Board of PEN Canada and on the Advisory Board for the Restoration of the Vimy Memorial. She has been on several international prize juries including that of the International Dublin IMPAC Award, the Giller Prize, and the American International Neustadt Award.\nHer books have been published in many countries, including Holland, France, Germany, Britain, Scandinavia, Australia, and The United States, and have been translated into several languages.\n\"In Winter I Get Up at Night\" was longlisted for the 2024 Giller Prize.\nNotes.\n &lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "60689", "revid": "5803848", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60689", "title": "Dao/Tao", "text": ""}
{"id": "60690", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60690", "title": "Nancy Huston", "text": "Canadian author, based in France (born 1953)\nNancy Louise Huston, OC (born September 16, 1953) is a Canadian novelist and essayist, a longtime resident of France, who writes primarily in French and translates her own works into English.\nBiography.\nHuston was born in Calgary, Alberta, Canada, the city in which she lived until age fifteen, at which time her family moved to Wilton, New Hampshire, where she attended High Mowing School. She studied at Sarah Lawrence College in New York City, where she was given the opportunity to spend a year of her studies in Paris. Arriving in Paris in 1973, Huston obtained a master's degree from the \u00c9cole des hautes \u00e9tudes en sciences sociales, writing a thesis on swear words under the supervision of Roland Barthes.\nShe was the second wife of Bulgarian-French historian and philosopher Tzvetan Todorov, with whom she had two children, daughter L\u00e9a and son Sacha; she and Todorov divorced in 2014. Huston now shares her life with Swiss painter Guy Oberson.\nCareer.\nBecause French was a language acquired at school and university, Huston found that the combination of her eventual command of the language and her distance from it as a non-native speaker helped her to find her literary voice. \nSince 1980, Huston has published over 45 books of fiction and non-fiction, including theatre and children's books. Some of her publications are self-translations of previously published works. Essentially she writes in French and subsequently self-translates into English but \"Plainsong\" (1993) was written first in English and then self-translated to French as \"Cantique des plaines\" (1993) \u2013 it was, however, the French version which first found a publisher.\nWhile Huston's often controversial works of non-fiction have been well-received, her fiction has earned her the most critical acclaim. Her first novel, \"Les variations Goldberg\" (1981), was awarded the Prix Contrepoint and was shortlisted for the Prix Femina. She translated this novel into English as \"The Goldberg Variations\" (1996).\nHer next major award came in 1993 when she was received the Canadian Governor General's Award for Fiction in French for \"Cantique des Plaines\" (1993). This was initially contested as it was a translation of \"Plainsong\" (1993), but Huston demonstrated that it was an adaptation and kept the prize. A subsequent novel, \"La virevolte\" (1994), won the Prix \"L\" and the Prix Louis-H\u00e9mon. It was published in English in 1996 as \"Slow Emergencies\".\nHuston's novel, \"Instruments des t\u00e9n\u00e8bres\", has been her most successful novel yet, being shortlisted for the Prix Femina, and the Governor General's Award. It was awarded the Prix Goncourt des Lyc\u00e9ens, as well as both the Prix des lectrices (Elle Qu\u00e9bec) and the Prix du livre Inter in 1997.\nIn 1998, she was nominated for a Governor General's Award for her novel \"L'Empreinte de l'ange\". The next year she was nominated for a Governor General's Award for translating the work into English as \"The Mark of the Angel\".\nIn 1999, she appeared in the film \"Set Me Free (Emporte-moi)\", also collaborating on the screenplay.\nHer works have been translated into many languages from Chinese to Russian.\nIn 2005, she was made an Officer of the Order of Canada,\nIn 2006, she received the Prix Femina for the novel \"Lignes de faille\" and which, as \"Fault Lines\", has been published by Atlantic Books and was shortlisted for the 2008 Orange Prize.\nIn 2007, she received an honorary doctorate from the University of Li\u00e8ge.\nIn 2010, she received an honorary doctorate from the University of Ottawa.\nIn 2012, she was awarded the Queen Elizabeth II Diamond Jubilee Medal. That same year, she won the Literary Review's Bad Sex in Fiction Award for her novel, \"Infrared\".\nCritical response.\nCanadian poet and critic Frank Davey in \"Big, Bad and Little Known: The Anglophone-Canadian Nancy Huston\" (2004), is critical of Huston's English writing style. In response to this, Joseph Pivato in \"Nancy Huston Meets le Nouveau Roman\" (2016), contends that Huston was influenced by the French writers of le Nouveau Roman and their theory of composition.\nSelected works.\nFiction.\nDate of first French-language edition followed by date of first English-language edition.\nPrix Contrepoint, 1982\nGovernor General's Award for French-language fiction, 1993\nPrix Limoges (or Prix \"L\"), 1994\nPrix Louis-H\u00e9mon, 1994\nPrix Goncourt des lyc\u00e9ens, 1996\nPrix du Livre Inter, 1996\nGrand prix des lectrices de \"Elle Qu\u00e9bec\", 1997\nPrix des libraires du Qu\u00e9bec, 1999\nGrand prix des lectrices de \"Elle\", 1999\nPrix Odyss\u00e9e, 2002\nPrix Femina, 2006\nPrix France T\u00e9l\u00e9visions, 2006\nAutobiographical writings.\nHuston calls the first instalment a \"r\u00e9cit\" or fact-based narrative, and the second a \"roman\" or novel.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "60692", "revid": "1314239032", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60692", "title": "Prime element", "text": "Analogue of a prime number in a commutative ring\nIn mathematics, specifically in abstract algebra, a prime element of a commutative ring is an object satisfying certain properties similar to the prime numbers in the integers and to irreducible polynomials. Care should be taken to distinguish prime elements from irreducible elements, a concept that is the same in UFDs but not the same in general.\nDefinition.\nAn element p of a commutative ring R is said to be prime if it is not the zero element or a unit and whenever p divides ab for all a and b in R, then p divides a or p divides b. With this definition, Euclid's lemma is the assertion that prime numbers are prime elements in the ring of integers. Equivalently, an element p is prime if, and only if, the principal ideal (\"p\") generated by p is a nonzero prime ideal. (Note that in an integral domain, the ideal (0) is a prime ideal, but 0 is an exception in the definition of 'prime element'.)\nInterest in prime elements comes from the fundamental theorem of arithmetic, which asserts that each nonzero integer can be written in essentially only one way as 1 or \u22121 multiplied by a product of positive prime numbers. This led to the study of unique factorization domains, which generalize what was just illustrated in the integers.\nBeing prime is relative to which ring an element is considered to be in; for example, 2 is a prime element in Z but it is not in Z[\"i\"], the ring of Gaussian integers, since 2 = (1 + \"i\")(1 \u2212 \"i\") and 2 does not divide any factor on the right.\nConnection with prime ideals.\nAn ideal \"I\" in the ring \"R\" (with unity) is prime if the factor ring \"R\"/\"I\" is an integral domain. Equivalently, \"I\" is prime if whenever formula_1 then either formula_2 or formula_3. \nIn an integral domain, a nonzero principal ideal is prime if and only if it is generated by a prime element.\nIrreducible elements.\nPrime elements should not be confused with irreducible elements. In an integral domain, every prime is irreducible but the converse is not true in general. However, in unique factorization domains, or more generally in GCD domains, primes and irreducibles are the same.\nExamples.\nThe following are examples of prime elements in rings:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "60693", "revid": "12336988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60693", "title": "Irreducible element", "text": "In algebra, element without non-trivial factors\nIn algebra, an irreducible element of an integral domain is a non-zero element that is not invertible (that is, is not a unit), and is not the product of two non-invertible elements.\nThe irreducible elements are the terminal elements of a factorization process; that is, they are the factors that cannot be further factorized. If the irreducible factors of every non-zero non-unit element are uniquely defined, up to the multiplication by a unit, then the integral domain is called a unique factorization domain, but this does not need to happen in general for every integral domain. It was discovered in the 19th century that the rings of integers of some number fields are not unique factorization domains, and, therefore, that some irreducible elements can appear in some factorization of an element and not in other factorizations of the same element. The ignorance of this fact is the main error in many of the wrong proofs of Fermat's Last Theorem that were given during the three centuries between Fermat's statement and Wiles's proof of Fermat's Last Theorem.\nIf formula_1 is an integral domain, then formula_2 is an irreducible element of formula_1 if and only if, for all formula_4, the equation formula_5 implies that the ideal generated by formula_2 is equal to the ideal generated by formula_7 or equal to the ideal generated by formula_8. This equivalence does not hold for general commutative rings, which is why the assumption of the ring having no nonzero zero divisors is commonly made in the definition of irreducible elements. It results also that there are several ways to extend the definition of an irreducible element to an arbitrary commutative ring.\nDefinition in an integral domain.\nLet formula_1 be an integral domain. An element formula_10 is \"irreducible\" if it is not a unit and whenever formula_11, either formula_7 or formula_8 is a unit.\nDefinition in rings with zero divisors.\nAnderson and Valdes-Leon in 1996 defined irreducible elements in arbitrary commutative rings (potentially with zero divisors): they define elements to be \"very strongly irreducible\", \"m-irreducible\", \"strongly irreducible\", and \"irreducible\" (in decreasing order of strength) based on different conditions on formula_7 and formula_8 (Theorem 2.13). All definitions require formula_2 to be not a unit. Their \"very strongly irreducible\" corresponds to the definition above. The condition \"m-irreducible\" is that whenever formula_11, formula_18 or formula_19. The condition \"strongly irreducible\" is that whenever formula_11, formula_2 is equivalent to either formula_7 or formula_8 up to multiplication by a unit. Finally their \"irreducible\" is the condition that, whenever formula_11, either formula_25 or formula_26.\nRelationship with prime elements.\nIrreducible elements should not be confused with prime elements. (A non-zero non-unit element formula_2 in a commutative ring formula_1 is called prime if, whenever formula_29 for some formula_7 and formula_8 in formula_32 then formula_33 or formula_34) In an integral domain, every prime element is irreducible, but the converse is not true in general. The converse is true for unique factorization domains (or, more generally, GCD domains).\nMoreover, while an ideal generated by a prime element is a prime ideal, it is not true in general that an ideal generated by an irreducible element is an irreducible ideal. However, if formula_35 is a GCD domain and formula_36 is an irreducible element of formula_35, then as noted above formula_36 is prime, and so the ideal generated by formula_36 is a prime (hence irreducible) ideal of formula_35.\nExample.\nIn the quadratic integer ring formula_41 it can be shown using norm arguments that the number 3 is irreducible. However, it is not a prime element in this ring since, for example, \n formula_42\nbut 3 does not divide either of the two factors.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "60695", "revid": "1754504", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60695", "title": "Associate elements", "text": ""}
{"id": "60697", "revid": "4897226", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60697", "title": "Archaeological excavation", "text": "Exposure, processing and recording of archaeological remains\nIn archaeology, excavation is the exposure, processing, and recording of archaeological remains. An excavation site or \"dig\" is the area being studied. These locations range from one to several areas at a time during a project and can be conducted over a few weeks to several years.\nExcavation involves the recovery of several types of data from a site. This data includes artifacts (portable objects made or modified by humans), features (non-portable modifications to the site itself such as post molds, burials, and hearths), ecofacts (evidence of human activity through organic remains such as animal bones, pollen, or charcoal), and archaeological context (relationships among the other types of data).\nBefore excavating, the presence or absence of archaeological remains can often be suggested by, non-intrusive remote sensing, such as ground-penetrating radar. Basic information about the development of the site may be drawn from this work, but to understand finer details of a site, excavation via augering can be used.\nDuring excavation, archaeologists often use stratigraphic excavation to remove phases of the site one layer at a time. This keeps the timeline of the material remains consistent with one another. This is done usually though mechanical means where artifacts can be spot dated and the soil processed through methods such as mechanical sieving or water flotation. Afterwards, digital methods are then used record the excavation process and its results. Ideally, data from the excavation should suffice to reconstruct the site completely in three-dimensional space.\nHistory.\nOne of the first known instances of archaeological excavation took place in the sixth century BC when Nabonidus, the king of Babylon, excavated a temple floor that was thousands of years old. During early Roman periods, Julius Caesar's men looted bronze artifacts, and by the medieval period, Europeans had begun digging up pots that had partially emerged from erosion, and weapons that had turned up on farmlands. Antiquarians excavated burial mounds in North America and North-West Europe, which sometimes involved destroying artifacts and their context, losing information about subjects from the past. Meticulous and methodical archaeological excavation took over from antiquarian barrow-digging around the early to mid-nineteenth century and is still being perfected today.\nThe most dramatic change that occurred over time is the amount of recording and care taken to ensure preservation of artifacts and features. In the past, archaeological excavation involved random digging to unearth artifacts. Exact locations of artifacts were not recorded, and measurements were not taken. Modern archaeological excavation has evolved to include removal of thin layers of sediment sequentially and recording of measurements about artifacts' locations in a site.\nMotivation.\nThere are two basic types of modern archaeological excavation:\nDevelopment-led archaeology.\nThere are two main types of trial excavation in professional archaeology both commonly associated with development-led excavation: the test pit or trench and the watching brief. The purpose of trial excavations is to determine the extent and characteristics of archaeological potential in a given area before extensive excavation work is undertaken. This is usually conducted in development-led excavations as part of Project management planning. The main difference between Trial trenching and watching briefs is that trial trenches are actively dug for the purpose of revealing archaeological potential whereas watching briefs are cursory examination of trenches where the primary function of the trench is something other than archaeology, for example a trench cut for a gas pipe in a road. In the US, a method of evaluation called a Shovel test pit is used which is a specified half meter square line of trial trenches dug by hand.\nConcepts.\nSite formation.\nArchaeological material tends to accumulate in events. A gardener swept a pile of soil into a corner, laid a gravel path or planted a bush in a hole. A builder built a wall and back-filled the trench. Years later, someone built a pigsty onto it and drained the pigsty into the nettle patch. Later still, the original wall blew over and so on. Each event, which may have taken a short or long time to accomplish, leaves a context. This layer cake of events is often referred to as the archaeological sequence or record. It is by analysis of this sequence or record that excavation is intended to permit interpretation, which should lead to discussion and understanding.\nThe prominent processual archaeologist Lewis Binford highlighted the fact that the archaeological evidence left at a site may not be entirely indicative of the historical events that actually took place there. Using an ethnoarchaeological comparison, he looked at how hunters amongst the Nunamiut I\u00f1upiat of north central Alaska spent a great deal of time in a certain area simply waiting for prey to arrive there, and that during this period, they undertook other tasks to pass the time, such as the carving of various objects, including a wooden mould for a mask, a horn spoon and an ivory needle, as well as repairing a skin pouch and a pair of caribou skin socks. Binford notes that all of these activities would have left evidence in the archaeological record, but that none of them would provide evidence for the primary reason that the hunters were in the area; to wait for prey. As he remarked, waiting for animals to hunt \"represented 24% of the total man-hours of activity recorded; yet there is no recognisable archaeological consequences of this behaviour. No tools left on the site were used, and there were no immediate material \"byproducts\" of the \"primary\" activity. All of the other activities conducted at the site were essentially boredom reducers.\"\nStratification.\nIn archaeology, especially in excavating, stratigraphy involves the study of how deposits occurs layer by layer. It is largely based on the Law of Superposition. The Law of Superposition indicates that layers of sediment further down will contain older artifacts than layers above. When archaeological finds are below the surface of the ground (as is most commonly the case), the identification of the context of each find is vital to enable the archaeologist to draw conclusions about the site and the nature and date of its occupation. It is the archaeologist's role to attempt to discover what contexts exist and how they came to be created. Archaeological stratification or sequence is the dynamic superimposition of single units of stratigraphy or contexts. The context (physical location) of a discovery can be of major significance. Archaeological context refers to where an artifact or feature was found as well as what the artifact or feature was located near. Context is important for determining how long ago the artifact or feature was in use as well as what its function may have been. The cutting of a pit or ditch in the past is a context, whilst the material filling it will be another. Multiple fills seen in section would mean multiple contexts. Structural features, natural deposits and inhumations are also contexts.\nBy separating a site into these basic, discrete units, archaeologists are able to create a chronology for activity on a site and describe and interpret it. Stratigraphic relationships are the relationships created between contexts in time representing the chronological order they were created. An example would be a ditch and the back-fill of said ditch. The relationship of \"the fill\" context to the ditch \"cut\" context is \"the fill\" occurred later in the sequence, i.e., you have to dig a ditch first before you can back-fill it. A relationship that is later in the sequence is sometimes referred to as \"higher\" in the sequence and a relationship that is earlier \"lower\" though the term \"higher\" or \"lower\" does not itself imply a context needs to be physically higher or lower. It is more useful to think of this \"higher\" or \"lower\" term as it relates to the contexts position in a Harris matrix, which is a two-dimensional representation of a site's formation in space and time.\nUnderstanding a site in modern archaeology is a process of grouping single contexts together in ever larger groups by virtue of their relationships. The terminology of these larger clusters varies depending on practitioner, but the terms interface, sub-group, group and land use are common. An example of a sub-group could be the three contexts that make up a burial: the grave cut, the body and the back-filled earth on top of the body. In turn sub-groups can be clustered together with other sub-groups by virtue of their stratigraphic relationship to form groups which in turn form \"phases\". A sub-group burial could cluster with other sub-group burials to form a cemetery or burial group which in turn could be clustered with a building such as church to produce a \"phase.\" A less rigorously defined combination of one or more contexts is sometimes called a feature.\nPhasing.\nPhase is the most easily understood grouping for the layman as it implies a near contemporaneous Archaeological horizon representing \"what you would see if you went back to a specific point in time\". Often but not always a phase implies the identification of an occupation surface \"old ground level\" that existed at some earlier time.\nThe production of phase interpretations is one of the first goals of stratigraphic interpretation and excavation. Digging \"in phase\" is not quite the same as phasing a site. Phasing a site represents reducing the site either in excavation or post-excavation to contemporaneous horizons whereas \"digging in phase\" is the process of stratigraphic removal of archaeological remains so as not to remove contexts that are earlier in time \"lower in the sequence\" before other contexts that have a latter physical stratigraphic relationship to them as defined by the law of superposition. The process of interpretation in practice will have a bearing on excavation strategies on site so \"phasing\" a site is actively pursued during excavation where at all possible and is considered good practice.\nAn \"intrusion\" or \"intrusive object\" is something that arrived later to the phase in the strata, for example modern pipework or the 16th-century bottles left by treasure-hunters at Sutton Hoo.\nMethods.\nExcavation initially involves the removal of any topsoil. A strategy for sampling the contexts and features is formulated which may involve total excavation of each feature or only portions. \nStratigraphic excavation.\nIn stratigraphic excavation, the goal is to remove some or, preferably, all archaeological deposits and features in the reverse order they were created and construct a Harris matrix as a chronological record or \"sequence\" of the site. This Harris matrix is used for interpretation and combining contexts into ever larger units of understanding. This stratigraphic removal of the site is crucial for understanding the chronology of events on site.\nStratigraphic excavation involves a process of cleaning or \"troweling back\" the surface of the site and isolating contexts and edges which are definable as either:\nFollowing this preliminary process of defining the context, it is then recorded and removed.\nOften, owing to practical considerations or error, the process of defining the edges of contexts is not followed and contexts are removed out of sequence and un-stratigraphically. This is called \"digging out of phase\". It is not good practice.\nAfter removing a context or if practical a set of contexts such as the case would be for features, the \"isolate and dig\" procedure is repeated until no man made remains are left on site and the site is reduced to natural.\nStrip, map and sample.\n\"Strip, map and sample\" is a method of excavation applied in the United Kingdom to preserve archaeological remains by record in the face of development threats. It involves machine stripping an area, plotting observed features onto a site plan, and then partially excavating those features (sampling). The approach is undertaken when a site is to be destroyed by development and no satisfactory method of preserving archaeological remains \"in situ\" can be devised or adequate funding and time have not been factored into development project planning to allow for a full archaeological investigation.\nTools and techniques.\nMechanical excavation.\nThis describes the use in excavations of various types and sizes of machines from small backhoes to heavy duty earth-moving machinery. Machines are often used in what is called salvage or rescue archaeology in developer-led excavation when there are financial or time pressures. Using a mechanical excavator is the quickest method to remove soil and debris and to prepare the surface for excavation by hand, taking care to avoid damaging archaeological deposits by accident or to make it difficult to identify later precisely where finds were located. The use of such machinery is often routine (as it is for instance with the British archaeological television series \"Time Team\") but can also be controversial as it can result in less discrimination in how the archaeological sequence on a site is recorded. One of the earliest uses of earth-moving machinery was at Durrington Walls in 1967. An old road through the henge was to be straightened and improved and was going to cause considerable damage to the archaeology. Rosemary Hill describes how Geoffrey Wainwright \"oversaw large, high-speed excavations, taking bulldozers to the site in a manner that shocked some of his colleagues but yielded valuable if tantalising information about what Durrington had looked like and how it might have been used.\" Machines are used primarily to remove modern overburden and for the control of spoil. In British archaeology mechanical diggers are sometimes nicknamed \"big yellow trowels\".\nRecording.\nArchaeological excavation is an unrepeatable process, since the same area of the ground cannot be excavated twice.\nThus, archaeology is often known as a destructive science, where you must destroy the original evidence in order to make observations. To mitigate this, highly accurate and precise digital methods can be used to record the excavation process and its results.\nSingle context recording system.\nSingle context recording was developed in the 1970s by the museum of London (as well as earlier in Winchester and York) and has become the de facto recording system in many parts of the world and is especially suited to the complexities of deep urban archaeology and the process of Stratification.\nEach excavated context is given a unique \"context number\" and is recorded by type on a context sheet and perhaps being drawn on a plan and/or a section. Depending on time constraints and importance contexts may also be photographed, but in this case a grouping of contexts and their associations are the purpose of the photography. Finds from each context are bagged and labeled with their context number and site code for later cross-reference work carried out post-excavation. The height above sea level of pertinent points on a context, such as the top and bottom of a wall are taken and added to plans sections and context sheets. Heights are recorded with a dumpy level or total station by relation to the site temporary benchmark (abbr. T.B.M). Samples of deposits from contexts are sometimes also taken, for later environmental analysis or for scientific dating.\nDigital recording.\nDigital tools used by field archaeologists during excavation include GPS, tablet computers, relational databases, digital cameras, 3d laser scanners, and unmanned aerial vehicles. After high quality digital data have been recorded, these data can then be shared over the internet for open access and use by the public and archaeological researchers.\nDigital imaging or digital image acquisition is digital photography, such as of a physical scene or of the interior structure of an object. The term is often used to include the processing, compression, storage, printing, and display of the images.\nFinds processing.\nFinds and artifacts that survive in the archaeological record are retrieved in the main by hand and observation as the context they survive in is excavated. Several other techniques are available depending on suitability and time constraints. Sieving (screening) and flotation are used to maximize the recovery of small items such as small shards of pottery or flint flakes, or bones and seeds.\nFlotation.\nFlotation is a process of retrieval that works by passing spoil onto the surface of water and separating finds that float from the spoil which sinks. This is especially suited to the recovery of environmental data stored in organic material such as seeds and small bones. Not all finds retrieval is done during excavation and some, especially flotation, may take place post-excavation from samples taken during excavation.\nSieving.\nThe use of sieving (screening) is more common on research-based excavations where more time is available. Some success has been achieved with the use of cement mixers and bulk sieving. This method allows the quick removal of context by shovel and mattock yet allows for a high retrieval rate. Spoil is shoveled into cement mixers and water added to form a slurry which is then poured through a large screen mesh. The speed of this technique is offset by the damage it does to more fragile artifacts. \nSpot Dating.\nOne important role of finds retrieval during excavation is the role of specialists to provide spot dating information on the contexts being removed from the archaeological record. This can provide advance warning of potential discoveries to come by virtue of residual finds redeposited in contexts higher in the sequence (which should be coming offsite earlier than contexts from early eras and phases). Spot dating also forms part of a confirmation process, of assessing the validity of the working hypothesis on the phasing of site during excavation. For example, the presence of an anomalous medieval pottery sherd in what was thought to be an Iron Age ditch feature could radically alter onsite thinking on the correct strategy for digging a site and save a lot of information being lost due to incorrect assumptions about the nature of the deposits which will be destroyed by the excavation process and in turn, limit the site's potential for revealing information for post-excavation specialists. Or anomalous information could show up errors in excavation such as \"undercutting\". Dating methodology in part relies on accurate excavation and in this sense the two activities become interdependent.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "60698", "revid": "195596", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60698", "title": "396 BC", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 396 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Tribunate of Saccus, Capitolinus, Esquilinus, Augurinus, Capitolinus and Priscus (or, less frequently, year 358 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 396 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy topic.\nSports.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "60699", "revid": "190012", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60699", "title": "184 BC", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 184 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Pulcher and Licinus (or, less frequently, year 570 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 184 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy place.\nChina.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "60700", "revid": "934435645", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60700", "title": "185 BC", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 185 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Pulcher and Puditanus (or, less frequently, year 569 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 185 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy place.\nIndia.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "60701", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60701", "title": "212 BC", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 212 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Flaccus and Pulcher (or, less frequently, year 542 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 212 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy place.\nRoman Republic.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "60702", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60702", "title": "MC ADE", "text": "American music producer and rapper\nM.C. A.D.E. (born Adrian Hines in Miami, Florida) is an American music producer and rapper who pioneered hip hop Miami bass music. His 1985 single, \"Bass Rock Express\", is considered to be the start of Miami bass. He recorded on the 4-Sight record label, which was owned by his Dad Billy Hines, considered to be the first Independent Hip Hop label of the entire south. His name stands for Adrian Does Everything, which refers to the fact that he both rapped and produced his own records.\nOn \"Just Somethin to Do\", M.C. A.D.E. recorded the song \"Romantic Rhyme\"; the song samples The Floaters' Float On.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "60703", "revid": "14423536", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60703", "title": "Fennec fox", "text": "Species of fox\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Taxobox/core/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe fennec fox (Vulpes zerda) is a small fox native to the deserts of North Africa, ranging from Western Sahara and Mauritania to the Sinai Peninsula. Its most distinctive feature is its unusually large ears, which serve to dissipate heat and listen for underground prey. The fennec is the smallest fox species. Its coat, ears, and kidney functions have adapted to the desert environment with high temperatures and little water.\nThe fennec fox mainly eats insects, small mammals and birds. It has a life span of up to 14 years in captivity and about 10 years in the wild. Pups are preyed upon by the Pharaoh eagle-owl; both adults and pups may fall prey to jackals and striped hyenas. Fennec families dig out burrows in the sand for habitation and protection, which can be as large as and adjoin the burrows of other families. Precise population figures are not known but are estimated from the frequency of sightings; these indicate that the fennec fox is currently not threatened by extinction. Knowledge of social interactions is limited to information gathered from captive animals. The fennec fox is commonly trapped for exhibition or sale in North Africa, and it is considered an exotic pet in some parts of the world.\nTaxonomy and phylogeny.\nThe fennec fox was scientifically described as \"Canis zerda\" by Eberhardt Zimmermann in 1780. In 1788, Johann Friedrich Gmelin gave the species the synonym of \"Canis cerdo\" with the type locality being the Sahara Desert. A few years later, Friedrich Albrecht Anton Meyer assigned the name \"Viverra aurita\" to the species in 1793; the type locality was Algeria. Subsequent synonyms include \"Fennecus arabicus\" by Anselme Ga\u00ebtan Desmarest in 1804; \"Megalotis cerda\" by Johann Karl Wilhelm Illiger in 1811 which was based on earlier descriptions by Gmelin, and another synonym by Desmarest (\"Fennecus brucei\") in 1820; the type locality was Algeria, Tunisia, Libya, and Sudan. In 1827, the species was given another synonym (\"Canis fennecus\") by Ren\u00e9 Lesson whose work was largely based on the species scientific description in 1780. In the 1840s, the species received synonyms by Pierre Boitard in 1842 (\"Vulpes denhamii\") and John Edward Gray in 1843 (\"Vulpes zuarensis\"). The type localities of these were \"interior of Africa\" and Egypt, respectively. In 1978 Gordon Barclay Corbet renamed the species to \"Vulpes zerda\", its current scientific name. It was originally assigned to the genus \"Canis\", but following molecular analysis it was moved to \"Vulpes\" despite having some distinct morphological and behavioral traits.\nAccording to DNA evidence, the closest living relative to the fennec fox is the Blanford's fox. They are two of eight \"desert fox\" species, which is a group of \"Vulpes\" that share comparable ecologies. The other members include the corsac fox, pale fox, kit fox, Tibetan fox, R\u00fcppell's fox and Cape fox. All eight species evolved to survive in desert environments, developing several traits such as sandy colored coats, large ears, pigmented eyes, and specialized kidneys. The word \"fennec\" is derived from the Arabic word \"fanak\" which likely has Persian origins.\nThe fennec fox is one of 13 extant \"Vulpes\" species and a member of the family Canidae.\nDescription.\nThe fennec fox has sand-colored fur which reflects sunlight during the day and helps keep it warm at night. Its nose is black and its tapering tail has a black tip. Its long ears have longitudinal reddish stripes on the back and are so densely haired inside that the external auditory meatus is not visible. The edges of the ears are whitish, but darker on the back. The ear to body ratio is the greatest in the canid family and likely helps in dissipating heat and locating prey. It has large, dense kidneys with somewhat compact medulla, which help store water in times of scarcity. It has dark streaks running from the inner eye to either side of the slender muzzle. Its large eyes are dark. The dental formula is 3.1.4.23.1.4.3\u00d7\u20092 = 42 with small and narrow canines. The pads of its paws are covered with dense fur, which facilitates walking on hot, sandy soil.\nThe fennec fox is the smallest canid species. Females range in head-to-body size from with a long tail and long ears, and weigh . Males are slightly larger, ranging in head-to-body size from with a long tail and long ears, weighing at least .\nDistribution and habitat.\nThe fennec fox is distributed throughout the Sahara, from Morocco and Mauritania to northern Sudan, through Egypt and its Sinai Peninsula. It inhabits small sand dunes and vast treeless sand areas with sparse vegetation such as grasses, sedges and small shrubs. In the northern part of its range annual rainfalls have been recorded at &lt;100\u00a0mm compared to 300\u00a0mm in its southern range. The fennec fox's range likely overlaps with that of other canines such as the golden jackal and R\u00fcppell's fox. Compared to these canids, the fennec fox seems to inhabit areas with more extreme climate and has been known to build burrows in grainier surfaces; this adaptation gives it an edge over competitors.\nBehaviour and ecology.\nBehaviour.\nFennec foxes are primarily nocturnal, displaying heightened activity during the cooler nighttime hours. This behaviour helps them escape the extreme Saharan heat and reduces water loss through panting. A fennec fox digs its den in sand, either in open areas or places sheltered by plants with stable sand dunes. In compacted soils, dens are up to large, with up to 15 different entrances. In some cases, different families interconnect their dens, or locate them close together. In soft, looser sand, dens tend to be simpler with only one entrance leading to a single chamber.\nCaptive individuals reside in family groups. Fennec foxes exhibit playful behavior, especially among younger individuals.\nHunting and diet.\nThe fennec fox is omnivorous, feeding on small rodents, lizards (geckos and skinks), small birds and their eggs, insects, fruits, leaves, roots and also some tubers. It relies on the moisture content of prey, but drinks water when available.\nIt hunts alone and digs in the sand for small vertebrates and insects. Some individuals were observed to bury prey for later consumption and searching for food in the vicinity of human settlements.\nIn the Algerian Sahara, 114 scat samples were collected that contained more than 400 insects, plant fragments and date palm (\"Phoenix dactylifera\") fruits, remains of birds, mammals, squamata and insects.\nReproduction.\nFennec foxes mate for life. Captive animals reach sexual maturity at around nine months and mate between January and April. Female fennec foxes are in estrus for an average of 24 hours and usually breed once per year; the copulation tie lasts up to two hours and 45 minutes. Gestation usually lasts between 50 and 52 days, though sometimes up to 63 days. After mating, the male becomes aggressive and protects the female, and provides her with food during pregnancy and lactation. Females give birth between March and June to a litter of one to four pups that open their eyes after 8 to 11 days. Both female and male care for the pups. They communicate by barking, purring, yapping and squeaking. Pups remain in the family even after a new litter is born. The pups are weaned at the age of 61 to 70 days. Adults rear pups until they are around 16 to 17 weeks old. The average lifespan in the wild is 10 years. The oldest captive male fennec fox was 14 years old, and the oldest female 13 years.\nPredators, parasites and diseases.\nAfrican horned owl species such as the Pharaoh eagle-owl prey on fennec fox pups. Anecdotal reports exist about jackals and striped hyenas also preying on the fennec fox. But according to nomads, the fennec fox is fast and changes directions so well that even their Salukis are hardly ever able to capture it.\nCaptive fennec foxes are susceptible to canine distemper virus, displaying fever, mucopurulent ocular discharge, diarrhea, severe emaciation, seizures, generalized ataxia, severe dehydration, brain congestion, gastric ulcers and death. Stress because of capture and long-distance transportation are thought to be the causes. In 2012, a study reported a case of \"Trichophyton mentagrophytes\", a fungus species, in a 2-year-old male. It died not too long after contracting the pathogen from anorexia and icterus. A 2019 review of the deaths of fennec foxes due to medical conditions or pathogens at the Bronx and Prospect Park Zoos since 1980 found that the majority of such deaths were attributed to neoplasia and infection. Most foxes developed infections or medical conditions from atopic dermatitis and other dermatologic diseases, as well as trauma. Parasites known to infect the fennec fox include roundworms such as \"Capillaria\" and \"Angiostrongylus vasorum\", as well as the alveolate \"Toxoplasma gondii\".\nThreats.\nIn North Africa, the fennec fox is commonly trapped for exhibition or sale to tourists. Expansion of permanent human settlements in southern Morocco caused its disappearance in these areas and restricted it to marginal areas. Other factors such as roadwork, seismic surveys, mining, oil fields, commercial expansion and the increased number of human communities in their range are cited as potential threats.\nConservation.\nAs of 2015, the fennec fox is classified as of least concern on the IUCN Red List. It is listed in CITES Appendix II and is protected in Morocco and Western Sahara, Algeria, Tunisia and Egypt, where it has been documented in several protected areas. Another measure taken to conserve the species is the placement of individuals in captive environments such as zoos. Educational programs are also promoted to further this initiative.\nInteractions with humans.\nIn culture.\nThe fennec fox is the national animal of Algeria. It also serves as the nickname for the Algeria national football team \"Les Fennecs\". The species is depicted in \"The Little Prince\", a 1943 novella by Antoine de Saint-Exup\u00e9ry which follows the story of a pilot who is forced to make an emergency plane landing in the remote Sahara Desert. In 2000, the fennec fox was portrayed on the cover of a \"Ranger Rick\" magazine. In Roman art and literature, there is dearth of depictions of fox species in general. However, according to Martial's \"Epigrams\", which describes the \"long-eared fox\" as a popular pet, it is likely that the fennec fox was kept as an exotic pet in the Roman empire. Additionally, the species has made appearances as \"Fenneko\" in the anime TV series \"Aggretsuko.\"\nIn captivity.\nThe fennec fox is bred commercially as an exotic pet. Commercial breeders remove the pups from their mother to hand-raise them, as tame foxes are more valuable. A breeders' registry has been set up in the United States to avoid any problems associated with inbreeding. As of 2020, 15 US states authorized the ownership of foxes without the need for a document, although one is also allowed. Due to inappropriate diet, captive foxes have been known to grow to abnormally large sizes.\nCaptive foxes have often been recorded exhibiting stereotyped behaviors; this may due to the insufficient environments they are placed in. When noises from zookeepers and visitors alike are produced, foxes often respond by pacing repeatedly. Similarly, in one case, two male individuals in the National Zoological Park spend the majority of their time pacing around their enclosures. Larger, outdoor enclosures may help reduce stereotyped behaviors, as they provide more space for foxes to flee from perceived danger and hide in a provided safe spot.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "60705", "revid": "50023935", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60705", "title": "Maggotron", "text": "Pioneer of Miami bass music\nMaggotron (born James McCauley, and also known as DXJ, Maggozulu Too, Planet Detroit and Bass Master Kahn) is one of the pioneers of miami bass music. He uses samples from many sources, and is influenced by Parliament, Funkadelic and Earth Wind and Fire among others. In 2000, he collaborated with his former engineer Bass Mekanik on the album \"Bass Alien \u2013 Tales from the Lo-Zone\". In 2001, he mixed and compiled a CD featuring miami bass classics for Empirewerks Music: \"Super Bass \u2013 Original Old School Booty Shakers\". The same year, his compilation \"Electro Jamz from the Vaults of Jamron Records\" encompassed miami bass and electro tracks from his early days as a producer and performer. Due to pressure from Pandisc Records, the humour in his later work for Pandisc became less notable.\nDXJ's earlier work was characterised by its humorous approach, which can also be seen in his use of pseudonyms.\nMusically, DXJ's music is characterised by its use of electro/bass beats and rock guitars, as well as vocal samples from all kinds of sources. Cultural and ethnic diversity are also part of the fabric of Maggotron's sound. Men and women of various nationalities have helped work to achieve the sound that Maggotron is noted for.\nInternationally known, DXJ'S contributions to miami bass, electro or street music has influenced break beat, crunk, ghettotech and other genres of music. Miami Bass/electro itself is a hybrid branch of the hip hop and electro music.\nDiscography.\nSingles, EPs, 12\"s, Compilations.\nOn BOUND SOUND RECORDS/JAMRON RECORDS/JAMARC RECORDS.\nOn HOT ASSOCIATED LABELS/HOT PRODUCTIONS/PO FUNKY BLAH RECORDS.\nOn PANDISC RECORDS.\n12\" Singles:\nOn STREET BEAT RECORDS:\nOn JOEY BOY RECORDS:\nOn 4 SIGHT RECORDS.\nOn ATLANTIC RECORDS:\nOn ZYX RECORDS:\nOn COOMACK RECORDS:\nOn CHANCE RECORDS:\nOn LITTLE LISA RECORDS (distributed by HOT):\nOn ROONEY RECORDS:\nOn DEBONAIRE RECORDS:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "60706", "revid": "25667", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60706", "title": "National Collegiate Athletic Association", "text": "North American athletic organization\nThe National Collegiate Athletic Association (NCAA) is a nonprofit organization that regulates student athletics among about 1,100 schools in the United States, and 1 in Canada. It also organizes the athletic programs of colleges and helps over 500,000 college student athletes who compete annually in college sports. The headquarters is located in Indianapolis, Indiana.\nUntil the 1956\u201357 academic year, the NCAA was a single division for all schools. That year, the NCAA split into the University Division and the College Division. In August 1973, the current three-division system of Division I, Division II, and Division III was adopted by the NCAA membership in a special convention. Under NCAA rules, Division I and Division II schools can offer athletic scholarships to students. Division III schools may not offer any athletic scholarships. Generally, larger schools compete in Division I and smaller schools in II and III. Division I football was further divided into I-A and I-AA in 1978, while Division I programs that did not have football teams were known as I-AAA. In 2006, Divisions I-A and I-AA were, respectively, renamed the Football Bowl Subdivision (FBS) and Football Championship Subdivision (FCS). In its 2022\u201323 fiscal year, the NCAA generated $1.28\u00a0billion in revenue, $945\u00a0million (74%) of which came from airing rights to the Division I men's basketball tournament.\nControversially, the NCAA substantially restricts the kinds of benefits and compensation (including paid salary) that collegiate athletes could receive from their schools. The consensus among economists is these caps for men's basketball and football players benefit the athletes' schools (through rent-seeking) at the expense of the athletes. Economists have subsequently characterized the NCAA as a cartel. In 2021, the Supreme Court of the United States unanimously ruled that some of these NCAA restrictions on student athletes are in violation of US antitrust law. The NCAA settled a lawsuit in May 2024 allowing member institutions to pay Division I athletes who have played since 2016.\nHistory.\nFormation and early years.\nIntercollegiate sports began in the United States in 1852 when crews from Harvard and Yale universities met in a challenge race in the sport of rowing. As rowing remained the preeminent sport in the country into the late-1800s, many of the initial debates about collegiate athletic eligibility and purpose were settled through organizations like the Rowing Association of American Colleges and the Intercollegiate Rowing Association. As other sports emerged, notably football and basketball, many of these same concepts and standards were adopted. Football, in particular, began to emerge as a marquee sport, but the rules of the game itself were in constant flux and often had to be adapted for each contest.\nThe NCAA dates its formation to two White House conferences convened by President Theodore Roosevelt in the early 20th century in response to repeated injuries and deaths in college football which had \"prompted many college and universities to discontinue the sport.\" Following those White House meetings and the reforms which had resulted, Chancellor Henry MacCracken of New York University organized a meeting of 13 colleges and universities to initiate changes in football playing rules; at a follow-on meeting on December 28, 1905, at the Murray Hill Hotel in New York City, 62 higher-education institutions became charter members of the Intercollegiate Athletic Association of the United States (IAAUS). The IAAUS was officially established on March 31, 1906, and took its present name, the NCAA, in 1910.\nFor several years, the NCAA was a discussion group and rules-making body, but in 1921, the first NCAA national championship was conducted: the National Collegiate Track and Field Championships. Gradually, more rules committees were formed and more championships were created, including a basketball championship in 1939.\nA series of crises brought the NCAA to a crossroads after World War II. The \"Sanity Code\" \u2013 adopted to establish guidelines for recruiting and financial aid \u2013 failed to curb abuses, and the Association needed to find more effective ways to curtail its membership. Postseason football games were multiplying with little control, and member schools were increasingly concerned about how the new medium of television would affect football attendance.\nThe NCAA engaged in a bitter power struggle with the Amateur Athletic Union. The complexity of those problems and the growth in membership and championships demonstrated the need for full-time professional leadership.\nWalter Byers, previously an assistant sports information director, was named executive director in 1951. The \"Harvard Crimson\" described Byers as \"power-mad\", \"The New York Times\" said that Byers was \"secretive, despotic, stubborn and ruthless\", \"The Washington Post\" described him as a dictator, and others described him as a \"petty tyrant\".\nByers wasted no time placing his stamp on the Association, and a national headquarters was established in Kansas City, Missouri, in 1952. A program to control live television of football games was approved, the annual Convention delegated enforcement powers to the Association's Council, and legislation was adopted governing postseason bowl games.\n1970s\u20131980s.\nAs college athletics grew, the scope of the nation's athletics programs diverged, forcing the NCAA to create a structure that recognized varying levels of emphasis. In 1973, the association's membership was divided into three legislative and competitive divisions \u2013 I, II, and III. Five years later in 1978, Division I members voted to create subdivisions I-A and I-AA (renamed the Football Bowl Subdivision and the Football Championship Subdivision in 2006) in football.\nUntil the 1980s, the association did not govern women's athletics. Instead, the Association for Intercollegiate Athletics for Women (AIAW), with nearly 1,000 member schools, governed women's collegiate sports in the United States. The AIAW was in a vulnerable position that precipitated conflicts with the NCAA in the early-1980s. Following a one-year overlap in which both organizations staged women's championships, the AIAW discontinued operation, and most member schools continued their women's athletics programs under the governance of the NCAA. By 1982 all divisions of the NCAA offered national championship events for women's athletics. A year later in 1983, the 75th Convention approved an expansion to plan women's athletic program services and pushed for a women's championship program.\nPresident's Commission.\nProposals at every NCAA Convention are voted on by the institutional members of the NCAA. Each institutional member has one representative: the president/CEO or a representative designated by him/her.\nAttendance by the actual president/CEO was low; less than 30%. Southern Methodist University President A. Kenneth Pye commented, \"In too many cases, presidents have not only delegated responsibility, they have abdicated it.\" Many presidents designated their athletic director as the institutional representative, something Pye compared to \"entrusting a chicken coop to the supervision of a wolf and a fox.\"\nBeginning around 1980, a group of college presidents thought there was a crisis of integrity in collegiate sports and discussed ways to \ntransform athletics to match the academic model. T\nhe American Council on Education (ACE) proposed a presidential board empowered to veto NCAA membership actions, while the NCAA Council, whose membership was mostly athletic officials, suggested a presidential commission with advisory powers. The council's proposal may have been intended to block the presidential effort to gain control of the NCAA. The two proposals were voted on by the membership at the NCAA Convention in January 1984. The ACE proposal was defeated by a vote of 313 to 328. The Council proposal passed on a voice vote without ballots.\nPublicly, the \"President's Commission\" (PC) was responsible for establishing an agenda for the NCAA, but the actual language of the proposal stated that their role was to be a presidential forum and to provide the NCAA with the president's position on major policy issues. The PC could study issues and urge action, call special meetings and sponsor legislation. Their one real power was to veto the selection of Executive Director. The composition of the commission was 22 CEOs from Division I and 11 CEOs each from Divisions II and III. \nThe true intent of the PC was to shift control of intercollegiate athletics back to CEOs. Graduation rates were an important metric to chancellors and presidents and became a focus of the PC.\nIn June 1985 a special convention was held to review legislative proposals including academic integrity, academic-reporting requirements, differences in \"major\" and \"secondary\" violations including the \"death penalty\" and requiring an annual financial audit of athletic departments. All proposals passed overwhelmingly. Many presidents who did not attend sent a vice-president rather than their athletic director. University of Florida President Marshall Criser stated that \"the ultimate responsibility must be assumed by the CEOs because we don't have enough NCAA cops to solve all of the problems.\"\nThe regular NCAA meeting in January 1986 presented proposals in regard to college eligibility, drug testing, and basketball competition limits. All passed but matters regarding acceptable academic progress, special-admissions and booster club activities were ignored. Many presidents did not attend and it appeared that athletic directors controlled the meeting. A survey of 138 Division I presidents indicated that athletic directors did control collegiate sports. Despite a moratorium on extending the season of any sport in 1985, the extension of basketball and hockey seasons were approved. Indiana University president John W. Ryan, outgoing chairman of the PC commented, \"If the moratorium is vacated, it's being vacated not by the commission, but by this convention.\" Following the vote, a delegate was quoted, \"A lot of Athletic Directors figure they've successfully waited out the presidents...unless the presidents fight back, NCAA reform is flat-ass dead in the water.\"\nThe PC proposed just one legislative issue at the January 1987 meeting: applying the minimum academic standards in Division I to Division II. It narrowly passed.\nThe PC attempted to again push the reform of college athletics by calling another special convention which was held in June 1987 to discuss cost-cutting measures and to address the overemphasis on athletics in colleges and universities. John Slaughter, Chancellor of the University of Maryland served as chairman. He stated, \"This represents the second major thrust since our commission was formed three years ago. The first involved academics and infractions. This will be equally momentous and more sweeping. We want to achieve a balance between athletics and other institutional programs.\"\nCost-cutting measures proposed included reductions in athletic financial aid, coaching staff sizes, and length of practice/playing seasons. A resolution was also floated that opposed coaches receiving outside financial compensation if outside activities interfere with regular duties. All the PC proposals were defeated, and two basketball scholarships were restored that were eliminated at the meeting in January. It was apparent that there was an open conflict between college presidents.\nThe president of the Carnegie Foundation for the Advancement of Teaching, Ernest L. Boyer, summarized the situation: \"There are presidents whose institutions are so deeply involved in athletics that their own institutional and personal futures hang in the balance. They feel they must resist such change because athletics are bigger than they are.\"\nThe PC sponsored no legislation at the January 1988 annual meeting, and there was not a vote of confidence.\nHowever, a year later at the annual meeting, financial aid restrictions were proposed for specific Division I and II sports. Following extensive discussions, the measure was withdrawn and a \"Special Committee on Cost Reductions\" was formed to study the issue. Once again, a proposal from the PC was circumvented.\nThe President's Commission met in October 1989 to prepare for the 1990 NCAA annual meeting. Proposals were developed to shorten spring football and the basketball season; grant financial aid based on need to academically deficient athletes; and reporting of graduation rates. Chancellor Martin Massengale of the University of Nebraska\u2013Lincoln was then chairman of the PC insisted that graduation rate data was needed to preclude \"further need for federal legislation\" that was being proposed by Representative Tom McMillen and Senator Bill Bradley. The proposals demonstrated that the PC was intent on regaining control of college athletics and the opposition was immediate. Commissioner of the Big Ten Conference Jim Delany responded, \"They tend to want quick answers and you don't solve the complexities of intercollegiate athletics. Yes, presidents are involved, but the truth is, they really don't have time to be involved.\" Bo Schembechler was blunt, \"Unfortunately, you're dealing with people who don't understand. We're trying to straddle the fence here because you still want me to put 100,000 (fans) in the stadium and the reason you want me to do it is because you're not going to help me financially at all.\" In 1990, the University of Michigan head football coach and athletic director resigned his college job to become president of the Major League Baseball Detroit Tigers. Upon his departure, he predicted, \"In the next five years, school presidents will completely confuse intercollegiate athletics directors, then they'll dump it back to athletics directors and say, 'You straighten this out.' About 2000, it may be back on track.\"\nPresidential turnout for the January 1990 meeting was good and many who did not attend sent a delegate to vote for the PC. The graduation reporting proposal passed overwhelmingly, and the proposal for need-based non-athletic aid passed easily. The final proposal to shorten basketball and spring football generated fierce debate. There was a motion to defer the proposal for study that failed 383\u2013363, but the many PC members relaxed, confident of victory. PC Chairman Massengale left the meeting for other business, but during lunch, council members began lobbying and twisting arms to change votes. When the session resumed, council members began criticizing the PC and quickly executed a parliamentary maneuver to refer the proposal to the NCAA Council. Many PC members were still at lunch when a roll call vote passed 170\u2013150. University of Texas women's athletic director Donna Lopiano complained, \"The President's Commission needs to do what it does best, and that is to macro-manage. Leave the micro-management to the various expert groups. We\nwill bring back solutions.\"\nNumerous presidents were shocked, upset and angry, but the remaining PC members began their own lobbying and arm-twisting. An hour later, there was a sense that representatives who had voted against the direction of their respective presidents had reconsidered, and a motion was made to reconsider by Lattie F. Coor, president of Arizona State University. West Point Lieutenant General Dave Richard Palmer urged the vote, stating the NCAA needed \"to make a mark on the wall...delay is the deadliest form of denial.\"\n Following discussion, compromise and voting on minor issues, the reconsideration motion passed, and the third proposal was adopted with a vote of 165\u2013156.\nThe President's Commission held hearings beginning on May 9, 1991, to develop stronger academic standards.\nThe President's Commission lasted for 13 years and pushed through initiatives such as restricting the size of coaching staffs; limiting how much time student-athletes can spend on their sports; and setting more demanding academic standards for Divisions I and II.\nBy the 1980s, televised college football had become a larger source of income for the NCAA. In September 1981, the Board of Regents of the University of Oklahoma and the University of Georgia Athletic Association filed suit against the NCAA in district court in Oklahoma. The plaintiffs stated that the NCAA's football television plan constituted price fixing, output restraints, boycott, and monopolizing, all of which were illegal under the Sherman Act. The NCAA argued that its pro-competitive and non-commercial justifications for the plan \u2013 protection of live gate, maintenance of competitive balance among NCAA member institutions, and the creation of a more attractive \"product\" to compete with other 7forms of entertainment \u2013 combined to make the plan reasonable. In September 1982, the district court found in favor of the plaintiffs, ruling that the plan violated antitrust laws. It enjoined the association from enforcing the contract. The NCAA appealed all the way to the United States Supreme Court, but lost in 1984 in a 7\u20132 ruling \"NCAA v. Board of Regents of the University of Oklahoma\". (If the television contracts the NCAA had with ABC, CBS, and ESPN had remained in effect for the 1984 season, they would have generated some $73.6\u00a0million for the association and its members.)\nLate 1990s.\nIn 1999, the NCAA was sued for discriminating against female athletes under Title IX for systematically giving men in graduate school more waivers than a woman to participate in college sports. In \"National Collegiate Athletic Association v. Smith\", 525 U.S. 459 (1999) the U.S. Supreme Court ruled that the NCAA was not subject to that law, without reviewing the merits of the discrimination claim.\nOver the last two decades recruiting international athletes has become a growing trend among NCAA institutions. For example, most German athletes outside of Germany are based at US universities. For many European athletes, the American universities are the only option to pursue an academic and athletic career at the same time. Many of these students come to the US with high academic expectations and aspirations.\nIn 2009, Simon Fraser University in Burnaby, British Columbia, Canada, became the NCAA's first non-US member institution, joining Division II. In 2018, Division II membership approved allowing schools from Mexico to apply for membership; CETYS of Tijuana, Baja California expressed significant interest in joining at the time.\nIn 2014, the NCAA set a record high of $989 million in net revenue. Just shy of $1 billion, it is among the highest of all large sports organizations.\nDuring the NCAA's 2022 annual convention, the membership ratified a new version of the organization's constitution. The new constitution dramatically simplifies a rulebook that many college sports leaders saw as increasingly bloated.\nIt also reduces the size of the NCAA Board of Governors from 20 to 9, and guarantees that current and former athletes have voting representation on both the NCAA board and the governing bodies of each NCAA division. The new constitution was the first step in a reorganization process in which each division will have the right to set its own rules, with no approval needed from the rest of the NCAA membership.\nHeadquarters.\nThe modern era of the NCAA began in July 1955 when its executive director, Kansas City, Missouri native Walter Byers, moved the organization's headquarters from the LaSalle Hotel in Chicago (where its offices were shared by the headquarters of the Big Ten Conference) to the Fairfax Building in Downtown Kansas City. The move was intended to separate the NCAA from the direct influence of any individual conference and keep it centrally located.\nThe Fairfax was a block from Municipal Auditorium which had hosted men's basketball Final Four games in 1940, 1941, and 1942. After Byers moved the headquarters to Kansas City, the championships would be held in Municipal Auditorium in 1953, 1954, 1955, 1957, 1961, and 1964. The Fairfax office consisted of three rooms with no air conditioning. Byers' staff consisted of four people: an assistant, two secretaries, and a bookkeeper.\nIn 1964, the NCAA moved three blocks away to offices in the Midland Theatre, moving again in 1973 to a $1.2\u00a0million building on on Shawnee Mission Parkway in suburban Mission, Kansas. In 1989, the organization moved farther south to Overland Park, Kansas. The new building was on and had of space.\nThe NCAA was dissatisfied with its Johnson County, Kansas suburban location, noting that its location on the southern edges of the Kansas City suburbs was more than 40 minutes from Kansas City International Airport. They also noted that the suburban location was not drawing visitors to its new visitors' center.\nIn 1997, it asked for bids for a new headquarters. Various cities competed for a new headquarters with the two finalists being Kansas City and Indianapolis. Kansas City proposed to relocate the NCAA back downtown near the Crown Center complex and would locate the visitors' center in Union Station. However, Kansas City's main sports venue at the time, Kemper Arena, was nearly 23 years old. Indianapolis argued that it was in fact more central than Kansas City in that two-thirds of the members are east of the Mississippi River. The 50,000-seat RCA Dome (since replaced by the larger Lucas Oil Stadium) far eclipsed 19,500-seat Kemper Arena. In 1999, the NCAA moved its 300-member staff to its new headquarters in the White River State Park in a four-story facility on the west edge of downtown Indianapolis, Indiana. Adjacent to the headquarters is the NCAA Hall of Champions.\nStructure.\nThe NCAA's Board of Governors (formerly known as the Executive Committee) is the main body within the NCAA. This body elects the NCAA's president.\nThe NCAA's legislative structure is broken down into cabinets and committees, consisting of various representatives of its member schools. These may be broken down further into sub-committees. The legislation is then passed on to the Management Council, which oversees all the cabinets and committees, and also includes representatives from the schools, such as athletic directors and faculty advisers. Management Council legislation goes on to the Board of Directors, which consists of school presidents, for final approval. The NCAA national office staff provides support by acting as guides, liaisons, researchers, and by managing public and media relations.\nThe NCAA runs the officiating software company ArbiterSports, based in Sandy, Utah, a joint venture between two subsidiaries of the NCAA, Arbiter LLC and eOfficials LLC. The NCAA's stated objective for the venture is to help improve the fairness, quality, and consistency of officiating across amateur athletics.\nPresidents of the NCAA.\nThe NCAA had no full-time administrator until 1951, when Walter Byers was appointed executive director. In 1998, the title was changed to president.\nChief medical officer.\nIn 2013, the NCAA hired Brian Hainline as its first chief medical officer.\nDivision history.\nBefore 1957, all NCAA sports used a single division of competition. In 1957 the NCAA split into two divisions for men's basketball only, with major programs making up the University Division and smaller programs making up the College Division. The names could be confusing, as some schools with \"University\" in their name still competed in the College Division while some with \"College\" in their name competed in the University Division. The split gradually took hold in other sports as well. Records from before the split were inherited by the University Division.\nIn 1973 the College Division split up between teams that wanted to grant athletic scholarships (becoming Division II, which inherited the College Division's records and history) and teams that did not (becoming Division III), and the University Division was renamed to Division I. Division I split into two subdivisions for football only in 1978 (though both still under the Division I name), with Division I-A consisting of major teams who would continue to compete in bowl games and use various polls to decide its champion and Division I-AA consisting of smaller teams who would compete in the new NCAA Football Tournament to decide its champion. Division I schools without football teams were known as Division I-AAA. In 2006, Division I-A became the Football Bowl Subdivision (FBS), Division I-AA became the Football Championship Subdivision (FCS), and Division I-AAA became Division I non-football. The changes were in name only with no significant structural differences to the organization.\n\"National Collegiate\" sports.\nFor some less-popular sports, the NCAA does not separate teams into their usual divisions and instead holds only one tournament to decide a single national champion between all three divisions (except for women's ice hockey and men's indoor volleyball, where the National Collegiate championship only features teams from Division I and Division II and a separate championship is contested for only Division III). The 13 sports which use the National Collegiate format, also called the single-division format, are women's bowling, men's fencing, women's fencing, men's gymnastics, women's gymnastics, women's ice hockey, rifle, skiing, men's indoor volleyball, women's beach volleyball, men's water polo, women's water polo, and women's wrestling. The newest such sport is women's wrestling, which holds its first NCAA championship in the 2025\u201326 school year. The NCAA considers a National Collegiate title equivalent to a Division I title even if the champion is primarily a member of Division II or III. These championships are largely dominated by teams that are otherwise members of Division I, but current non-Division I teams have won 40 National Collegiate championships since the University Division/College Division split as of 2022 (2 in bowling, 20 in fencing, 8 in women's ice hockey, and 10 in rifle). Division III schools are allowed to grant athletic scholarships to students who compete in National Collegiate sports, though most do not.\nMen's ice hockey uses a similar but not identical \"National Collegiate\" format as women's ice hockey and men's indoor volleyball (Division III has its own championship but several Division III teams compete in Division I for men's ice hockey), but its top-level championship is branded as a \"Division I\" championship. While the NCAA has not explained why it is the only sport with this distinction, the NCAA held a separate Division II championship from 1978 to 1984 and again from 1993 to 1999. As of 2025, 12 Division I men's ice hockey championships have been won by current non-Division I teams since the University Division/College Division split. Like with National Collegiate sports, schools that are otherwise members of Division III who compete in Division I for men's ice hockey are allowed to grant athletic scholarships for the sport.\nAll sports used the National Collegiate format until 1957, when the NCAA was split into the University Division and College Division (which itself was split into Divisions II and III in 1973). The only sport that immediately saw a change after the 1957 split was men's basketball; all other sports continued to use the National Collegiate format for at least one season, and usually many more. Some sports that began after the split once used the format and no longer do. This include men's and women's lacrosse, women's rowing, women's soccer, and men's and women's indoor track &amp; field.\nSome sports, including men's and women's golf, men's ice hockey, men's lacrosse, and men's and women's soccer used to have a combined championship between Divisions II and III, but these were known as a \"Division II/III championship\" in most cases. The NCAA considered these titles equivalent to a Division II title. No sport currently uses this format.\nPlayer eligibility.\nThe NCAA requires all of its athletes to be amateurs. All incoming athletes must be certified as amateurs. To remain eligible, athletes must not sign contract with sports clubs, earn a salary playing a sport, try out for professional sports, or enter into agreements with agents.\nTo participate in college athletics in their freshman year, the NCAA requires that students meet three criteria: having graduated from high school, be completing the minimum required academic courses, and having qualifying grade-point average (GPA).\nThe 16 academic credits are four courses in English, two courses in math, two classes in social science, two in natural or physical science, and one additional course in English, math, natural or physical science, or another academic course such as a foreign language.\nTo meet the Division I requirements for grade point average, the lowest possible high school GPA a student may have to be eligible with to play in their freshman year is a 2.30 (2.20 for Division II or III), but they are allowed to play beginning in their second year with a GPA of 2.00.\nAs of the 2017\u201318 school year, a high school student may sign a letter of intent to enter and play football for a Division I or Division II college in either of two periods. The first, introduced in 2017\u201318, is a three-day period in mid-December, coinciding with the first three days of the previously existing signing period for junior college players. The second period, which before 2017 was the only one allowed for signings of high school players, starts on the first Wednesday in February. In August 2011, the NCAA announced plans to raise academic requirements for postseason competition, including its two most prominent competitions, football's now-defunct Bowl Championship Series (replaced in 2014 by the College Football Playoff) and the Division I men's basketball tournament; the new requirement, which are based on an \"Academic Progress Rate\" (APR) that measures retention and graduation rates, and is calculated on a four-year, rolling basis. The changes raise the rate from 900 to 930, which represents a 50% graduation rate.\nStudent-athletes can accept prize money from tournaments or competitions if they do not exceed the total expenses from the event. For example, during high school, D1 tennis players may take up to $10,000 in total prize money. If the student surpassed the amount of $10,000 of prize money in a calendar year, they would lose eligibility.\nStudents are only allowed to compete athletically for four years. Athletes are allowed to sit out a year while still attending school but not lose a year of eligibility by redshirting. In other words, a student has five years from the time they begin college to play four seasons before getting drafted to any professional sports teams.\nNCAA sponsored sports.\nThe NCAA currently awards 92 national team championships yearly \u2013 47 women's, 43 men's, and 2 coed championships for rifle and skiing. Sports sanctioned by the NCAA include the following: basketball, baseball (men), track and field, softball (women), football (men), cross country, field hockey (women), bowling (women), golf, fencing, lacrosse, soccer, gymnastics, rowing (women), swimming and diving, beach volleyball (women), volleyball, ice hockey, water polo, rifle (coeducational), tennis, skiing (coeducational), and wrestling.\nThe newest sport to be officially sanctioned is women's wrestling, which will hold its first official championship in winter 2026. Before then, the last sport to have been officially sanctioned was beach volleyball, which held its first championship in spring 2016. The NCAA had called the sport \"sand volleyball\" until June 23, 2015, when it announced that it would use the internationally recognized name of \"beach volleyball\".\nThe Division I Council, acting on a recommendation from the NCAA Sports Oversight Committee, voted in June 2025 to separate men's and women's scoring in the fencing championship, which would effectively establish separate men's and women's championships in that sport. Because fencing is a National Collegiate sport with a single championship event for all divisions, Divisions II and III had to separately approve this change. The other divisions approved this change the following month.\nThe Football Bowl Subdivision of Division I determines its own champion separately from the NCAA via the College Football Playoff; this is not an official NCAA championship (see below).\nThe NCAA awards championships in the sports listed below. For the two coeducational championships, women's dates reflect the first championship that was open to women.\nThe number of teams (school programs) that compete in each sport in their respective division as of the 2021\u201322 academic year are as follows:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nEmerging sports for women.\nIn addition to the above sports, the NCAA recognizes Emerging Sports for Women. These sports have roster (Division I) and scholarship (Division II) limitations for each sport, but do not currently have officially sanctioned NCAA championships. A member institution may use these sports to meet the required level of sports sponsorship for its division. An \"Emerging Sport\" must gain championship status (minimum 40 varsity programs for team sports, except 28 for Division III) within 10 years, or show steady progress toward that goal to remain on the list. Until then, it is under the auspices of the NCAA and its respective institutions. Emerging Sport status allows for competition to include club teams to satisfy the minimum number of competitions bylaw established by the NCAA.\nThe five sports currently designated as Emerging Sports for Women are:\nWrestling was removed from the Emerging Sports program in January 2025 when it became an official championship sport, with the first season taking place in 2025\u201326.\nThe NCAA has recommended that flag football be added to the Emerging Sports program no later than 2026\u201327. All three divisions are expected to vote on this recommendation in early 2026.\nSports added and dropped.\nThe popularity of each of these sports programs has changed over time. Between 1988\u201389 and 2010\u201311, NCAA schools had net additions of 510 men's teams and 2,703 women's teams.\nThe following tables show the changes over time in the number of NCAA schools across all three divisions combined sponsoring each of the men's and women's team sports.\nMen's sports.\nThe men's sports with the biggest net gains during the 1988\u201389 to 2010\u201311 period were indoor track and field, lacrosse, and cross country (each with more than 100 net gains). The men's sports with the biggest losses were wrestling (\u2212104 teams), tennis, and rifle; the men's team sport with the most net losses was water polo. Other reports show that 355 college wrestling programs have been eliminated since 2000; 212 men's gymnastics programs have been eliminated since 1969 with only 17 programs remaining as of 2013.\nAdditionally, eight NCAA sports\u2014all men's sports\u2014were sponsored by fewer Division I schools in 2020 than in 1990, despite the D-I membership having increased by nearly 60 schools during that period. Four of these sports, namely wrestling, swimming &amp; diving, gymnastics, and tennis, lost more than 20 net teams during that timeframe. As a proportion of D-I membership, men's tennis took the greatest hit; 71.5% of D-I members had men's tennis in 2020, compared to 93.2% in 1990.\nThe following table lists the men's individual DI sports with at least 5,000 participating athletes. Sports are ranked by number of athletes.\nWomen's sports.\nThe women's sports with the biggest net gains during the 1988\u201389 to 2010\u201311 period were soccer (+599 teams), golf, and indoor track and field; no women's sports programs experienced double-digit net losses.\nThe following table lists the women's individual NCAA sports with at least 1,000 participating athletes. Sports are ranked by number of athletes.\nChampionships.\nTrophies.\nFor every NCAA sanctioned sport other than Division I FBS football, the NCAA awards trophies with gold, silver, and bronze plating for the first-, second-, and third-place teams, respectively. In the case of the NCAA basketball tournaments, both semifinalists who did not make the championship game receive bronze plated trophies for third place (prior to 1982 the teams played a \"consolation\" game to determine third place). Similar trophies are awarded to both semifinalists in the NCAA football tournaments (which are conducted in Division I FCS and both lower divisions), which have never had a third-place game. Winning teams maintain permanent possession of these trophies unless it is later found that they were won via serious rules violations.\nStarting with the 2001\u201302 season, and again in the 2007\u201308 season, the trophies were changed. Starting in the 2006 basketball season, teams that make the Final Four in the Division I tournament receive bronze-plated \"regional championship\" trophies upon winning their Regional Championship which state the region they won and have the Final Four logo. The teams that make the National Championship game receive an additional trophy that is gold-plated for the winner. Starting in the mid-1990s, the National Champions in men's and women's basketball receive an elaborate trophy with a black marble base and crystal \"neck\" with a removable crystal basketball following the presentation of the standard NCAA Championship trophy.\nAs of May 30, 2022, Stanford, UCLA, and Southern California (USC) have the most NCAA championships. Stanford has won 131 and UCLA has won 119 NCAA team championships in men's and women's sports, while USC is third with 111.\nFootball Bowl Subdivision.\nThe NCAA has never sanctioned an official championship for its highest level of football, now known as Division I FBS. Instead, several outside bodies award their own titles. The NCAA does not hold a championship tournament or game for Division I FBS football. In the past, teams that placed first in any of a number of season-ending media polls, most notable the AP Poll of writers and the Coaches Poll, were said to have won the \"national championship\".\nFrom 2014 through 2023, the College Football Playoff \u2013 a consortium of the conferences and independent schools that compete in Division I FBS and six bowl games \u2013 has arranged to place the top four teams (based on a thirteen-member committee that selects and seeds the teams) into two semifinal games, with the winners advancing to compete in the College Football Playoff National Championship, which is not officially sanctioned or recognized by the NCAA. The winner of the game receives a trophy; since the NCAA awards no national championship for Division I FBS football, this trophy does not denote \"NCAA\" as other NCAA college sports national championship trophies do. The playoff expanded to 12 teams starting in 2024.\nCurrent champions.\n+: The Division I FCS National Championship is the official NCAA-sanctioned football championship for Division I. The NCAA doesn't officially endorse a national champion at the Division I FBS level but maintains a list of \"official selectors\" in their record books.\nConferences.\nThe NCAA is divided into three levels of conferences, Division I, Division II, and Division III, organized in declining program size, as well as numerous sub-divisions. Most schools belong to a primary \"multisport conference\" for most of their sports. Schools may belong to different conferences for different sports.\nThe Division I, Division II, and Division III \"Independents\" listed below are not conferences per se; it is a designation used for schools that do not belong to a conference for a particular sport. These schools may still have conference memberships for other sports. For example, Notre Dame primarily belongs to the Atlantic Coast Conference for most sports, but its ice hockey team competes in the Big Ten Conference and its football team is an independent.\nDivision I.\nAmong the NCAA regulations, each Division I conference defined as a \"multisport conference\" must have at least seven active Division I member institutions. These conferences must sponsor at least 12 sports, including six sports for men and six for women. At least seven active members in a multisport conference must sponsor both men's and women's basketball. However, a conference may operate for up to 2 years with fewer active members under a hardship rule. For non-football conferences, they must sponsor at least two men's team sports other than basketball. Teams that consist of both men and women are counted as men's teams for sports sponsorship purposes.\nFor all institutions in the Division I Football Bowl Subdivision, they have additional requirements. Among them, they must participate in conference play in at least six men's and eight women's sports, including football, men's and women's basketball, and at least two other women's team sports. In 2023, the NCAA added new requirements for FBS membership, set to take effect in 2027\u201328. At that time, FBS institutions must fund the equivalent of 210 full scholarships across all of their NCAA sports; must spend at least $6 million annually on said scholarships; and must provide at least 90% of the required number of full scholarships across 16 sports (as chosen by the institution), including football.\n* FBS conferences in football are denoted with an asterisk (*)\n* FCS conferences in football are denoted with two asterisks (**)\n* Conferences that do not sponsor football or basketball are in \"italics\"\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nDivision I hockey-only conferences.\nDivision I ice hockey has a different conference structure than the above multisport conferences. These schools have memberships in other conferences for other sports.\nDivision II.\nAmong the NCAA regulations, Division II institutions must sponsor at least five sports for men and five for women (or four for men and six for women), with two team sports for each sex, and each playing season represented by each sex. Teams that consist of both men and women are counted as men's teams for sports sponsorship purposes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nDivision III.\nUnlike the other two divisions, Division III institutions cannot offer athletic scholarships. Among the other NCAA Division III requirements, all institutions, regardless of enrollment, must sponsor at least three team sports for each sex/gender, and each playing season represented by each sex/gender. Furthermore, a sports sponsorship rule unique to Division III is that the total number of sports that must be sponsored differs by a school's full-time undergraduate enrollment: schools with an enrollment of 1,000 or fewer must sponsor at least five sports for men and five for women; those with larger enrollments must sponsor six men's and six women's sports. As in the other divisions, teams that include both men and women are treated as men's sports for the purpose of these regulations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nMedia.\nThe NCAA has current media rights contracts with CBS Sports, CBS Sports Network, ESPN/ABC/ESPN+, TNT Sports and Golf Channel for coverage of 43 of its 93 championships. According to the official NCAA website, ESPN and its associated networks have rights to 40 championships, CBS to two, TNT Sports to one and NBC's Golf Channel to two. The following are the most prominent championships and rights holders until the 2031\u201332 season:\nWestwood One has exclusive radio rights to the men's and women's basketball Final Fours and the Men's College World Series (baseball).\nFrom 1998 to 2013, Electronic Arts had a license to develop college sports video games with the NCAA's branding, which included its \"NCAA Football\", \"NCAA Basketball\" (formerly \"NCAA March Madness\") and \"MVP Baseball\" series. The NCAA's licensing was not required to produce the games, as rights to use teams are not licensed through the NCAA, but through entities such as individual schools and the Collegiate Licensing Company. EA only acquired the license so that it could officially incorporate the Division I men's basketball tournament into its college basketball game series. The NCAA withdrew EA's license due to uncertainties surrounding a series of lawsuits, most notably \"O'Bannon v. NCAA\", involving the use of player likenesses in college sports video games.\nOffice of Inclusion.\nInclusion and Diversity Campaign.\nThe week-long program took place October 1\u20135, 2018. The aim was to utilize social media platforms in order to promote diversity and inclusion within intercollegiate athletics. Throughout the NCAA's history, there has been controversy as to the levels of diversity present within intercollegiate athletics, and this campaign is the NCAA's most straightforward approach to combatting these issues.\nNCAA Inclusion Statement.\nAs a core value, the NCAA believes in and is committed to diversity, inclusion and gender equity among its student-athletes, coaches and administrators. It seeks to establish and maintain an inclusive culture that fosters equitable participation for student-athletes and career opportunities for coaches and administrators from diverse backgrounds. Diversity and inclusion improve the learning environment for all student-athletes and enhance excellence within the Association.\nThe Office of Inclusion will provide or enable programming and education, which sustains foundations of a diverse and inclusive culture across dimensions of diversity including but not limited to age, race, sex, class, national origin, creed, educational background, religion, gender identity, disability, gender expression, geographical location, income, marital status, parental status, sexual orientation and work experiences.\nThis statement was adopted by the NCAA Executive Committee in April 2010, and amended by the NCAA Board of Governors in April 2017.\nGender equity and Title IX.\nWhile no concrete criteria are given as to a state of gender equity on campuses, an athletics program is considered gender equitable when both women's and men's sports programs reach a consensus.\nThe basis of Title IX, when amended in 1972 to the 1964 Civil Rights Act, criminalized discrimination on the basis of sex. This plays into intercollegiate athletics in that it helps to maintain gender equity and inclusion in intercollegiate athletics. The NCAA provides many resources to provide information and enforce this amendment.\nThe NCAA has kept these core values central to its decisions regarding the allocation of championship bids. In April 2016, the Board of Governors announced new requirements for host cities that include protection against discrimination based on sexual orientation or gender identity for all people involved in the event. This decision was prompted by several states passing laws that permit discrimination based on sexual orientation or gender identity in accordance with religious beliefs.\nLGBTQ.\nThe LGBTQ community has been under scrutiny and controversy in the public eye of collegiate athletics, but the NCAA has gradually liberalised its policy on them. The NCAA provides many resources concerning the education of the college community on this topic and policies in order to foster diversity. Title IX protects the transgender community within intercollegiate athletics and on college campuses.\nOn January 19, 2022, the NCAA approved a new policy for transgender athletes, effective immediately, and this replaced their previous policy, which was in place since 2011. Now, the participation of transgender athletes in a particular sport is generally to be governed by the rules of the sport's national governing body, international federation policy, or International Olympic Committee policy criteria (though an NCAA committee may provide its own recommendation). This action prompted immediate critique from LGBTQ advocates, including Athlete Ally and former NCAA LGBTQ OneTeam facilitator Rhea Debussy.\nPreviously, the NCAA used testosterone levels to qualify transgender athletes for participation. A transgender male student-athlete was not allowed to compete on a male sports team unless they had undergone medical treatment of testosterone for gender transition, and a transgender female student-athlete was not allowed to compete on a women's sports team until completing one calendar year of testosterone suppression treatment. Under this policy, transgender males were ineligible to compete on a women's team, and transgender females were ineligible to compete on a men's team, without changing the team's status to be a mixed team. In December 2021, John Lohn, the editor-in-chief of Swimming World, criticised NCAA policy; writing about transgender swimmer Lia Thomas, he argued that the \"one-year suppressant requirement is not nearly stringent enough to create a level playing field between Thomas and the biological females against whom she is racing\".\nIn 2010, the NCAA Executive Committee announced its support and commitment to diversity, inclusion, and gender equality among its student-athletes, coaches, and administrators. The statement included the NCAA's commitment to ensuring that all students have equal opportunities to achieve their academic goals, and coaches and administrators have equal opportunities for career development in a climate of respect. In 2012, the LGBTQ Subcommittee of the NCAA association-wide Committee on Women's Athletics and the Minority Opportunities and Interests Committee commissioned \"Champions of Respect,\" a document that provides resources and advocacy that promotes inclusion and equality for LGBTQ student-athletes, coaches, administrators and all others associated with intercollegiate athletics\".\" This resource uses guides from the Women's Sports Foundation It Takes a Team! project for addressing issues related to LGBTQ equality in intercollegiate athletics. The document provides information on specific issues LGBTQ sportspeople face, similarities and differences of these issues on women's and men's teams, policy recommendations and best practices, and legal resources and court cases.\nThe NCAA expressed concern over Indiana's Religious Freedom Restoration Act that allows businesses to discriminate against people based on their sexual orientation. This bill was proposed just before Indianapolis was set to host the 2015 Men's Basketball Final Four tournament. The bill clashed with the NCAA core values of inclusion and equality, and forced the NCAA to consider moving events out of Indiana. Under pressure from across the nation and fearing the economic loss of being banned from hosting NCAA events, the governor of Indiana, Mike Pence, revised the bill so that businesses could not discriminate based on sexual orientation, race, religion, or disability. The NCAA accepted the revised bill and continues to host events in Indiana. The bill was enacted into law on July 1, 2015.\nOn September 12, 2016, the NCAA announced that it would pull all seven planned championship events out of North Carolina for the 2016\u20132017 academic year. This decision was a response to the state passing the Public Facilities Privacy and Security Act (H.B. 2) on March 23, 2016. This law requires people to use public restrooms that correspond with their sex assigned at birth and stops cities from passing laws that protect against discrimination towards gay and transgender people. The NCAA Board of Governors determined that this law would make ensuring an inclusive atmosphere in the host communities challenging, and relocating these championship events best reflects the association's commitment to maintaining an environment that is consistent with its core values. After state lawmakers repealed the bill and replaced it with a less restrictive one, the NCAA announced in April 2017 that the championship ban on the state had been lifted.\nIn December 2024, Texas Attorney General Ken Paxton sued the NCAA, arguing that allowing trans women to compete in women's sporting events was \"false, deceptive, and misleading\" to attendees.\nOn February 6, 2025, the day after President Donald Trump signed the executive order Keeping Men Out of Women's Sports, the NCAA changed its policy to limit college competitions in women's sports to athletes who were assigned female at birth, effective immediately.\nRace and ethnicity.\nRacial/Ethnic minority groups in the NCAA are protected by inclusion and diversity policies put in place to increase sensitivity and awareness to the issues and challenges faced across intercollegiate athletics. The NCAA provides a demographics database that can be openly viewed by the public.\nHistorically, the NCAA has used its authority in deciding on host cities to promote its core values. The Association also prohibits championship events in states that display the Confederate flag, and at member schools that have abusive or offensive nicknames or mascots based on Native American imagery. Board members wish to ensure that anyone associated with an NCAA championship event will be treated with fairness and respect.\nStudent-athletes with disabilities.\nThe NCAA defines a disability as a current impairment that has a substantial educational impact on a student's academic performance and requires accommodation. Student-Athletes with disabilities are given education accommodations along with an adapted sports model. The NCAA hosts adapted sports championships for both track and field and swimming and diving as of 2015.\nInternational student athletes.\nOver the last two decades recruiting international athletes has become a growing trend among NCAA institutions. For example, most German athletes outside of Germany are based at US universities. For many European athletes, the American universities are the only option to pursue an academic and athletic career at the same time. Some of these students go to the US with high academic expectations and aspirations.\nCollege team name changes.\nAs of 2018, there has been a continuation of changing school mascots that are said by some to be based on racist or offensive stereotypes. Universities under NCAA policy are under scrutiny for specifically Native American-inspired mascots. While many colleges have changed their mascots, some have gotten legal permission from the tribe represented and will continue to bear the mascot. This Native American mascot controversy has not been completely settled; however, many issues have been resolved.\nHere is a list of notable colleges that changed Native American mascots and/or nicknames in recent history:\nOthers:\nOf note: Utah (Utes), Central Michigan (Chippewas), Florida State (Seminoles) and Mississippi College (Choctaws) all appealed successfully to the NCAA after being deemed \"hostile and offensive\". Each cited positive relationships with neighboring tribes in appeal. UNC Pembroke (Braves), an institution originally created to educate Native Americans and enjoying close ties to the local Lumbee tribe, was approved to continue the use of native-derived imagery without needing an appeal.\nRules violations.\nMember schools pledge to follow the rules promulgated by the NCAA. Creation of a mechanism to enforce the NCAA's legislation occurred in 1952 after careful consideration by the membership.\nAllegations of rules violations are referred to the NCAA's enforcement staff, who monitor information about potential violations, investigate and process violations, provide notice of alleged violations, and bring cases before the NCAA's Committees on Infractions. A preliminary investigation is initiated to determine if an official inquiry is warranted and to categorize any resultant violations as secondary or major. If several violations are found, the NCAA may determine that the school as a whole has exhibited a \"lack of institutional control\". The institution involved is notified promptly and may appear on its own behalf before the NCAA Committee on Infractions.\nFindings of the Committee on Infractions and the resultant sanctions in major cases are reported to the institution. Sanctions will generally include having the institution placed on \"probation\" for a period of time, in addition to other penalties. The institution may appeal the findings or sanctions to an appeals committee. After considering written reports and oral presentations by representatives of the Committee on Infractions and the institution, the committee acts on the appeal. Action may include accepting the infractions committee's findings and penalty, altering either, or making its own findings and imposing an appropriate penalty.\nIn cases of particularly egregious misconduct, the NCAA has the power to ban a school from participating in a particular sport, a penalty known as the \"Death Penalty\". Since 1985, any school that commits major violations during the probationary period can be banned from the sport involved for up to two years. However, when the NCAA opts not to issue a death penalty for a repeat violation, it must explain why it did not do so. This penalty has only been imposed three times in its modern form, most notably when Southern Methodist University's (SMU) football team had its 1987 season canceled due to massive rules violations dating back more than a decade. SMU opted not to field a team in 1988 as well due to the aftershocks from the sanctions, and the program has never recovered. The Mustangs did not post a winning season until 1997, did not appear in their next bowl game until 2009, did not post consecutive winning seasons until 2011 and 2012, did not return to the national rankings until 2019, and did not win a conference title again until 2023. The devastating effect the death penalty had on SMU has reportedly made the NCAA skittish about issuing another one. Since the SMU case, there are only three instances where the NCAA has seriously considered imposing it against a Division I school; it imposed it against Division II Morehouse College's men's soccer team in 2003 and Division III MacMurray College's men's tennis team in 2005. In addition to these cases, the most recent Division I school to be considered was Penn State. This was because of the Jerry Sandusky Incident that consequently almost landed Penn State on the hook for the death penalty. They received a $60\u00a0million fine, in addition to forfeited seasons and other sanctions as well. The NCAA later reversed itself by restoring all forfeited seasons and overturning the remaining sanctions.\nAdditionally, in particularly egregious cases of rules violations, coaches, athletic directors, and athletic support staff can be barred from working for any NCAA member school without permission from the NCAA. This procedure is known as a \"show-cause penalty\" (not to be confused with an order to show cause in the legal sense). Theoretically, a school can hire someone with a \"show cause\" on their record during the time the show cause order is in effect only with permission from the NCAA Infractions Committee. The school assumes the risks and stigma of hiring such a person. It may then end up being sanctioned by the NCAA and the Infractions Committee for their choice, possibly losing athletic scholarships, revenue from schools who would not want to compete with that other school, and the ability for their games to be televised, along with restrictions on recruitment and practicing times. As a result, a show-cause order essentially has the effect of blackballing individuals from being hired for the duration of the order.\nOne of the most famous scandals in NCAA history involved Heisman Trophy-winning quarterback Cam Newton of the Auburn Tigers in 2011. As a direct effect of not being compensated for his college athletics, Cam Newton's family allegedly sought upwards of $100,000 for him to instead play at Mississippi State. This was revealed days before the conference SEC championship game; however, Cam Newton was later reinstated as there was insufficient evidence against him.\nSponsors.\nThe NCAA has a two-tier sponsorship division. AT&amp;T, Coca-Cola, and Capital One are NCAA Corporate Champions, all others are NCAA Corporate Partners.\nFinances.\nAs a governing body for amateur sports the NCAA is classified as a tax-exempt not-for-profit organization. As such, it is not required to pay most taxes on income that for-profit private and public corporations are subject to. The NCAA's business model of prohibiting salaries for collegial athletes has been challenged in court, but a 2015 case was struck down. As of 2014 the NCAA reported that it had over $600\u00a0million in unrestricted net assets in its annual report. During 2014 the NCAA also reported almost a billion dollars of revenue, contributing to a \"budget surplus\" \u2013 revenues in excess of disbursements for that year \u2013 of over $80\u00a0million. Over $700\u00a0million of that revenue total was from licensing TV rights to its sporting events. In addition, the NCAA also earns money through investment growth of its endowment fund. Established in 2004 with $45\u00a0million, the fund has grown to over $380\u00a0million in 2014.\nNCAA expenditures.\nAccording to the NCAA, it receives most of its annual revenue from two sources: Division I Men's Basketball television and marketing rights, and championships ticket sales. According to the NCAA, \"that money is distributed in more than a dozen ways \u2013 almost all of which directly support NCAA schools, conferences and nearly half a million student-athletes.\"\nIn 2017 total NCAA revenues were in excess of $1.06\u00a0billion. Division I basketball television and marketing rights generated $821.4\u00a0million, and \"championships ticket sales\" totaled $129.4\u00a0million. Other \"smaller streams of revenue, such as membership dues\" contributed an unspecified amount.\nExpenses by category.\nThe NCAA provided a breakdown of how those revenues were in turn spent, organizing pay-outs and expenses into some 14 basic categories. By far the largest went to Sports Scholarship and Sponsorship Funds, funding for sports and student scholarships under the Division I Basketball Performance Fund, expenses incurred in producing Division I Championships (including team food, travel, and lodging), the Student Assistance Fund, and Student Athlete Services. Together these top five recipients accounted for 65% of all NCAA expenditures. General and Administrative expenses for running the NCAA day-to-day operations totaled approximately 4% of monies paid out, and other association-wide expenses, including legal services, communications, and business insurance totaled 8%.\nThe categories:\n Distributed to Division I schools to help fund NCAA sports and provide scholarships for college athletes.\n Distributed to Division I conferences and independent schools based on their performance in the men's basketball tournament over a six-year rolling period. The money is used to fund NCAA sports and provide scholarships for college athletes.\n Provides college athletes the opportunity to compete for a championship and includes support for team travel, food, and lodging.\n Distributed to Division I student-athletes for essential needs that arise during their time in college.\n Includes funding for catastrophic injury insurance, drug testing, student-athlete leadership programs, postgraduate scholarships, and additional Association-wide championships support.\n Distributed equally among Division I basketball-playing conferences that meet athletic and academic standards to play in the men's basketball tournament. The money is used to fund NCAA sports and provide scholarships for college athletes.\n Distributed to Division I schools to assist with academic programs and services.\n Funds championships, grants, and other initiatives for Division II college athletes.\n Covers costs related to NCAA governance committees and the annual NCAA Convention.\n Funds championships, grants, and other initiatives for Division III college athletes.\n Distributed to Division I conferences for programs that enhance officiating, compliance, minority opportunities, and more.\n Supports various educational services for members to help prepare student-athletes for life, including the Women Coaches Academy, the Emerging Leaders Seminars, and the Pathway Program.\n Includes support for Association-wide legal services, communications, and business insurance.\n Funds the day-to-day operations of the NCAA national office, including administrative and financial services, information technology, and facilities management.\nAccording to the NCAA, the 2017 fiscal year was the first in which its revenues topped $1.0\u00a0billion. The increase in revenue from 2016 came from hikes in television and marketing fees, plus greater monies generated from championship events and investment income.\nAn ESPN critique of the organization's 2017 financials indicated some $560.3\u00a0million of the total $956\u00a0million paid out went back to its roughly 1,100 member institutions in 24 sports in all three divisions, as well as $200\u00a0million for a one-time payment the NCAA made to schools to fund additional programs.\nThe Division I basketball tournament alone generated some $761\u00a0million, with another $60\u00a0million in 2016\u201317 marketing rights. With increases in rights fees it is estimated the basketball tournament will generate some $869\u00a0million for the 2018 championship.\nPlayer compensation proposals.\nThe NCAA has limited the amount of compensation that individual players can receive to scholarships equal to school tuition and related expenses. This rule has generated controversy, in light of the large amounts of revenues that schools earn from sports from TV contracts, ticket sales, and licensing and merchandise. Several commentators have discussed whether the NCAA limit on player compensation violates antitrust laws. There is a consensus among economists that the NCAA's compensation caps for men's basketball and football players benefit the athletes' schools (through rent-seeking) at the expense of the athletes. Economists have subsequently characterized the NCAA as a cartel and collusive monopsony.\nPro-rating payouts to Division I basketball players in proportion to the size of revenues its championship tournament generates relative to the NCAA's total annual revenues would be one possible approach, but will open the door to litigation by students and schools adversely affected by such a formula.\nAccording to a national study by the National College Players Association (NCPA) and the Drexel University Sport Management Department, the average FBS \"full\" athletic scholarship falls short of the full cost of attending each school by an average of $3285 during 2011\u201312 school year, and leaves the vast majority of full scholarship players living below the federal poverty line. \nIn 2020, the NCAA Board of Governors announced that they supported rule changes that would permit players to receive athletics-related endorsements from third-parties. All divisions were expected to adopt new rules relating to the use of players' names, images, and likenesses before the 2021\u20132022 academic year begins.\nOn May 6, 2021, Governor Brian Kemp signed Bill 617 into law, giving collegiate athletes the ability to profit off their Name, Image and Likeness. The University of Georgia have said they will immediately compensate their student athletes, while Georgia Tech and Georgia State University have not set anything yet.\nOn June 21, 2021, the U.S. Supreme Court held unanimously in \"National Collegiate Athletic Association v. Alston\" that the NCAA's restrictions on education-related payments were unlawfully in violation of Sherman Act's antitrust and trade regulations. Though this holding did not address restrictions on direct compensation payment to athletes, it also opened the door for the possibility of future court cases concerning this matter.\nThe NCAA announced on July 1, 2021, that as a result of \"O'Bannon\" and numerous state laws giving college players the ability to manage their publicity, the board had agreed to new rules that removed restrictions on college athletes from entering paid endorsements and other sponsorship deals, and from using agents to manage their publicity. Students would still be required to inform the school of all such activities, with the school to make determinations if those activities violate state and local laws.\nOn the first day of effect for the NIL rule change (July 1), athletes such as D'Eriq King (Miami (FL) quarterback), Justyn Ross (Clemson wide receiver), Bo Nix (Auburn quarterback), Antwan Owen (Jackson State defensive end), McKenzie Milton (Florida State quarterback), Malik Cunningham (Louisville quarterback), Michael Penix Jr. (Indiana quarterback), Spencer Rattler (Oklahoma quarterback), Lexi Sun (Nebraska volleyball), Paige Bueckers (UConn basketball) and twins Haley &amp; Hanna Cavinder (Fresno State basketball), all signed deals and/or unveiled trademarks to profit off of their names, images, and likenesses. As of day one, LSU gymnast Olivia Dunne was projected to be the highest earning college athlete of 2021\u201322, out of both men's and women's sports.\nThe new NIL agreement has given student athletes big time deals and opportunities to put themselves out there and gain profit using their name, image, and likeness. For example, Ga'Quincy McKinstry, a cornerback from Alabama known since childhood as \"Kool-Aid\", signed a deal with Kool-Aid. Not only can they partner up with companies, student athletes can get paid for other talents (i.e. singing).\nRussell Steinberg in 2021 says, \"In addition to his prowess on the football field, where he has a shot at tying the school record for most starts, Marshall's Will Ulmer is a talented musician who wasn't able to earn money using his own name \u2014 until now. He had been going by \"Lucky Bill\" to avoid running afoul of NCAA regulations, but now says he is ready to book shows using his real name\" (Steinberg 2021). The NIL has allowed Ulmer great opportunities to further pursue his football and musician career.\nSome companies have partnered up with multiple athletes and created a team of their own. Degree, the deodorant brand, started a team of 14 student athletes to help promote their brand. Degree calls this team Breaking Limits. \"The Unilever-owned antiperspirant brand has committed $5 million over the next five years to inspire people to break limits. The first group of athletes that Degree has selected represent a diverse range of backgrounds regarding race, gender, and sport, and their stories will be unveiled on Instagram. These athletes will also have the chance to participate in events to help their local communities\" (Steinberg 2021).\nOn May 23, 2024, the NCAA and its five power conferences agreed to allow schools to directly pay players for the first time in the 100-plus-year history of college sports. The NCAA and its leagues announced their intention to enter into a multibillion-dollar agreement to settle three pending antitrust cases. In doing so, the NCAA will pay more than $2.7 billion in damages over ten years to more than 10,000 past and current athletes. It is anticipated that each player in the class will receive an annual check worth 10% of the money they are owed. Additionally, the NCAA and its league are also set to enter into a revenue-sharing plan, which allows each member school to share up to roughly $20 million per year with its athletes.\nIndividual awards.\nThe NCAA presents a number of different individual awards, including:\nIn previous years, the NCAA has presented the following awards at its NCAA Honors event: Astronaut Salute, Business Leader Salute, Congressional Medal of Honor Salute, Governor Salute, Olympians Salute, Performing Arts Salute, President's Cabinet Salute, Prominent National Media Salute, Special Recognition Awards, U.S. House of Representatives Salute, and U.S. Senate Salute.\nOther collegiate athletic organizations.\nThe NCAA is the dominant, but not the only, collegiate athletic organization in the United States. Several other such collegiate athletic organizations exist.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes and references.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "60709", "revid": "1461430", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60709", "title": "Penmanship", "text": "Technique of writing with the hand\nPenmanship is the technique of writing with the hand using a writing instrument. Today, this is most commonly done with a pen, or pencil, but throughout history has included many different implements. The various generic and formal historical styles of writing are called \"hands\" while an individual's style of penmanship is referred to as \"handwriting\".\nHistory.\nOrigins.\nThe earliest example of systematic writing is the Sumerian pictographic system found on clay tablets, which eventually developed around 3200 BC into a modified version called cuneiform which was impressed on wet clay with a sharpened reed. This form of writing eventually evolved into an ideographic system (where a sign represents an idea) and then to a syllabic system (where a sign represents a syllable). Developing around the same time, the Egyptian system of hieroglyphics also began as a pictographic script and evolved into a system of syllabic writing. Two cursive scripts were eventually created, hieratic, shortly after hieroglyphs were invented, and demotic (Egyptian) in the seventh century BC. Scribes wrote these scripts usually on papyrus, with ink on a reed pen.\nThe first known alphabetical system came from the Phoenicians, who developed a vowel-less system of 22 letters around the eleventh century BC. The Greeks eventually adapted the Phoenician alphabet around the eighth century BC. Adding vowels to the alphabet, dropping some consonants and altering the order, the Ancient Greeks developed a script which included only what we know of as capital Greek letters. The lowercase letters of Classical Greek were a later invention of the Middle Ages. The Phoenician alphabet also influenced the Hebrew and Aramaic scripts, which follow a vowel-less system. One Hebrew script was only used for religious literature and by a small community of Samaritans up until the sixth century BC. Aramaic was the official script of the Babylonian, Assyrian and Persian empires and 'Square Hebrew' (the script now used in Israel) developed from Aramaic around the third century AD.\nHandwriting based on Latin script.\nThe Romans in Southern Italy eventually adopted the Greek alphabet as modified by the Etruscans to develop Latin writing. Like the Greeks, the Romans employed stone, metal, clay, and papyrus as writing surfaces. Handwriting styles which were used to produce manuscripts included square capitals, rustic capitals, uncials, and half-uncials. Square capitals were employed for more-formal texts based on stone inscriptional letters, while rustic capitals freer, compressed, and efficient. Uncials were rounded capitals (majuscules) that originally were developed by the Greeks in the third century BC, but became popular in Latin manuscripts by the fourth century AD. Roman cursive or informal handwriting started out as a derivative of the capital letters, though the tendency to write quickly and efficiently made the letters less precise. Half-uncials (minuscules) were lowercase letters, which eventually became the national hand of Ireland. Other combinations of half-uncial and cursive handwriting developed throughout Europe, including Visigothic, and Merovingian.\nAt the end of the eighth century, Charlemagne decreed that all writings in his empire were to be written in a standard handwriting, which came to be known as Carolingian minuscule. Alcuin of York was commissioned by Charlemagne to create this new handwriting, which he did in collaboration with other scribes and based on the tradition of other Roman handwriting. Carolingian minuscule was used to produce many of the manuscripts from monasteries until the eleventh century and most lower-case letters of today's European scripts derive from it.\nGothic or black-letter script, evolved from Carolingian, became the dominant handwriting from the twelfth century until the Italian Renaissance (1400\u20131600 AD). This script was not as clear as the Carolingian, but instead was narrower, darker, and denser. Because of this, the dot above the \"i\" was added in order to differentiate it from the similar pen strokes of the \"n\", \"m\", and \"u\". Also, the letter \"u\" was created as separate from the \"v\", which had previously been used for both sounds. Part of the reason for such compact handwriting was to save space, since parchment was expensive. Gothic script, being the writing style of scribes in Germany when Gutenberg invented movable type, became the model for the first typeface. Another variation of Carolingian minuscule was created by the Italian humanists in the fifteenth century, called by them \"littera antiqua\" and now called humanist minuscule. This was a combination of Roman capitals and the rounded version of Carolingian minuscule. A cursive form eventually developed, and it became increasingly slanted due to the quickness with which it could be written. This manuscript handwriting, called cursive humanistic, became known as the typeface Italic used throughout Europe.\nCopperplate engraving influenced handwriting as it allowed penmanship copybooks to be more widely printed. Copybooks first appeared in Italy around the sixteenth century; the earliest writing manuals were published by Sigismondo Fanti and Ludovico degli Arrighi. Other manuals were produced by Dutch and French writing masters later in the century, including Pierre Hamon. However, copybooks only became commonplace in England with the invention of copperplate engraving. Engraving could better produce the flourishes in handwritten script, which helped penmanship masters to produce beautiful examples for students. Some of these early penmanship manuals included those of Edward Cocker, John Seddon, and John Ayer. By the eighteenth century, schools were established to teach penmanship techniques from master penmen, especially in England and the United States. Penmanship became part of the curriculum in American schools by the early 1900s, rather than just reserved for specialty schools teaching adults penmanship as a professional skill. Several different penmanship methods have been developed and published, including Spencerian, Getty-Dubay, Barchowsky Fluent Handwriting, Icelandic (Italic), Zaner-Bloser, and D\u2019Nealian methods among others used in American education.\nHandwriting based on Chinese script.\nWriting systems developed in East Asia include Chinese and Japanese writing systems. Chinese characters represent whole morphemes rather than individual sounds, and consequently are visually far more complex than European scripts; in some cases their pictographic origins are still visible. The earliest form of Chinese was written on bones and shells (called Jiaguwen) in the fourteenth century BC. Other writing surfaces used during this time included bronze, stone, jade, pottery, and clay, which became more popular after the twelfth century BC. Greater Seal script (Dazhuan) flourished during 1100 BC and 700 BC and appeared mainly in bronze vessels. Lesser Seal script (Xiaozhuan) is the precursor of modern complex Chinese script, which is more stylized than the Greater Seal.\nChinese handwriting is considered an art, more so than illuminated manuscripts in Western culture. Calligraphy is widely practiced in China, which employs scripts such as Kaishu (standard), Xingshu (semi-cursive), and Caoshu (cursive). Chinese calligraphy is meant to represent the artistic personality in a way western calligraphy cannot, and therefore penmanship is valued higher than in any other nation. Standard Script (Kaishu) is main traditional script used today.\nJapanese writing evolved from Chinese script and Chinese characters, called kanji, or ideograms, were adopted to represent Japanese words and grammar. Kanji were simplified to create two other scripts, called hiragana and katakana. Hiragana is the more widely used script in Japan today, while katakana, meant for formal documents originally, is used similarly to italics in alphabetic scripts.\nTeaching methods and history.\nBooks used in North America.\nPlatt Rogers Spencer is known as the \"Father of American Penmanship\". His writing system was first published in 1848, in his book \"Spencer and Rice's System of Business and Ladies' Penmanship\". The most popular Spencerian manual was \"The Spencerian Key to Practical Penmanship\", published by his sons in 1866. This \"Spencerian Method\" Ornamental Style was taught in American schools until the mid-1920s, and has seen a resurgence in recent years through charter schools and home schooling using revised Spencerian books and methods produced by former IAMPETH president Michael Sull (born 1946).\nGeorge A. Gaskell (1845\u20131886), a student of Spencer, authored two popular books on penmanship, \"Gaskell's Complete Compendium of Elegant Writing\" and \"The Penman's Hand-Book\" (1883). Louis Henry Hausam published the \"New Education in Penmanship\" in 1908, called \"the greatest work of the kind ever published.\"\nMany copybooks were produced in North America at the start of the 20th century, mostly for Business Style penmanship (a simplified form of Ornamental Style). These included those produced by A. N. Palmer, a student of Gaskell, who developed the Palmer Method, as reflected in his \"Palmer's Guide to Business Writing\", published in 1894. Also popular was Zaner-Bloser Method, introduced by Charles Paxton Zaner (15 February 1864\u00a0\u2013 1 December 1918) and Elmer Ward Bloser (6 November 1865\u00a0\u2013 1929) of the Zanerian Business College. The A. N. Palmer Company folded in the early 1980s.\nModern Styles include more than 200 published textbook curricula including: D'Nealian Method (a derivative of the Palmer Method which uses a slanted, serifed manuscript form followed by an entirely joined and looped cursive), Modern Zaner-Bloser which accounts for the majority of handwriting textbook sales in the US, A Beka, Schaffer, Peterson, Loops and Groups, McDougal, Steck Vaughn, and many others.\nItalic Styles include Getty-Dubay Italic (slightly slanted), Eager, Portland, Barchowsky Fluent Handwriting, Queensland, etc.\nOther copybook styles that are unique and do not fall into any previous categories are Smithhand, Handwriting without Tears, Ausgangsschrift, Bob Jones, etc. These may differ greatly from each other in a variety of ways.\nThe first made video for correcting messy handwriting especially for people with ADHD and or dysgraphia was \"Anyone Can Improve Their Own Handwriting\" by learning specialist Jason Mark Alster MSc.\nSchools in East Asia.\nBy the nineteenth century, attention was increasingly given to developing quality penmanship in Eastern schools. Countries that had a writing system based on logographs and syllabaries placed particular emphasis on form and quality when learning. These countries, such as China and Japan, have pictophonetic characters that are difficult to learn. Chinese children start by learning the most fundamental characters first and building to the more esoteric ones. Often, children trace the different strokes in the air with the teacher and eventually start writing them on paper.\nIn the twentieth and twenty-first centuries, there have been more efforts to simplify these systems and standardize handwriting. For example, in China in 1955, in order to respond to illiteracy among people, the government introduced a Romanized version of Chinese script, called Pinyin. However, by the 1960s, people rebelled against the infringement upon traditional Chinese by foreign influences. This writing reform did not help illiteracy among peasants. Japanese also has simplified the Chinese characters it uses into scripts called kana. However kanji are still used in preference over kana in many contexts, and a large part of children's schooling is learning kanji. Moreover, Japan has tried to hold on to handwriting as an art form while not compromising the more modern emphasis on speed and efficiency. In the early 1940s, handwriting was taught twice, once as calligraphy in the art section of school curricula, and then again as a functional skill in the language section. The practical function of penmanship in Japan did not start to be questioned until the end of the twentieth century; while typewriters proved more efficient than penmanship in the modern West, these technologies had a hard time transferring to Japan, since the thousands of characters involved in the language made typing unfeasible.\nMotor control.\nHandwriting requires the motor coordination of multiple joints in the hand, wrist, elbow, and shoulder to form letters and to arrange them on the page. Holding the pen and guiding it across paper depends mostly upon sensory information from skin, joints and muscles of the hand and this adjusts movement to changes in the friction between pen and paper. With practice and familiarity, handwriting becomes highly automated using motor programs stored in motor memory. Compared to other complex motor skills handwriting is far less dependent on a moment-to-moment visual guidance.\nResearch in individuals with complete peripheral deafferentation with and without vision of their writing hand finds increase of number of pen touches, increase in number of inversions in velocity, decrease of mean stroke frequency and longer writing movement duration. The changes show that cutaneous and proprioceptive feedback play a critical role in updating the motor memories and internal models that underlie handwriting. In contrast, sight provides only a secondary role in adjusting motor commands.\nSee also.\nTypes of writing\nStudies of writing and penmanship\nPenmanship-related professions\nOther penmanship-related topics\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
