{"id": "70426", "revid": "6399654", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70426", "title": "Edema", "text": "Accumulation of excess fluid in tissue\nMedical condition&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nEdema (American English), also spelled oedema (Commonwealth English), and also known as fluid retention, swelling, dropsy and hydropsy, is the build-up of fluid in the body's tissue. Most commonly, the legs or arms are affected. Symptoms may include skin that feels tight, the area feeling heavy, and joint stiffness. Other symptoms depend on the underlying cause.\nCauses may include venous insufficiency, heart failure, kidney problems, low protein levels, liver problems, deep vein thrombosis, infections, kwashiorkor, angioedema, certain medications, and lymphedema. It may also occur in immobile patients (stroke, spinal cord injury, aging), or with temporary immobility such as prolonged sitting or standing, and during menstruation or pregnancy. The condition is more concerning if it starts suddenly, or pain or shortness of breath is present.\nTreatment depends on the underlying cause. If the underlying mechanism involves sodium retention, decreased salt intake and a diuretic may be used. Elevating the legs and support stockings may be useful for edema of the legs. Older people are more commonly affected. The word is from the Ancient Greek \"o\u00edd\u0113ma\" meaning 'swelling'.\nSigns and symptoms.\nSpecific area.\nAn edema will occur in specific organs as part of inflammation, tendinitis or pancreatitis. Certain organs develop edema through tissue specific mechanisms. Examples of edema in specific organs:\nGeneralized.\nA rise in hydrostatic pressure occurs in cardiac failure. A fall in osmotic pressure occurs in nephrotic syndrome and liver failure.\nCauses of edema that are generalized to the whole body can cause edema in multiple organs and peripherally. For example, severe heart failure can cause pulmonary edema, pleural effusions, ascites and peripheral edema. Such severe systemic edema is called anasarca. In rare cases, a parvovirus B19 infection may cause generalized edemas.\nAlthough a low plasma oncotic pressure is widely cited for the edema of nephrotic syndrome, most physicians note that the edema may occur before there is any significant protein in the urine (proteinuria) or fall in plasma protein level. Most forms of nephrotic syndrome are due to biochemical and structural changes in the basement membrane of capillaries in the kidney glomeruli, and these changes occur, if to a lesser degree, in the vessels of most other tissues of the body. Thus the resulting increase in permeability that leads to protein in the urine can explain the edema if all other vessels are more permeable as well.\nAs well as the previously mentioned conditions, edemas often occur during the late stages of pregnancy in some women. This is more common with those of a history of pulmonary problems or poor circulation also being intensified if arthritis is already present in that particular woman. Women who already have arthritic problems most often have to seek medical help for pain caused from over-reactive swelling. Edemas that occur during pregnancy are usually found in the lower part of the leg, usually from the calf down.\nHydrops fetalis is a condition in a baby characterized by an accumulation of fluid in at least two body compartments.\nCause.\nHeart.\nThe pumping force of the heart should help to keep a normal pressure within the blood vessels. But if the heart begins to fail (a condition known as congestive heart failure) the pressure changes can cause very severe water retention. In this condition water retention is mostly visible in the legs, feet and ankles, but water also collects in the lungs, where it causes a chronic cough. This condition is usually treated with diuretics; otherwise, the water retention may cause breathing problems and additional stress on the heart.\nKidneys.\nAnother cause of severe water retention is kidney failure, where the kidneys are no longer able to filter fluid out of the blood and turn it into urine. Kidney disease often starts with inflammation, for instance in the case of diseases such as nephrotic syndrome or lupus. This type of water retention is usually visible in the form of swollen legs and ankles.\nLiver.\nCirrhosis (scarring) of the liver is a common cause of edema in the legs and abdominal cavity.\nVeins.\nPhlebetic lymphedema (or phlebolymphedema) is seen in untreated chronic venous insufficiency and is the most common type of edema (approx. 90%). It is a combination venous/lymphatic disorder that originates in defective \"leaky\" veins that allows the blood to back flow (venous reflux), slowing the return of the blood to the heart (venous stasis). The venous pressure in the legs changes dramatically while standing compared to lying down. How much pressure there is depends on the person's height, in the average adult person, it is 8 mm Hg while lying down and 100 mm Hg while standing.\nIn venous insufficiency, venous stasis results in abnormally high venous pressure (venous hypertension) and greater permeability of blood capillaries (capillary hyperpermeability), to drain the blood through the lymphatic system. The lymphatic system slowly removes excess fluid and proteins from the veins in the lower legs towards the upper body; however, as it is not as efficient as an unimpaired circulatory system, swelling (edema) is visible, particularly in the ankles and lower leg. The chronic increased fluid in the lymphatic system and capillary hyperpermeability causes an inflammatory response which leads to tissue fibrosis of both veins and lymphatic system, opening of arteriovenous shunts, all of which then worsens the condition in a vicious cycle.\nOthers.\nSwollen legs, feet and ankles are common in late pregnancy. The problem is partly caused by the weight of the uterus on the major veins of the pelvis. It usually clears up after delivery of the baby, and is mostly not a cause for concern, though it should always be reported to a doctor.\nLack of exercise is another common cause of water retention in the legs. Exercise helps the leg veins work against gravity to return blood to the heart. If blood travels too slowly and starts to pool in the leg veins, the pressure can force too much fluid out of the leg capillaries into the tissue spaces. The capillaries may break, leaving small blood marks under the skin. The veins themselves can become swollen, painful and distorted \u2013 a condition known as varicose veins.\nCauses of bilateral pedal edema:\n(after exclusion of cardiac, renal, heart, liver and thyroid disorders, malnutrition or malabsorption).\n Muscle action is needed not only to keep blood flowing through the veins but also to stimulate the lymphatic system to fulfil its \"overflow\" function. Long-haul flights, lengthy bed-rest, immobility caused by disability and so on, are all potential causes of water retention. Even very small exercises such as rotating ankles and wiggling toes can help to reduce it.\nCertain medications are prone to causing water retention. These include estrogens, thereby including drugs for hormone replacement therapy or the combined oral contraceptive pill, as well as non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs and beta-blockers.\nPremenstrual water retention, causing bloating and breast tenderness, is common.\nMechanism.\nSix factors can contribute to the formation of edema:\nGeneration of interstitial fluid is regulated by the forces of the Starling equation. Hydrostatic pressure within blood vessels tends to cause water to filter out into the tissue. This leads to a difference in protein concentration between blood plasma and tissue. As a result, the colloidal or oncotic pressure of the higher level of protein in the plasma tends to draw water back into the blood vessels from the tissue. Starling's equation states that the rate of leakage of fluid is determined by the difference between the two forces and also by the permeability of the vessel wall to water, which determines the rate of flow for a given force imbalance. Most water leakage occurs in capillaries or post capillary venules, which have a semi-permeable membrane wall that allows water to pass more freely than protein. (The protein is said to be reflected and the efficiency of reflection is given by a reflection constant of up to 1.) If the gaps between the cells of the vessel wall open up then permeability to water is increased first, but as the gaps increase in size permeability to protein also increases with a fall in reflection coefficient.\nChanges in the variables in Starling's equation can contribute to the formation of edemas either by an increase in hydrostatic pressure within the blood vessel, a decrease in the oncotic pressure within the blood vessel or an increase in vessel wall permeability. The latter has two effects. It allows water to flow more freely and it reduces the colloidal or oncotic pressure difference by allowing protein to leave the vessel more easily.\nAnother set of vessels known as the lymphatic system acts like an \"overflow\" and can return much excess fluid to the bloodstream. But even the lymphatic system can be overwhelmed, and if there is simply too much fluid, or if the lymphatic system is congested, then the fluid will remain in the tissues, causing swellings in legs, ankles, feet, abdomen or any other part of the body.\nMolecular biology.\nThe excessive extracellular fluid (interstitial fluid) in edemas is to a substantial degree caused by an increased permeability of the smallest blood vessels (capillaries). This permeability is modulated by numerous biochemical chain reactions and can therefore be unbalanced by many influences.\nInvolved in these processes are, among others, the transmembrane proteins occludin, claudins, tight junction protein ZO-1, cadherins, catenins and actinin, which are directed by intracellular signal chains, in particular in connection with the enzyme protein kinase C.\nDiagnosis.\nEdema may be described as pitting edema or non-pitting edema. Pitting edema is when, after pressure is applied to a small area, the indentation persists after the release of the pressure. Peripheral pitting edema, as shown in the illustration, is the more common type, resulting from water retention. It can be caused by systemic diseases, pregnancy in some women, either directly or as a result of heart failure, or local conditions such as varicose veins, thrombophlebitis, insect bites, and dermatitis.\nNon-pitting edema is observed when the indentation does not persist. It is associated with such conditions as lymphedema, lipedema, and myxedema.\nEdema caused by malnutrition defines kwashiorkor, an acute form of childhood protein-energy malnutrition characterized by edema, irritability, anorexia, ulcerating dermatoses, and an enlarged liver with fatty infiltrates.\nTreatment.\nWhen possible, treatment involves resolving the underlying cause. Many cases of heart or kidney disease are treated with diuretics.\nTreatment may also involve positioning the affected body parts to improve drainage. For example, swelling in feet or ankles may be reduced by having the person lie down in bed or sit with the feet propped up on cushions. Intermittent pneumatic compression can be used to pressurize tissue in a limb, forcing fluids\u2014both blood and lymph\u2014to flow out of the compressed area.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70428", "revid": "271657", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70428", "title": "The Quiet Man", "text": "1952 romantic comedy-drama film by John Ford\nThe Quiet Man is a 1952 American romantic comedy drama film directed and produced by John Ford, and starring John Wayne, Maureen O'Hara, Victor McLaglen, Barry Fitzgerald, Arthur Shields and Ward Bond. The screenplay by Frank S. Nugent was loosely based on a 1933 \"Saturday Evening Post\" short story of the same name by Irish author Maurice Walsh, later published as part of a collection titled \"The Green Rushes\". The film features Winton Hoch's lush photography of the Irish countryside and a long, climactic, semi-comic fist fight.\nThe film was an official selection of the 1952 Venice Film Festival. John Ford won the Academy Award for Best Director, his fourth, and Winton Hoch won for Best Cinematography. In 2013, the film was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being \"culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant\".\nPlot.\nIn the 1920s, Sean \"Trooper Thorn\" Thornton, an Irish-born American retired boxer, travels from Pittsburgh to his birthplace of Inisfree to purchase the old family farm. Shortly after arriving, he meets and falls in love with fiery, red-headed Mary Kate Danaher, the sister of bullying Squire \"Red\" Will Danaher. Will also wants to buy the old Thornton property, and is angered when the property's current owner, the wealthy Widow Tillane, accepts Sean's bid instead of his. Will then retaliates by refusing consent for Sean to marry his sister.\nSome village residents, including parish priest Father Peter Lonergan and local matchmaker-cum-bookmaker Michaeleen \u00d3ge Flynn, trick Will Danaher into believing that Widow Tillane will marry him if Mary Kate is no longer under his roof. He gleefully allows the marriage, but he refuses to give Mary Kate her dowry when he finds he was deceived, and the Widow Tillane knows nothing about the deal. Sean, unschooled in Irish customs, professes no interest in obtaining the dowry; but to Mary Kate, the dowry represents her personal value to the community and her freedom. She insists that the dowry must be received to validate their marriage, causing an estrangement between her and Sean. The villagers eventually persuade Will to release Mary Kate's furniture (which she owns), but Will refuses to hand over the monetary part of the dowry (which is his contribution).\nMary Kate believes Sean is a coward for not fighting Will. Sean goes to the local Church of Ireland minister and fellow former boxer, the Rev. Cyril Playfair, and reveals that he once accidentally killed a younger, married opponent in the ring. Sean had sworn to give up fighting out of fear and guilt over the manslaughter. Mary Kate also https:// (in Irish Gaelic) her part in the quarrel to Father Lonergan, who berates her for her selfishness. She and Sean partially reconcile that night, and they share the bedroom for the first time since their marriage.\nHowever, the next morning, Mary Kate quietly leaves their cottage and boards a train for Dublin, hoping this pretense of leaving will spur Sean to action. Sean soon learns from Michaeleen where she is, races his horse to the railway station, and pulls her off the train. Followed by a growing crowd of villagers, Sean forces Mary Kate to walk with him the back to the Danaher farm. There, Sean confronts Will and demands the dowry money. When Will refuses, Sean throws Mary Kate back at her brother, declaring he will abide by the Irish custom \"no fortune, no marriage\". The ultimatum shocks both Mary Kate and Will, who finally pays the \u00a3350 (over \u00a317,000 in 2022). Sean immediately burns it in the boiler, abetted by Mary Kate. She proudly leaves for home, but a humiliated Will takes a swing at Sean, only to be knocked down by Sean's defensive counter-punch.\nA donnybrook ensues, then evolves into a long Homeric fistfight between Sean and Will after they insincerely agree to adhere to the Marquess of Queensberry rules. This much-anticipated match attracts more and more spectators as it continues for miles across the landscape. The fighters finally pause for a drink inside Cohan's Bar, where they begrudgingly admit a mutual respect for one another. As they argue over who will pay for the drinks, Will tosses a brew into Sean's face. Sean punches Will, sending him falling through the bar doors to lie unconscious in the street, ending the fight. Later, the reconciled and inebriated brothers-in-law stagger arm-in-arm back to Sean and Mary Kate's home for supper, much to Mary Kate's amusement and delight.\nThe next day, a humbled Will and the Widow Tillane begin their own courtship, and they ride out of the village side by side in a jaunting car driven by Michaeleen. Sean, Mary Kate, and the villagers wave to them as they pass, before Sean and Mary Kate playfully chase each other across the fields back to the cottage.\nCast.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;* John Wayne as Sean Thornton\nProduction.\nThe film was a departure for Republic Pictures, which backed Ford in what was considered a risky venture at the time. It was the only time the studio, known for low budget B-movies, released a film that would receive an Oscar nomination for Best Picture.\nFord read the story in 1933 and soon purchased the rights to it for $10. The story's author was paid another $2,500 when Republic bought the idea, and he received a final payment of $3,750 when the film was actually made. Republic Pictures agreed to finance the film with O'Hara and Wayne starring and Ford directing, but only if all three agreed to first film a Western with Republic. They did, and after completing \"Rio Grande\", they headed for Ireland to start shooting.\nOne of the conditions that Republic placed on Ford was that the film run under two hours. However, the finished picture was two hours and nine minutes. When screening the film for Republic executives, Ford stopped the film at approximately two hours in, on the verge of the climactic fistfight. Republic executives relented and allowed the film to run its full length. It was one of the few films that Republic filmed in Technicolor; most of the studio's other color films were made in a more economical process known as Trucolor.\nThe film employed many actors from the Irish theatre, including Barry Fitzgerald's brother, Arthur Shields, as well as extras from the Irish countryside, and it is one of the few Hollywood movies in which the Irish language can be heard. Filming commenced on June 7, 1951. All of the outdoor scenes were shot on location in Ireland in County Mayo and County Galway. The inside scenes were filmed toward the end of July at the Republic Studios in Hollywood. Vawn Corrigan reports that Ford made considerable efforts to get the costumes correct for the period with \u00d3\u2019Maille \u2013 The Original House of Style in Galway tasked with sourcing the costumes.\nThe story is set in the fictional community of Inisfree. This is not the same as the Lake Isle of Innisfree, a place in Lough Gill on the Sligo\u2013Leitrim county border made famous by poet William Butler Yeats, which is a tiny island. Many scenes for the film were actually shot in and around the village of Cong, County Mayo, on the grounds of Cong's Ashford Castle. Cong is now a wealthy small town and the castle a 5-star luxury hotel. The connections with the film have led to the area becoming a tourist attraction. In 2008, a pub opened in the building used as the pub in the film (it had actually been a shop at the time when the movie was shot); the pub hosts daily re-runs of the film on DVD. The Quiet Man Fan Club holds its annual general meeting in Ashford Castle. Other locations in the film include Thoor Ballylee, County Galway, home of poet W. B. Yeats for a period; Ballyglunin railway station near Tuam, County Galway, which was filmed as Castletown station; and various places in County Mayo and Connemara, County Galway. Among those are Lettergesh beach, where the horse race scene was filmed, \"The Quiet Man Bridge\", signposted off the N59 road between Maam Cross and Oughterard and the \"White O'Morn\" cottage. The latter is located on R336 south of Maam, but long ago fell into ruin.\nThe film also presents Ford's depiction of an idealized Irish society, with only implied social divisions based on class and differences in political or religious affiliations. The Catholic priest, Father Lonergan, and the Protestant minister, Reverend Playfair, maintain a strong friendly relationship throughout the film, which represented the norm in what was then the Irish Free State, where religious tensions occurred in the 1930s but were the norm only in Northern Ireland. One of the allusions to Anglo-Irish animosity occurs after the happy couple is married and a congratulatory toast offered by Hugh Forbes expresses the wish that they live in \"national freedom\" (the term \"national\" has been censored from most editions) and before the final donnybrook when Thornton demands his wife's dowry from Danaher. Danaher asks Hugh Forbes, who had been commander of the local Irish Republican Army unit during the fight to expel the British, \"So the IRA is in this too, ah\", to which Forbes replies, \"If it were, not a scorched stone of your fine house would be standing.\"\nErnie O'Malley, an Irish Republican Army officer during the war of independence, commander of the anti-Treaty IRA during the Irish Civil War, and author, acted as an advisor to Ford on the local culture, being on set with him every day. According to O'Hara, Ford \"had a great deal of respect for Ernie...He had such respect for Ernie. They would natter away like old buddies...They liked each other. They were friends\".\nThis movie is, in many ways a family affair. Francis Ford, who played the old man who gets up from his deathbed to watch the fight, is John Ford's older brother. Patrick Ford, the director's son, did much of the stunt work for Victor McLaglen during the fight scene, and was a unit director. Arthur Shields, who played the Reverend Playfair, is the younger brother of Barry Fitzgerald, Michaeleen \u00d3ge Flynn, who was born William Joseph Shields. Charles B. Fitzsimmons, who played Hugh Forbes, and James O'Hara, who played Father Paul, are the brothers of Maureen O'Hara. In addition, four of John Wayne's children are seen in the horse race scene.\nMusic.\nFord chose his friend, Hollywood composer Victor Young, to compose the score for the film. Young sprinkled the soundtrack with many Irish airs such as the \"Rakes of Mallow\" and \"The Wild Colonial Boy\". One piece of music, chosen by Ford himself, is most prominent: the melody the \"Isle of Innisfree\", written not by Young, but by the Irish policeman/songwriter Richard Farrelly. The melody of the \"Isle of Innisfree\", which is first heard over the opening credit sequence with Ashford Castle in the background, becomes the principal musical theme of \"The Quiet Man\". The melody is reprised at least eleven times throughout the film.\nThe upbeat melody comically hummed by Michaeleen Oge Flynn and later played on the accordion is the \"Rakes of Mallow\".\nA portion of the Irish version of \"The Wild Colonial Boy\" is played throughout the film.\nWhen Maureen O'Hara died in October 2015, her family stated she listened to music from \"The Quiet Man\" during her final hours. Filmmaker George A. Romero was also said to have died listening to the score.\nReception.\nIn 1952 A.H. Weiler of \"The New York Times\" viewed the film \"as darlin' a picture as we've seen this year,\" with \"dialogue that is as tuneful as a lark's song.\" In another contemporary review, the entertainment trade paper \"Variety\" called the picture \"beautifully filmed\" and wrote that \"Wayne works well under Ford's direction,\" but found the 129-minute running time \"unnecessary.\" \"Harrison's Reports\" described the film as \"a delightful and rollicking comedy melodrama of Irish life, directed with skill and acted with gusto by a fine cast.\" Richard L. Coe of \"The Washington Post\" declared it \"a complete jim-dandy ... The photography is glorious and Victor Young's score, inspired by folk airs, is a complete joy for an exuberant, vigorous picture.\" Philip Hamburger of \"The New Yorker\" was not so taken with the film, writing, \"If am to believe what I saw in John Ford's sentimental new film, \"The Quiet Man\", practically everybody in Ireland is just as cute as a button,\" adding, \"Mr. Ford's scenes of the Irish countryside are often breathtaking ... but the master who made \"The Informer\" appears to have fallen into a vat of treacle.\"\nOn the review-aggregation website Rotten Tomatoes, \"The Quiet Man\" in 2023 has a 91% approval rating based on reviews from 46 critics. Critical consensus on the website states, \"Director John Ford and star John Wayne depart the Western for the Irish countryside, and the result is a beautifully photographed, often comedic romance.\"\nThe film was also a financial success, grossing $3.8 million in its first year of release. This was among the top ten grosses of the year. It was also the seventh most popular film for British audiences in 1952.\nHome media.\nIt was first released on DVD December 14, 1998 by Artisan Home Entertainment. It was also released 4 years later on a Collector's edition DVD on October 22, 2002, by Artisan. The Special features on this edition include \"The Making of the Quiet Man\" Documentary with Leonard Maltin, and \"The Joy of Ireland\" Documentary with Maureen O'Hara and Andrew V. McLaglen, and \"Remembering The Quiet Man Montage\".\nOn January 22, 2013, Olive Films released \"The Quiet Man\" on DVD and for the first time on Blu-ray, as a 60th Anniversary Special Edition. It included the documentary \"The Making of the Quiet Man\" with Leonard Maltin.\nIn 2010 there was a documentary called \"Dreaming The Quiet Man\" made about the journey and making of \"The Quiet Man\". It was narrated by Gabriel Byrne, and had interviews with Peter Bogdanovich, Martin Scorsese, Charles F. Fitzsimons, and Maureen O'Hara. It was released on DVD and Blu-ray for the first time on March 24, 2015.\nIn popular culture.\nThe scene where John Wayne kisses Maureen O'Hara during a storm appears on a television set in a scene of the 1982 Steven Spielberg film, \"E.T. The Extra-Terrestrial\".\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70430", "revid": "66", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70430", "title": "Etic", "text": ""}
{"id": "70432", "revid": "1313854505", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70432", "title": "Emic and etic", "text": "Two kinds of anthropologic field research\nEmic () and etic () refer to two kinds of field research done in anthropology, folkloristics, linguistics, and the social and behavioral sciences, and viewpoints obtained from them.\nThe \"emic\" approach is an insider's perspective, which looks at the beliefs, values, and practices of a particular culture from the perspective of the people who live within it. This approach aims to understand the cultural meaning and significance of a particular behavior or practice, as it is understood by the people who engage in it.\nThe \"etic\" approach is an outsider's perspective, which looks at a culture from the perspective of an outside observer or researcher. This approach tends to focus on the observable behaviors and practices of a culture, and aims to understand them in terms of their functional or evolutionary significance. The etic approach often involves the use of standardized measures and frameworks to compare different cultures and may involve the use of concepts and theories from other disciplines, such as psychology or sociology.\nThe emic and etic approaches each have their own strengths and limitations, and each can be useful in understanding different aspects of culture and behavior. Some anthropologists argue that a combination of both approaches is necessary for a complete understanding of a culture, while others argue that one approach may be more appropriate depending on the specific research question being addressed.\nDefinitions.\n\"The emic approach investigates how local people think\", how they perceive and categorize the world, their rules for behavior, what has meaning for them, and how they imagine and explain things. \"The etic (scientist-oriented) approach shifts the focus from local observations, categories, explanations, and interpretations to those of the anthropologist. The etic approach realizes that members of a culture often are too involved in what they are doing ... to interpret their cultures impartially. When using the etic approach, the ethnographer emphasizes what he or she considers important.\"\nAlthough emics and etics are sometimes regarded as inherently in conflict and one can be preferred to the exclusion of the other, the complementarity of emic and etic approaches to anthropological research has been widely recognized, especially in the areas of interest concerning the characteristics of human nature as well as the form and function of human social systems.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Emic knowledge and interpretations are those existing within a culture, that are 'determined by local custom, meaning, and belief' (Ager and Loughry, 2004: n.p.) and best described by a 'native' of the culture. Etic knowledge refers to generalizations about human behavior that are considered universally true, and commonly links cultural practices to factors of interest to the researcher, such as economic or ecological conditions, that cultural insiders may not consider very relevant (Morris et al., 1999).\nEmic and etic approaches to understanding behavior and personality fall under the study of cultural anthropology, which states that people are shaped by their cultures and their subcultures, and we must account for this in the study of personality. One way is looking at things through an emic approach. This approach \"is culture specific because it focuses on a single culture and it is understood on its own terms.\" As explained below, the term \"emic\" originated from the specific linguistic term \"phonemic\", from \"phoneme\", which is a language-specific way of abstracting speech sounds.\nWhen these two approaches are combined, the \"richest\" view of a culture or society can be understood. On its own, an emic approach would struggle with applying overarching values to a single culture. The etic approach is helpful in enabling researchers to see more than one aspect of one culture, and in applying observations to cultures around the world.\nHistory.\nThe terms were coined in 1954 by linguist Kenneth Pike, who argued that the tools developed for describing linguistic behaviors could be adapted to the description of any human social behavior. As Pike noted, social scientists have long debated whether their knowledge is objective or subjective. Pike's innovation was to turn away from an epistemological debate and turn instead to a methodological solution. \"Emic\" and \"etic\" are derived from the linguistic terms \"phonemic\" and \"phonetic\", respectively, where a \"phone\" is a distinct speech sound or gesture (such distinction being referred to as \"phonetic\"), regardless of whether the exact sound is critical to the meanings of words, whereas a \"phoneme\" is a speech sound in a given language that, if swapped with another phoneme, could change one word to another. The possibility of a truly objective description was discounted by Pike himself in his original work; he proposed the emic\u2013etic dichotomy in anthropology as a way around philosophic issues about the very nature of objectivity.\nThe terms were also championed by anthropologists Ward Goodenough and Marvin Harris with slightly different connotations from those used by Pike. Goodenough was primarily interested in understanding the culturally specific meaning of specific beliefs and practices; Harris was primarily interested in explaining human behavior.\nPike, Harris, and others have argued that cultural \"insiders\" and \"outsiders\" are equally capable of producing emic \"and\" etic accounts of their culture. Some researchers use \"etic\" to refer to outsider accounts, and \"emic\" to refer to insider accounts.\nMargaret Mead was an anthropologist who studied the patterns of adolescence in Samoa. She discovered that the difficulties and the transitions that adolescents faced are culturally influenced. The hormones that are released during puberty can be defined using an etic framework, because adolescents globally have the same hormones being secreted. However, Mead concluded that how adolescents respond to these hormones is greatly influenced by their cultural norms. Through her studies, Mead found that simple classifications about behaviors and personality could not be used because peoples\u2019 cultures influenced their behaviors in such a radical way. Her studies helped create an emic approach of understanding behaviors and personality. Her research deduced that culture has a significant impact in shaping an individual's personality.\nCarl Jung, a Swiss psychoanalyst, is a researcher who took an emic approach in his studies. Jung studied mythology, religion, ancient rituals, and dreams, leading him to believe that there are archetypes that can be identified and used to categorize people's behaviors. Archetypes are universal structures of the collective unconscious that refer to the inherent way people are predisposed to perceive and process information. The main archetypes that Jung studied were the persona (how people choose to present themselves to the world), the anima and animus (part of people experiencing the world in viewing the opposite sex, that guides how they select their romantic partner), and the shadow (dark side of personalities because people have a concept of evil; well-adjusted people must integrate both good and bad parts of themselves). Jung looked at the role of the mother and deduced that all people have mothers and see their mothers in a similar way; they offer nurture and comfort. His studies also suggest that \"infants have evolved to suck milk from the breast, it is also the case that all children have inborn tendencies to react in certain ways.\" This way of looking at the mother is an emic way of applying a concept cross-culturally and universally.\nImportance in understanding personality.\nEmic and etic approaches are important to understanding personality because problems can arise \"when concepts, measures, and methods are carelessly transferred to other cultures in attempts to make cross-cultural generalizations about personality.\" It is hard to apply certain generalizations of behavior to people who are so diverse and culturally different. One example of this is the F-scale (Macleod). The F-scale, which was created by Theodor Adorno, is used to measure authoritarian personality, which can, in turn, be used to predict prejudiced behaviors. This test, when applied to Americans, accurately depicts prejudices towards black individuals. However, when a study was conducted in South Africa using the F-Scale (Pettigrew and Friedman), results did not predict any prejudices towards black individuals. This study used emic approaches of study by conducting interviews with the locals and etic approaches by giving participants generalized personality tests.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70435", "revid": "33333849", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70435", "title": "Battle of Vimy Ridge", "text": "World War I battle (April 1917)\nThe Battle of Vimy Ridge was part of the Battle of Arras, in the Pas-de-Calais department of France, during the First World War. The main combatants were the four divisions of the Canadian Corps in the First Army, against three divisions of the German 6th Army. The battle occurred from 9 to 12 April 1917, marking the commencement of the Battle of Arras and serving as the inaugural assault of the Nivelle Offensive. The objective was to draw German reserves away from the French forces, preparing for a crucial offensive along the Aisne and the Chemin des Dames ridge several days later.\nThe Canadian Corps was to capture the German-held high ground of Vimy Ridge, an escarpment on the northern flank of the Arras front. This would protect the First Army and the Third Army farther south from German enfilade fire. Supported by a creeping barrage, the Canadian Corps captured most of the ridge during the first day. The village of Th\u00e9lus fell during the second day, as did the crest of the ridge, once the Canadian Corps overran a salient against considerable German resistance. The final objective, a fortified knoll outside the village of Givenchy-en-Gohelle, fell to the Canadians on 12 April. The German 6th Army then retreated to the Oppy\u2013M\u00e9ricourt line.\nHistorians attribute the success of the Canadian Corps to technical and tactical innovation, meticulous planning, powerful artillery support and extensive training, as well as the inability of the 6th Army properly to apply the new German defensive doctrine. The battle was the first occasion when the four divisions of the Canadian Expeditionary Force fought together and it was made a symbol of Canadian national achievement and sacrifice. A portion of the former battleground serves as a memorial park and site of the Canadian National Vimy Memorial.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBackground.\nVimy Ridge 1914\u20131916.\nVimy Ridge is an escarpment northeast of Arras on the western edge of the Douai Plain. The ridge rises gradually on its western side and drops more quickly on the eastern side. At approximately in length and culminating at an elevation of or above the Douai Plains, the ridge provides a natural unobstructed view for tens of kilometres in all directions. The ridge fell under German control in October 1914 during the Race to the Sea as the Franco-British and German forces attempted to outflank each other through north-eastern France. The French Tenth Army attempted to dislodge the Germans from the region during the Second Battle of Artois in May 1915 by attacking their positions at Vimy Ridge and Notre Dame de Lorette. The French 1st Moroccan Division managed to briefly capture the height of the ridge but was unable to hold it owing to a lack of reinforcements. The French made another attempt during the Third Battle of Artois in September 1915 but only captured the village of Souchez at the western base of the ridge. The Vimy sector calmed following the offensive with both sides taking a largely live and let live approach. The French suffered approximately 150,000 casualties in their attempts to gain control of Vimy Ridge and surrounding territory.\n1916\u20131917.\nThe French Tenth Army was relieved in February 1916 by XVII Corps (Lieutenant-General Sir Julian Byng) and transferred to join in the Battle of Verdun. The British soon discovered that German tunnelling companies had taken advantage of the relative calm on the surface to build an extensive network of tunnels and deep mines from which they would attack French positions by setting off explosive charges underneath their trenches. The Royal Engineers sent specialist tunnelling companies to the ridge to combat the German mining operations and German artillery and trench mortar fire intensified in early May 1916. On 21 May 1916, after shelling the British forward trenches and divisional artillery positions from eighty hidden batteries on the reverse slope of the ridge, the German infantry began , an attack on the British lines along a front, to eject them from positions along the ridge. The Germans captured several British-controlled tunnels and mine craters before halting their advance and digging in. Small counter-attacks by battalions of the 140th and 141st Brigades took place on 22 May but were foiled. The Canadian Corps relieved IV Corps along the western slopes of Vimy Ridge in October 1916.\nPrelude.\nStrategy.\nOn 28 May 1916, Byng took command of the Canadian Corps from Lieutenant-General Sir Edwin Alderson. Discussions for a spring offensive near Arras began, following a formal conference of corps commanders held at the First Army Headquarters (HQ) on 21 November 1916. In March 1917, the army HQ formally presented Byng with orders giving Vimy Ridge as the Canadian Corps objective for the Arras Offensive.\nA plan, adopted in early March 1917, drew on the briefings of staff officers sent to learn from the experiences of the French Army during the Battle of Verdun. For the first time the four Canadian divisions would fight together. The nature and size of the attack needed more resources than the Canadian Corps possessed and the British 5th Division, artillery, engineer and labour units were attached to the corps, bringing the nominal strength of the Canadian Corps to about 170,000 men, of whom 97,184 were Canadian.\nTactics.\nIn January 1917, three Canadian Corps officers accompanied other British and Dominion officers attending lectures by the French Army on their experiences during the Battle of Verdun. The French counter-offensive devised by General Robert Nivelle had been one of a number of Allied successes of 1916. Following extensive rehearsal, eight French divisions had assaulted German positions in two waves along a front. Supported by extremely powerful artillery, the French had recovered lost ground and inflicted severe casualties on five German divisions.\nOn their return from the lectures, the Canadian Corps staff officers produced a tactical analysis of the Verdun battles and delivered corps and divisional-level lectures to promote the primacy of artillery and stress the importance of harassing fire and company and platoon flexibility. The report of the 1st Canadian Division commander, Arthur Currie, highlighted the lessons he believed the Canadian Corps could learn from the experiences of the French. The final plan for the assault on Vimy Ridge drew on the experience and tactical analysis of the officers who attended the Verdun lectures. The First Army commander, General Henry Horne approved the plan on 5 March 1917.\nThe plan divided the Canadian Corps advance into four coloured objective lines. The attack would be made on a front of , with its centre opposite the village of Vimy, to the east of the ridge. The first objective, the Black Line, was the German forward defensive position. The final objective of the northern flank was the Red Line, taking the highest point on the ridge, the fortified knoll known as the Pimple, la Folie Farm, the (intermediate position) and the hamlet of Les Tilleuls. The southern two divisions were to achieve two more objectives, the Blue Line, encompassing the village of Th\u00e9lus and the woods outside the village of Vimy and the Brown Line, which aimed at capturing (Twelve Trench) and the German second position. The infantry would advance close to a creeping barrage by field guns, advancing in timed increments. The medium and heavy howitzers would establish a series of standing barrages further ahead of the infantry against defensive positions.\nThe plan called for units to leapfrog as the advance progressed, to maintain momentum during the attack. The initial wave would capture and consolidate the Black Line and then push forward to the Red Line. The barrage would pause for reserve units to move up, then move forward with the units pushing beyond the Red Line to the Blue Line. Once the troops secured the Blue Line, advancing units would once again leapfrog them and capture the Brown Line. Conducted properly, the plan would leave the German forces little time to exit their deep dugouts and defend their positions against the infantry. If the corps maintained its schedule, the troops would advance as much as and have the majority of the ridge under control by 1:00\u2009\n pm on the first day.\nGerman defences.\nThe experience of the Battle of the Somme led the German command to conclude that the policy of rigidly defending a trench position was no longer effective against the firepower that the Entente armies had accumulated. Ludendorff published a new defensive doctrine in December 1916, in which deeper defences were to be built, within which the garrison would have room to manoeuvre, rather than rigidly holding successive lines of trenches. Along Vimy Ridge, the German forces had spent two years constructing fortifications designed for rigid defence. An extensive network of tunnels and trenches south of Neuville St Vaast was known as \"The Labyrinth\". Little reconstruction based upon the new defence-in-depth doctrine had been accomplished by April 1917 because the terrain made it impractical.\nThe ridge was across at its narrowest point, with a steep drop on the eastern side, all but eliminating the possibility of counterattacks if the ridge was captured. The Germans were apprehensive about the inherent weakness of the Vimy Ridge defences. Their defensive scheme was to maintain a front line defence of sufficient strength to withstand an initial assault and move operational reserves forward, before the enemy could consolidate their gains or overrun the remaining German positions. The German defence at Vimy Ridge relied largely on the firepower of machine guns.\nThree divisions, comprising seven infantry regiments were responsible for the immediate defence of the ridge. The paper strength of each division was approximately 15,000 men but their actual strength was significantly lower. In 1917, a full-strength German rifle company was 264 men; at Vimy Ridge, each rifle company contained approximately 150 men. Each German regiment held a zone approximately wide, as far back as the rear area. When the Canadian Corps attacked, each German company faced two or more battalions of approximately 1,000 men each. Reserve divisions were kept about back instead of assembling close behind the second line, according to the defence-in-depth theory.\nArtillery.\nThe eight field artillery brigades of the Canadian Corps divisional artillery and two heavy artillery groups were reinforced with British artillery units. Four heavy artillery groups, nine field artillery brigades, three divisional artillery groups and the artillery complement of the 5th Division was attached to the Canadian Corps. Ten heavy artillery groups of the flanking I and XVII Corps were assigned tasks in support of the Canadian Corps. The artillery batteries of I Corps were particularly important because they enfiladed German gun positions behind Vimy Ridge. The British provided twenty-four brigade artillery groups consisting of four hundred and eighty 18\u00a0pounder field guns, one hundred and thirty-eight 4.5\u00a0inch howitzers, ninety-six 2\u00a0inch trench mortars, twenty-four 9.45\u00a0inch mortars, supported by 245 siege guns and heavy mortars. This firepower gave a density of one heavy gun for every and one field gun for every of the corps frontage, representing a considerable average increase, including three times the heavy guns over the distribution of artillery at the Battle of the Somme in 1916.\nOn 8 February, the First Army issued a 3,000-word artillery plan devised by Horne and his principal artillery commander, Major General H. F. Mercer. Brigadier-General Edward Morrison developed and issued a 35-page multi-phased fire support plan called \"Canadian Corps Artillery Instruction No.1 for the Capture of Vimy Ridge\" to support the efforts of the infantry. The Canadian Corps received three times the artillery normally assigned to a corps for regular operations. To manage the supply of the extra guns, the Royal Artillery staff officer, Major Alan Brooke, coordinated communication and transport plans to work with the barrage plans.\nA 1.6million shell allotment allowed the artillery along the Canadian Corps front to maintain a high rate of fire. Improvements in the quality of the shells ensured fewer duds. The new instantaneous No. 106 fuze greatly improved the effectiveness of the artillery since this fuse burst reliably with the slightest of contact, unlike older timed fuses, making it especially effective at wire cutting before the advance. To maintain communications during the battle, particularly with the artillery, field units laid over of telegraph and field telephone cabling, normally at a depth of . The corps conducted coordinated counter-battery shoots before the battle. The First Army Field Survey Company printed barrage maps for all batteries, produced artillery boards and provided counter-battery support with their flash spotting groups and sound ranging sections. Using flash spotting, sound ranging and aerial reconnaissance from 16 Squadron and 1 &amp; 2 Balloon Companies Royal Flying Corps (RFC) in the week before the battle, the counter-battery artillery under command of Lieutenant-Colonel Andrew McNaughton fired 125,900 shells, harassing an estimated 83 per cent of the German gun positions.\nTraining.\nIn February 1917, the British General Staff released a training pamphlet \"SS 143 Instructions for the Training of Platoons for Offensive Action\", espousing the return to the pre-war emphasis on fire and movement tactics and the use of the platoon as the basic tactical unit. The pamphlet noted the importance of specialist hand grenade, rifle grenade, rifle and Lewis gun sections in suppressing enemy strong points by exploiting the characteristics of different weapons to fight forward, allowing other units to advance. Coupled with the observations and suggestions made by Currie in the report he submitted in January 1917 following the Verdun lectures, the Canadian Corps instilled the tactical change with vigour. The corps implemented the tactical doctrine for small units by assigning objectives down to the platoon. Assaulting infantry battalions used hills behind the lines as full-scale models of the battlefield.\nTaped lines demarcated German trench lines while officers on horseback carried flags to represent the advancing front of the artillery barrage. Recognizing that leaders were likely to be wounded or killed, soldiers learned the jobs of those beside and above them. At the First Army headquarters, a large plasticine model of the Vimy sector was constructed and used to show commissioned and senior non-commissioned officers the topographical features of the battlefield and details of the German trench system. Upwards of 40,000 topographical trench maps were printed and distributed to ensure that even platoon sergeants and section commanders possessed a wider awareness of the battlefield. The new measures gave each platoon a clearer picture of how it fitted into the greater battle plan and in so doing, reduced the command problems that plagued First World War operations.\nUnderground operations.\nOperations along the Vimy Ridge were accompanied by extensive excavations. The Arras\u2013Vimy sector was conducive to tunnelling, owing to the soft, porous, yet extremely stable nature of the chalk underground. Mine warfare had been conducted on the Vimy sector since 1915 and Bavarian engineers had blown twenty mines in the sector by March 1915. By early 1916, German miners had gained an advantage over their French counterparts. British tunnelling companies of the Royal Engineers took over from the French between February and May 1916.\nOn their arrival, the British began offensive mining against German miners, first stopping the German underground advance and then developing a defensive strategy that prevented the Germans from gaining a tactical advantage by mining. From spring 1916, the British had deployed five tunnelling companies along the Vimy Ridge and during the first two months of their tenure of the area, 70 mines were fired, mostly by the Germans. Between October 1915 and April 1917 an estimated 150 French, British and German charges were fired in this sector of the Western Front. In May 1916, Operation Schleswig-Holstein, a German infantry attack, forced the British back , to stop British mining by capturing the shaft entrances. In the second half of 1916, the British constructed strong defensive underground positions and from August 1916, the Royal Engineers developed a mining scheme for a big infantry attack on the Vimy Ridge proposed for autumn 1916, although this was postponed. After September 1916, when the Royal Engineers had completed their network of defensive galleries along most of the front line, offensive mining largely ceased although activities continued until 1917. The British gallery network beneath Vimy Ridge eventually grew to a length of .\nThe Canadian Corps was posted to the northern part of Vimy Ridge in October 1916 and preparations for an attack were revived in February 1917. Twelve subways, up to long were excavated at a depth of and used to connect reserve lines to front lines, permitting soldiers to advance to the front quickly, securely and unseen. Often incorporated into subways were light rail lines, hospitals, command posts, water reservoirs, ammunition stores, mortar and machine gun posts and communication centres. The Germans dug a number of similar tunnels on the Vimy front, to provide covered routes to the front line and protection for headquarters, resting personnel, equipment, and ammunition. The Germans also conducted counter-mining against the British tunnellers and destroyed a number of British attempts to plant mines under or near their lines.\nPrior to the battle, the British tunnelling companies secretly laid 13 mines under German positions, to destroy surface fortifications before the assault. To protect some advancing troops from German machine gun fire as they crossed no man's land during the attack, eight smaller \"Wombat\" charges were laid at the end of the subways to allow troops to move more quickly and safely enter the German trench system by creating an elongated trench-depth crater that spanned the length of no man's land. At the same time, 19 crater groups existed along this section of the Western Front, each with several large craters. To assess the consequences of infantry having to advance across cratered ground after a mining attack, officers from the Canadian Corps visited La Boisselle and Fricourt where the mines had been blown on the First day of the Somme. Their reports and the experience of the Canadians at The Actions of St Eloi Craters in April 1916, where mines had so altered and damaged the landscape as to render occupation of the mine craters by the infantry all but impossible, led to the decision to remove offensive mining from the central sector allocated to the Canadian Corps at Vimy Ridge. Further British mines in the area were vetoed following the blowing by the Germans on 23 March 1917 of nine craters along no man's land as it was probable that the Germans were aiming to restrict an attack to predictable points. The three mines laid by 172nd Tunnelling Company were also dropped from the British plans. The mines were left in place after the assault and were only removed in the 1990s. Another mine, prepared by 176th Tunnelling Company against the German strongpoint known as the Pimple, was not completed in time for the attack. The gallery had been pushed silently through the clay, avoiding the sandy and chalky layers of the Vimy Ridge but by 9 April 1917 was still short of its target. In the end, two mines were blown before the attack, while three mines and two \"Wombat\" charges were fired to support the attack, including those forming a northern flank.\nTrench raiding.\nTrench raiding involved making small-scale surprise attacks on enemy positions, often in the middle of the night for reasons of stealth. All belligerents employed trench raiding as a tactic to harass their enemy and gain intelligence. In the Canadian Corps trench raiding developed into a training and leadership-building mechanism. The size of a raid would normally be anything from a few men to an entire company, or more, depending on the size of the mission. The four months before the April attack saw the Canadian Corps execute no fewer than 55 separate trench raids. Competition between units even developed with units competing for the honour of the greatest number of prisoners captured or most destruction wrought. The policy of aggressive trench raiding was not without its cost. A large-scale trench raid on 13 February 1917, involving 900 men from the 4th Canadian Division, resulted in 150 casualties. An even more ambitious trench raid, using chlorine gas, on 1 March 1917, once again by the 4th Canadian Division, failed and resulted in 637 casualties including two battalion commanders and a number of company commanders killed. This experience did not lessen the extent to which the Canadian Corps employed trench raiding with raids being conducted nightly between 20 March and the opening of the offensive on 9 April, resulting in approximately 1,400 additional Canadian casualties. The Germans operated an active patrolling policy and although not as large and ambitious as those of the Canadian Corps, they also engaged in trench raiding. As an example, a German trench raid launched by 79 men against the 3rd Canadian Division on 15 March 1917 was successful in capturing prisoners and causing damage.\nAir operations.\nThe RFC launched a determined effort to gain air superiority over the battlefield in support of the spring offensive. The Canadians considered activities such as artillery observation and photography of opposing trench systems, troop movements and gun emplacements essential to continue their offensive. The Royal Flying Corps deployed 25 squadrons with 365 aircraft along the Arras sector, outnumbering the (Imperial German Air Service) by 2-to-1. Byng was given use of 2 Squadron, 8 (Naval) Squadron, 25 Squadron, 40 Squadron and 43 Squadron, with 16 Squadron permanently attached to the Canadian Corps and employed exclusively for reconnaissance and artillery-observation.\nAerial reconnaissance was often a hazardous task because of the necessity of flying at slow speeds and low altitudes. The task was made more dangerous with the arrival of German air reinforcements, including the highly experienced and well equipped Jasta 11 which led to a sharp increase in RFC losses. Although significantly outnumbering the Germans, the RFC lost 131 aircraft during the first week of April (Bloody April). Despite the losses suffered by the RFC, the failed to prevent the British from carrying out its priority, air support of the army during the Battle of Arras with up-to-date aerial photographs and other reconnaissance information.\nBattle.\nBelligerents.\nGerman 6th Army commander General Ludwig von Falkenhausen was responsible for the Cambrai\u2013Lille sector and commanded 20 divisions, plus reserves. Vimy Ridge itself was principally defended by the ad hoc formation based under I Bavarian Reserve Corps commander Karl von Fasbender. A division of the HQ of VIII Reserve Corps (General of the Infantry Georg Karl Wichura) was involved in the frontline defence along the northernmost portion of the ridge.\nThree divisions were responsible for manning the frontline defences opposite the Canadian Corps. The 16th Bavarian Division was located opposite the village of Souchez and responsible for the defence of the northernmost section of the ridge. The division had been created in January 1917 by amalgamating existing Bavarian formations and had so far only opposed the Canadian Corps. The 79th Reserve Division was responsible for the defence of the vast central section, including the highest point of the ridge, Hill 145. The 79th Reserve Division had fought for two years on the Eastern Front before being transferred to the Vimy sector at the end of February 1917. The 1st Bavarian Reserve Division had been in the Arras area since October 1914 and held the villages of Th\u00e9lus, Bailleul and the southern slope of the ridge.\nByng commanded four attacking divisions, one division in reserve and numerous support units. He was supported to the north by the 24th Division, I Corps, which advanced north of the Souchez River and by the XVII Corps to the south. The 4th Canadian Division was responsible for the northern portion of the advance that included the capture of the highest point of the ridge, followed by the elaborately fortified Pimple just west of the village of Givenchy-en-Gohelle. The 3rd Canadian Division was responsible for the narrow central section of the ridge, including the capture of La Folie Farm. The 2nd Canadian Division, which later included a brigade from the 5th Division, was directly south of the 3rd Canadian Division and entrusted with the capture of the village of Th\u00e9lus. The 1st Canadian Division was responsible for the broad southern sector of the corps advance and expected to cover the longest distance. Byng planned for a healthy reserve for contingencies that included the relief of forward troops, help in consolidating positions and aiding the 4th Canadian Division with the capture of the Pimple. As a result, the 9th Canadian Brigade and the British 15th and 95th Brigades were kept in corps reserve.\nPreliminary attack.\nForeign intelligence gathering by the Germans, big Allied trench raids and troop concentrations seen west of Arras, made it clear to the Germans that a spring offensive in the area was being prepared. In February 1917, a German-born Canadian soldier deserted and helped confirm many of the suspicions held by the Germans, providing them with a great deal of useful information. On 29 March four Canadians from the 31st Battalion were taken prisoner and gave much information under interrogation, including the plan of attack and a list of the divisions involved. By March 1917, the 6th Army knew that an offensive was imminent and would include operations aimed at capturing Vimy Ridge. General of Infantry Ernst August Marx von Bachmeister, commanding the German 79th Reserve Division, reported in late March that he believed the Canadian Corps was moving into an echelon formation and were preparing for a big attack. The Germans quickly planned Operation Munich (), a spoiling attack to capture the northern section of the Zouave Valley, along the northernmost portion of the Canadian front. Munich was not undertaken because the extent of Canadian Corps artillery fire made it impracticable.\nThe preliminary phase of the Canadian Corps artillery bombardment began on 20 March 1917, with a systematic two-week bombardment of German batteries, trenches and strong points. The Canadian Corps gunners paid particular attention to eliminating German barbed wire, a task made easier with the introduction of the No. 106 instantaneous fuse. Only half of the artillery fired at once and the intensity of the barrage was varied to confuse the Germans about Canadian intentions. Phase two lasted the week beginning 2 April 1917 and employed all of the guns supporting the Canadian Corps, massing the equivalent of a heavy gun for every and a field gun for every . The German soldiers came to refer to the week before the attack as \"the week of suffering\". In the German account, their trenches and defensive works were almost completely demolished. The health and morale of the German troops suffered from the stress of remaining at the ready for eleven straight days under extremely heavy artillery bombardment. Compounding German difficulties was the inability of ration parties to bring food supplies to the front lines. On 3 April, General von Falkenhausen ordered his reserve divisions to prepare to relieve front line divisions over the course of a long drawn-out defensive battle in a manner similar to the Battle of the Somme and the divisions were kept from the battlefield to avoid being shelled.\nMain assault.\n9 April.\nThe attack was to begin at 5:30\u2009\n am on Easter Monday, 9 April 1917. The attack was originally planned for the morning of 8 April (Easter Sunday) but it was postponed for 24hours at the request of the French. During the late hours of 8 April and early morning of 9 April the men of the leading and supporting wave of the attack were moved into their forward assembly positions. The weather was cold and later changed to sleet and snow. Although physically discomforting for everyone, the north-westerly storm provided some advantage to the assaulting troops by blowing snow in the faces of the defending troops. Light Canadian and British artillery bombardments continued throughout the night but stopped in the few minutes before the attack, as the artillery recalibrated their guns in preparation for the synchronized barrage. At 5:30\u2009\n am, every artillery piece at the disposal of the Canadian Corps began firing. Thirty seconds later, engineers detonated the mine charges laid under no man's land and the German trench line, destroying a number of German strong points and creating secure communication trenches directly across no man's land.\nField guns fired a barrage that mostly advanced at a rate of in three minutes while medium and heavy howitzers fired standing barrages further ahead against defensive systems. During the early fighting, the German divisional artilleries, despite many losses, were able to maintain their defensive fire. As the Canadian infantry advanced, they overran many of the German guns because large numbers of their draught horses had been killed in the initial gas attack. The 1st, 2nd and 3rd Canadian Divisions reached the Black Line, by 6:25\u2009\n am. The 4th Canadian Division encountered a great deal of trouble during its advance and was unable to complete its first objective until some hours later. After the pause when the 1st, 2nd and 3rd Canadian Divisions consolidated their positions, the advance resumed. Shortly after 7:00am, the 1st Canadian Division captured the left half of its second objective, the Red Line and moved the 1st Canadian Brigade forward to mount an attack on the remainder. The 2nd Canadian Division reported reaching the Red Line and capturing the village of Les Tilleuls at approximately the same time.\nThe advance of the 3rd Canadian Division was preceded by a mine explosion that killed many troops of Reserve Infantry Regiment 262 in the front line. The survivors could do no more than man temporary lines of resistance until later occupying the German third line. The southern section of the 3rd Canadian Division was able to reach the Red Line at the western edge of the Bois de la Folie at around 7:30am. At 9:00am the division learned of its exposed left flank, as the 4th Canadian Division had not yet captured Hill 145. The 3rd Canadian Division had to establish a divisional defensive flank to its north. Although the German commanders were able to communicate with the front line, the speed of the Canadian advance was too quick to react to in time.\nThe advance of the 4th Canadian Division, collapsed almost immediately after exiting their trenches. The commanding officer of one of the assaulting battalions had requested that the artillery leave a portion of the German trench undamaged. Machine-gun nests in the undamaged sections of the German line shot down much of the troops on the right flank. The progress on the left flank was eventually impeded by harassing fire from the Pimple, made worse when the creeping barrage got too far ahead of the advancing troops. The 4th Canadian Division did not attempt a further frontal assault that the afternoon.\nReserve units from the 4th Canadian Division came forward and once again attacked the German positions on the top of the ridge. Persistent attacks eventually forced the German troops holding the southwestern portion of Hill145 to withdraw after they ran out of ammunition, mortar rounds, and grenades. Towards noon, the 79th Reserve Division was ordered to recapture the portions of its third line lost during the Canadian attack. It was not until 6:00pm that the force was able to counter-attack, clearing the Canadians out of the ruined village of Vimy, but not recapturing the third line south of the village. By that night, the German forces holding the top of the ridge believed they had overcome the immediate crisis. German reinforcements began arriving and by the late evening, portions of the 111th Division occupied the third line near Acheville and Arleux, with the remainder of the division arriving the following day.\n10 April.\nThe British moved three fresh brigades up to the Red Line by 9:30\u2009\n am on 10 April to support the advance of the 1st and 2nd Canadian Division, whereupon they were to leapfrog existing units occupying the Red Line and advance to the Blue Line. Fresh units including two sections of tanks and the 13th British Brigade were called up from reserve to support the advance of the 2nd Canadian Division. By approximately 11:00\u2009\n am, the Blue Line, including Hill 135 and the village of Th\u00e9lus, had been captured. To permit the troops time to consolidate the Blue Line, the advance halted and the barrage remained stationary for 90 minutes while machine guns were brought forward. Shortly before 1:00\u2009\n pm, the advance recommenced with both the 1st and 2nd Canadian Divisions reporting their final objective. The tank-supported advance via Farbus and directed at the rear of the 79th Reserve Division was eventually halted by concentrated German fire short of the village. The Canadian 1st and 2nd Divisions were nonetheless able to secure the Brown Line by approximately 2:00\u2009\n pm.\nThe 4th Canadian Division had made an attempt to capture the northern half of Hill 145 at around 3:15\u2009\n pm, briefly capturing the peak before a German counterattack retook the position. The Germans occupying the small salient on the ridge soon found themselves being attacked along their flanks by continuously reinforced Canadian Corps troops. When it became obvious that the position was completely outflanked and there was no prospect of reinforcement, the German troops pulled back. The German forces were evacuated off the ridge with German artillery batteries moved west of the Vimy\u2013Bailleul railway embankment or to the Oppy\u2013M\u00e9ricourt line. By nightfall of 10 April, the only Canadian objective not yet achieved was the capture of the Pimple.\n12 April.\nThe 4th Canadian Division faced difficulties at the start of the battle that forced it to delay its assault on the Pimple until 12 April. The Pimple was initially defended by the 16th Bavarian Infantry Division but the Canadian Corps' preliminary artillery bombardment leading up to the assault on 9 April caused heavy casualties amongst its ranks. On 11 April, the 4th Guards Infantry Division first reinforced and then relieved affected 16th Bavarian Infantry Division units. The night before the attack, artillery harassed German positions while a gas section of Royal Engineers, employing Livens Projectors, fired more than 40 drums of gas directly into the village of Givenchy-en-Gohelle to cause confusion. The defending German troops managed to drive back the initial Canadian assaults at around 4:00\u2009\n am using small arms fire. The 10th Canadian Brigade attacked once again at 5:00\u2009\n am, this time supported by a significant amount of artillery and the 24th Division of I Corps to the north. The German defensive artillery fire was late and too light to cause the assaulting troops great difficulty, allowing the Canadian Corps to exploit wide gaps and break into the German positions. The 10th Canadian Brigade, assisted by snow and a westerly wind, fought hastily entrained German troops to capture the entire Pimple by 6:00\u2009\n pm.\nAftermath.\nBy nightfall on 12 April 1917, the Canadian Corps was in firm control of the ridge, having suffered 10,602 casualties; 3,598 men had been killed and 7,004 wounded. The 6th Army casualties were not known at first in the disorganization after the defeat. Later sources state around 20,000 casualties; German historians credit the high number of German casualties to Canadian and British artillery. Approximately 4,000 men were taken prisoner. The German Historical Service estimated that the 6th Army suffered 79,418 casualties during April and May 1917, 22,792 were classified as missing. Crown Prince Rupprecht estimated 85,000 casualties for the 6th Army, with 3,404 men taken prisoner at Vimy Ridge. Losses of the 79th Reserve Division from 1 to 11 April were 3,473 and in the 1st Bavarian Reserve Division 3,133. Casualties from the bombardment amongst reinforcements and divisions are additional.\nFollowing the defeat, the chief of the German General Staff, Field Marshal Paul von Hindenburg, ordered (OHL, Supreme Army Command) to conduct a court of enquiry into the defensive collapse of the Arras sector. The court concluded that the 6th Army headquarters had disregarded reports from commanders in the front line noting a possible imminent attack and reserve units were too distant to counter-attack before the Canadians could consolidate. The court concluded that 6th Army commander General Ludwig von Falkenhausen failed to apply an elastic defence according to German defensive doctrine. Instead, the defensive system comprised strong points and lines of resistance, which the Allied artillery had isolated and destroyed. Hindenburg removed Falkenhausen from his command and transferred him to Belgium, where he served the remainder of the war as governor-general.\nGerman military commanders did not consider the Canadian Corps' capture of Vimy Ridge as a defeat. Contemporary German sources viewed the action, at worst, as a draw, given that no breakthrough followed the attack. The Germans did not try to recapture the ridge, even during the Spring Offensive in 1918 and it remained under British control until the end of the war. The loss of Vimy Ridge forced the Germans to reassess their defensive strategy in the area. Instead of mounting a counterattack, they pursued a scorched earth policy and retreated to the Oppy\u2013M\u00e9ricourt line. The failure of the Nivelle Offensive in the week after the Battle of Arras placed pressure on Field Marshal Douglas Haig to keep the Germans occupied in the Arras sector to minimize French losses. The Canadian Corps participated in several of these actions including the Battle of Arleux and the Third Battle of the Scarpe in late April and early May 1917.\nOn 7 October 1919, Byng was raised to the peerage as Baron Byng of Vimy, of Thorpe-le-Soken in the County of Essex. The next month, he retired from the military.\nAwards.\nVictoria Cross.\nFour members of the Canadian Corps were awarded a Victoria Cross, highest military award of the British honours system for their actions during the battle:\nPour le M\u00e9rite.\nAt least two Orders Pour le M\u00e9rite, the Kingdom of Prussia's highest military order, were awarded to German commanders for their actions during the battle.\nCommemoration.\nInfluence on Canada.\nThe Battle of Vimy Ridge has considerable significance for Canada. Although the battle is not generally considered the greatest achievement of the Canadian Corps in strategic importance or results obtained, it was the first instance in which all four Canadian divisions, made up of troops drawn from all parts of the country, fought together. The image of national unity and achievement is what, according to one of many recent patriotic narratives, initially gave the battle importance for Canada. According to Pierce, \"The historical reality of the battle has been reworked and reinterpreted in a conscious attempt to give purpose and meaning to an event that came to symbolize Canada's coming of age as a nation\". That Canadian national identity and nationhood were born out of the battle is an opinion that in the late twentieth century became widely held in military and general histories of Canada. McKay and Swift contend that the theory that Vimy Ridge is a source of Canada's rise as a nation is highly contested and developed in the latter part of the twentieth century after most of those who experienced the Great War had died but in 1919 Hopkins had attributed to F.A. MacKenzie the recognition \"...that Dominions sharing the common burden shall share the common direction of the Empire's war policy\" and related Lloyd George's commitment that the Dominions would not again be engaged in wars without consultation.\nVimy Memorial.\nThe Canadian National Vimy Memorial is Canada's largest overseas war memorial. Located on the highest point of the Vimy Ridge, the memorial commemorates Canadian Expeditionary Force members killed during the First World War and those killed in France during the First World War with no known grave. France granted Canada perpetual use of a section of land at Vimy Ridge in 1922 for a battlefield park and memorial. A portion of the former battlefield is preserved as part of the memorial park that surrounds the monument. The grounds of the site are still honeycombed with wartime tunnels, trenches, craters and unexploded munitions and are largely closed for public safety. A section of preserved trenches and a portion of a tunnel have been made accessible to visitors.\nThe memorial was designed by Toronto architect and sculptor Walter Seymour Allward, who described it as a \"sermon against the futility of war\". The memorial took eleven years and cost $1.5million ($ million in present terms) to build. The unveiling was conducted on 26 July 1936, by King Edward VIII accompanied by President Lebrun of France and a crowd of over 50,000 people, including at least 6,200 Canadian veterans and their families.\nThe Prime Minister of Canada, Mackenzie King, was absent as he had not fought in the war and was reluctant to meet veterans. Mackenzie King's harsh treatment of Byng during the 1926 King\u2013Byng affair caused many veterans to despise him and he felt that a war veteran from the Cabinet should attend in his place. On the day, four federal government ministers and four Canadian Army General officers attended the unveiling. Edward VIII thanked France, in English and French, for its generosity and assured those assembled that Canada would never forget its war missing and dead. A restoration project began in 2004, which included general cleaning and the recarving of many inscribed names. Queen Elizabeth II rededicated the monument on 9 April 2007, during a ceremony commemorating the 90th anniversary of the battle. Veterans Affairs Canada maintains the memorial site. The commemoration at the memorial on 9 April 2017 for the 100th anniversary of the Battle of Vimy Ridge was attended by the Prime Minister of Canada, Justin Trudeau; the Governor General of Canada, David Johnston; Charles, Prince of Wales; Prince William, Duke of Cambridge; Prince Harry and the President of France, Francois Hollande.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70441", "revid": "15996738", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70441", "title": "John Fisher", "text": "16th-century Bishop of Rochester\nJohn Fisher (c. 19 October 1469 \u2013 22 June 1535) was an English Catholic prelate who served as Bishop of Rochester from 1504 to 1535 and as chancellor of the University of Cambridge. He is honoured as a martyr and saint by the Catholic Church.\nFisher was executed by order of Henry VIII during the English Reformation for refusing to accept him as Supreme Head of the Church of England and for upholding the Catholic Church's doctrine of papal supremacy and the independence of the Church from control by the State. He was named a cardinal shortly before his death.\nIn answer to a popular petition of English Catholics, Pope Pius XI canonized John Fisher and Thomas More on 19 May 1935 as representatives of the many Catholic martyrs of England. The two martyrs share a common feast day on 22 June in the current General Roman Calendar of the Catholic Church. His name also appears in some Anglican calendars of saints.\nBiography.\nEarly life.\nJohn Fisher was born at Beverley, Yorkshire in 1469, the son of Robert Fisher, a prosperous mercer of Beverley, and Agnes, his wife, with whom he had four children. Robert Fisher died in 1477, and was buried in St. Mary's, the parish church; in his will, he made bequests to his children and various poorhouses, churches, and priests, as well as providing Mass stipends.\nJohn was then eight years old. His widowed mother subsequently married a man named White, to whom she bore four further children.\nFisher's early education was probably at the school attached to the collegiate church in his home town. He seems to have had close contacts with his extended family all his life.\nUniversity of Cambridge.\nAcknowledging Fisher's aptitude for learning, and being financially comfortable, his mother assented to his admission to the University of Cambridge, in 1482, at the age of twelve or thirteen.\nThe University of Cambridge had regressed and stagnated academically. In an oration delivered before Henry VII in 1506, Fisher recalled:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"At the time when your majesty first showed your concern for us, learning had begun to decline among us\u2014this may have been the result of constant litigation with the town, or of the frequent plagues that beset us so that we lost many of our leading scholars, or of the lack of patrons of learning. Whatever the cause, we should indeed have been reduced to despair had not your majesty shone down upon us like the rising sun itself.\"\nFisher studied at the University of Cambridge from 1484, where at Michaelhouse he came under the influence of William Melton, a pastorally-minded theologian open to the new current of reform in studies arising from the Renaissance. Fisher received the Bachelor of Arts degree in 1487. In 1491 he proceeded to a Master of Arts degree and was elected a fellow of his college.\nAlso in 1491 Fisher received a papal dispensation to be ordained to the priesthood despite being under the canonical age. On 17 December 1491 he was ordained into the priesthood, and appointed (nominal) Vicar of Northallerton, Yorkshire.\nIn 1494 he resigned this benefice to become proctor of the University and three years later was appointed master debater and about the same time he was also appointed chaplain and confessor to Margaret Beaufort, Countess of Richmond and Derby, mother of King Henry VII.\nOn 5 July 1501, he received the degree of doctor of sacred theology and 10 days later was elected Vice-Chancellor of the university. Under Fisher's guidance, his patroness Lady Margaret founded St John's and Christ's Colleges at Cambridge, and a Lady Margaret Professorship of Divinity at each of the two universities at Oxford and Cambridge. Fisher himself becoming the first occupant of the Cambridge chair. From 1505 to 1508 he was also the President of Queens' College. At the end of July 1516 he was at Cambridge for the opening of St John's College and consecrated the chapel.\nFisher's strategy was to assemble funds and attract to Cambridge leading scholars from Europe, promoting the study not only of Classical Latin and Greek authors, but of Hebrew. He placed great weight upon pastoral commitment, above all popular preaching, on the part of the endowed fellows. Fisher had a vision to which he dedicated all his personal resources and energies. Despite occasional opposition, he managed to administer the entire university, one of only two in England, conceiving and seeing through long-term projects.\nFisher's foundations were also dedicated to prayer for the dead, especially through chantry foundations. A stern and austere man, Fisher was known to place a human skull on the altar during Mass and on the table during meals.\nErasmus said of John Fisher: \"He is the one man at this time who is incomparable for uprightness of life, for learning and for greatness of soul.\"\nBishop.\nBy papal bull dated 14 October 1504, Fisher was appointed bishop of Rochester, at the personal insistence of Henry VII. Rochester was then the poorest diocese in England and usually seen as a first step on an episcopal career. Nonetheless, Fisher stayed there, presumably by his own choice, for the remaining 31 years of his life.\nAt the same time, like any English bishop of his day, Fisher had certain state duties. These included in particular, his role regarding the University of Cambridge, in which he maintained a passionate interest. In 1504 he was elected the university's chancellor. Re-elected annually for 10 years, Fisher ultimately received a lifetime appointment. At this date he is also said to have acted as tutor to the future king, Henry VIII. As a preacher, his reputation was so great that he was appointed to preach the funeral oration for King Henry VII and the Lady Margaret, both of whom died in 1509, the texts being extant. Besides the part he played in the Lady Margaret's foundations, Fisher gave further proof of his zeal for learning by inducing Erasmus to visit Cambridge. The latter attributes it (\"Epistulae\" 6:2) to Fisher's protection that the study of Greek was allowed to proceed at Cambridge without the active molestation that it encountered at Oxford.\nDespite his fame and eloquence, it was not long before Fisher came into conflict with the new King, his former pupil. The dispute arose over funds left by the Lady Margaret, the King's grandmother, for financing foundations at Cambridge.\nIn 1512 Fisher was nominated as one of the English representatives at the Fifth Council of the Lateran, then sitting, but his journey to Rome was postponed, and finally abandoned.\nOpposition to Lutheranism.\nJohn Fisher was \"the first theologian to diagnose justification through faith alone as the founding dogma of the Protestant Reformation.\" \nFisher has also been named, though without any convincing proof, as the true author of the royal treatise against Martin Luther entitled \"Assertio septem sacramentorum\" (\"Defence of the Seven Sacraments\"), published in 1521, which won for King Henry VIII the title \"Fidei Defensor\" (\"Defender of the Faith\"). Prior to this date Fisher had denounced various abuses in the Church, urging the need for disciplinary reforms.\nIn 1523, Fisher published a 200,000 word response to Martin Luther's (Assertions): (Confutation of the Lutheran Assertions). Luther omitted some of the more provocative material from his German version, allowing the view that Fisher (and, the next year, Erasmus) had misunderstood Luther. Luther did not respond to Fisher.\nOn about 11 February 1526, at the King's command, he preached a famous sermon against Luther at St Paul's Cross, the open-air pulpit outside St Paul's Cathedral in London, as part of a spectacle where some Lutherans would publicly abjure and confiscated Lutheran books would be burnt. In the preface to the printed English version of the sermon, Fisher offered to meet secretly with any Lutheran to \"to hear the bottom of his mind, and he shall hear mine again, if it so please him: and I trust\nin our lord, that finally we shall so agree, that either he shall make me a Lutheran, or else I shall induce him to be a Catholic, and to follow the doctrine of Christ's\nchurch.\" The battle against heterodox teachings increasingly occupied Fisher's later years.\nIn 1529 Fisher was called to confirm with Thomas Hitton, a follower of William Tyndale arrested for suspected heresy, that the records of his interviews and forthright admissions to Archbishop William Warham were correct and to convince Hitton to abjure. Failing this, Hitton was handed to the secular authorities and executed at the stake for heresy. William Tyndale, then living overseas, claimed that Hitton had been tortured by the archbishops, however Protestant historian John Foxe who was diligent in passing on this kind of claim, does not claim this.\nDefence of Catherine of Aragon.\nWhen Henry tried to annul his marriage to Catherine of Aragon, Fisher became the Queen's chief supporter. As such, he appeared on the Queen's behalf in the legates' court, where he startled the audience by the directness of his language and by declaring that, like St John the Baptist, he was ready to die on behalf of the indissolubility of marriage. Henry VIII, upon hearing this, grew so enraged by it that he composed a long Latin address to the legates in answer to the bishop's speech. Fisher's copy of this still exists, with his manuscript annotations in the margin which show how little he feared the royal anger. The removal of the cause to Rome brought Fisher's personal involvement to an end, but the King never forgave him for what he had done.\nHenry's attack on church prerogatives.\nIn November 1529, the \"Long Parliament\" of Henry's reign began encroaching on the Catholic Church's prerogatives. Fisher, as a member of the upper house, the House of Lords, at once warned Parliament that such acts could only end in the utter destruction of the Catholic Church in England. The Commons, through their speaker, complained to the King that Fisher had disparaged Parliament, presumably with Henry prompting them behind the scenes. Henry summoned Fisher before him, demanding an explanation. This being given, Henry declared himself satisfied, leaving it to the Commons to declare that the explanation was inadequate, so that he appeared as a magnanimous sovereign, instead of Fisher's enemy.\nA year later, in 1530, the continued encroachments on the Church moved Fisher, as bishop of Rochester, along with the bishops of Bath and Ely, to appeal to the Holy See. This gave the King his opportunity and an edict forbidding such appeals was immediately issued, and the three bishops were arrested. Their imprisonment, however, must have lasted only a few months for in February 1531, Convocation met, and Fisher was present. This was the occasion when the clergy were forced, at a cost of 100,000 pounds, to purchase the King's pardon for having recognized Cardinal Wolsey's authority as legate of the pope; and at the same time to acknowledge Henry as supreme head of the Church in England, to which phrase the addition of the clause \"so far as God's law permits\" was made through Fisher's efforts.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThis yere was a coke boylyd in a cauderne in Smythfeld for he wolde a powsyned the bishop of Rochester Fycher with dyvers of hys servanttes, and he was lockyd in a chayne and pullyd up and downe with a gybbyt at dyvers tymes tyll he was dede.\nPoisoned porridge and cannonball.\nA few days later, several of Fisher's household were taken ill after eating some porridge served to the household and two died: however Fisher was fasting that day. Henry VIII had parliament enact a retroactive bill that allowed the cook, Richard Roose, without a public trial, to be executed by the state by being boiled alive for the crime of poisoning.\nOn another occasion in 1530, a cannonball fired from across the Thames hit Fisher's house, narrowly missing his study. This was rumoured to be a warning or assassination attempt from the Boleyn family.\nIntrigues with the Holy Roman Emperor.\nFisher also engaged in secret activities to overthrow Henry. As early as 1531 he began secretly communicating with foreign diplomats. In September 1533 communicating secretly through the imperial ambassador Eustace Chapuys he encouraged Holy Roman Emperor Charles V to invade England and depose Henry in combination with a domestic uprising.\n\"The King's Great Matter\".\nMatters now moved rapidly. In May 1532, Sir Thomas More resigned the chancellorship and, in June, Fisher preached publicly against the annulment. In August, William Warham, Archbishop of Canterbury, died and Thomas Cranmer was at once proposed by Henry to the Pope as his successor. In January of the next year, Henry secretly went through a form of marriage with Anne Boleyn. Cranmer's consecration as a bishop took place in March 1533, and, a week later, Fisher was arrested. It seems that the purpose of this arrest was to prevent him from opposing the annulment which Cranmer pronounced in May, or the coronation of Anne Boleyn which followed on 1 June, for Fisher was set at liberty again within a fortnight of the latter event, no charge being made against him.\nIn the autumn of 1533, various arrests were made in connection with the so-called revelations of the Holy Maid of Kent, Elizabeth Barton, but as Fisher was taken seriously ill in December, proceedings against him were postponed for a time. However, in March 1534, a special Bill of Attainder against Fisher and others for complicity in the matter of the Maid of Kent was introduced in Parliament and passed. By this, Fisher was condemned to forfeit all his personal estate and to be imprisoned during the King's pleasure. Subsequently, a pardon was granted him on payment of a fine of 300 pounds.\nSuccession and supremacy.\nThe same session of Parliament passed the First Succession Act, by which all who should be called upon to do so were compelled to take an oath of succession, acknowledging the issue of Henry and Anne as legitimate heirs to the throne, under pain of being guilty of misprision of treason. Fisher refused the oath and was imprisoned in the Tower of London on 26 April 1534. Several efforts were made to induce him to submit, but without effect, and in November he was attained of misprision of treason a second time, his goods being forfeited as from the previous 1 March, and the See of Rochester being declared vacant as of 2 June following. He was to remain in the Tower for over a year, and while he was allowed food and drink sent by friends, and a servant, he was not allowed a priest, even to the very end. A long letter exists, written from the Tower by Fisher to Thomas Cromwell, speaking of the severity of his conditions of imprisonment.\nLike Thomas More, Bishop Fisher believed that, because the statute condemned only those speaking maliciously against the King's new title, there was safety in silence. However, on 7 May he fell into a trap laid for him by Richard Rich, who was to perjure himself to obtain Thomas More's conviction. Rich told Fisher that for his own conscience's sake the King wished to know, in strict secrecy, Fisher's real opinion. Fisher, once again, declared that the King was not Supreme Head of the Church of England.\nCardinalate and martyrdom.\nIn May 1535, the newly elected Pope Paul III created Fisher Cardinal Priest of \"San Vitale\", apparently in the hope of inducing Henry to ease Fisher's treatment. The effect was precisely the reverse: Henry forbade the cardinal's hat to be brought into England, declaring that he would send the head to Rome instead.\nIn June a special commission for Fisher's trial was issued, and on Thursday, 17 June, he was arraigned in Westminster Hall before a court of seventeen, including Thomas Cromwell, Anne Boleyn's father, and ten justices. The charge was treason, in that he denied that the King was the Supreme Head of the Church of England. Since he had been deprived of his position of Bishop of Rochester by the Act of Attainder, he was treated as a commoner, and tried by jury. The only testimony was that of Richard Rich. John Fisher was found guilty and condemned to be hanged, drawn and quartered at Tyburn.\nHowever, a public outcry was brewing among the London populace who saw a sinister irony in the parallels between the conviction of Fisher and that of his patronal namesake, Saint John the Baptist, who was executed by King Herod Antipas for challenging the validity of Herod's marriage to his brother's divorc\u00e9e Herodias. For fear of John Fisher's living through his patronal feast day, that of the Nativity of St. John the Baptist on 24 June, and of attracting too much public sympathy, the king commuted the sentence to that of beheading, to be accomplished before 23 June, the Vigil of the feast of the Nativity of St. John the Baptist.\nHe was executed on Tower Hill on 22 June 1535. The execution had the opposite effect from that which Henry VIII intended, as it created yet another parallel with that of the martyrdom of St. John the Baptist, who was also beheaded; his death also happened on the feast day of Saint Alban, the first martyr of Britain.\nFisher met death with a calm dignified courage which profoundly impressed those present. His body was treated with particular rancour, apparently on Henry's orders, being stripped and left on the scaffold until the evening, when it was taken on pikes and thrown naked into a rough grave in the churchyard of All Hallows' Barking, also known as All Hallows-by-the-Tower. There was no funeral prayer. A fortnight later, his body was laid beside that of Sir Thomas More in the chapel of St Peter ad Vincula within the Tower of London. Fisher's head was stuck upon a pole on London Bridge but its ruddy and lifelike appearance excited so much attention that, after a fortnight, it was thrown into the Thames, its place being taken by that of Sir Thomas More, whose execution, also at Tower Hill, occurred on 6 July.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"Catholic piety conventionally explains the scarlet robes that Cardinals wear as a sign of their readiness to shed their blood for the sake of the Christian gospel. This is an edifying thought: but as a matter of fact, in the whole millenium-long history of the cardinalate, only one member of the Sacred College has actually ever suffered martyrdom. That man was John Fisher. (...)\u2014\u200a\nWritings.\nA list of John Fisher's writings is found in Joseph Gillow's \"Bibliographical Dictionary of the English Catholics\" (London, s.d.), II, 262\u2013270. There are twenty-six works in all, printed and manuscript, mostly ascetical or controversial treatises, several of which have been reprinted many times. The original editions are very rare and valuable. The principal are:\nLegacy.\nCanonisation.\nJohn Fisher was beatified by Pope Leo XIII with Thomas More and 52 other English Martyrs on 29 December 1886. In the Decree of Beatification, the greatest place was given to Fisher.\nHe was canonised, with Thomas More, on 19 May 1935 by Pope Pius XI,after the presentation of a petition by English Catholics. His feast day, for celebration jointly with St Thomas More, is on 22 June (the date of Fisher's execution). In 1980, despite being an opponent of the English Reformation, Fisher was added to the Church of England's calendar of Saints and Heroes of the Christian Church, jointly with Thomas More, to be commemorated every 6 July (the date of More's execution) as \"Thomas More, Scholar, and John Fisher, Bishop of Rochester, Reformation Martyrs, 1535\". He is also listed along with Thomas More in the calendar of saints of some of the other Churches of the Anglican Communion, such as The Anglican Church of Australia.\nPersonal.\nPortraits.\nSeveral portraits of John Fisher exist, the most prominent being by Hans Holbein the Younger in the Royal Collection; and a few secondary relics are extant.\nRelic.\nFisher's walking-staff is in the possession of the Eyston family of East Hendred, in Oxfordshire (formerly Berkshire).\nCinematic and television portrayals.\nJohn Fisher was portrayed by veteran actor Joseph O'Conor in the film \"Anne of the Thousand Days\" (1969), by Bosco Hogan in the series \"The Tudors\", by Geoffrey Lewis in the 1971 miniseries \"The Six Wives of Henry VIII\" and by Richard Durden in the 2015 miniseries \"Wolf Hall\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70442", "revid": "7098284", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70442", "title": "Thomas Howard", "text": "Thomas or Tom Howard may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "70443", "revid": "29084867", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70443", "title": "Tritone", "text": "Musical interval\nIn music theory, the tritone is defined as a musical interval spanning three adjacent whole tones (six semitones). For instance, the interval from F up to the B above it (in short, F\u2013B) is a tritone as it can be decomposed into the three adjacent whole tones F\u2013G, G\u2013A, and A\u2013B.\nNarrowly defined, each of these whole tones must be a step in the scale, so by this definition, within a diatonic scale there is only one tritone for each octave. For instance, the above-mentioned interval F\u2013B is the only tritone formed from the notes of the C major scale. More broadly, a tritone is also commonly defined as any interval with a width of three whole tones (spanning six semitones in the chromatic scale), regardless of scale degrees. According to this definition, a diatonic scale contains two tritones for each octave. For instance, the above-mentioned C major scale contains the tritones F\u2013B (from F to the B above it, also called augmented fourth) and B\u2013F (from B to the F above it, also called diminished fifth, semidiapente, or semitritonus); the latter is decomposed as a semitone B\u2013C, a whole tone C\u2013D, a whole tone D\u2013E, and a semitone E\u2013F, for a total width of three whole tones, but composed as four steps in the scale. In twelve-equal temperament, the tritone divides the octave exactly in half as 6 of 12 semitones or 600 of 1,200 cents.\nIn classical music, the tritone is a harmonic and melodic dissonance and is important in the study of musical harmony. The tritone can be used to avoid traditional tonality: \"Any tendency for a tonality to emerge may be avoided by introducing a note three whole tones distant from the key note of that tonality.\" The tritone found in the dominant seventh chord can also drive the piece of music towards resolution with its tonic. These various uses exhibit the flexibility, ubiquity, and distinctness of the tritone in music.\nThe condition of having tritones is called tritonia; that of having no tritones is atritonia. A musical scale or chord containing tritones is called tritonic; one without tritones is atritonic.\nAugmented fourth and diminished fifth.\nSince a chromatic scale is formed by 12 pitches (each a semitone apart from its neighbors), it contains 12 distinct tritones, each starting from a different pitch and spanning six semitones. According to a complex but widely used naming convention, six of them are classified as \"augmented fourths\", and the other six as \"diminished fifths\".\nUnder that convention, a \"fourth\" is an interval encompassing four staff positions, while a \"fifth\" encompasses five staff positions (see interval number for more details).\nThe augmented fourth (\"A4\") and diminished fifth (\"d5\") are defined as the intervals produced by widening the perfect fourth and narrowing the perfect fifth by one chromatic semitone.\nThey both span six semitones, and they are the inverse of each other, meaning that their sum is exactly equal to one perfect octave (A4 + d5 = P8).\nIn twelve-tone equal temperament, the most commonly used tuning system, the A4 is equivalent to a d5, as both have the size of exactly half an octave. In most other tuning systems, they are not equivalent, and neither is exactly equal to half an octave.\nAny augmented fourth can be decomposed into three whole tones. For instance, the interval F\u2013B is an augmented fourth and can be decomposed into the three adjacent whole tones F\u2013G, G\u2013A, and A\u2013B.\nIt is not possible to decompose a diminished fifth into three adjacent whole tones. The reason is that a whole tone is a major second, and according to the rule of interval addition explained in Interval (music), the composition of three seconds is always a fourth (for instance, an A4). To obtain a fifth (for instance, a d5), it is necessary to add another second. For instance, using the notes of the C major scale, the diminished fifth B\u2013F can be decomposed into the four adjacent intervals\n B\u2013C (minor second), C\u2013D (major second), D\u2013E (major second), and E\u2013F (minor second).\nUsing the notes of a chromatic scale, B\u2013F may be also decomposed into the four adjacent intervals\n B\u2013C\u266f (major second), C\u266f\u2013D\u266f (major second), D\u266f\u2013E\u266f (major second), and E\u266f\u2013F\u266e (diminished second).\nNotice that the last diminished second is formed by two enharmonically equivalent notes (E\u266f and F\u266e). On a piano keyboard, these notes are produced by the same key. However, in the above-mentioned naming convention, they are considered different notes, as they are written on different staff positions and have different diatonic functions within music theory.\nDefinitions.\nA tritone (abbreviation: \"TT\") is traditionally defined as a musical interval composed of three whole tones. As the symbol for whole tone is \"T\", this definition may also be written as follows:\n \"TT = T+T+T\"\nOnly if the three tones are of the same size (which is not the case for many tuning systems) can this formula be simplified to:\n \"TT = 3T\"\nThis definition, however, has two different interpretations (broad and strict).\nBroad interpretation (chromatic scale).\nIn a chromatic scale, the interval between any note and the previous or next is a semitone. Using the notes of a chromatic scale, each tone can be divided into two semitones:\n \"T = S+S\"\nFor instance, the tone from C to D (in short, C\u2013D) can be decomposed into the two semitones C\u2013C\u266f and C\u266f\u2013D by using the note C\u266f, which in a chromatic scale lies between C and D. This means that, when a chromatic scale is used, a tritone can be also defined as any musical interval spanning six semitones:\n \"TT = T+T+T = S+S+S+S+S+S\".\nAccording to this definition, with the twelve notes of a chromatic scale it is possible to define twelve different tritones, each starting from a different note and ending six notes above it. Although all of them span six semitones, six of them are classified as \"augmented fourth\"s, and the other six as \"diminished fifths\".\nStrict interpretation (diatonic scale).\nWithin a diatonic scale, whole tones are always formed by adjacent notes (such as C and D) and therefore they are regarded as incomposite intervals. In other words, they cannot be divided into smaller intervals. Consequently, in this context the above-mentioned \"decomposition\" of the tritone into six semitones is typically not allowed.\nIf a diatonic scale is used, with its 7 notes it is possible to form only one sequence of three adjacent whole tones (\"T+T+T\"). This interval is an A4. For instance, in the C major diatonic scale (C\u2013D\u2013E\u2013F\u2013G\u2013A\u2013B\u2013...), the only tritone is from F to B. It is a tritone because F\u2013G, G\u2013A, and A\u2013B are three adjacent whole tones. It is a \"fourth\" because the notes from F to B are four (F, G, A, B). It is \"augmented\" (i.e., widened) because it is wider than most of the fourths found in the scale (they are perfect fourths).\nAccording to this interpretation, the d5 is not a tritone. Indeed, in a diatonic scale, there is only one d5, and this interval does not meet the strict definition of tritone, as it is formed by one semitone, two whole tones, and another semitone:\n \"d5 = S+T+T+S\".\nFor instance, in the C major diatonic scale, the only d5 is from B to F. It is a \"fifth\" because the notes from B to F are five (B, C, D, E, F). It is \"diminished\" (i.e. narrowed) because it is smaller than most of the fifths found in the scale (they are perfect fifths).\nSize in different tuning systems.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Stack/styles.css\"/&gt;\nIn twelve-tone equal temperament, the Aug\u00a04 is exactly half an octave (i.e., a ratio of \u221a2:1 or 600\u00a0cents. The inverse of 600\u00a0cents is 600\u00a0cents. Thus, in this tuning system, the Aug\u00a04 and its inverse (dim\u00a05) are equivalent.\nThe half-octave or equal tempered Aug\u00a04 and dim\u00a05 are unique in being equal to their own inverse (each to the other). In other meantone tuning systems, besides 12\u00a0tone equal temperament, Aug\u00a04 and dim\u00a05 are distinct intervals because neither is exactly half an octave. In any meantone tuning near to -comma meantone the Aug\u00a04 is near to the ratio\u00a07:5 (582.51) and the dim\u00a05 to 10:7 (617.49), which is what these intervals are in septimal meantone temperament. In 31 equal temperament, for example, the Aug\u00a04 is 580.65\u00a0cents, whereas the dim\u00a05 is 619.35 cents. This is perceptually indistinguishable from septimal meantone temperament.\nSince they are the inverse of each other, by definition Aug\u00a04 and dim\u00a05 always add up (in cents) to exactly one perfect octave:\n \"Aug\u00a04 + dim\u00a05 = Perf\u00a08\".\nOn the other hand, two Aug\u00a04 add up to six whole tones. In equal temperament, this is equal to exactly one perfect octave:\n \"Aug\u00a04 + Aug\u00a04 = Perf\u00a08\".\nIn quarter-comma meantone temperament, this is a diesis (128:125) less than a perfect octave:\n \"Aug\u00a04 + Aug\u00a04 = Perf\u00a08 \u2212 diesis\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Stack/styles.css\"/&gt;\nIn just intonation several different sizes can be chosen both for the Aug\u00a04 and the dim\u00a05. For instance, in 5-limit tuning, the Aug\u00a04 is either 45:32 or 25:18, and the dim\u00a05 is either 64:45 or 36:25. The 64:45 just diminished fifth arises in the C major scale between B and F, consequently the 45:32 augmented fourth arises between F and B.\nThese ratios are not in all contexts regarded as strictly just but they are the justest possible in 5-limit tuning. 7-limit tuning allows for the justest possible ratios (ratios with the smallest numerator and denominator), namely 7:5 for the Aug\u00a04 (about 582.5 cents, also known as septimal tritone) and 10:7 for the dim\u00a05 (about 617.5 cents, also known as Euler's tritone).\nThese ratios are more consonant than 17:12 (about 603.0\u00a0cents) and 24:17 (about 597.0\u00a0cents), which can be obtained in 17\u00a0limit tuning, yet the latter are also fairly common, as they are closer to the equal-tempered value of 600\u00a0cents.\nEleventh harmonic.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Stack/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe ratio of the eleventh harmonic, 11:8 (551.318 cents; approximated as F4 above C1), known as the lesser undecimal tritone or undecimal semi-augmented fourth, is found in some just tunings and on many instruments. For example, very long alphorns may reach the twelfth harmonic and transcriptions of their music usually show the eleventh harmonic sharp (F\u266f above C, for example), as in Brahms's First Symphony. This note is often corrected to 4:3 on the natural horn in just intonation or Pythagorean tunings, but the pure eleventh harmonic was used in pieces including Britten's \"Serenade for tenor, horn and strings\". Ivan Wyschnegradsky considered the major fourth a good approximation of the eleventh harmonic.\nDissonance and expressiveness.\nJ\u00e1n Haluska wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The unstable character of the tritone sets it apart, as discussed in [Paul Hindemith. \"The Craft of Musical Composition\", Book I. Associated Music Publishers, New York, 1945]. It can be expressed as a ratio by compounding suitable superparticular ratios. Whether it is assigned the ratio 64/45 or 45/32, depending on the musical context, or indeed some other ratio, it is not superparticular, which is in keeping with its unique role in music.\nHarry Partch has written:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCommon uses.\nOccurrences in diatonic scales.\nThe augmented fourth (A4) occurs naturally between the fourth and seventh scale degrees of the major scale (for example, from F to B in the key of C major). It is also present in the natural minor scale as the interval formed between the second and sixth scale degrees (for example, from D to A\u266d in the key of C minor). The melodic minor scale, having two forms, presents a tritone in different locations when ascending and descending (when the scale ascends, the tritone appears between the third and sixth scale degrees and the fourth and seventh scale degrees, and when the scale descends, the tritone appears between the second and sixth scale degrees). Supertonic chords using the notes from the natural minor mode thus contain a tritone, regardless of inversion. Containing tritones, these scales are tritonic.\nOccurrences in chords.\nThe dominant seventh chord in root position contains a diminished fifth (tritone) within its pitch construction: it occurs between the third and seventh above the root. In addition, augmented sixth chords, some of which are enharmonic to dominant seventh chords, contain tritones spelled as augmented fourths (for example, the German sixth, from A to D\u266f in the key of A minor); the French sixth chord can be viewed as a superposition of two tritones a major second apart.\nThe diminished triad also contains a tritone in its construction, deriving its name from the diminished-fifth interval (i.e. a tritone). The half-diminished seventh chord contains the same tritone, while the fully diminished seventh chord is made up of two superposed tritones a minor third apart.\nOther chords built on these, such as ninth chords, often include tritones (as diminished fifths).\nResolution.\n&lt;score sound=\"1\"&gt;\n \\new Staff \u00ab\n \\new Voice \\relative c' {\n \\clef treble \\key c \\major \\time 4/4\n \\stemUp b'2 c f e\n \\new Voice \\relative c' {\n \\clef treble \\key c \\major \\time 4/4\n \\stemDown f2 e \\bar \" \nIn all of the sonorities mentioned above, used in functional harmonic analysis, the tritone pushes towards resolution, generally resolving by step in contrary motion. This determines the resolution of chords containing tritones.\nThe augmented fourth resolves outward to a minor or major sixth (the first measure below). The inversion of this, a diminished fifth, resolves inward to a major or minor third (the second measure below). The diminished fifth is often called a tritone in modern tonal theory, but functionally and notationally it can only resolve inwards as a diminished fifth and is therefore not reckoned a tritone\u2014that is, an interval composed of three adjacent whole tones\u2014in mid-renaissance (early 16th-century) music theory.\nOther uses.\nThe tritone is also one of the defining features of the Locrian mode, being featured between the and fifth scale degrees.\nThe half-octave tritone interval is used in the musical/auditory illusion known as the tritone paradox.\nHistorical uses.\n&lt;score sound=\"1\"&gt; {\n\\relative c' {\n \\clef treble \\time 9/8 \\key e \\major\n \\set Score.tempoHideNote = ##t \\tempo \"Tr\u00e8s mod\u00e9r\u00e9\" 4. = 36\n \\override Score.SpacingSpanner #'common-shortest-duration = #(ly:make-moment 1 8)\n \\set Staff.midiInstrument = \"flute\"\n \\stemDown cis'4.~(^\"Flute\"\\p cis8~_\\markup \\italic \"doux et expressif\" cis16 \\set stemRightBeamCount = #1 b \\times 2/3 { \\set stemLeftBeamCount = #1 ais16 a gis } g8. a16 b bis)\n cis4.~( cis8~ cis16 \\set stemRightBeamCount = #1 b \\times 2/3 { \\set stemLeftBeamCount = #1 ais16 a gis } g8. a16 b bis) \\override DynamicLineSpanner.staff-padding = #3\n cis8(\\&lt; dis gis e4 gis,8 b4.~\\! \n b8\\&gt; b cis ais4)\\!\n&lt;/score&gt; The theme that opens Claude Debussy's outlines the tritone between C\u266f and G.\nThe tritone is a restless interval, classed as a dissonance in Western music from the early Middle Ages through to the end of the common practice period. This interval was frequently avoided in medieval ecclesiastical singing because of its dissonant quality. The first explicit prohibition of it seems to occur with the development of Guido of Arezzo's hexachordal system, who suggested that rather than make B\u266d a diatonic note, the hexachord be moved and based on C to avoid the F\u2013B tritone altogether. Later theorists such as Ugolino d'Orvieto and Tinctoris advocated the inclusion of B\u266d.\nFrom then until the end of the Renaissance the tritone was regarded as an unstable interval and rejected as a consonance by most theorists.\nThe name has been applied to the interval from at least the early 18th century, or the late Middle Ages, though its use is not restricted to the tritone, being that the original found example of the term is (Mi against Fa is the devil in music), referring to the minor second. Andreas Werckmeister cites this term in 1702 as being used by \"the old authorities\" for both the tritone and for the clash between chromatically related tones such as F\u266e and F\u266f, and five years later likewise calls the opposition of \"square\" and \"round\" B (B\u266e and B\u266d, respectively) because these notes represent the juxtaposition of . Johann Joseph Fux cites the phrase in his seminal 1725 work , Georg Philipp Telemann in 1733 describes, \"mi against fa\", which the ancients called \"Satan in music\"\u2014and Johann Mattheson, in 1739, writes that the \"older singers with solmization called this pleasant interval or 'the devil in music'.\" Although the latter two of these authors cite the association with the devil as from the past, there are no known citations of this term from the Middle Ages, as is commonly asserted. However Denis Arnold, in the \"New Oxford Companion to Music\", suggests that the nickname was already applied early in the medieval music itself:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;It seems first to have been designated as a \"dangerous\" interval when Guido of Arezzo developed his system of hexachords and with the introduction of B flat as a diatonic note, at much the same time acquiring its nickname of (\"the devil in music\").\nThat original symbolic association with the devil and its avoidance led to Western cultural convention seeing the tritone as suggesting \"evil\" in music. However, stories that singers were excommunicated or otherwise punished by the Church for invoking this interval are likely fanciful. At any rate, avoidance of the interval for musical reasons has a long history, stretching back to the parallel organum of the . In all these expressions, including the commonly cited , the \"mi\" and \"fa\" refer to notes from two adjacent hexachords. For instance, in the tritone B\u2013F, B would be \"mi\", that is the third scale degree in the \"hard\" hexachord beginning on G, while F would be \"fa\", that is the fourth scale degree in the \"natural\" hexachord beginning on C.\nLater, with the rise of the Baroque and Classical music era, composers accepted the tritone, but used it in a specific, controlled way\u2014notably through the principle of the tension-release mechanism of the tonal system. In that system (which is the fundamental musical grammar of Baroque and Classical music), the tritone is one of the defining intervals of the dominant-seventh chord and two tritones separated by a minor third give the fully diminished seventh chord its characteristic sound. In minor, the diminished triad (comprising two minor thirds, which together add up to a tritone) appears on the second scale degree\u2014and thus features prominently in the progression iio\u2013V\u2013i. Often, the inversion iio6 is used to move the tritone to the inner voices as this allows for stepwise motion in the bass to the dominant root. In three-part counterpoint, free use of the diminished triad in first inversion is permitted, as this eliminates the tritone relation to the bass.\nIt is only with the Romantic music and modern classical music that composers started to use it totally freely, without functional limitations notably in an expressive way to exploit the \"evil\" connotations culturally associated with it, such as Franz Liszt's use of the tritone to suggest Hell in his \"Dante Sonata\":\n&lt;score override_ogg=\"Liszt, apres une lecture de Dante from Annees de Pelerinage.wav\"&gt; {\n\\relative c' { \\new PianoStaff \u00ab \\set PianoStaff.connectArpeggios = ##t\n\\new Staff { \\key f \\major \\tempo \"Andante maestoso\"\n R1 R r2 \\clef F \u00ab { 2\\(\n \\stemDown &lt;bes des g&gt; &lt;ces ees aes&gt; \\stemUp &lt;ees ees'&gt;2..\\) q16 s1 } \\\\\n { \\stemNeutral s2*3 &lt;aes bes&gt;2\\&lt;_\\markup\\italic{poco rit.} &lt;g bes&gt;\\&gt;\n &lt;ees aes ces ees&gt;1\\arpeggio\\!^\\fermata } \u00bb\n\\new Staff { \\clef F \\key f \\major\n \\slashedGrace { 8 } 2^^ \\slashedGrace { &lt;ees ees'&gt;8 } &lt;ees ees'&gt;2^^\n \\slashedGrace { 8 } 4^^ \\slashedGrace { &lt;ees ees'&gt;8 } &lt;ees ees'&gt;4^^\n \\slashedGrace { 8 } 4^^ \\slashedGrace { &lt;ees ees'&gt;8 } &lt;ees ees'&gt;4^^~q1~q~\n q4 &lt;fes fes'&gt;8. ( &lt;ges ges'&gt;16 &lt;fes fes'&gt;4 &lt;ees ees'&gt; )\n &lt;aes ees' aes&gt;1\\arpeggio_\\fermata %\n\u00bb } }&lt;/score&gt; Liszt, from .\n Wagner, Prelude to Act 2 of \"Siegfried\".\n\u2014or Wagner's use of timpani tuned to C and F\u266f to convey a brooding atmosphere at the start of the second act of the opera \"Siegfried\".\n Debussy, , Figure 30.\nIn his early cantata , Debussy uses a tritone to convey the words of the poem by Dante Gabriel Rossetti.\n Debussy, String Quartet, 2nd movement,bars 140\u2013147.\nRoger Nichols (1972, p19) says that \"the bare fourths, the wide spacing, the tremolos, all depict the words\u2014'the light thrilled towards her'\u2014with sudden, overwhelming power.\" Debussy's String Quartet also features passages that emphasize the tritone.\nThe tritone was also exploited heavily in that period as an interval of modulation for its ability to evoke a strong reaction by moving quickly to distantly related keys. For example, the climax of Hector Berlioz's (1846) consists of a transition between \"huge B and F chords\" as Faust arrives in Pandaemonium, the capital of Hell. Musicologist Julian Rushton calls this \"a tonal wrench by a tritone\".\nLater, in twelve-tone music, serialism, and other 20th century compositional idioms, composers considered it a neutral interval. In some analyses of the works of 20th century composers, the tritone plays an important structural role; perhaps the most cited is the axis system, proposed by Ern\u0151 Lendvai, in his analysis of the use of tonality in the music of B\u00e9la Bart\u00f3k. Tritone relations are also important in the music of George Crumb and Benjamin Britten, whose \"War Requiem\" features a tritone between C and F\u266f as a recurring motif. John Bridcut (2010, p.\u00a0271) describes the power of the interval in creating the sombre and ambiguous opening of the \"War Requiem\": \"The idea that the chorus and orchestra are confident in their wrong-headed piety is repeatedly disputed by the music. From the instability of the opening tritone\u2014that unsettling interval between C and F sharp\u2014accompanied by the tolling of warning bells\u00a0... eventually resolves into a major chord for the arrival of the boys singing 'Te decet hymnus'.\" Leonard Bernstein uses the tritone harmony as a basis for much of \"West Side Story\". George Harrison uses tritones on the downbeats of the opening phrases of the Beatles songs \"The Inner Light\", \"Blue Jay Way\", and \"Within You Without You\", creating a prolonged sense of suspended resolution. Perhaps the most striking use of the interval in rock music of the late 1960s can be found in Jimi Hendrix's song \"Purple Haze\". According to Dave Moskowitz (2010, p.\u00a012), Hendrix \"ripped into 'Purple Haze' by beginning the song with the sinister sounding tritone interval creating an opening dissonance, long described as 'The Devil in Music'.\" The opening riff of \"Black Sabbath\", the first song on Black Sabbath's eponymous debut album, is an inversion of a tritone; the album, and this song in particular, are considered to mark the birth of heavy metal music.\nTritones also became important in the development of jazz tertian harmony, where triads and seventh chords are often expanded to become 9th, 11th, or 13th chords, and the tritone often occurs as a substitute for the naturally occurring interval of the perfect 11th. Since the perfect 11th (i.e. an octave plus perfect fourth) is typically perceived as a dissonance requiring a resolution to a major or minor 10th, chords that expand to the 11th or beyond typically raise the 11th a semitone (thus giving us an augmented or sharp 11th, or an octave plus a tritone from the root of the chord) and present it in conjunction with the perfect 5th of the chord. Also in jazz harmony, the tritone is both part of the dominant chord and its substitute dominant (also known as the sub V chord). Because they share the same tritone, they are possible substitutes for one another. This is known as a tritone substitution. The tritone substitution is one of the most common chord and improvisation devices in jazz.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In the theory of harmony it is known that a diminished interval needs to be resolved inwards, and an augmented interval outwards. ... and with the correct resolution of the \"true\" tritones this desire is totally satisfied. However, if one plays a \"just\" diminished fifth that is perfectly in tune, for example, there is no wish to resolve it to a major third. Just the opposite\u2014aurally one wants to enlarge it to a minor sixth. The opposite holds true for the \"just\" augmented fourth. ...\nThese apparently contradictory aural experiences become understandable when the cents of both types of just tritones are compared with those of the true tritones and then read 'crossed-over'. One then notices that the just augmented fourth of 590.224 cents is only 2 cents bigger than the true diminished fifth of 588.270 cents, and that both intervals lie below the middle of the octave of 600.000 cents. It is no wonder that, following the ear, we want to resolve both downwards. The ear only desires the tritone to be resolved upwards when it is bigger than the middle of the octave. Therefore the opposite is the case with the just diminished fifth of 609.776 cents.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70449", "revid": "28078513", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70449", "title": "Mary Tudor, Queen of France", "text": "Queen of France from 1514 to 1515\nMary Tudor ( ; 18 March 1496 \u2013 25 June 1533) was an English princess who was briefly Queen of France as the third wife of King Louis XII. Louis was more than 30 years her senior. Mary was the fifth child of Henry VII of England and Elizabeth of York, and the youngest to survive infancy.\nFollowing Louis's death, Mary married Charles Brandon, 1st Duke of Suffolk. Performed secretly in France, the marriage occurred without the consent of Mary's brother Henry VIII. The marriage necessitated the intervention of Thomas Wolsey; Henry eventually pardoned the couple after they paid a large fine. Mary had four children with Suffolk. Through her older daughter, Frances, she was the maternal grandmother of Lady Jane Grey, the disputed queen of England for nine days in July 1553.\nEarly life.\nMary was the fifth child of Henry VII of England and Elizabeth of York, and the youngest of those who survived infancy. She was born at Shene Palace, on 18 March 1496. Mary was likely named after either the Virgin Mary, or her maternal aunt, Mary of York, who died at the age of 14 in 1482. A privy seal bill dated from midsummer 1496 authorizes a payment of 50 shillings to her nurse, Anne Skeron. Also, Erasmus stated that she was four years old when he visited the royal nursery in 1499\u20131500. At age six, she was given her own household, complete with \"a staff of gentlewomen assigned to wait upon her\", a schoolmaster, and a physician. She was given instruction in French, Latin, music, dancing, and embroidery. Her Governess was Joan Vaux, who she called Mother Guildford; the two shared a close relationship and Mary was furious when Joan was sent back to England upon her arrival in France.\nAs children, Mary and her brother, the future King Henry VIII, shared a close friendship. He named his first surviving child, the future Queen Mary I, in her honour. They lost their mother when Mary was just six and, given the number of bills paid to her apothecary from 1504 to 1509, it would appear that Mary's own health was fragile.\nShe was known in her youth as one of the most beautiful princesses in Europe; Erasmus said of her that \"Nature never formed anything more beautiful.\"\nIn 1506, during a visit from Philip I of Castile, Mary was called to entertain the guests, dancing and playing the lute and clavichord. In September 1506, Philip died, and on 21 December 1507, Mary was betrothed to his son Charles, later Holy Roman Emperor. The betrothal was called off in 1514.\nFirst marriage: Queen of France.\nCardinal Wolsey negotiated a peace treaty with France, and on 9 October 1514, at the age of 18, Mary married the 52-year-old King Louis XII of France at Abbeville. She was accompanied to France by several English maids of honour (one of whom was Anne Boleyn) under the supervision of her old governess Lady or \"Mother\" Guildford, who acted as her principal lady-in-waiting.\nDespite two previous marriages, Louis had no living sons, and sought to produce one. But he died on 1 January 1515, less than three months after marrying Mary, reputedly worn out by his exertions in the bedchamber, but more likely from the effects of gout. Their union produced no children. Following Louis's death, his successor, King Francis I of France, made unsuccessful attempts to arrange a second marriage for Mary.\nSecond marriage: Duchess of Suffolk.\nMary had been unhappy in her marriage of state to King Louis XII, as she was almost certainly already in love with Charles Brandon, 1st Duke of Suffolk. King Henry VIII was aware of Mary's feelings; letters from her in 1515 indicated that she had agreed to wed Louis only on condition that \"if she survived him, she should marry whom she liked\". However, Henry VIII wanted any future marriage to be to his advantage. The King's Council, not wishing to see Charles Brandon gain further power at court, was also opposed to the match.\nMeanwhile, rumours swirled in France that she would wed either Antoine, Duke of Lorraine, or Charles III, Duke of Savoy. On 26 June 1515, the Duke of Lorraine married Ren\u00e9e of Bourbon instead. At one point, even King Francis I, perhaps in hope of his wife Queen Claude's death, was one of Mary's suitors in the first week of her widowhood; Mary asserted that she had given him her confidence in order to avoid his overtures. A pair of French friars went so far as to warn Mary that she must not wed Charles Brandon, because he \"had traffickings with the devil\".\nWhen King Henry VIII sent Brandon to bring Mary back to England in late January 1515, he made the Duke promise that he would not propose to her. Once in France, Mary persuaded Charles to abandon that pledge; Charles later wrote to the King stating he \"never saw a woman so weep\". The couple married in secret at the Hotel de Cluny in Paris on 3 March 1515 in the presence of just 10 people, among them King Francis I. Technically, this was treason, as Brandon had married a royal princess without King Henry's consent. Henry was outraged, and the privy council urged that Charles be imprisoned or executed; Mary, as royalty and the King's favourite sister, was safe from execution.\nDue to the intervention of Thomas Wolsey and Henry's affection for both his sister and Charles, the couple were given only a heavy fine of \u00a324,000, to be paid to the King in yearly instalments of \u00a31000; the whole of Mary's dower from King Louis XII of \u00a3200,000; and the gold plate and jewels King Louis had given or promised her. The \u00a324,000 was later reduced by the King. They officially later married on 13 May 1515 at Greenwich Palace in the presence of King Henry VIII and his courtiers. In 1528, Charles secured a papal bull from Pope Clement VII legitimising the marriage.Mary was Charles Brandon's third wife, and he had two daughters, Anne and Mary, by his second wife Anne Browne, who had died in 1510 or 1512. Mary raised the girls with her own children. Even after her second marriage, Mary was normally referred to at the English court as the Queen of France, and was not known as the Duchess of Suffolk in her lifetime, despite being legally allowed to be. Mary spent most of her time at the Duke's country seat of Westhorpe Hall in Suffolk.\nIn the late 1520s, relations between King Henry VIII and his sister Mary were strained when she opposed the King's attempt to obtain an annulment of his marriage to Catherine of Aragon, whom Mary had known for many years. Mary strongly disliked Anne Boleyn (King Henry's intended wife), whom she had first encountered in France. Anne and her sister Mary Boleyn had been among the maids of honour in the entourage that had accompanied Mary to France for her wedding to King Louis XII.\nIn March 1532, Venetian Ambassador Carlo Capello wrote of an incident where &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt; Though it was said to be caused by a private quarrel, he was \"assured it was owing to opprobrious language uttered against Madam Anne by his Majesty's sister, the Duchess of Suffolk, Queen Dowager of France.\" Anne Boleyn was the niece of the Duke of Norfolk mentioned by Capello.\nDeath.\nMary had multiple bouts of illness, requiring treatments over her lifetime. She died, age 37, at Westhorpe Hall, Suffolk, on 25 June 1533, having never fully recovered from the sweating sickness she caught in 1528. The cause of death has been speculated to have been tuberculosis, appendicitis, or cancer.\nAs an English princess, daughter of a king, sister to the current king, and a dowager queen of France, Mary Tudor's funeral and interment was conducted with much heraldic ceremony. A requiem mass was held at Westminster Abbey. Her body was embalmed and held in state at Westhorpe Hall for three weeks. On 21 July 1533, a delegation from France joined the English delegation for the lavish funeral ceremony. Her daughter Frances was chief mourner, accompanied by her husband and siblings. As was tradition, neither Mary's husband nor her brother the king attended. The funeral procession included 100 torch bearers, clergy carrying the cross, six horses pulling the hearse, other nobility and 100 of the duke's yeomen. A requiem mass and burial at Bury St. Edmunds Abbey followed the next day. At the funeral, her step-daughters, Anne and Mary, pushed themselves to the head of the cort\u00e8ge just before the coffin was lowered into the crypt of the Abbey, much to the consternation of their half-siblings.\nFive years later, when the monastery was dissolved, Mary's body was removed to nearby St. Mary's Church, Bury St. Edmunds. In 1784, her remains were disinterred, her coffin opened, and locks of her hair were taken by Horace Walpole, Dorothy Bentinck, Duchess of Portland, and several others.\nAppearance and personality.\nUpon her arrival in France, Mary was described as being \"handsome and well favoured, were not her eyes and eyebrows too light; she is slight, rather than defective from corpulence, and conducts herself with so much grace, and has such good manners, that for her age of 18 years\u2014and she does not look more\u2014she is a paradise.\"\nContemporaries lauded her beauty, including her husband, Louis XII, who described her as a \"nymph from heaven\". She regularly took part in masques at her brother's court, and enjoyed \"hearing singing, instrumental music, and dancing\".\nMary was described as \"very lively\", with one nobleman noting \"[she] is never still.\" She was also said to be cheerful and affable; this is shown when, upon meeting her future husband Louis for the first time, she blew him a kiss in greeting.\nIssue.\nMary and Charles had four children, two daughters and two sons:\nMary and Charles raised their children at their home at Westhorpe Hall. Their two sons, both named Henry, are commonly mistaken for being the same son. Both boys died when they were children.\nMary's widower later married their son's (Henry Brandon, Earl of Lincoln) betrothed, who was also his ward, the 14-year-old Catherine Willoughby, by whom he had his two youngest sons.\nIn literature.\nShe is the main character in several historical fiction novels:\nPortraiture and other depictions.\nMary's portraits and other depictions are mostly subject of heated debate as to if it is really her or somebody else, who draw or painted her or whether the painting is misdated.\nConfirmed depictions of her include:\nAlleged portraits of Mary meant for Charles V include:\nMany believe it is the lost painting of Queen Isabella I of Castile by Sittow, but it is not attributed to him.\nNote: on Wikipedia this painting is labelled as by Jean Perr\u00e9al, location unknown. However, on the museum's webpage it is not labelled as by him but by anonymous Ma\u00eetre de la Reine Marie Tudor(Master of Queen Mary Tudor).\nLost depictions:\n2 in Ashmolean Museum, one labelled as by follower of Jean Clouet, and the other by anonymous. \n1 in Uffizi Gallery -labelled as Ritratto di donna(portrait of woman) 3911 F, it is a very crude sketch by Francois Clouet, who was a child when Mary was in France.\n2 more versions from Biblioth\u00e8que Municipale M\u00e9janes, Aix en Provence. Both bear a 16th-century text(thus most likely to be original). However the picture on Wikipedia of one of them is described as not the real drawing but a print of it.\nOther suggested depictions:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70452", "revid": "41906662", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70452", "title": "V\u00f6lsunga saga", "text": "13th century Icelandic saga\nThe V\u00f6lsunga saga (often referred to in English as the Volsunga Saga or Saga of the V\u00f6lsungs) is a legendary saga, a late 13th-century prose rendition in Old Norse of the origin and decline of the V\u00f6lsung clan (including the story of Sigurd and Brunhild and the destruction of the Burgundians). It is one of the most famous legendary sagas and an example of a \"heroic saga\" that deals with Germanic heroic legend.\nThe saga covers topics including the quarrel between Sigi and Ska\u00f0i, a huge family tree of great kings and powerful conquerors, the quest led by Sigmund and Sinfj\u01ebtli to save princess Sign\u00fd from the evil king Siggeir, and, most famously, Sigurd killing the serpent/dragon F\u00e1fnir and obtaining the cursed ring Andvaranaut that F\u00e1fnir guarded.\nContext and overview.\nThe saga is largely based on the epic poetry of the historic \"Elder Edda\". The earliest known pictorial representation of this tradition is the Ramsund carving in Sweden, which was created c.\u20091000 CE.\nThe origins of the material are considerably older, however, and it in part echoes real events in Central Europe during the Migration Period, chiefly the destruction of the Kingdom of the Burgundians by the Huns in the fifth century. Some of the poems contained in the \"Elder Edda\" relate episodes from the V\u00f6lsung legend. On the other hand, the only surviving medieval manuscript of the saga, Ny kgl. Saml. 1824 b 4to, which is held by the Royal Library of Denmark, dates to about 1400. In this manuscript, the saga leads straight in to \"Ragnars saga lo\u00f0br\u00f3kar\".\nContents.\nThe saga can be divided into five phases: the preliminary generations, Sigurd and his foster family, Sigurd and the Gjukingar, Gudrun and the Budlingar, and Gudrun's last marriage.\nVolsung's ancestors.\nThe \"V\u00f6lsunga saga\" begins with Sigi, the ancestor of the V\u00f6lsung lineage, and Ska\u00f0i. Sigi was more important since he was richer and more powerful and was said to be a son of Odin. In the saga, Ska\u00f0i owns a thrall named Bre\u00f0i whom Sigi takes on a hunting trip all day and evening. When they compare their skills, Bre\u00f0i's outshine Sigi's. Enraged, Sigi murders Bre\u00f0i and hides his body in a snowdrift. When Sigi returns, he lies to Ska\u00f0i that Bre\u00f0i rode away into the forest. But Ska\u00f0i, suspecting something amiss, goes off with his men in search of Bre\u00f0i and discovers his body in the snowdrift. Ska\u00f0i declares the drift \"Bre\u00f0i's drift\", and soon every large drift comes to be called \"Bre\u00f0i's drift\" in his honor. Ska\u00f0i casts Sigi out, leaving him \"a wolf in hallowed places\".\nAfter much adventuring, Odin leads Sigi to a land where some longships lay. He and his troops (that his unnamed father gave him) take up raiding. Sigi becomes a successful raider and warlord before seizing a kingdom called Hunaland to rule. His wife's brothers eventually become envious of Sigi's power and wealth and raise an army against him. In the following battle, Sigi is killed and his enemies take over the kingdom. Later, Sigi's son Rerir avenges his father's death, killing his uncles and taking his father's throne. However, he and his wife have no heir, so they turn to Odin and Frigg to pray for one. In response, Odin and Frigg send one of their wish maidens to take the form of a crow and place a magical apple on Rerir's lap. When Rerir shares it with the queen, she conceives and endures an extraordinarily long pregnancy. While awaiting the birth of his heir, Rerir goes on a campaign to pacify the land, but he catches sick and dies before returning. Since the queen knows that she has not long left before the pregnancy kills her, she orders her baby to be cut from her. She dies in the process, but the male child survives and is named V\u00f6lsung.\nThe life of king V\u00f6lsung.\nV\u00f6lsung marries Hljod, the daughter of a j\u00f6tunn and the maiden who gave the queen the golden apple. V\u00f6lsung and Hljod have ten sons and one daughter, the two eldest and strongest being the boy and girl twins Sigmund and Sign\u00fd. King V\u00f6lsung has a grand palace built for him, with the great hall built around a massive tree known as Barnstokkr (lit.\u2009'child trunk') to stand proudly over V\u00f6lsung's guests. One day, Siggeir, the king of Gautland, comes to visit V\u00f6lsung and ask for Sign\u00fd's hand in marriage. V\u00f6lsung is pleased at the idea of Sign\u00fd marrying Siggeir, but Sign\u00fd despises him. King V\u00f6lsung arranges the marriage anyway. On the wedding day, as everyone is celebrating, a hooded man with one eye comes into the hall, draws a sword, and thrusts it into Barnstokkr. The mysterious figure says that whoever can pull the sword from Barnstokkr will receive it as a gift, then abruptly leaves. Although the saga does not explicitly say who the man is, his hood and missing eye suggest he is Odin. Indeed, later in the saga it is made clear that such a man could be no one but the All-father, as the figure returns to set more formidable challenges, and the sword later demonstrates its divine powers. Many people attempt to draw the sword from the tree, but no one can make it budge until Sigmund V\u00f6lsungson comes and pulls the sword out with ease. King Siggeir offers to buy the sword, but Sigmund refuses. That night Siggeir and Sign\u00fd sleep together, and by the next day she is pressuring King V\u00f6lsung to allow them to divorce. Although his daughter is in distress, he reluctantly refuses, so as to maintain their alliance with Gautland.\nBut when Sign\u00fd travels to Gautland, she finds out that Siggeir is plotting to overthrow V\u00f6lsung and add Hunaland to his empire. Sign\u00fd returns to Hunaland to gather V\u00f6lsung, Sigmund, and their most powerful men, telling them that they must raise an army and invade Gautland if they do not want Hunaland to fall. V\u00f6lsung agrees to the invasion, sending his army to the shore of Gautland to overthrow and kill Siggeir. After a long, grim, and intense battle, the V\u00f6lsungs are forced to concede defeat after the deaths of the king and one of his sons.\nThe war against Siggeir.\nSign\u00fd goes to speak with King Siggeir as his wife, begging him to tie her brothers up instead of killing them. Siggeir agrees, thinking a slower death more suitable for them, so the brothers are tied up by their feet and hands and thrown into the woods to die. Sign\u00fd, hoping for this outcome, sends one of her most trusted men to find her brothers. When he finds them, they tell him that one has been killed and eaten by a she-wolf. For some reason, however, he is unable to untie them, and the she-wolf continues to come every night until only Sigmund is left alive. On the day before he would die, Sign\u00fd's scout returns to the forest and gives him honey, instructing Sigmund to put some in his mouth and smear it on his face. When the she-wolf comes she begins to lick Sigmund's face, and intrigued by the sweetness, she puts her tongue in his mouth to lick the honey out. As soon as she does so, Sigmund bites down on her tongue, ripping it out as the beast struggles and thereby killing the she-wolf. The sage mentions that this wolf may have been Siggeir's mother who took the shape of a she-wolf through \"witchcraft and sorcery\". Sigmund stays where he is so that Sign\u00fd's scouts can find him again. They do, informing Sign\u00fd of what happened. She visits him and helps him dig an underground base, bringing him enough supplies to survive in secret while they plot revenge against Siggeir.\nOne night, while Sign\u00fd is sitting in her chamber, a v\u00f6lva comes and asks her to exchange forms. They do, and the seeress sleeps with Siggeir that night without the king's notice. Meanwhile, Sign\u00fd travels to Sigmund's base in the form of the v\u00f6lva, telling him that she had gotten lost in the woods. Sigmund accepts her in, and they have incestuous sexual intercourse. After changing back, Sign\u00fd discovers she is pregnant. She gives birth to Sinfj\u01ebtli.\nWhen Sinfj\u01ebtli is ten, Sign\u00fd puts him and her other sons through a painful test to see who is worthy of serving Sigmund. Although the others cry out in pain, Sinfj\u01ebtli does not flinch. Together, Sigmund and Sinfj\u01ebtli plot revenge against King Siggeir. One night, they sneak into Siggeir's dwelling and try to assassinate him, but one of Siggeir's children catch them and have them seized. The two are thrown in a mound but escape with the power of Sigmund's sword that Sign\u00fd returns to him. They kill Siggeir by making him walk into a bonfire. Sign\u00fd walks in with him, wanting to die with her husband. Sigmund takes the throne, becoming a great and powerful ruler. He marries Borghild and by her has a son named Helgi.\nAs an adult, Helgi meets Sigr\u00fan, daughter of King H\u00f6gne, and wishes to marry her. She tells him that her father has promised her to Hothbrodd, so Helgi and Sinfj\u01ebtli raise an army and invade Hothbrodd's realm. Helgi kills Hothbrodd, marries Sigr\u00fan, and usurps Hothbrodd's kingship. Sinfj\u01ebtli also meets a woman he wishes to marry, and to win her he fights and kills another man, who happens to be Borghild's brother. In revenge, Borghild kills Sinfj\u01ebtli by poison. A grieving Sigmund rejects Borghild and drives her out of his kingdom.\nAs an old man, Sigmund marries Hj\u00f6rd\u00eds, daughter of King Eylimi. The suitor she rejected in Sigmund's favor brings an army against him, and Sigmund is mortally wounded in the battle. Hj\u00f6rd\u00eds finds her wounded husband, who entrusts to her the shards of his sword, prophesying that they will be reforged someday for their yet unborn son. He dies, and Hj\u00f6rd\u00eds is taken in by Alf, son of Hjalprek, king of Denmark. Shortly thereafter she gives birth to Sigurd, her son by Sigmund. Sigurd is fostered in Hjalprek's court by Reginn, his tutor, and grows to manhood there.\nSigurd and his foster family.\nSigurd grows up to be strong, brave, and very popular. One day, he enters the forest looking for a horse and meets Odin, who gives him Grani, who is descended from Odin's own Sleipnir and better than any other horse. With Grani, Reginn believes Sigurd capable of a heroic quest and decides to tell him the story of F\u00e1fnir the dragon.\nReginn's father Hrei\u00f0marr had three sons: himself, \u00d3tr, and F\u00e1fnir. \u00d3tr was able to shapeshift into an otter-like fisherman, F\u00e1fnir was large and fierce, and Reginn was skilled with ironwork. One day, Odin, Loki, and H\u0153nir were fishing and killed \u00d3tr in his otter shape, then skinned and ate him. King Hrei\u00f0marr found out and demanded that they fill and cover the skin with gold. Loki took the dwarf Andvari's gold and the debt was paid. But out of Andvari's treasure, he cursed a ring called Andvaranaut (\"Andvari's gift\"), warning that it would bring death to anyone who owned it. Later, F\u00e1fnir killed his father, hid the body, and took all the treasure, including the Advaranaut, to his hoard. There, he turned into an evil dragon. Reginn, meanwhile, became a smith for King Hjalprek.\nReginn convinces Sigurd to slay F\u00e1fnir and take the treasure. In preparation, he smiths two swords one after another for Sigurd, but they break when he tests them. Sigurd's mother gives him the pieces of his father's broken sword and Reginn reforges them into a legendary sword called Gram. When Sigurd tests it, it splits the iron anvil down to its base. Before going to kill F\u00e1fnir, he goes to the soothsayer Gr\u00edpir to ask about his fate. Gr\u00edpir tells him after some hesitation, and Sigurd returns to Reginn, saying he must avenge his father Sigmund before he can kill the dragon. Sigurd sails to Hunding's kingdom and kills many and burns settlements. A brutal battle ensues between him and King Lyngvi and Hunding's sons, but Sigurd kills them all with Gram. He returns to Reginn to prepare to meet F\u00e1fnir.\nSigurd travels to F\u00e1fnir's territory and digs a ditch to hide in and stab the dragon from. Odin comes and advises him to dig several ditches for the blood to flow into, which he does. As F\u00e1fnir crawls over the ditch, Sigurd stabs him through the heart. As the dragon is dying, he asks Sigurd about his lineage and says that his gold and Reginn will be the cause of Sigurd's death. Sigurd returns to Reginn, who was hiding in the heather during F\u00e1fnir's slaying. Reginn drinks F\u00e1fnir's blood and asks Sigurd to roast F\u00e1fnir's heart and let him eat it. When Sigurd tests whether the heart is fully cooked and licks his finger, he suddenly understands the speech of birds. He overhears the nuthatches talking to each other about Reginn's plan to kill him. They say that he should eat the heart himself, kill Reginn, take the gold, and find Brynhild. Sigurd kills Reginn, eats some of the heart, takes as much treasure as he can carry, including the Helm of Terror and the Andvaranaut, and rides off on Grani.\nSigurd rides to the land of the Franks and finds a sleeping warrior. He removes the helmet, discovers it is a woman, and cuts her chainmail open. She wakes and tells him Odin stabbed her with a sleeping thorn and mandated that she must marry, but she refuses to marry any man who knows fear. Brynhild gives him beer and recites a poem about how to use different magical runes. Following this, Brynhild gives Sigurd several pieces of sound advice on how to navigate society and survive, and they agree to marry each other.\nSigurd and the Gjukingar.\nSigurd rides to the estate of Heimr, husband of Bekkhild, Brynhild's sister. Sigurd catches sight of Brynhild weaving a golden tapestry in the castle. Alsvid tells him to not think about women, but after Brynhild saying they are not fated to be together, they renew their vows.\nMeanwhile, a skilled sorceress named Grimhild is married to King Gjuki, and together they have three sons: Gunnar, H\u01ebgni, and Guthormr. Their daughter Gu\u00f0r\u00fan has a dream about a golden hawk, which Brynhild interprets as her future husband. They then talk of Sigurd's excellence and the prophecies about him before his birth. Then Gu\u00f0r\u00fan has a dream about a handsome stag, which Brynhild interprets as Sigurd. Brynhild prophesies she will marry Sigurd, lose him, marry Atli the Hun, lose her brothers, then kill Atli.\nSigurd comes to Gjuki with his horse Grani and his treasure from the dragon F\u00e1fnir. Grimhild gives him a drink that makes him forget about Brynhild, wanting him to marry Gu\u00f0r\u00fan. Gunnar and the others swear brotherhood with Sigurd, and he marries Gu\u00f0r\u00fan. She eats some of the dragon's heart, and bears Sigurd a son, Sigmund. Meanwhile, Grimhild encourages Gunnar to marry Brynhild. Sigurd and the three brothers ride to King Bu\u00f0li for Gunnar to ask for Brynhild's hand. She is inside a hall surrounded by fire and has vowed an oath to marry whoever can ride through the flames, believing only Sigurd could be brave enough to do so. Gunnar can't take on this task, so he and Sigurd exchange shapes, and Sigurd rides through the fire and asks Brynhild to marry him as Gunnar. Brynhild reluctantly agrees because of her oath and leaves her daughter Aslaug by Sigurd to be raised with Heimr.\nLater, Brynhild and Gu\u00f0r\u00fan are arguing about whose husband is better, and Gu\u00f0r\u00fan shows her the ring which Brynhild had given Sigurd. Brynhild recognizes the ring and realizes she has been tricked. She tells Gunnar she knows he deceived her and that she will kill him and seek revenge on Grimhild. Brynhild takes to her room and Sigurd comes to try to make amends by asking her to marry him, but she rejects his offer, wanting to die and bring doom upon everyone involved.\nGunnar consults with his brothers whether they should kill Sigurd to keep Brynhild or not. They decide to give snake's and wolf's meat to Guthormr to turn him violent and kill Sigurd. He goes into Sigurd's bed chamber and stabs him while asleep. Sigurd wakes up and before dying, throws Gram after him as he leaves, cutting Guthormr in two. Brynhild laughs when she hears Gu\u00f0r\u00fan sobbing, and Gu\u00f0r\u00fan tells Gunnar he made a mistake by killing Sigurd. Brynhild also tells Gunnar he has made a mistake and stabs herself. But before she dies, she foretells the rest of Gunnar's and Gu\u00f0r\u00fan's future. Gunnar fulfills Brynhild's last request, that he put her on a bonfire with Sigurd, Guthormr, and Sigurd's 3-year-old son.\nGu\u00f0r\u00fan and the Budlingar.\nEveryone mourns Sigurd's death and Gu\u00f0r\u00fan runs away, ending up with King Half in Denmark. Grimhild finds Gu\u00f0r\u00fan and orders her to marry King Atli against her will, which she unhappily does. One night, Atli has a dream that he is fed his children, which Gu\u00f0r\u00fan interprets to mean his sons will die. She sends her brothers a runic message warning them about Atli, but the messenger Vingi alters it, inviting her brothers to come to Atli's hall. H\u01ebgni's wife Kostbera sees the message is false and tells him. She tells her dream to H\u01ebgni, in which she predicts the treachery of Atli and H\u01ebgni's death, but he does not believe her. Gunnar's wife Glaumvor also has symbolic dreams predicting Gunnar's betrayal by Atli and his death, but he eventually gives up trying to interpret them differently and simply concedes he will probably have a short life. Gunnar and H\u01ebgni go with Vingi to Atli. Vingi reveals he betrayed them, and Gunnar and H\u01ebgni kill him with their axe handles.\nWhen they arrive, Atli says he wants Sigurd's gold and will avenge Sigurd by killing his brothers-in-law. Gu\u00f0r\u00fan tries to stop the fighting, but then puts on armor, picks up a sword, and fights with her brothers. Many of Atli's champions are killed. Of their army, only Gunnar and H\u01ebgni survive and are captured. H\u01ebgni's heart is cut out and shown to Gunnar. Gunnar is placed in a snake pit, but Gu\u00f0r\u00fan brings him a harp which he plays with his toes. All the snakes fall asleep except one, which bites his heart and kills him.\nGu\u00f0r\u00fan and Atli hold a funeral feast. Later, Gu\u00f0r\u00fan kills Atli's two sons and gives their blood and hearts to Atli to eat and drink. Atli says she deserves to be killed. H\u01ebgni's son Niflung wants to avenge his father, so he and Gu\u00f0r\u00fan stab Atli while he is asleep. After he dies, Gu\u00f0r\u00fan sets the hall on fire and all Atli's retainers die while fighting each other in panic.\nGu\u00f0r\u00fan's last marriage.\nGu\u00f0r\u00fan and Sigurd's daughter is Svanhild, radiantly beautiful. Gu\u00f0r\u00fan goes to the sea to drown herself after killing Atli, but she gets swept away to the court of King Jonakr, who marries her. They have three sons: Hamdir, Sorli, and Erp. Svanhild is raised with them.\nKing Jormunrek wants to marry Svanhild, but Bikki convinces Jormunrek's son Randver that he would be a better match for her than his father, so he and Svanhild marry. Upon Bikki's advice, Jormunrek hangs Randver and has horses trample Svanhild to death.\nGu\u00f0r\u00fan encourages her sons to kill Jormunrek and avenge Svanhild. Her sons ask Erp if he will help them kill Jormunrek, but he gives an ambivalent answer they misunderstand as arrogance, so they kill him, coming to regret it afterwards. They meet Jormunrek and cut off his hands and feet, but Erp would have cut off Jormunrek's head, which would have kept Jormunrek from calling for his housecarls. The housecarls are unable to kill Gu\u00f0r\u00fan's sons with sharp weapons. Odin then appears as an old one-eyed man and advises Jormunrek's housecarls to have the avengers killed with stones, which they do.\nThemes.\nOdin and the supernatural.\nThroughout the saga, elements of the supernatural are interwoven into the narrative. One recurring theme is the periodic appearance of Odin, the foremost among Norse deities, associated with \"war, wisdom, ecstasy, and poetry\". He is typically depicted as a mysterious, hooded old man with one eye.\nOdin appears a number of times to assist characters with his magic and powers. At the start of the saga, he guides his son Sigi out of the underworld. He also sends a wish maiden to Sigi's son Rerir with an enchanted apple that finally allowed Rerir and his wife to have a child. Later, he appears as an old, one-eyed stranger and sticks his sword into the tree Barnstokkr during a feast at the palace of King V\u00f6lsung, declaring that \"he who draws this sword out of the trunk shall receive it from me as a gift, and he himself shall prove that he has never carried a better sword than this one\", which King V\u00f6lsung's son Sigmund does.\nOdin also directly intervenes during key points in the narrative. During a battle, Odin, again in the guise of an old, one-eyed man, breaks Sigmund's sword, turning the tide of the battle and ultimately leading to his death. He also stabs Brynhild with a sleeping thorn and curses her never to win another battle as an act of revenge for killing Hjalmgunnar, a rival king to whom Odin had promised victory.\nThe ring Andvaranaut.\nIn the latter half of the saga the ring Andvaranaut serves as a connection and explanation for the characters' troubles. Loki killed \u00d3tr, the son of Hreidmar. As compensation for \u00d3tr's death, Loki coerced a dwarf named Andvari into repaying the debt with gold. Andvari tried to hold onto one gold ring and when Loki forced him to give it up Andvari cursed the ring, saying, \"This ring... and indeed the entire treasure, will be the death of whoever owns it.\" This plays out as one character after another is killed soon after they receive the ring. \u00d3tr's brother F\u00e1fnir killed his father in order to get the ring and then turned into a dragon to protect it. Sigurd then kills F\u00e1fnir, taking the ring and giving it to Brynhild. The ring is then brought into Queen Grimhild's family after her children marry Sigurd and Brynhild. The story of the Andvaranaut is thought to have been one of the texts that inspired J.R.R Tolkien's \"The Lord of the Rings\".\nAdaptations and related works.\nThe Middle High German epic poem the \"Nibelungenlied\" is related in content. The relative historical accuracy and origin of both works are a subject of academic research\u2014however, whilst traditionally the stories from the \"Poetic Edda\" and \"V\u00f6lsunga saga\" were assumed to contain an earlier or \"more original\" version, the actual development of the different texts is more complex\u2014for more details see Nibelungenlied \u00a7 Origins.\nAmong the more notable adaptations of this text are Richard Wagner's tetralogy of music dramas \"Der Ring des Nibelungen\", Ernest Reyer's opera \"Sigurd\", Henrik Ibsen's \"The Vikings at Helgeland\", and William Morris's epic poem \"The Story of Sigurd the Volsung and the Fall of the Niblungs\". J. R. R. Tolkien's \"The Legend of Sigurd and Gudr\u00fan\" is derived instead from the V\u00f6lsung poems in the \"Elder Edda\", as Tolkien thought the author of the saga had made a jumble of things.\nThe saga is also one inspiration for \u00der\u00e1inn Bertelsson's satirical crime novel \"Valkyrjur\" (Reykjav\u00edk: JPV, 2005). Melvin Burgess similarly drew inspiration from the saga in his novel \"Bloodtide\" (1999) and its sequel \"Bloodsong\" (2007).\nEditions and translations.\nEnglish translations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nOther translations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nLiterary retellings.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70453", "revid": "39508241", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70453", "title": "List of premiers of British Columbia", "text": "The premier of British Columbia is the first minister for the Canadian province of British Columbia. The province was a British crown colony governed by the governors of British Columbia before joining Canadian Confederation in 1871. Since then, it has had a unicameral Westminster-style parliamentary government, in which the premier is the leader of the party that controls the most seats in the legislative assembly. The premier is British Columbia's head of government, and the king of Canada is its head of state and is represented by the lieutenant governor of British Columbia. The premier picks a cabinet from the elected members to form the Executive Council of British Columbia and presides over that body.\nMembers are first elected to the legislature during general elections. General elections must be conducted every four years from the date of the last election. An election may also take place if the governing party loses the confidence of the legislature by the defeat of a supply bill or tabling of a no-confidence motion.\nBefore 1903, British Columbia did not use a party system; instead, premiers of British Columbia had no official party affiliation and were chosen by elected members of the legislative assembly from among themselves. Candidates ran as \"Government\", \"Opposition\", \"Independent\", or in formulations such as \"Opposition independent\", indicating their respective positions to the incumbent regime.\nBritish Columbia has had 36 individuals serve as premier since joining Confederation, of which 14 individuals had no party affiliation, three were Conservatives, eight were Liberals, four were Socreds, and seven were New Democrats. The first premier was John Foster McCreight, who was inaugurated in 1871. Joseph Martin spent the shortest time in office, at 106 days. At over twenty years, W. A. C. Bennett spent the longest time in office and is the only premier to serve in more than five parliaments. The incumbent premier is David Eby, who was sworn in on November 18, 2022.\nPremiers of British Columbia.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"template:sticky header/styles.css\"/&gt; \nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nGeneral.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70454", "revid": "40192293", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70454", "title": "Monteverdi", "text": ""}
{"id": "70489", "revid": "82432", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70489", "title": "Geordie", "text": "Northern English dialect and demonym native to Tyneside\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nGeordie ( ) is a demonym and vernacular dialect characterising Newcastle-upon-Tyne and the wider Tyneside area of North East England.\nThe vernacular, also known as Tyneside English or Newcastle English in linguistics, is one of the major dialects of northern England. It developed as a variety of the old Northumbrian dialect. \nAs a regional nickname, applying the term is set by one's definition of or acceptance to being called a Geordie: it varies from supporters of Newcastle United Football Club, the city, Tyneside, Tyne-and-Wear and to North East England. People from the latter two wider areas are less likely to accept the term as applying to them.\nThe term has also been applied to the Geordie Schooner, glass traditionally used to serve Newcastle Brown Ale. It is often considered unintelligible to many other native English speakers. The Geordie dialect and identity are perceived as the \"most attractive in England\", according to a 2008 newspaper survey, amongst the British public and as working-class.\nHistory.\nLike all English dialects, the Geordie dialect traces back to the Old English spoken by Anglo-Saxon settlers, initially employed by the ancient Brythons who fought Pictish invaders after the end of Roman rule in Britain in the 5th century. The Angles, Saxons, and Jutes who arrived became ascendant politically and culturally over the native British through subsequent migration from tribal homelands along the North Sea coast of mainland Europe. The Anglo-Saxon kingdoms that emerged in the Dark Ages spoke largely mutually intelligible varieties of what is now called Old English, each varying somewhat in phonology, morphology, syntax, and lexicon. In Northern England and the Scottish borders, then dominated by the kingdom of Northumbria, there developed a distinct Northumbrian Old English dialect, which preceded modern Geordie. The linguistic conservatism of Geordie means that poems by the Anglo-Saxon scholar the Venerable Bede can be translated more successfully into Geordie than into standard modern English. \nThe British Library points out that the Norse, who primarily lived south of the River Tees, affected the language in Yorkshire but not in regions to the north. This source adds that \"the border skirmishes that broke out sporadically during the Middle Ages meant the River Tweed established itself as a significant northern barrier against Scottish influence\". Today, many who speak the Geordie dialect use words such as \"gan\" ('go' \u2013 modern Dutch ) and \"bairn\" ('child' \u2013 modern Danish ), which \"can still trace their roots right back to the Angles\".\nGeographical coverage.\nPeople.\nWhen referring to the people, as opposed to the dialect, dictionary definitions of a Geordie typically refer to a native or inhabitant of Newcastle upon Tyne, England, or its environs, an area that encompasses North Tyneside, Newcastle, South Tyneside and Gateshead. This area has a combined population of around 700,000, based on 2011 census-data.\nThe term itself, according to Brockett, originated from all the North East coal mines. The catchment area for the term \"Geordie\" can include Northumberland and County Durham or be confined to an area as small as the city of Newcastle upon Tyne and the metropolitan boroughs of Tyneside.\nScott Dobson, the author of the book \"Larn Yersel Geordie\", once stated that his grandmother, who was brought up in Byker, thought the miners were the true Geordies. There is a theory the name comes from the Northumberland and Durham coal mines. Poems and songs written in this area in 1876 (according to the OED), speak of the \"Geordie\".\nDialect.\nAcademics refer to the Geordie dialect as \"Tyneside English\".\nAccording to the British Library, \"Locals insist there are significant differences between Geordie and several other local dialects, such as Pitmatic and Mackem. Pitmatic is the dialect of the former mining areas in County Durham and around Ashington to the north of Newcastle upon Tyne, while \"Mackem\" is used locally to refer to the dialect of the city of Sunderland and the surrounding urban area of Wearside\".\nEtymology.\nA number of rival theories explain how the term \"Geordie\" came about, though all accept that it derives from a familiar diminutive form of the name George, \"a very common name among the pitmen\" (coal miners) in North East England; indeed, it was once the most popular name for eldest sons in the region.\nOne account traces the name to the times of the Jacobite Rebellion of 1715. The Jacobites declared that the natives of Newcastle were staunch supporters of the Hanoverian kings, whose first representative George I reigned (1714\u20131727) at the time of the 1715 rebellion. Newcastle contrasted with rural Northumberland, which largely supported the Jacobite cause. In this case, the term \"Geordie\" may have derived from the popular anti-Hanoverian song \"Cam Ye O'er Frae France?\", which calls the first Hanoverian king \"Geordie Whelps\", a play on \"George the Guelph\".\nAnother explanation for the name is that local miners in the northeast of England used Geordie safety lamps, designed by George Stephenson, known locally as \"Geordie the engine-wright\", in 1815 rather than the competing Davy lamps, designed about the same time by Humphry Davy and used in other mining communities. Using the chronological order of two John Trotter Brockett books, \"Geordie\" was given to North East pitmen; later he acknowledges that the pitmen also christened their Stephenson lamp \"Geordie\".\nLinguist Katie Wales also dates the term earlier than does the current \"Oxford English Dictionary\"; she observes that \"Geordy\" (or \"Geordie\") was a common name given to coal-mine pitmen in ballads and songs of the region, noting that such usage turns up as early as 1793. It occurs in the titles of two songs by songwriter Joe Wilson: \"Geordy, Haud the Bairn\" and \"Keep your Feet Still, Geordie\". Citing such examples as the song \"Geordy Black\", written by Rowland Harrison of Gateshead, she contends that, as a consequence of popular culture, the miner and the keelman had become icons of the region in the 19th century, and \"Geordie\" was a label that \"affectionately and proudly reflected this,\" replacing the earlier ballad emblem, the figure of Bob Crankie.\nIn the \"English Dialect Dictionary\" of 1900, Joseph Wright gave as his fourth definition of \"Geordie\": \"A man from Tyneside; a miner; a north-country collier vessel\", quoting two sources from Northumberland, one from East Durham and one from Australia. The source from Durham stated: \"In South Tyneside even, this name was applied to the Lower Tyneside men.\"\nNewcastle publisher Frank Graham's \"Geordie Dictionary\" states:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The origin of the word Geordie has been a matter of much discussion and controversy. All the explanations are fanciful and not a single piece of genuine evidence has ever been produced.\nIn Graham's many years of research, the earliest record he found of the term's use dated to 1823 by local comedian Billy Purvis. Purvis had set up a booth at the Newcastle Races on the Town Moor. In an angry tirade against a rival showman, who had hired a young pitman called Tom Johnson to dress as a clown, Billy cried out to the clown:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Ah man, wee but a feul wad hae sold off his furnitor and left his wife. Noo, yor a fair doon reet feul, not an artificial feul like Billy Purvis! Thous a real Geordie! gan man an hide thysel! gan an' get thy picks agyen. Thou may de for the city, but never for the west end o' wor toon.\nJohn Camden Hotten wrote in 1869: \"Geordie, general term in Northumberland and Durham for a pitman, or coal-miner. Origin not known; the term has been in use more than a century.\" Using Hotten as a chronological reference, Geordie has been documented for at least years as a term related to Northumberland and County Durham.\nThe name \"Bad-weather Geordy\" applied to cockle sellers:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;As the season at which cockles are in greatest demand is generally the most stormy in the year \u2013 September to March \u2013 the sailors' wives at the seaport towns of Northumberland and Durham consider the cry of the cockle man as the harbinger of bad weather, and the sailor, when he hears the cry of 'cockles alive,' in a dark wintry night, concludes that a storm is at hand, and breathes a prayer, backwards, for the soul of Bad-Weather-Geordy.\u2014\u200a\nTravel writer Scott Dobson used the term \"Geordieland\" in a 1973 guidebook to refer collectively to Northumberland and Durham.\nLinguistic surveys.\nThe Survey of English Dialects included Earsdon and Heddon-on-the-Wall in its fieldwork, administering more than 1,000 questions to local informants.\nThe Linguistic Survey of Scotland included Cumberland and Northumberland (using historic boundaries) in its scope, collecting words through postal questionnaires. Tyneside sites included Cullercoats, Earsdon, Forest Hall, Gosforth, Newcastle upon Tyne, Wallsend-on-Tyne and Whitley Bay.\nPhonology.\nThe phonemic notation used in this article is based on the set of symbols used by . Other scholars may use different transcriptions. Watt and Allen stated that there were approximately 800,000 people in the early 2000s who spoke this form of British English.\nTyneside English (TE) is spoken in Newcastle upon Tyne, a city of around 260,000 inhabitants in the far north of England, and in the conurbation stretching east and south of Newcastle along the valley of the River Tyne as far as the North Sea. The total population of this conurbation, which also subsumes Gateshead, Jarrow, North and South Shields, Whitley Bay, and Tynemouth, exceeds 800,000.\nConsonants.\nGeordie consonants generally follow those of Received Pronunciation, with these unique characteristics as follows:\nVocabulary.\nThe Geordie dialect shares similarities with other Northern English dialects, as well as with the Scots language (See Rowe 2007, 2009).\nDorfy, real name Dorothy Samuelson-Sandvid, was a noted Geordie dialect writer. In her column for the South Shields Gazette, Samuelson-Sandvid attests many samples of Geordie language usage, such as the nouns \"bairn\" (\"child\") and \"clarts\" (\"mud\"); the adjectives \"canny\" (\"pleasant\") and \"clag\" (\"sticky\"); and the imperative verb phrase \"howay\" (\"hurry up!\"; \"come on!\")\n\"Howay\" is broadly comparable to the invocation \"Come on!\" or the French \"Allez-y!\" (\"Go on!\"). Examples of common use include \"Howay man!\", meaning \"come on\" or \"hurry up\", \"Howay the lads!\" as a term of encouragement for a sports team for example (the players' tunnel at St James' Park has this phrase just above the entrance to the pitch), or \"Ho'way!?\" (with stress on the second syllable) expressing incredulity or disbelief. The literal opposite of this phrase is \"haddaway\" (\"go away\"); although not as common as \"howay\", it is perhaps most commonly used in the phrase \"Haddaway an' shite\" (Tom Hadaway, Figure 5.2 Haddaway an' shite; 'Cursing like sleet blackening the buds, raging at the monk of Jarrow scribbling his morality and judgement into a book.').\nAnother word, \"divvie\" or \"divvy\" (\"idiot\"), seems to come from the Co-op dividend, or from the two Davy lamps (the more explosive Scotch Davy used in 1850, commission disapproved of its use in 1886 (inventor not known, nicknamed Scotch Davy probably given by miners after the Davy lamp was made perhaps by north east miners who used the Stephenson Lamp), and the later better designed Davy designed by Humphry Davy also called the Divvy.) As in a north east miner saying 'Marra, ye keep way from me if ye usin a divvy.' It seems the word divvie then translated to daft lad/lass. Perhaps coming from the fact one would be seen as foolish going down a mine with a Scotch Divvy when there are safer lamps available, like the Geordie, or the Davy.\nThe Geordie word \"netty\", meaning a toilet and place of need and necessity for relief or bathroom, has an uncertain origin. However, some have theorised that it may come from slang used by Roman soldiers on Hadrian's Wall, which may have later become \"gabinetti\" in the Romance language Italian (such as in the Westoe Netty, the subject of a famous painting from Bob Olley). \"Gabinetto\" in Modern Italian actually derives from the French word \"cabinet\", which can also have the meaning of \"toilet\" (\"cabinet d'aisances\"). Thus, another explanation would be that it comes from the Modern Italian plural form of the word \"gabinetti\", though only a relatively small number of Italians have migrated to the North of England, mostly during the 19th century.\nSome etymologists connect the word \"netty\" to the Modern English word \"needy\". John Trotter Brockett, writing in 1829 in his \"A glossary of north country words...\", claims that the etymon of \"netty\" (and its related form \"neddy\") is the Modern English \"needy\" and \"need\".\nBill Griffiths, in \"A Dictionary of North East Dialect\", points to the earlier form, the Old English \"n\u00edd\"; he writes: \"MS locates a possible early ex. \"Robert Hovyngham sall make... at the other end of his house a knyttyng\" York 1419, in which case the root could be OE n\u00edd 'necessary'\". Another related word, \"nessy\" is thought (by Griffiths) to derive from the Modern English \"necessary\".\nA poem called \"Yam\" narrated by author Douglas Kew demonstrates the usage of a number of Geordie words.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70491", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70491", "title": "Victoria BC", "text": ""}
{"id": "70492", "revid": "32010320", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70492", "title": "A Short History of the Confederate States of America", "text": "Essay by Jefferson Davis\nA Short History of the Confederate States of America is a memoir written by Jefferson Davis, completed shortly before his death in 1889. Davis wrote most of this book while staying at Beauvoir along the Mississippi Gulf Coast near Biloxi, Mississippi.\nThe book is much less a Davis memoir than an articulation of the secession argument. In Davis' earlier work, \"The Rise and Fall of the Confederate Government\", he had written what is probably the most thorough exegesis of the compact theory of the United States Constitution in existence, devoting the first fifteen chapters of the book to that topic. Fearful that his readers might not understand, or might forget, he repeated the explanation every second or third chapter after that. Still concerned that people might not understand the compact theory of the Constitution, he wrote A Short History of the Confederate States of America shortly before his death.\nThe book was first published in 1890 by Belford Co. in New York.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70493", "revid": "69423", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70493", "title": "Tenor banjo", "text": ""}
{"id": "70494", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70494", "title": "Ad\u00fbnaic", "text": "Fictional language in the fantasy works of J. R. R. Tolkien\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nAd\u00fbnaic (or N\u00famen\u00f3rean) (\"language of the West\") is one of the fictional languages devised by J. R. R. Tolkien for his fantasy works.\nOne of the languages of Arda in Tolkien's Middle-earth legendarium, Ad\u00fbnaic was spoken by the Men of N\u00famenor during the Second Age. By the time of the War of the Ring at the end of the Third Age, it had developed into the common speech or Westron.\nFictional history.\nAd\u00fbnaic was invented by the first Men as they awoke in Hild\u00f3rien. It was the language of N\u00famenor, and after its destruction in the Akallab\u00eath, the \"native speech\" of the people of Elendil in the kingdoms of Arnor and Gondor in the west of Middle-earth, though they usually spoke the Elvish language Sindarin. By the time of the War of the Ring, it had developed into the common speech or Westron. Tolkien called Ad\u00fbnaic \"the language of the culturally and politically influential N\u00famen\u00f3reans.\"\nConcept and creation.\nAlthough Tolkien created very few original words in Ad\u00fbnaic, mostly names, the language serves his concept as the ancestor of a lingua franca for Middle-earth, Westron, a shared language for many different peoples.\nTolkien devised Ad\u00fbnaic (or N\u00famen\u00f3rean), the language spoken in N\u00famenor, shortly after World War II, and thus at about the time he completed \"The Lord of the Rings\", but before he wrote the linguistic background information of the Appendices. Ad\u00fbnaic is intended as the language from which Westron (also called \"Ad\u00fbni\") is derived.\nThis added a depth of historical development to the Mannish languages. Ad\u00fbnaic was intended to have a \"faintly Semitic flavour\". Its development began with his 1945 work \"The Notion Club Papers\". It is there that the most extensive sample of the language is found, revealed to one of the (modern-day) protagonists, Lowdham, in a visionary dream of Atlantis. Its grammar is sketched in the unfinished \"Lowdham's Report on the Adunaic Language\", included in \"Sauron Defeated\".\nTolkien remained undecided whether the language of the Men of N\u00famenor should be derived from the original Mannish language (as in Ad\u00fbnaic), or if it should be derived from \"the Elvish Noldorin\" (i.e. Quenya) instead. In \"The Lost Road and Other Writings\" it is implied that the N\u00famen\u00f3reans spoke Quenya, and that Sauron, hating all things Elvish, taught the N\u00famen\u00f3reans the old Mannish tongue they themselves had forgotten.\nPhonology.\nThe phonology is as follows:\n1\nGrammar.\nMost information about Ad\u00fbnaic grammar comes from an incomplete typescript \"Lowdham's Report on the Ad\u00fbnaic Language\", written by Tolkien to accompany \"The Notion Club Papers\". The report discusses phonology and morphological processes in some detail, and starts to discuss nouns, but breaks off before saying much about verbs, other parts of speech or the grammar as a whole. It appears that Tolkien abandoned work on the language after writing this portion of the Report, and never returned to it.\nNouns.\nMost Ad\u00fbnaic nouns are triconsonantal, but there are a number of biconsonantal nouns as well. Nouns can be divided into three declensions, called Strong I, Strong II and Weak. The two strong declensions form their various cases by modifying the last vowel, similarly to English \"man/men\". The weak declension forms its cases by appending a suffix.\nThere are three numbers, singular, plural and dual. Dual is used mainly for \"natural pairs\", like eyes and shoes. There are three cases, Normal, Subjective and Objective. The Subjective case is used as the subject of a verb. The Objective case is used only in compound expressions and appears only in the singular. The Normal case is used in all other circumstances, such as the object of a verb.\nExample declensions:\nSample text.\nThis Ad\u00fbnaic text, part of the tale of the Fall of N\u00famenor, appears in \"The Notion Club Papers\". It is fragmentary because it appeared in a dream to Tolkien's frame story character Lowdham, and is only partially translated by him because he did not know the language. Words in bold are not translated at the point in the text where the translation is first given, but their translation is given later in the story.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70497", "revid": "385837", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70497", "title": "Tom Maguire", "text": "Irish politician and republican (1892\u20131993)\nTom Maguire (28 March 1892 \u2013 5 July 1993) was an Irish republican who held the rank of commandant-general in the Western Command of the Irish Republican Army (IRA) and led the South Mayo flying column.\nEarly life.\nTom Maguire was born 28 March 1892 in Cross, County Mayo, the fourth of eleven children of William Maguire, and Mary Grehan. He joined the Irish Volunteers on their foundation in 1913, and after the 1916 Easter rising, he formed the first company of Volunteers in Cross in 1917. He was elected as a member of Mayo County Council in June 1920 and was subsequently chairman of Ballinrobe district council.\nIrish Republican Army.\nOn 18 September 1920, the Mayo Brigade was reorganised, it was split up into four separate brigades. Maguire was appointed commander of the South Mayo Brigade.\nOn 3 May 1921, Maguire led an ambush on a Royal Irish Constabulary (RIC) patrol in Toormakeady, County Mayo, killing five members of the RIC. Maguire's flying column then made for the Partry Mountains. One account claimed that the column were surrounded by over 700 soldiers and policemen guided by aeroplanes. Maguire was wounded and his adjutant (Michael O'Brien) killed, but the column managed to escape with no further casualties. British casualties were not revealed but were believed to have been high. Some recent research has raised the possibility that fewer than forty British soldiers were in the vicinity and that Maguire's column was forced to abandon their weapons with only one British officer wounded.\nMaguire was involved in numerous other engagements including the Kilfall ambush.\nAt the 1921 election to D\u00e1il \u00c9ireann, Maguire was returned unopposed as Teachta D\u00e1la (TD) for Mayo South\u2013Roscommon South as a Sinn F\u00e9in candidate. He opposed the Anglo-Irish Treaty, and apart from saying \"N\u00edl\" (\"No\" in English) when the vote was called, did not participate in any substantial way in the D\u00e1il treaty debates. He was returned unopposed at the 1922 general election. At the 1923 general election, Maguire faced a contest and succeeded in securing the second of five seats in the Mayo South constituency, winning 5,712 votes (17.8%). He was a member of the anti-Treaty IRA executive which commanded rebel troops during the Irish Civil War. Maguire was captured by the National Army while in bed and was told that he would be executed, but his life was spared. While in prison his brother, Sean Maguire, aged 17, was executed by the government.\nMaguire remained a TD until 1927. He had initially indicated a willingness to contest the June 1927 general election as a Sinn F\u00e9in candidate but withdrew after the IRA threatened to court-martial any member under IRA General Army Order 28, which forbade its members from standing in elections. (Despite this ban, IRA officers Se\u00e1n Farrell (Leitrim\u2013Sligo) and John Madden (Mayo North) contested the election, the latter successfully).\nMaguire subsequently drifted out of the IRA and became vice-president of Sinn F\u00e9in from 1931 to 1933 during the presidency of Brian O'Higgins. In 1932, a Mayo IRA officer reported that Maguire, now firmly aligned with Sinn F\u00e9in, refused to call on men to join the IRA when speaking at republican commemorations. When challenged on this, Maguire claimed that, as the IRA \"were no longer the same as they used to be\", he disagreed with the organisation.\nMaguire and republican legitimacy.\nIn December 1938, Maguire was one of a group of seven people, who had been elected to the Second D\u00e1il in 1921, who met with the IRA Army Council under Se\u00e1n Russell. At this meeting, the seven signed over what they contended was the authority of the Government of D\u00e1il \u00c9ireann to the Army Council. Henceforth, the IRA Army Council perceived itself to be the legitimate government of the Irish Republic and, on this basis, the IRA and Sinn F\u00e9in justified their rejection of the states of the Republic of Ireland and Northern Ireland and political abstentionism from their parliamentary institutions. According to J. Bowyer Bell, in \"The Secret Army\", \"With the possible exception of Tom Maguire, who went along, the D\u00e1il members felt that the IRA request gave them the moral recognition so long denied by all factions and that their conditional devolution of power would in turn give the IRA the moral basis for the impending campaign\" of 1939\u201345.\nWhen the majority of IRA and Sinn F\u00e9in decided to abandon abstentionism in the 1969\u20131970 split, Ruair\u00ed \u00d3 Br\u00e1daigh and D\u00e1ith\u00ed \u00d3 Conaill sought and secured Maguire's recognition of the Provisional IRA Council as the legitimate successor to the 1938 Army Council. Of the seven 1938 signatories, Maguire was the only one still alive. Maguire's support meant that the Provisional Army Council could claim to being the legitimate government of Ireland and the caretaker of true Irish Republicanism. \nLikewise, in the aftermath of the 1986 split in the Republican Movement, both the Provisional IRA and the Continuity IRA sought Maguire's support. Maguire signed a statement which was issued posthumously in 1996. In it, he conferred legitimacy on the Army Council of the Continuity IRA (who provided a firing party at Maguire's funeral in 1993). In \"The Irish Troubles\", J. Bowyer Bell describes Maguire's opinion in 1986, \"abstentionism was a basic tenet of republicanism, a moral issue of principle. Abstentionism gave the movement legitimacy, the right to wage war, to speak for a Republic all but established in the hearts of the people.\"\nDeath.\nHe died on 5 July 1993. He is buried in Cross, County Mayo. Republican Sinn F\u00e9in have held multiple commemorations by his graveside.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70499", "revid": "800198", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70499", "title": "Alto", "text": "Vocal and pitch range above tenor and below soprano\nThe musical term alto, meaning \"high\" (from Latin: ), historically refers to the contrapuntal part higher than the tenor and its associated vocal range. In four-part voice leading alto is the second-highest part, sung in choruses by either low women's or high men's voices. In vocal classification these are usually called contralto and male alto or countertenor.\nEtymology.\nIn choral music for mixed voices, \"alto\" describes the lowest part commonly sung by women. The explanation for the anomaly of this name is to be found not in the use of adult falsettists in choirs of men and boys but further back in innovations in composition during the mid-15th century. Before this time it was usual to write a melodic \"cantus\" or \"superius\" against a tenor (from Latin \"tenere\", to hold) or 'held' part, to which might be added a contratenor, which was in counterpoint with (in other words, against = contra) the tenor. The composers of Ockeghem's generation wrote two contratenor parts and designated them as \"contratenor altus\" and \"contratenor bassus\"; they were respectively higher and lower than the tenor part. From these derive both the modern terms \"alto\" (and contralto) and \"bass\".\nIn opera.\nAccording to \"The New Grove Dictionary of Opera\" (1992), the term \"alto\" refers to singers whose voice encompasses the pitches of the notes \"f\" to \"d\u2033\" (see Helmholtz pitch notation). The singer of this voice type is more often described, for a female, as a contralto; for a male, as a countertenor (or in early French music as \"haute-contre\") or a falsetto singer. A castrato may also sing in this range.\nSolo voices.\nThe contralto voice is a matter of vocal timbre and tessitura as well as range, and a classically trained solo contralto would usually have a range greater than that of a normal choral alto part in both the upper and lower ranges. However, the vocal tessitura of a classically trained contralto would still make these singers more comfortable singing in the lower part of the voice. A choral non-solo contralto may also have a low range down to D3 (thus perhaps finding it easier to sing the choral tenor part), but some would have difficulty singing above E5. In a choral context mezzo-sopranos and contraltos might sing the alto part, together with countertenors, thus having three vocal timbres (and two means of vocal production) singing the same notes.\nThe use of the term \"alto\" to describe solo voices is mostly seen in contemporary music genres (pop, rock, etc.) to describe singers whose range is lower than that of a mezzo-soprano but higher than that of a true contralto, and is very rarely seen in classical music outside of soloists in choral works. In classical music, most women with an alto range would be grouped within mezzo-sopranos, but many terms in common usage in various languages and in different cultures exist to describe solo classical singers with this range. Examples include contralto, countertenor, \"haute-contre\", and \"tenor altino\", among others.\nIn choral music.\nIn SATB four-part mixed chorus, the alto is the second-highest vocal range, above the tenor and bass and below the soprano. The alto range in choral music is approximately from F3 (the F below middle C) to F5 (the second F above middle C). In common usage, alto is used to describe the voice type that typically sings this part, though this is not strictly correct. Alto, like the other three standard modern choral voice classifications (soprano, tenor and bass) was originally intended to describe a part within a homophonic or polyphonic texture, rather than an individual voice type and the terms alto and contralto are not interchangeable nor synonymous.\nAlthough some women who sing alto in a choir are contraltos, many would be more accurately called mezzo-sopranos (a voice of somewhat higher range and different timbre). Men singing in this range are countertenors, although this term is a source of considerable controversy, some authorities preferring the usage of the term \"male alto\" for those countertenors who use a predominantly falsetto voice production (boys singing in their natural range may be termed \"boy altos\").\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70500", "revid": "50667673", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70500", "title": "Tenor", "text": "Classical male singing voice\nThe tenor is a type of male singing voice whose vocal range lies between the countertenor and baritone voice types. It is the highest male chest-voice type. Composers typically write music for the tenor in the range from the second B below middle C, to the G above middle C (i.e. B2 to G4) in choral music \u2013 and from the second B-flat below middle C, to the C above middle C (B\u266d2 to C5) in operatic music \u2013 but the range can extend at either end. Subtypes of the tenor include the \"leggero\" tenor, lyric tenor, spinto tenor, dramatic tenor, heldentenor and tenor buffo (also known as the ).\nHistory.\nThe term \"tenor\" derives from the Latin word \"tenere\", which means 'to hold'. \"Tenor\" came into use, at first, to denote the role of the critical male voice in the structure of a polyphonic vocal work. All other voices were normally calculated in relation to the tenor, which often proceeded in longer note values and carried a borrowed \"cantus firmus\" melody. Until the late 16th-century introduction of the contratenor singers, the tenor was usually the lowest voice, assuming the role of providing a foundation. It was also in the 18th century that \"tenor\" came to signify the male voice that sang such parts. Thus, for earlier repertoire, a line marked 'tenor' indicated the part's role, and not the required voice type; indeed, even as late as the eighteenth century, part-books labelled 'tenor' sometimes contained parts for a range of voice types.\nVocal range.\nThe vocal range of the tenor is the highest of the male voice types. Within opera, the lowest note in the standard tenor repertoire is widely defined to be B\u266d2. However, the role of Rodrigo di Dhu (written for Andrea Nozzari) in Rossini's rarely performed \"La donna del lago\" is defined as a tenor but requires an A\u266d2. Within more frequently performed repertoire, Mime and Herod both call for an A2. \nA few tenor roles in the standard repertoire call for a \"tenor C\" (C5, one octave above middle C). Some, if not all, of the few top Cs in the standard operatic repertoire are either optional \u2013 such as in \"Che gelida manina\" in Puccini's \"La boh\u00e8me \u2013\" or interpolated (added) by tradition, such as in \"Di quella pira\" from Verdi's \"Il trovatore\"); however, the highest demanded note in the standard tenor operatic repertoire is D5, found in \"Mes amis, \u00e9coutez l'histoire\" from Adolphe Adam's \"Le postillon de Lonjumeau\" and \"\" from Fromental Hal\u00e9vy's \"La Juive\"). In the \"leggero\" repertoire, the highest note is F5 (Arturo in \"Credeasi, misera\" from Bellini's \"I puritani\"), therefore, very few tenors, a notable case being Nicolai Gedda, have this role in their repertoire without transposition (given the raising of concert pitch since its composition), or employing passaggio, such as Luciano Pavarotti.\nIn choral music.\nIn SATB four-part mixed chorus, the tenor is the second lowest vocal range, above the bass and below the alto and soprano. Men's chorus usually denotes an ensemble of TTBB in which the first tenor is the highest voice. Whilst certain choral music does require the first tenors to ascend the full tenor range, the majority of choral music places the tenors in the range from approximately B2 up to A4. The requirements of the tenor voice in choral music are also tied to the style of music most often performed by a given choir. Orchestral choruses typically call for tenors with fully resonant voices, but chamber or a cappella choral music (choral music sung with no instrumental accompaniment) can rely on baritones singing in falsetto.\nEven so, one nearly ubiquitous facet of choral singing is the shortage of tenor voices. Most men's tessituras lie within the baritone range, and because of this, many men in choirs tend to prefer singing in the bass section (though true basses are even rarer than tenors). Many baritones sing tenor even if they are not able to cover the full range in only their chest voice, and sometimes contraltos sing the tenor part. In men's choruses that consist of four male vocal parts (TTBB; tenor 1, tenor 2, bass 1, bass 2), tenors will often sing both in chest voice and falsetto, extending the vocal range of the choir.\nSubtypes and roles in opera.\nWithin the tenor voice type category are seven generally recognized subcategories: \"leggero\" tenor, lyric tenor, spinto tenor, dramatic tenor, heldentenor, Mozart tenor, and tenor buffo or spieltenor. There is considerable overlap between the various categories of role and of voice-type; some tenor singers have begun with lyric voices but have transformed with time into spinto or even dramatic tenors.\nLeggero.\nAlso known as the \"tenore di grazia\", the \"leggero\" tenor is essentially the male equivalent of a lyric coloratura. This voice is light, agile, and capable of executing difficult passages of fioritura. The typical \"leggero\" tenor possesses a range spanning from approximately C3 to E5, with a few being able to sing up to F5 or higher in full voice. In some cases, the chest register of the \"leggero\" tenor may extend below C3. Voices of this type are utilized frequently in the operas of Rossini, Donizetti, Bellini and in music dating from the Baroque period.\n\"Leggero\" tenor roles in operas:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nLyric.\nThe lyric tenor is a warm graceful voice with a bright, full timbre that is strong but not heavy and can be heard over an orchestra. Lyric tenors have a range from approximately the C one octave below middle C (C3) to the D one octave above middle C (D5). Similarly, their lower range may extend a few notes below the C3. There are many vocal shades to the lyric tenor group, repertoire should be selected according to the weight, colors, and abilities of the voice.\nGilbert Duprez (1806\u20131896) was a historically significant dramatic tenor. He was the first tenor to sing on stage the operatic high C from the chest (\"ut de poitrine\") as opposed to using falsettone. He is also known for originating the role of Edgardo in \"Lucia di Lammermoor\".\nLyric tenor roles in operas:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSpinto.\nThe spinto tenor has the brightness and height of a lyric tenor, but with a heavier vocal weight enabling the voice to be \"pushed\" to dramatic climaxes with less strain than the lighter-voice counterparts. Spinto tenors have a darker timbre than a lyric tenor, without having a vocal color as dark as many dramatic tenors. The German equivalent of the Spinto \"Fach\" is the ' and encompasses many of the Dramatic tenor roles as well as some Wagner roles such as Lohengrin and Stolzing. The difference is often the depth and metal in the voice where some lyric tenors age or push their way into singing as a Spinto giving them a lighter tone and a ' tends to be either a young heldentenor or true lyric spinto. Spinto tenors have a range from approximately the C one octave below middle C (C3) to the C one octave above middle C (C5).\nSpinto tenor roles in operas:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nDramatic.\nAlso \"tenore robusto\", the dramatic tenor has an emotive, ringing and very powerful, clarion, heroic tenor sound. The dramatic tenor's approximate range is from the B one octave below middle C (B2) to the B one octave above middle C (B4) with some able to sing up to the C one octave above middle C (C5). Many successful dramatic tenors though have historically avoided the coveted high C in performance. Their lower range tends to extend into the baritone tessitura or, a few notes below the C3, even down to A\u266d2. Some dramatic tenors have a rich and dark tonal colour to their voice (such as the mature Enrico Caruso) while others (like Francesco Tamagno) possess a bright, steely timbre.\nDramatic tenor roles in operas:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nHeldentenor.\nThe heldentenor (English: \"heroic tenor\") has a rich, dark, powerful and dramatic voice. As its name implies, the heldentenor vocal \"Fach\" features in the German romantic operatic repertoire. The heldentenor is the German equivalent of the tenore drammatico, however with a more baritonal quality: the typical Wagnerian protagonist. The keystone of the heldentenor's repertoire is arguably Wagner's \"Siegfried\", an extremely demanding role requiring a wide vocal range and great power, plus tremendous stamina and acting ability. Often the heldentenor is a baritone who has transitioned to this \"Fach\" or tenors who have been misidentified as baritones. Therefore, the heldentenor voice might or might not have facility up to high B or C. The repertoire, however, rarely calls for such high notes.\nHeldentenor roles in operas:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nTenor buffo or spieltenor.\nA Tenor buffo or spieltenor is a tenor with good acting ability, and the ability to create distinct voices for his characters. This voice specializes in smaller comic roles. The range of the tenor buffo is from the C one octave below middle C (C3) to the C one octave above middle C (C5). The tessitura of these parts ranges from lower than other tenor roles to very high and broad. These parts are often played by younger tenors who have not yet reached their full vocal potential or older tenors who are beyond their prime singing years. Only rarely will a singer specialize in these roles for an entire career. In French op\u00e9ra comique, supporting roles requiring a thin voice but good acting are sometimes described as 'trial', after the singer Antoine Trial (1737\u20131795), examples being in the operas of Ravel and in \"The Tales of Hoffmann\".\nTenor buffo or spieltenor roles in operas:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nOther uses.\nThere are four parts in barbershop harmony: bass, baritone, lead, and tenor (lowest to highest), with \"tenor\" referring to the highest part. The tenor generally sings in falsetto voice, corresponding roughly to the countertenor in classical music, and harmonizes above the lead, who sings the melody. The barbershop tenor range is Middle C to A one octave above Middle C, though it is written an octave higher. The \"lead\" in barbershop music is equivalent to the normal tenor range.\nIn bluegrass music, the melody line is called the lead. Tenor is sung an interval of a third above the lead. Baritone is the fifth of the scale that has the lead as a tonic, and may be sung below the lead, or even above the lead (and the tenor), in which case it is called \"high baritone\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70501", "revid": "23838081", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70501", "title": "Atlanta Thrashers", "text": "Former National Hockey League team (1999\u20132011)\nThe Atlanta Thrashers were a professional ice hockey team based in Atlanta. Atlanta was granted a franchise in the National Hockey League (NHL) on June 25, 1997, and became the league's 28th franchise when it began play in the 1999\u20132000 season. They were members of the Southeast Division of the NHL's Eastern Conference, and played their home games at what is now known as State Farm Arena in downtown Atlanta. Despite several high-level draft picks and some high-profile player acquisitions, including two first-overall selections, the Thrashers were futile for the majority of their existence. They qualified for the Stanley Cup playoffs only once, after winning the Southeast Division in the 2006\u201307 season, but were swept in the first round by the New York Rangers.\nIn May 2011, the Thrashers were sold to Canadian-based ownership group True North Sports &amp; Entertainment. The group moved the franchise to Winnipeg, which became the second incarnation of the Winnipeg Jets (the first incarnation of the Winnipeg Jets relocated to Phoenix in 1996 to become the Coyotes). The sale and relocation was approved by the NHL on June 21, 2011. With the sale and relocation of the team, Atlanta became the first city in the NHL's modern era to have two ice hockey teams relocate to different cities. In both cases, the team moved from Atlanta to a Western Canadian city; the city's previous NHL team, the Atlanta Flames, moved to Calgary in 1980 to become the Calgary Flames.\nHistory.\nAfter the departure of the International Hockey League (IHL)'s Atlanta Knights (1992\u20131996) to become the Quebec Rafales, the city of Atlanta was awarded an NHL franchise on June 25, 1997, as part of a four-team tiered expansion. This also included teams in Nashville, Columbus, and St. Paul, in which each new franchise would begin play as its respective new arena was completed. The birth of the new franchise marked NHL hockey's return to Georgia after the Atlanta Flames, established in 1972, departed for Canada in 1980 to become the Calgary Flames. The Flames had been the League's first foray into the southern U.S., and their failure discouraged further efforts to bring NHL hockey south of Washington for another decade.\nThe nickname \"Thrashers,\" after Georgia's state bird, the brown thrasher, was selected from a fan poll. \"Thrashers\" had actually been runner-up to \"Flames\" in the poll (as an homage to the old Atlanta Flames), and Philips Arena, the Thrashers' new home, was built on the site of the former Omni, which had been home to the Flames. By coincidence, the first encampment (circa 1839) which later became Atlanta was called Thrasherville, and a historical marker of this is located just down from the arena in front of the State Bar of Georgia (the former home of the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta). The team was owned by Atlanta-based media mogul Ted Turner, who also owned Major League Baseball's Atlanta Braves and the NBA's Atlanta Hawks.\n1999\u20132003: The early years.\nThe newly formed Thrashers selected Patrik Stefan with the first overall selection and Luke Sellars with the 30th overall pick (second pick of the second round) in the 1999 NHL entry draft. However, the entire 1999 NHL entry draft was a major disappointment for the Thrashers, as all 11 of their draft picks were out of the NHL by the team's last season; Stefan played the most games for the Thrashers (414) from that draft. Their first two picks (Stefan and Sellars) were two of the biggest disappointments in draft history; NHL.com listed Stefan as the worst first overall pick of all time and Sellars (who played only one NHL game) as the worst 30th overall pick in NHL history. This was a surprise, as not only did the media hype Stefan as a franchise player, but hockey experts also considered then-Thrashers general manager Don Waddell to have excellent scouting ability.\nThe Thrashers played their first game on October 2, 1999, losing 4\u20131 to the New Jersey Devils. Captain Kelly Buchberger scored the franchise's first goal in the loss and the team finished their first season in last place in the Southeast Division with 14 wins, 61 losses (including four overtime losses), and seven ties for a total of 39 points.\nAtlanta had the second overall pick in the 2000 NHL entry draft; this draft brought better results, as the player chosen with that pick, Dany Heatley, became one of the team's best players. The team also had a fine choice in the 2001 draft with first overall pick Ilya Kovalchuk. Both Heatley and Kovalchuk played their first season in the NHL in 2001\u201302; both were named to the NHL All-Rookie Team and Heatley was awarded the Calder Memorial Trophy as the League's Rookie of the Year.\nThe early years of the Atlanta Thrashers saw a sharp increase of hockey fans in Atlanta. Ticket sales for Thrashers games averaged at 10,000 per night, many of them being season tickets. A section of the arena was dedicated to season ticket holders that called themselves the \"Nasty Nest\". The \"Nasty Nest\" chanted and shouted at the opposing team to disrupt them. The Thrashers also had two Thrasher bird heads that faced opposite to the scoreboard. The Thrasher heads opened their beaks to reveal a flamethrower that ignited when the team scored a goal. At this time, the franchise adopted a motto \"Believe in Blueland\", which was often used in advertising.\nAt the same time, however, the Thrashers were hamstrung by Turner's reluctance to spend the money it took to make them competitive. According to veteran forward Ray Ferraro, who played for the Thrashers during their first three seasons, Waddell told him that Turner treated the Thrashers mostly as an afterthought; they were allocated whatever money was left over after Turner allocated payroll for the Braves and Hawks.\nMarcel Comeau was named director of amateur scouting for the Thrashers, on July 9, 2003, and stayed in the role until the team was sold.\n2003\u20132005: The Atlanta Spirit years and the NHL lockout.\nTurner stepped down as vice chairman of AOL Time Warner, parent company of Turner's Turner Broadcasting System, in 2003. A year later, AOL Time Warner sold both teams to Atlanta Spirit, LLC, a group consisting of businessmen based both in Atlanta and elsewhere. \nIt later emerged that Atlanta Spirit almost immediately put the Thrashers on the market, which only came to light after one of a myriad of lawsuits involving the consortium.\nTragedy struck the team just eight days after the sale, as star forward Dany Heatley crashed his Ferrari in a one-car accident that seriously injured both himself and Thrashers center Dan Snyder. Heatley suffered a broken jaw and arm, a sprained wrist and a torn anterior cruciate ligament (ACL) and medial collateral ligament (MCL); Snyder died five days later due to septic shock from his injuries. The Thrashers dedicated their entire 2003\u201304 season to Snyder's memory, and Thrashers players wore black patches with Snyder's number, 37, on their jerseys for the season. Heatley's blood alcohol content was below the legal limit, but his combination of speeding (he was driving an estimated 80 miles per hour) and recklessness led to criminal charges, which were later dropped. He eventually received three years' probation and community service.\nLed by captain Shawn McEachern, the Thrashers jumped quickly out of the gate with some notable highlights. Ilya Kovalchuk scored eight goals in the first seven games, including two hat-tricks, one in a 7\u20132 rout of the Chicago Blackhawks and another in a come-from-behind victory against the Nashville Predators. Those comeback victories became a recurring sight throughout the season, as Atlanta pulled off stunning upsets over the Toronto Maple Leafs, Boston Bruins and Ottawa Senators, as well as wins against the Los Angeles Kings and New York Islanders.\nEleven games into the season, the Thrashers were in first place in the Southeast Division and the NHL. Although they continued to play well, they could not keep up with the Tampa Bay Lightning, the eventual Stanley Cup champions, or other teams in the League. Boxing Day 2003 marked both a bright and dark day for the Thrashers. On that day, Heatley skated for the first time since his car accident with Snyder, but it also marked the last win for the Thrashers before an extended losing streak. From December 28 to February 11, the team went a dismal 2\u201316\u20133. Kovalchuk became only the second Thrashers' player to score in the NHL All-Star Game (after Heatley).\nWhile the Thrashers' playoff hopes were done for the year, they finished second in the Southeast Division to Tampa Bay and tenth in the Eastern Conference, only a handful of wins away from the Stanley Cup playoffs. Kovalchuk tied for the League lead in goals (41) with the Calgary Flames' Jarome Iginla and the Columbus Blue Jackets' Rick Nash. Goaltender Kari Lehtonen began his NHL career with four wins in four starts, including one shutout.\n2005\u201306: Post-lockout.\nBefore the start of the 2005\u201306 season, the Thrashers signed several NHL veterans in the hopes of making the playoffs, including forwards Bobby Holik and Scott Mellanby, defenseman Jaroslav Modry and goaltender Mike Dunham. At the same time, however, they lost one of their brightest stars, as Heatley requested a trade in an attempt to leave behind memories of his tragic 2003 car accident. He was eventually swapped to the Ottawa Senators in exchange for Marian Hossa (a four-time 30-goal scorer at the time of the trade) and Greg de Vries.\nThe 2005\u201306 season saw the Thrashers win a club-record 41 games, even with numerous goaltending injuries. Only a few minutes into the first game of the season, Kari Lehtonen pulled his groin, an injury that would keep him out for a good portion of the season. Veteran backup Mike Dunham, an experienced number-one netminder, stepped in, but also promptly injured himself only a few games later; this left only prospects Michael Garnett and Adam Berkhoel to tend goal. Journeyman goaltender Steve Shields was signed, but he too was injured within ten games. On April 6, Lehtonen was run into by Tampa Bay's Chris Dingman, injuring him yet again. The remainder of the season was left to Dunham. Garnett was injured in a game against the Washington Capitals. Dunham, who had started the game but was relieved by the young rookie after poor play, was forced back into action in the third period.\n2006\u201307: Brief success and only playoff appearance.\nThe Thrashers' 2006\u201307 season began with the highest expectations in franchise history, even after the team's second-leading scorer, Marc Savard, departed as a free agent for the Boston Bruins. Veteran center Steve Rucchin, Niko Kapanen and Jon Sim were acquired in an effort to make up for the Savard loss. With NHL superstars Marian Hossa and Ilya Kovalchuk, as well as a healthy goaltender in Kari Lehtonen, the Thrashers clinched their first (and only) playoff berth, winning the Southeast Division title with 43 wins and claiming the third seed in the Conference and home-ice advantage in the first round of the playoffs. However, they were eliminated from the playoffs on April 18, being swept by the New York Rangers in four straight games in the conference quarterfinals.\nThis season was the highest attended the Thrashers ever had, with every home playoff game sold out as well as the season opening and closing games. The team was gaining attention within the league for their playoff debut, and team popularity within Atlanta reached an all-time high. Atlanta-based hip hop artist Lil Jon publicly showed his support for the team, posing for a picture with the Stanley Cup while wearing a Thrashers jersey. After this season, the Thrashers' ticket sales would start dwindling due to the housing market crash of 2008, and a stale economy in Atlanta. It did not help matters that the great majority of Thrashers fans lived in Atlanta's northern suburbs, and were not willing to brave Atlanta's infamous traffic to go to games at Philips Arena.\n2007\u20132010: Struggles.\nJust months after reaching the playoffs for the first time, the Thrashers began the 2007\u201308 season 0\u20136. Consequently, they fired head coach Bob Hartley on October 17, 2007, with general manager Don Waddell taking over behind the bench on an interim basis. The Thrashers ended the season with only 76 points, finishing 14th in the Eastern Conference.\nOn January 27, 2008, the Thrashers hosted the NHL All-Star Game at Philips Arena, matching the Eastern Conference All-Stars against the Western Conference All-Stars. The game had originally been scheduled for the 2004\u201305 season, but the NHL lockout of that year, followed by the 2006 Winter Olympics the following season and the Dallas Stars' hosting of the 2007 NHL All-Star Game, made 2008 the earliest available date. The Eastern Conference won the game 8\u20137, with former Thrasher Marc Savard scoring the game winner late in the third period.\nOn June 20, 2008, John Anderson was named as the fourth head coach in Thrashers history. In his first season, the Thrashers matched their previous season with 76 points, while finishing 13th in the Eastern Conference. Simultaneously, Atlanta Spirit, LLC, the team's ownership group, was coming apart at the seams. A dispute between Steve Belkin and his seven fellow owners dated back to 2005; Belkin claimed the other owners breached their contract, giving him the right to buy them out at cost, while his partners said they should be able to buy out Belkin's 30% stake. On November 3, court proceedings began in Maryland to decide the group's fate.\nIn the final year of his contract, Ilya Kovalchuk and the Thrashers could not come to an agreement on an extension. General manager Don Waddell reportedly offered 12-year, $101 million and seven-year, $70 million contracts, both of which Kovalchuk turned down. Rather than potentially losing him to free agency in the off-season, the team traded Kovalchuk on February 4, 2010, to the New Jersey Devils. Atlanta received defenseman Johnny Oduya, rookie forward Niclas Bergfors, junior prospect Patrice Cormier and a first-round pick in the 2010 NHL entry draft in exchange for Kovalchuk and defenseman Anssi Salmela; the teams also traded second-round selections in 2010. The Thrashers finished tenth in the Conference, with 83 points, which would be the most points they had earned in a regular season from the time they won the division title in 2006\u201307 to the team's eventual relocation in the summer of 2011.\n2010\u201311: The final season in Atlanta.\nOn April 14, 2010, three days after the finish of the 2009\u201310 season and after two unsuccessful attempts at making the playoffs, the contracts of head coach John Anderson and his coaching staff were not renewed. General manager Don Waddell was promoted to president of hockey operations, while former assistant general manager Rick Dudley took Waddell's place as general manager. This was the only general manager change in Thrashers history.\nDudley made his first trade on June 23, 2010, involving nine players and draft picks, with the Chicago Blackhawks. The Thrashers received Dustin Byfuglien, Ben Eager, Brent Sopel and Akim Aliu in exchange for Marty Reasoner, Joey Crabb, Jeremy Morin, the Devils' first-round pick (24th overall) in 2010 and the Devils' second-round pick (54th overall) in 2010. Later, the Thrashers also traded for Blackhawk Andrew Ladd while sending prospect Ivan Vishnevskiy and a draft pick to Chicago. The Blackhawks, the 2010 Stanley Cup champions, found it necessary to trade players for prospects and picks as they were in difficulty with the salary cap.\nThe next day, the team named Craig Ramsay as the team's new head coach. Ramsay, who had been an assistant coach for the Boston Bruins for the previous three seasons, was a former NHL player who had been a teammate of Rick Dudley's on the Buffalo Sabres. In the following weeks, the Thrashers hired an associate coach, John Torchetti, and an assistant coach, Mike Stothers. The team also hired Clint Malarchuk as a goaltending consultant.\nThe Thrashers' last win came against the New York Rangers, 3\u20130 at Madison Square Garden on April 7, 2011. On April 10, 2011, the Thrashers played their last game in Atlanta against the Pittsburgh Penguins. Tim Stapleton scored the last goal in Thrashers history in a 5\u20132 loss to Pittsburgh. The final NHL goal scored in Philips Arena was tallied by the Penguins' Mike Comrie, an empty net goal and his first of the season.\nSale and relocation.\nDue to financial losses and ownership struggles, the team was frequently a target of relocation rumors. In later years, reports saw the team courted by suitors intending to relocate to Kansas City, Portland, Quebec City, Hamilton, or Winnipeg. On January 22, 2011, the team's ownership group claimed it had lost US$130 million in the last six years, partially as a result of an ongoing lawsuit with former partner Steve Belkin. In February 2011, majority owner Michael Gearon stated that the team would be seeking new investors. Various local groups announced their intent to purchase the franchise and keep it in Atlanta.\nOn May 16, the \"Atlanta Journal-Constitution\" reported that talks for a sale to the Winnipeg-based True North Sports &amp; Entertainment were underway. According to \"The Globe and Mail\", a deal was finalized on May 20, 2011, to relocate the team to Winnipeg. The League later denied the report, but acknowledged that advanced negotiations between the two teams were underway and that NHL Commissioner Gary Bettman supported the move. Draft schedules were prepared that accommodated for the team's move to Winnipeg, as True North sought to move the Manitoba Moose of the American Hockey League (AHL), eventually moving the team to St. John's, Newfoundland and Labrador, in Atlantic Canada, playing as the St. John's IceCaps. However, the IceCaps were eventually moved back to Winnipeg in 2015.\nOn May 31, True North Sports &amp; Entertainment and the NHL held a press conference in Winnipeg to announce the completion of a deal to purchase the Thrashers. True North intended to relocate the team to the MTS Centre in Winnipeg on June 21, 2011 to become the new Winnipeg Jets. Both the sale and relocation of the team were formally approved by the NHL's Board of Governors. The Atlanta Spirit Group, however, retained the rights of the name and logos for the Thrashers, which are expected to be used by any future Atlanta NHL franchise that may be established or move there.\nThe last Atlanta Thrashers player on the Winnipeg Jets' active roster was Blake Wheeler, who left the franchise after the 2022\u201323 NHL season. As of the 2024\u201325 NHL season, only two former Thrashers are active in the NHL \u2013 Zach Bogosian of the Minnesota Wild and Evander Kane of the Vancouver Canucks. Ben Chiarot of the Detroit Red Wings is the only other player drafted by the Thrashers still active in the NHL, although he did not enter the league until after the Thrashers relocated to Winnipeg.\nAtlanta was not without professional ice hockey for long. In 2015, the Gwinnett Gladiators of the ECHL changed their name to the Atlanta Gladiators to include the Atlanta metropolitan area. The team plays in Duluth, Georgia, located northeast of Atlanta and the Gladiators honored the Thrashers legacy on December 16, 2022, by wearing the original blue jerseys first worn in 1999 against the Greenville Swamp Rabbits, in which Greenville won 5\u20134 in overtime.\nTeam information.\nJerseys.\nThroughout the team's tenure in Atlanta, the Thrashers' wore jerseys of ice blue, navy blue, red, gold and white.\nIn 2003, the Thrashers unveiled an alternate home jersey. Predominantly blue, it featured a black yoke on the right shoulder with the word 'ATLANTA' inside. In 2006, it became the team's full-time home jersey, replacing the original navy blue jersey that had been worn since the club's inception in 1999.\nIn 2007, Reebok released new team jerseys as part of the rollout of the Reebok Edge Uniform System. For the Thrashers' jerseys, the waist stripes were removed from the home and road jerseys and piping was added.\nAtlanta unveiled its new third jersey, red and midnight blue with white and gold trim, on October 10, 2008. It is often mocked as one of the worst uniforms in league history.\nOn November 7, 2022, the Thrashers' former ECHL affiliate, the Atlanta Gladiators, unveiled plans to take on the identity of the Thrashers for a single game on December 16.\nMascot.\nThe team's mascot was Thrash, a brown thrasher, which also is the official state bird of Georgia.\nPlayers and personnel.\nTeam captains.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nRetired numbers.\nThe Thrashers never officially retired any numbers. No. 37 was unofficially taken out of circulation after the death of Thrasher Dan Snyder in September 2003. No. 99 was retired league-wide by the NHL during the 2000 NHL All-Star Game to honor Wayne Gretzky.\nFranchise records.\nScoring leaders.\nThese are the top-ten point, goal, and assist scorers in franchise history.\n\"Note: Pos = Position; GP = Games played; G = Goals; A = Assists; Pts = Points; P/G = Points per game; G/G = Goals per game; A/G = Assists per game\"\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSingle-season leaders.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAwards and trophies.\nCalder Memorial Trophy\nRocket Richard Trophy\nGeorgia's Own Credit Union 3 Stars of the Year Award.\nThe Georgia's Own Credit Union 3 Stars of the Year Award was awarded annually to the Thrashers player amassing the most points throughout the season by being named as one of the three stars of each game. The award was created in the Thrashers' inaugural season of 1999.\nMedia.\nThe Atlanta Thrashers were broadcast on cable television on SportSouth and Fox Sports South. Over-the-air, the Thrashers were broadcast on WUPA (channel 69) (1999\u20132004) and WPXA (channel 14) (2005\u20132007). Radio coverage included play-by-play of all games on WCNN in Atlanta. The station was the flagship of a network that included 18 stations. Most were in Georgia, but there were two affiliates in South Carolina and one in Alabama. The radio play-by-play voice for the first season was Scott Ferrall, followed by Dan Kamal.\nRadio.\nPlay-by-play\nColor commentators\nTelevision.\nPlay-by-play\nColour commentators\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nj"}
{"id": "70502", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70502", "title": "Baritone", "text": "Type of classical male vocal range\nA baritone is a type of classical male singing voice whose vocal range lies between the bass and the tenor voice-types. It is the most common male voice. The term originates from the Greek (), meaning \"low sounding\". Composers typically write music for this voice in the range from the second F below middle C to the F above middle C (i.e. F2\u2013F4) in choral music, and from the second G below middle C to the G above middle C (G2 to G4) in operatic music, but the range can extend at either end. Subtypes of baritone include the baryton-Martin baritone (light baritone), lyric baritone, \"Kavalierbariton\", Verdi baritone, dramatic baritone, \"baryton-noble\" baritone, and the bass-baritone.\nHistory.\nThe first use of the term \"baritone\" emerged as \"baritonans\", late in the 15th century, usually in French sacred polyphonic music. At this early stage it was frequently used as the lowest of the voices (including the bass), but in 17th-century Italy the term was all-encompassing and used to describe the average male choral voice.\nBaritones took roughly the range as it is known today at the beginning of the 18th century, but they were still lumped in with their bass colleagues until well into the 19th century. Many operatic works of the 18th century have roles marked as bass that in reality are low baritone roles (or bass-baritone parts in modern parlance). Examples of this are to be found, for instance, in the operas and oratorios of George Frideric Handel. The greatest and most enduring parts for baritones in 18th-century operatic music were composed by Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart. They include Count Almaviva in \"The Marriage of Figaro\", Guglielmo in \"Cos\u00ec fan tutte\", Papageno in \"The Magic Flute\" and \"Don Giovanni\".\n19th century.\nIn theatrical documents, cast lists, and journalistic dispatches that from the beginning of the 19th century till the mid-1820s, the terms \"primo basso\", \"basse chantante\", and \"basse-taille\" were often used for men who would later be called baritones. These included the likes of Filippo Galli, Giovanni Inchindi, and Henri-Bernard Dabadie. The basse-taille and the proper bass were commonly confused because their roles were sometimes sung by singers of either actual voice part.\nThe bel canto style of vocalism which arose in Italy in the early 19th century supplanted the castrato-dominated \"opera seria\" of the previous century. It led to the baritone being viewed as a separate voice category from the bass. Traditionally, basses in operas had been cast as authority figures such as a king or high priest; but with the advent of the more fluid baritone voice, the roles allotted by composers to lower male voices expanded in the direction of trusted companions or even romantic leads\u2014normally the province of tenors. More often than not, however, baritones found themselves portraying villains.\nThe principal composers of bel canto opera are considered to be:\nThe prolific operas of these composers, plus the works of Verdi's maturity, such as \"Un ballo in maschera\", \"La forza del destino\", \"Don Carlos\"/\"Don Carlo\", the revised \"Simon Boccanegra\", \"Aida\", \"Otello\" and \"Falstaff\", blazed many new and rewarding performance pathways for baritones.\nFigaro in \"Il barbiere\" is often called the first true baritone role. However, Donizetti and Verdi in their vocal writing went on to emphasize the top fifth of the baritone voice, rather than its lower notes\u2014thus generating a more brilliant sound. Further pathways opened up when the musically complex and physically demanding operas of Richard Wagner began to enter the mainstream repertory of the world's opera houses during the second half of the 19th century.\nThe major international baritone of the first half of the 19th century was the Italian Antonio Tamburini (1800\u20131876). He was a famous Don Giovanni in Mozart's eponymous opera as well as being a Bellini and Donizetti specialist. Commentators praised his voice for its beauty, flexibility and smooth tonal emission, which are the hallmarks of a bel canto singer. Tamburini's range, however, was probably closer to that of a bass-baritone than to that of a modern \"Verdi baritone\". His French equivalent was Henri-Bernard Dabadie, who was a mainstay of the Paris Opera between 1819 and 1836 and the creator of several major Rossinian baritone roles, including Guillaume Tell. Dabadie sang in Italy, too, where he originated the role of Belcore in \"L'elisir d'amore\" in 1832.\nThe most important of Tamburini's Italianate successors were all Verdians. They included:\nAmong the non-Italian born baritones that were active in the third quarter of the 19th century, Tamburini's mantle as an outstanding exponent of Mozart and Donizetti's music was probably taken up most faithfully by a Belgian, Camille Everardi, who later settled in Russia and taught voice. In France, Paul Barroilhet succeeded Dabadie as the Paris opera's best known baritone. Like Dabadie, he also sang in Italy and created an important Donizetti role: in his case, Alphonse in \"La favorite\" (in 1840).\nLuckily, the gramophone was invented early enough to capture on disc the voices of the top Italian Verdi and Donizetti baritones of the last two decades of the 19th century, whose operatic performances were characterized by considerable re-creative freedom and a high degree of technical finish. They included Mattia Battistini (known as the \"King of Baritones\"), Giuseppe Kaschmann (born Josip Ka\u0161man) who, atypically, sang Wagner's Telramund and Amfortas not in Italian but in German, at the Bayreuth Festival in the 1890s; Giuseppe Campanari; Antonio Magini-Coletti; Mario Ancona (chosen to be the first Silvio in \"Pagliacci\"); and Antonio Scotti, who came to the Met from Europe in 1899 and remained on the roster of singers until 1933. Antonio Pini-Corsi was the standout Italian \"buffo\" baritone in the period between about 1880 and World War I, reveling in comic opera roles by Rossini, Donizetti and Paer, among others. In 1893, he created the part of Ford in Verdi's last opera, \"Falstaff\".\nNotable among their contemporaries were the cultured and technically adroit French baritones Jean Lassalle (hailed as the most accomplished baritone of his generation), Victor Maurel (the creator of Verdi's Iago, Falstaff and Tonio in Leoncavallo's \"Pagliacci\"), Paul Lh\u00e9rie (the first Posa in the revised, Italian-language version of \"Don Carlos\"), and Maurice Renaud (a singing actor of the first magnitude). Lassalle, Maurel and Renaud enjoyed superlative careers on either side of the Atlantic and left a valuable legacy of recordings. Five other significant Francophone baritones who recorded, too, during the early days of the gramophone/phonograph were L\u00e9on Melchiss\u00e9dec and Jean Not\u00e9 of the Paris Opera and Gabriel Soulacroix, Henry Albers and Charles Gilibert of the Op\u00e9ra-Comique. The Quaker baritone David Bispham, who sang in London and New York between 1891 and 1903, was the leading American male singer of this generation. He also recorded for the gramophone.\nThe oldest-born star baritone known for sure to have made solo gramophone discs was the Englishman Sir Charles Santley (1834\u20131922). Santley made his operatic debut in Italy in 1858 and became one of Covent Garden's leading singers. He was still giving critically acclaimed concerts in London in the 1890s. The composer of \"Faust\", Charles Gounod, wrote Valentine's aria \"Even bravest heart\" for him at his request for the London production in 1864 so that the leading baritone would have an aria. A couple of primitive cylinder recordings dating from about 1900 have been attributed by collectors to the dominant French baritone of the 1860s and 1870s, Jean-Baptiste Faure (1830\u20131914), the creator of Posa in Verdi's original French-language version of \"Don Carlos\". It is doubtful, however, that Faure (who retired in 1886) made the cylinders. However, a contemporary of Faure's, Antonio Cotogni, (1831\u20131918)\u2014probably the foremost Italian baritone of his generation\u2014can be heard, briefly and dimly, at the age of 77, on a duet recording with the tenor Francesco Marconi. (Cotogni and Marconi had sung together in the first London performance of Amilcare Ponchielli's \"La Gioconda\" in 1883, performing the roles of Barnaba and Enzo respectively.)\nSubtypes.\nThere are 19th-century references in the musical literature to certain baritone subtypes. These include the light and tenorish baryton-Martin, named after French singer Jean-Blaise Martin (1768/69\u20131837), and the deeper, more powerful Heldenbariton (today's bass-baritone) of Wagnerian opera.\nPerhaps the most accomplished \"Heldenbaritons\" of Wagner's day were August Kindermann, Franz Betz and Theodor Reichmann. Betz created Hans Sachs in \"Die Meistersinger \"and undertook Wotan in the first \"Der Ring des Nibelungen\" cycle at Bayreuth, while Reichmann created Amfortas in \"Parsifal\", also at Bayreuth. Lyric German baritones sang lighter Wagnerian roles such as Wolfram in \"Tannh\u00e4user\", Kurwenal in \"Tristan und Isolde \"or Telramund in \"Lohengrin\". They made large strides, too, in the performance of art song and oratorio, with Franz Schubert favouring several baritones for his vocal music, in particular Johann Michael Vogl.\nNineteenth-century operettas became the preserve of lightweight baritone voices. They were given comic parts in the tradition of the previous century's comic bass by Gilbert and Sullivan in many of their productions. This did not prevent the French master of operetta, Jacques Offenbach, from assigning the villain's role in \"The Tales of Hoffmann \"to a big-voiced baritone for the sake of dramatic effect. Other 19th-century French composers like Meyerbeer, Hector Berlioz, Camille Saint-Sa\u00ebns, Georges Bizet and Jules Massenet wrote attractive parts for baritones, too. These included Nelusko in \"L'Africaine\" (Meyerbeer's last opera), Mephistopheles in \"La damnation de Faust \"(a role also sung by basses), the Priest of Dagon in \"Samson and Delilah\", Escamillo in \"Carmen\", Zurga in \"Les p\u00eacheurs de perles\", Lescaut in \"Manon\", Athanael in \"Tha\u00efs \"and Herod in \"H\u00e9rodiade\". Russian composers included substantial baritone parts in their operas. Witness the title roles in Peter Tchaikovsky's \"Eugene Onegin \"(which received its first production in 1879) and Alexander Borodin's \"Prince Igor \"(1890).\nMozart continued to be sung throughout the 19th century although, generally speaking, his operas were not revered to the same extent that they are today by music critics and audiences. Back then, baritones rather than high basses normally sang Don Giovanni \u2013 arguably Mozart's greatest male operatic creation. Famous Dons of the late 19th and early 20th centuries included Scotti and Maurel, as well as Portugal's Francisco D'Andrade and Sweden's John Forsell.\nThe verismo baritone, Verdi baritone, and other subtypes are mentioned below, though not necessarily in 19th-century context.\n20th century.\nThe dawn of the 20th century opened up more opportunities for baritones than ever before as a taste for strenuously exciting vocalism and lurid, \"slice-of-life\" operatic plots took hold in Italy and spread elsewhere. The most prominent verismo baritones included such major singers in Europe and America as the polished Giuseppe De Luca (the first Sharpless in \"Madama Butterfly\"), Mario Sammarco (the first Gerard in \"Andrea Ch\u00e9nier\"), Eugenio Giraldoni (the first Scarpia in \"Tosca\"), Pasquale Amato (the first Rance in \"La fanciulla del West\"), Riccardo Stracciari (noted for his richly attractive timbre) and Domenico Viglione Borghese, whose voice was exceeded in size only by that of the lion-voiced Titta Ruffo. Ruffo was the most commanding Italian baritone of his era or, arguably, any other era. He was at his prime from the early 1900s to the early 1920s and enjoyed success in Italy, England and America (in Chicago and later at the Met).\nThe chief verismo composers were Giacomo Puccini, Ruggero Leoncavallo, Pietro Mascagni, Alberto Franchetti, Umberto Giordano and Francesco Cilea. Verdi's works continued to remain popular, however, with audiences in Italy, the Spanish-speaking countries, the United States and the United Kingdom, and in Germany, where there was a major Verdi revival in Berlin between the wars.\nOutside the field of Italian opera, an important addition to the Austro-German repertory occurred in 1905. This was the premiere of Richard Strauss's \"Salome\", with the pivotal part of John the Baptist assigned to a baritone. (The enormous-voiced Dutch baritone Anton van Rooy, a Wagner specialist, sang John when the opera reached the Met in 1907). Then, in 1925, Germany's Leo Sch\u00fctzendorf created the title baritone role in Alban Berg's harrowing \"Wozzeck\". In a separate development, the French composer Claude Debussy's post-Wagnerian masterpiece \"Pell\u00e9as et M\u00e9lisande\" featured not one but two lead baritones at its 1902 premiere. These two baritones, Jean P\u00e9rier and Hector Dufranne, possessed contrasting voices. (Dufranne \u2013 sometimes classed as a bass-baritone \u2013 had a darker, more powerful instrument than did P\u00e9rier, who was a true baryton-Martin.)\nCharacteristic of the Wagnerian baritones of the 20th century was a general progression of individual singers from higher-lying baritone parts to lower-pitched ones. This was the case with Germany's Hans Hotter. Hotter made his debut in 1929. As a young singer he appeared in Verdi and created the Commandant in Richard Strauss's \"Friedenstag \"and Olivier in \"Capriccio\". By the 1950s, however, he was being hailed as the top Wagnerian bass-baritone in the world. His Wotan was especially praised by critics for its musicianship. Other major Wagnerian baritones have included Hotter's predecessors Leopold Demuth, Anton van Rooy, Hermann Weil, Clarence Whitehill, Friedrich Schorr, Rudolf Bockelmann and Hans-Hermann Nissen. Demuth, van Rooy, Weil and Whitehill were at their peak in the late 19th and early 20th centuries while Schorr, Bockelmann and Nissen were stars of the 1920s and 1930s.\nIn addition to their heavyweight Wagnerian cousins, there was a plethora of baritones with more lyrical voices active in Germany and Austria during the period between the outbreak of WW1 in 1914 and the end of WW2 in 1945. Among them were Joseph Schwarz, Heinrich Schlusnus, Herbert Janssen, Willi Domgraf-Fassbaender, Karl Schmitt-Walter and Gerhard H\u00fcsch. Their abundant inter-war Italian counterparts included, among others, Carlo Galeffi, Giuseppe Danise, Enrico Molinari, Umberto Urbano, Cesare Formichi, Luigi Montesanto, Apollo Granforte, Benvenuto Franci, Renato Zanelli (who switched to tenor roles in 1924), Mario Basiola, Giovanni Inghilleri, Carlo Morelli (the Chilean-born younger brother of Renato Zanelli) and Carlo Tagliabue, who retired as late as 1958.\nOne of the best known Italian Verdi baritones of the 1920s and 1930s, Mariano Stabile, sang Iago and Rigoletto and Falstaff (at La Scala) under the baton of Arturo Toscanini. Stabile also appeared in London, Chicago and Salzburg. He was noted more for his histrionic skills than for his voice, however. Stabile was followed by Tito Gobbi, a versatile singing actor capable of vivid comic and tragic performances during the years of his prime in the 1940s, 1950s and early 1960s. He learned more than 100 roles in his lifetime and was mostly known for his roles in Verdi and Puccini operas, including appearances as Scarpia opposite soprano Maria Callas as Tosca at Covent Garden.\nGobbi's competitors included Gino Bechi, Giuseppe Valdengo, Paolo Silveri, Giuseppe Taddei, Ettore Bastianini, Cesare Bardelli and Giangiacomo Guelfi. Another of Gobbi's contemporaries was the Welshman Geraint Evans, who famously sang Falstaff at Glyndebourne and created the roles of Mr. Flint and Mountjoy in works by Benjamin Britten. Some considered his best role to have been Wozzeck. The next significant Welsh baritone was Bryn Terfel. He made his premiere at Glyndebourne in 1990 and went on to build an international career as Falstaff and, more generally, in the operas of Mozart and Wagner.\nPerhaps the first famous American baritone appeared in the 1900s. It was the American-born but Paris-based Charles W. Clark who sang Italian, French and German composers. An outstanding group of virile-voiced American baritones appeared then in the 1920s. The younger members of this group were still active as recently as the late 1970s. Outstanding among its members were the Met-based Verdians Lawrence Tibbett (a compelling, rich-voiced singing actor), Richard Bonelli, John Charles Thomas, Robert Weede, Leonard Warren and Robert Merrill. They sang French opera, too, as did the American-born but also Paris-based baritone of the 1920s, and 1930s Arthur Endreze.\nAlso to be found singing Verdi roles at the Met, Covent Garden and the Vienna Opera during the late 1930s and the 1940s was the big-voiced Hungarian baritone, Sandor (Alexander) Sved.\nThe leading Verdi baritones of the 1970s and 1980s were probably Italy's Renato Bruson and Piero Cappuccilli, America's Sherrill Milnes, Sweden's Ingvar Wixell and the Romanian baritone Nicolae Herlea. At the same time, Britain's Sir Thomas Allen was considered to be the most versatile baritone of his generation in regards to repertoire, which ranged from Mozart to Verdi and lighter Wagner roles, through French and Russian opera, to modern English music. Another British baritone, Norman Bailey, established himself internationally as a memorable Wotan and Hans Sachs. However, he had a distinguished, brighter-voiced Wagnerian rival during the 1960s, 70s, and 80s in the person of Thomas Stewart of America. Other notable post-War Wagnerian baritones have been Canada's George London, Germany's Hermann Uhde and, more recently, America's James Morris.\nAmong the late-20th-century baritones noted throughout the opera world for their Verdi performances was Vladimir Chernov, who emerged from the former USSR to sing at the Met. Chernov followed in the footsteps of such richly endowed East European baritones as Ippolit Pryanishnikov (a favorite of Tchaikovski's), Joachim Tartakov (an Everardi pupil), Oskar Kamionsky (an exceptional \"bel canto\" singer nicknamed the \"Russian Battistini\"), Waclaw Brzezinski (known as the \"Polish Battistini\"), Georges Baklanoff (a powerful singing actor), and, during a career lasting from 1935 to 1966, the Bolshoi's Pavel Lisitsian. Dmitri Hvorostovsky and Sergei Leiferkus are two Russian baritones of the modern era who appear regularly in the West. Like Lisitsian, they sing Verdi and the works of their native composers, including Tchaikovsky's \"Eugene Onegin\" and \"The Queen of Spades\".\nIn the realm of French song, the bass-baritone Jos\u00e9 van Dam and the lighter-voiced G\u00e9rard Souzay have been notable. Souzay's repertoire extended from the Baroque works of Jean-Baptiste Lully to 20th-century composers such as Francis Poulenc. Pierre Bernac, Souzay's teacher, was an interpreter of Poulenc's songs in the previous generation. Older baritones identified with this style include France's Dinh Gilly and Charles Panz\u00e9ra and Australia's John Brownlee. Another Australian, Peter Dawson, made a small but precious legacy of benchmark Handel recordings during the 1920s and 1930s. (Dawson, incidentally, acquired his outstanding Handelian technique from Sir Charles Santley.) Yet another Australian baritone of distinction between the wars was Harold Williams, who was based in the United Kingdom. Important British-born baritones of the 1930s and 1940s were Dennis Noble, who sang Italian and English operatic roles, and the Mozartian Roy Henderson. Both appeared often at Covent Garden.\nPrior to World War II, Germany's Heinrich Schlusnus, Gerhard H\u00fcsch and Herbert Janssen were celebrated for their beautifully sung lieder recitals as well as for their mellifluous operatic performances in Verdi, Mozart, and Wagner respectively. After the war's conclusion, Hermann Prey and Dietrich Fischer-Dieskau appeared on the scene to take their place. In addition to his interpretations of lieder and the works of Mozart, Prey sang in Strauss operas and tackled lighter Wagner roles such as Wolfram or Beckmesser. Fischer-Dieskau sang parts in 'fringe' operas by the likes of Ferruccio Busoni and Paul Hindemith as well as appearing in standard works by Verdi and Wagner. He earned his principal renown, however, as a lieder singer. Talented German and Austrian lieder singers of a younger generation include Olaf B\u00e4r, Matthias Goerne, Wolfgang Holzmair and Johannes Sterkel (which are also performing or have performed regularly in opera), Thomas Quasthoff, Stephan Genz and Christian Gerhaher. Well-known non-Germanic baritones of recent times have included the Italians Giorgio Zancanaro and Leo Nucci, the Frenchman Fran\u00e7ois le Roux, the Canadians Gerald Finley and James Westman and the versatile American Thomas Hampson, his compatriot Nathan Gunn and the Englishman Simon Keenlyside.\nVocal range.\nThe vocal range of the baritone lies between the bass and the tenor voice types. The baritone vocal range is usually between the second G below middle C (G2) and the G above middle C (G4). Composers typically write music for this voice in the range from the second F below middle C to the F above middle C (i.e. F2\u2013F4) in choral music, and from the second A below middle C to the A above middle C (A2 to A4) in operatic music.\nSubtypes and roles in opera.\nWithin the baritone voice type category are seven generally recognized subcategories: baryton-Martin baritone (light baritone); lyric baritone; \"Kavalierbariton;\" Verdi baritone; dramatic baritone; \"baryton-noble\" baritone; and the bass-baritone.\nBaryton-Martin.\nThe baryton-Martin baritone (sometimes referred to as light baritone) lacks the lower G2\u2013B2 range a heavier baritone is capable of, and has a lighter, almost tenor-like quality. Its common range is from C3 to the B above middle C (C3 to B4). Generally seen only in French repertoire, this \"Fach\" was named after the French singer Jean-Blaise Martin. Associated with the rise of the baritone in the 19th century, Martin was well known for his fondness for falsetto singing, and the designation 'baryton Martin' has been used (Faure, 1886) to separate his voice from the 'Verdi Baritone', which carried the chest register further into the upper range. This voice type shares the \"primo passaggio\" and \"secondo passaggio\" with the Dramatic Tenor and Heldentenor (C4 and F4 respectively), and hence could be trained as a tenor.\nBaryton-Martin roles in opera:\nLyric.\nThe lyric baritone is a sweeter, milder sounding baritone voice, lacking in harshness; lighter and perhaps mellower than the dramatic baritone with a higher tessitura. Its common range is from the A below C3 to the A\u266d above middle C (A2 to A\u266d4). It is typically assigned to comic roles.\nLyric baritone roles in opera:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\n\"Kavalierbariton\".\nThe \"Kavalierbariton\" baritone is a metallic voice that can sing both lyric and dramatic phrases, a manly, noble baritonal color. Its common range is from the A below low C to the G above middle C (A2 to G4). Not quite as powerful as the Verdi baritone who is expected to have a powerful appearance on stage, perhaps muscular or physically large.\n\"Kavalierbariton\" roles in opera:\nVerdi.\nThe Verdi baritone is a more specialized voice category and a subset of the Dramatic Baritone. Its common range is from the G below low C to the B\u266d above middle C (G2 to B\u266d4). A Verdi baritone refers to a voice capable of singing consistently and with ease in the highest part of the baritone range. It will generally have a lot of squillo.\nVerdi baritone roles in opera:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nDramatic.\nThe dramatic baritone is a voice that is richer, fuller, and sometimes harsher than a lyric baritone and with a darker quality. Its common range is from the G half an octave below low C to the G above middle C (G2 to G4). The dramatic baritone category corresponds roughly to the Heldenbariton in the German \"Fach\" system except that some Verdi baritone roles are not included. The primo passaggio and secondo passaggio of both the Verdi and dramatic baritone are at B\u266d and E\u266d respectively, hence the differentiation is based more heavily on timbre and tessitura. Accordingly, roles that fall into this category tend to have a slightly lower tessitura than typical Verdi baritone roles, only rising above an F at the moments of greatest intensity. Many of the Puccini roles fall into this category. However, it is important to note that, for all intents and purposes, a Verdi Baritone is simply a Dramatic Baritone with greater ease in the upper tessitura (Verdi Baritone roles center approximately a minor third higher). Because the Verdi Baritone is sometimes seen as a subset of the Dramatic Baritone, some singers perform roles from both sets of repertoire. Similarly, the lower tessitura of these roles allows them frequently to be sung by bass-baritones.\nDramatic baritone roles in opera:\n\"Baryton-noble\".\nThe \"baryton-noble\" baritone is French for \"noble baritone\" and describes a part that requires a noble bearing, smooth vocalisation and forceful declamation, all in perfect balance. This category originated in the Paris Opera, but it greatly influenced Verdi (Don Carlo in \"Ernani \"and \"La forza del destino\"; Count Luna in \"Il trovatore\"; \"Simon Boccanegra\") and Wagner as well (\"Wotan\"; \"Amfortas\"). Similar to the Kavalierbariton.\n\"Baryton-noble\" roles in opera are:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nBass-baritone.\nThe bass-baritone range extends from the F below low C to the F or F\u266f above middle C (F2 to F4 or F\u266f4). Bass-baritones are typically divided into two separate categories: lyric bass-baritone and dramatic bass-baritone.\nLyric bass-baritone roles in opera include:\nDramatic bass-baritone roles in opera include:\nGilbert and Sullivan.\nAll of Gilbert and Sullivan's Savoy operas have at least one lead baritone character (frequently the comic principal). Notable operetta roles are:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nBaritone in popular music.\nIn barbershop music, the baritone part sings in a similar range to the lead (singing the melody) however usually singing lower than the lead. A barbershop baritone has a specific and specialized role in the formation of the four-part harmony that characterizes the style.\nThe baritone singer is often the one required to support or \"fill\" the bass sound (typically by singing the fifth above the bass root) and to complete a chord. On the other hand, the baritone will occasionally find himself harmonizing above the melody, which calls for a tenor-like quality. Because the baritone fills the chord, the part is often not very melodic.\nIn bluegrass music, the melody line is called the lead. Tenor is sung an interval of a third above the lead. Baritone is the fifth of the scale that has the lead as a tonic, and may be sung below the lead, or even above the lead (and the tenor), in which case it is called \"high baritone\". Conversely, the more \"soul\" baritones have the more traditional timbre, but sing in a vocal range that is closer to the tenor vocal range. Some of these singers include David Ruffin, Wilson Pickett, Otis Redding, Tom Jones, Michael McDonald, and Levi Stubbs of the Four Tops.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70503", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70503", "title": "Betty Robinson", "text": "American Olympic champion\nElizabeth R. Schwartz (n\u00e9e Robinson; August 23, 1911 \u2013 May 18, 1999) was an American athlete and winner of the first Olympic 100 metres for women.\nEarly life.\nRobinson was born in Riverdale, Illinois. She was a student at Thornton Township High School when she achieved national acclaim as an Olympic champion.\nHer talent was discovered by her science teacher Charles Price, who saw her running to catch the train after school. He was a former athlete and the coach of the school team.\nAthletics.\nRobinson ran her first official race on March 30, 1928, at the age of 16, at an indoor meet where she finished second to Helen Filkey, the US record holder at 100 m, in the 60-yard dash. At her next race on June 2, outdoors at 100 meters, she beat Filkey and equalled the world record, though her time was not recognized because it was deemed wind-aided.\nAt the 1928 Amsterdam Olympics, her third 100 m competition, Robinson was the only US athlete to qualify for the 100 m final. She reached the final and won, equaling the world record of 12.2 seconds. She was the inaugural Olympic champion in the event, since athletics for women had not been on the program before, and its inclusion was in fact still heavily disputed among officials. She remains the youngest athlete to win Olympic 100 m gold. With the American 4 x 100 metres relay team, Robinson added a silver medal to her record.\nSix decades later, Robinson was interviewed for a book, \"Tales of Glory: An Oral History of the Summer Olympic Games Told By America's Gold Medal Winners\", by Lewis H. Carlson and John J Fogarty. This is how she remembered the 100 m race:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I can remember breaking the tape, but I wasn't sure that I'd won. It was so close. But my friends in the stands jumped over the railing and came down and put their arms around me, and then I knew I'd won. Then, when they raised the flag, I cried.\n\"Chicago Tribune\" reporter William L Shirer wrote that 'an unheralded, pretty, blue-eyed blond young woman from Chicago became the darling of the spectators when she flew down the cinder path, her golden locks flying, to win'.\nShe joined Northwestern University where she decided to pursue a physical education degree, hoping to become a coach at the 1936 Olympics. Robinson joined the rifle team at Northwestern in addition to running track there. She was also a member of Kappa Kappa Gamma.\nOn 28 June 1931, Robinson was involved in a plane crash and was severely injured. Initial reports had her being discovered unconscious in the wreckage and wrongly thought dead by her rescuer; in fact, he merely thought she was beyond saving. He took her to Oak Forest infirmary, locally known as the \"Poor Farm\", because he knew the undertaker. Doctors determined she had suffered severe multiple injuries and she would never race again. It was another six months before she could get out of a wheelchair, and two years before she could walk normally again. Meanwhile, she missed the 1932 Summer Olympics in her home country.\nStill unable to kneel for a normal 100 m start due to the fractures and surgeries on her left leg, Robinson was a part of the US team of 4 \u00d7 100 metres relay at the 1936 Summer Olympics. The US team was running behind the heavily favored Germans, but the Germans dropped their baton. Robinson took the lead and handed off the baton to Helen Stephens, resulting in her second Olympic gold medal.\nAfter athletic career.\nRetiring after the Berlin Olympics, Robinson remained involved in athletics as an official. She worked in a hardware store for many years. In 1977, she was inducted into the USA National Track and Field Hall of Fame. In 1996, she carried the Olympic Torch for the Atlanta Olympic Games.\nPersonal life.\nShe married and had two children. The family resided in Glencoe, Illinois, a suburb on Chicago's North Shore.\nShe died at age 87, suffering from cancer and Alzheimer's disease.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70506", "revid": "2731577", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70506", "title": "Louis XI", "text": "King of France from 1461 to 1483\nLouis XI (3 July 1423 \u2013 30 August 1483), called \"Louis the Prudent\" (), was King of France from 1461 to 1483. He succeeded his father, Charles VII. Louis entered into open rebellion against his father in a short-lived revolt known as the Praguerie in 1440. The king forgave his rebellious vassals, including Louis, to whom he entrusted the management of the Dauphin\u00e9, then a province in southeastern France. Louis's ceaseless intrigues, however, led his father to banish him from court. From the Dauphin\u00e9, Louis led his own political establishment and married Charlotte of Savoy, daughter of Louis, Duke of Savoy, against the will of his father. Charles VII sent an army to compel his son to his will, but Louis fled to Burgundy, where he was hosted by Philip the Good, the Duke of Burgundy, Charles's greatest enemy.\nWhen Charles VII died in 1461, Louis left the Burgundian court to take possession of his kingdom. His taste for intrigue and his intense diplomatic activity earned him the nicknames \"the Cunning\" () and \"the Universal Spider\" (), as his enemies accused him of spinning webs of plots and conspiracies.\nIn 1472, the subsequent Duke of Burgundy, Charles the Bold, took up arms against his rival Louis. However, Louis was able to isolate Charles from his English allies by signing the Treaty of Picquigny (1475) with Edward IV of England. The treaty formally ended the Hundred Years' War. With the death of Charles the Bold at the Battle of Nancy in 1477, the dynasty of the dukes of Burgundy died out. Louis took advantage of the situation to seize numerous Burgundian territories, including Burgundy itself and Picardy.\nWithout direct foreign threats, Louis was able to eliminate his rebellious vassals, expand royal power, and strengthen the economic development of his country. He died in 1483, and was succeeded by his only surviving son Charles VIII, who was then still in his minority.\nChildhood.\nLouis was born in Bourges on 3 July 1423, the son of King Charles VII of France and Marie of Anjou. At the time of the Hundred Years War, the English held northern France, including the city of Paris, and Charles VII was restricted to the centre and south of the country. Louis was the grandson of Yolande of Aragon, who was a force in the royal family for driving the English out of France, which was at a low point in its struggles. Just a few weeks after Louis's christening at the Cathedral of St. \u00c9tienne on 4 July 1423, the French army suffered a crushing defeat by the English at Cravant. Shortly thereafter, a combined Anglo-Burgundian army briefly raided Bourges itself.\nDuring the reign of Louis's grandfather Charles VI (1380\u20131422), the Duchy of Burgundy was very much connected with the French throne, but because the central government lacked any real power, all the duchies of France tended to act independently. In its position of independence from the French throne, Burgundy had grown in size and power. By the reign of Louis's father Charles VII, Philip the Good was reigning as duke of Burgundy, and the duchy had expanded its borders to include all the territory in France from the North Sea in the north to the Jura Mountains in the south and from the Somme River in the west to the Moselle River in the east. During the Hundred Years War, the Burgundians allied themselves with England against the French crown.\nIn 1429, young Louis found himself at Loches in the presence of Joan of Arc, fresh from her first victory over the English at the Siege of Orl\u00e9ans, which initiated a turning point for the French in the Hundred Years War. Joan later led troops in other victories at the Battle of Jargeau and the Battle of Patay. Paris was recaptured after her death, and Louis and his father were able to ride in triumph into the city on 12 November 1437. Nevertheless, Louis grew up aware of the continuing weakness of France. He regarded his father as a weakling, and despised him for this.\nMarriages.\nOn 24 June 1436, Louis met Margaret, daughter of King James I of Scotland, the bride his father had chosen for diplomatic reasons. There are no direct accounts from Louis or his young bride of their first impressions of each other, and it is mere speculation whether they actually had negative feelings for each other. Several historians think that Louis had a predetermined attitude to hate his wife, but it is universally agreed that Louis entered the ceremony and the marriage itself dutifully, as evidenced by his formal embrace of Margaret upon their first meeting.\nLouis's marriage with Margaret resulted from the nature of medieval royal diplomacy and the precarious position of the French monarchy at the time. The wedding ceremony\u2014very plain by the standards of the time\u2014took place in the chapel of the castle of Tours on the afternoon of 25 June 1436, and was presided over by Renaud of Chartres, the Archbishop of Reims. The Scottish guests were quickly hustled out after the wedding reception, as the French royal court was quite impoverished at this time. They simply could not afford an extravagant ceremony or to host their Scottish guests for any longer than they did. The Scots, however, saw this behaviour as an insult to their small but proud country.\nFollowing the ceremony, \"doctors advised against consummation\" because of the relative immaturity of the bride and bridegroom. Margaret continued her studies, and Louis went on tour with Charles to loyal areas of the kingdom. Even at this time, Charles was taken aback by the intelligence and temper of his son. During this tour, Louis was named Dauphin of France by Charles, as was traditional for the eldest son of the king. The beautiful and cultured Margaret was popular at the court of France, but her marriage to Louis was not a happy one, in part because of his strained relations with her father-in-law, who was very attached to her. She died childless at the age of 20 in 1445.\nIn 1440, Louis, aged 16, took part in an uprising known as the Praguerie, which sought to neutralize Charles and install Louis as regent of France. The uprising failed, and Louis was forced to submit to the king, who chose to forgive him. In this revolt, Louis came under the influence of Charles I, Duke of Bourbon, whose troops were in no condition to mount such a serious threat to royal authority. Louis was forced to retreat to Paris, but was \"by no means trounced\". In fact, before his final defeat, \"[Louis's]...military strength, combined with antipathy of the masses for great lords, won him the support of the citizens of Paris.\" This was a great learning experience for Louis.\nIn 1444, Louis led an army of \"\u00e9corcheurs\" (bands of mercenary soldiers) against the Swiss at the Battle of St. Jakob an der Birs where he sought to reconquer territories of his future brother-in-law, Sigismund of Austria-Tyrol. He won only one victory before suing for peace. He failed to achieve his original objective.\nHe still quarreled with his father. His objectionable scheming, which included disrespectful behavior directed against his father's beloved mistress Agn\u00e8s Sorel, caused him to be ordered out of court on 27 September 1446 and sent to his own province of Dauphin\u00e9. He lived mainly in Grenoble, in the \"tour de la Tr\u00e9sorerie\". Despite frequent summons by the king, the two would never meet again. In Dauphin\u00e9, Louis ruled as king in all but name, continuing his intrigues against his father. On 14 February 1451, Louis, who had been widowed for six years, made a strategic marriage to the eight-year-old Charlotte of Savoy, without Charles's consent. This marriage was to have long-ranging effects on foreign policy as the beginning of French involvement in the affairs of the Italian peninsula.\nFinally, in August 1456, Charles sent an army to Dauphin\u00e9 under the command of Antoine de Chabannes. Louis fled to Burgundy, where he was granted refuge by Duke Philip the Good and settled in the castle of Genappe. King Charles was furious when Philip refused to hand over Louis and warned the duke that he was giving shelter to \"a fox who will eat his chickens.\"\nAscension.\nIn 1461, Louis learned that his father was dying. He hurried to Reims to be crowned, in case his brother, Charles, Duke of Berry, should try to do the same. Louis XI became King of France on 22 July 1461.\nLouis pursued many of the same goals that his father had, such as limiting the powers of the dukes and barons of France, with consistently greater success. Among other initiatives, Louis instituted reforms to make the tax system more efficient. He suppressed many of his former co-conspirators, who had thought him their friend, and he appointed to government service many men of no rank, but who had shown promising talent. He particularly favored the associates of the great French merchant Jacques Coeur. He also allowed enterprising nobles to engage in trade without losing their privileges of nobility. He eliminated offices within the government bureaucracy, and increased the demand on other offices within the government in order to promote efficiency. Louis spent a large part of his kingship on the road. Travelling from town to town in his kingdom, Louis would surprise local officials, investigate local governments, establish fairs, and promote trade regulations. Perhaps the most significant contribution of Louis XI to the organization of the modern state of France was his development of the system of royal postal roads in 1464. In this system, relays at instant service to the king operated on all the high roads of France; this communications network spread all across France and led to the king acquiring his nickname \"Universal Spider\".\nAs king, Louis became extremely prudent fiscally, whereas he had previously been lavish and extravagant. He wore rough and simple clothes and mixed with ordinary people and merchants. A candid account of some of his activities is recorded by the courtier Philippe de Commines in his memoirs of the period. Louis made a habit of surrounding himself with valuable advisers of humble origins, such as Commines himself, Olivier Le Daim, Louis Tristan L'Hermite, and Jean Balue. Louis was anxious to speed up everything, transform everything, and build his own new world. In recognition of all the changes that Louis XI made to the government of France, he has the reputation of a leading \"civil reformer\" in French history, and his reforms were in the interests of the rising trading and mercantile classes that would later become the bourgeoisie of France.\nLouis XI also involved himself in the affairs of the Church in France. In October 1461, Louis abolished the Pragmatic Sanction that his father had instituted in 1438 to establish a French Gallican Church free of the controls of the popes in Rome.\nFeud with Charles the Bold.\nPhilip III was the Duke of Burgundy at the time that Louis came to the throne, and was keen to initiate a Crusade against the Ottoman Empire. However, he needed funds to organize such an enterprise. Louis XI gave him 400,000 gold crowns for the Crusade in exchange for a number of territories, including Picardy and Amiens. However, Philip's son, the future Charles I, Duke of Burgundy (known as the Count of Charolais at the time of Louis's accession) was angry about this transaction, feeling that he was being deprived of his inheritance. He joined a rebellion called the League of the Public Weal, led by Louis's brother Charles, the Duke of Berry. Although the rebels were largely unsuccessful in battle, Louis had no better luck. Louis XI fought an indecisive battle against the rebels at Montlh\u00e9ry and was forced to grant an unfavourable peace as a matter of political expediency.\nWhen the Count of Charolais became Duke of Burgundy in 1467 as Charles I (\"the Bold\"), he seriously considered declaring an independent kingdom of his own. However, Louis's progress toward a strong centralized government had advanced to the point where the dukes of Burgundy could no longer act as independently as they had in the past. The duchy now faced many problems and revolts in its territories, especially from the people of Li\u00e8ge, who conducted the Li\u00e8ge Wars against the Duke of Burgundy. In the Li\u00e8ge Wars, Louis XI allied himself at first with the people of Li\u00e8ge.\nIn 1468, Louis and Charles met at P\u00e9ronne, but during the course of negotiations, they learned that the citizens of Li\u00e8ge had again risen up against Charles and killed the Burgundian governor. Charles was furious. Philippe de Commines, at that time in the service of the duke of Burgundy, had to calm him down with the help of the duke's other advisors for fear that he might hit the king. Louis was forced into a humiliating treaty. He gave up many of the lands he had acquired from Philip the Good, turned on his erstwhile allies in Li\u00e8ge and swore to help Charles put down the uprising in Li\u00e8ge. Louis then witnessed a siege of Li\u00e8ge in which hundreds were massacred.\nHowever, once out of Charles's reach, Louis declared the treaty invalid, and set about building up his forces. His aim was to destroy Burgundy once and for all. Nothing was more odious to Louis' dream of a centralized monarchy than the existence of an over-mighty vassal such as the Duke of Burgundy. War broke out in 1472. Duke Charles laid siege to Beauvais and other towns. However, these sieges proved unsuccessful; the Siege of Beauvais was lifted on 22 July 1472, and Charles finally sued for peace. Philippe de Commines was then welcomed into the service of King Louis.\nIn 1469, Louis founded the Order of St. Michael, probably in imitation of the prestigious Burgundian Order of the Golden Fleece, founded by Charles's father Philip the Good, just as King John II of France had founded the now defunct Order of the Star in imitation of the Order of the Garter of King Edward III of England. In both cases, a French king appears to have been motivated to found an order of chivalry to increase the prestige of the French royal court by the example of his chief political adversary.\nDealings with England.\nAt the same time that France and Burgundy were fighting each other, England was experiencing a bitter civil conflict now known as the Wars of the Roses. Louis had an interest in this war, for the Duke of Burgundy, Charles the Bold, was allied with the Yorkists who opposed King Henry VI. When the Earl of Warwick fell out with the Yorkist King Edward IV, after helping Edward attain his throne, Louis granted Warwick refuge in France. Through Louis's diplomacy, Warwick then formed an alliance with his bitter enemy Margaret of Anjou in order to restore her husband Henry VI to the throne. The plan worked, and Edward was forced into exile in 1470, but he later returned to England in 1471. Warwick was then killed at the Battle of Barnet in 1471. King Henry VI was soon murdered afterwards.\nNow the undisputed master of England, Edward invaded France in 1475, but Louis was able to negotiate the Treaty of Picquigny, by which the English army left France in return for a large sum of money. The English renounced their claim to French lands such as Normandy, and the Hundred Years' War could be said to be finally over.\nOutcome of rivalry with Charles the Bold.\nJust as his father had done, Louis spent most of his reign dealing with political disputes with the reigning Duke of Burgundy, and for this purpose he employed the Swiss, whose military might was renowned. He had admired it himself at the Battle of St. Jakob an der Birs.\nWar broke out between Charles and the Swiss after he invaded Switzerland. The invasion proved to be a tremendous mistake. On 2 March 1476, the Swiss attacked and defeated the Burgundians first at Grandson and then again a few months later, on 22 June that year, at Murten. The duke was killed at the Battle of Nancy on 5 January 1477, an event that marked the end of the Burgundian Wars.\nLouis was thus able to see the destruction of his sworn enemy. Those lords who still favored the feudal system gave in to his authority. Others, such as Jacques d'Armagnac, Duke of Nemours, were executed. The lands belonging to the Duchy of Burgundy as constituted by Louis's great-great-grandfather John II for the benefit of his son Philip the Bold reverted to the crown of France.\nItalian connections.\nThe marriage on 14 February 1451 between 28-year-old Louis and the 8-year-old Charlotte of Savoy was the true beginning of French involvement in the affairs of Italy. The Italian peninsula was a compact and politically competitive space dominated by five powers: Venice, Milan, Florence, the Papacy, and the Kingdom of Naples. Beside these five great regional powers, there were about a dozen smaller states in Italy that were constantly changing policies and shifting alliances between and towards the various regional powers. The city/state of Genoa and the rising state of Savoy, which centered on the city of Turin, were examples of these lesser powers in northern Italy. Even the Italic League\u2014the combination of the five major powers of Italy that had been born out of the Treaty of Lodi of 1454\u2014was constantly undergoing internal realignments.\nBoth Louis XI and his father Charles VII had been too busy with their struggles with Burgundy to pay much attention to political affairs smoldering in Italy. Additionally, Louis had his attention drawn away from Italy by disagreements with the rulers of England and his struggles with Maximilian of Austria, who married the heir of Charles the Bold, Mary of Burgundy, and wanted to keep her territorial inheritance intact. However, the death of the Duke of Burgundy in 1477, which conclusively settled the issue of Burgundy's position under the French throne, the conclusion of the Treaty of Picquigny with England in 1475 and the peaceful resolution in 1482 of the disposition of the \"Burgundian inheritance\" left to Mary of Burgundy finally allowed Louis XI to turn his attention to Italy.\nViewed from the Italian states, the death of the Duke of Burgundy in 1477 and the resultant downfall of his duchy as a threat to the French throne signalled vast changes in the states' relationships with the kingdom of France.Despite his connection by marriage to the royal house of Savoy, Louis XI continuously courted a strong relationship with Francesco I Sforza, the Duke of Milan, who was a traditional enemy of Savoy. As a confirmation of the close relationship between Milan and the king of France, Sforza sent his son Galeazzo Maria Sforza to aid Louis XI in his war against the League of Public Weal in 1465 at the head of a large army. Later, differences arose between France and Milan that caused Milan to seek ways of separating itself from dependence on the French. However, with the downfall of Burgundy in 1477, France was seen in a new light by Milan, which now hurriedly repaired its relationship with Louis XI. Likewise, France's old enemy King Ferdinand I of Naples began to seek a marriage alliance between the Kingdom of Naples and France. Louis XI also opened new friendly relations with the Papal States, forgetting the past devotion of the popes for the Duke of Burgundy. In January 1478, he signed a favorable treaty with the Republic of Venice.\nFrench involvement in the affairs of Italy would be carried to new levels by Louis XI's son Charles VIII in 1493, when he answered an appeal for help from Ludovico Sforza, the younger son of Francesco Sforza, that led to an invasion of Italy. This would become a significant turning point in Italian political history.\nDeath.\nLouis XI, having suffered from bouts of apoplexy and years of illness, died on 30 August 1483, and was interred in the Basilica of Notre-Dame de Cl\u00e9ry in Cl\u00e9ry-Saint-Andr\u00e9 in the Arrondissement of Orl\u00e9ans. His widow, Charlotte, died a few months later, and is interred with him. Louis XI was succeeded by his son Charles VIII, who was thirteen years of age. Louis' eldest daughter, Anne, became regent on Charles's behalf.\nLegacy.\nEager to obtain information about his enemies, Louis created, from 1464, a net of postal relays all over France, which was a precursor to the modern French postal service.\nLouis developed his kingdom by encouraging trade fairs and the building and maintenance of roads. Louis XI pursued the organization of the kingdom of France with the assistance of bourgeois officials. In some respects, Louis XI perfected the framework of the modern French Government which was to last until the French Revolution. Thus, Louis XI is one of the first modern kings of France who helped take it out of the Middle Ages.\nLouis XI was very superstitious and surrounded himself with astrologers. Interested in science, he once pardoned a man sentenced to death on condition that he serve as a test subject for a gallstone operation.\nThrough wars and guile, Louis XI overcame France's mostly independent feudal lords, and at the time of his death in the Ch\u00e2teau de Plessis-lez-Tours, he had united France and laid the foundations of a strong monarchy. He was, however, a secretive, reclusive man, and few mourned his death.\nDespite Louis XI's political acumen and overall policy of \"Realpolitik\", Niccol\u00f2 Machiavelli criticized him harshly in Chapter 13 of \"The Prince\", calling him shortsighted and imprudent for abolishing his own infantry in favor of Swiss mercenaries.\nChildren.\nLouis and Charlotte of Savoy had:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70508", "revid": "6060594", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70508", "title": "Brief Encounter", "text": "1945 British film directed by David Lean\nBrief Encounter is a 1945 British romantic tragedy film directed by David Lean from a screenplay by No\u00ebl Coward, based on his 1936 one-act play \"Still Life\". The film stars Celia Johnson and Trevor Howard in lead roles, alongside Stanley Holloway, Joyce Carey, Cyril Raymond, Everley Gregg and Margaret Barton.\n\"Brief Encounter\" tells the story of two married strangers living in pre-World War II England, whose chance meeting at a railway station leads to a brief yet intense emotional affair disrupting their otherwise conventional lives.\nThe film premiered in London on 13 November 1945, followed by its wide release on 25 November. It received widespread critical acclaim, with Johnson and Howard's performances earning high praise, and moderate commercial success at the box-office.\n\"Brief Encounter\" received three nominations at the 19th Academy Awards for Best Director (Lean), Best Actress (Johnson) and Best Adapted Screenplay. The film was one of eleven winners in the \"Grand Prix\" category at the 1946 Cannes Film Festival, while Johnson won the New York Film Critics Circle Award for Best Actress.\nMany critics, historians, and scholars consider \"Brief Encounter\" as one of the greatest films of all time\".\" In 1999, the British Film Institute ranked it the second-greatest British film of all time. In 2017, a \"Time Out\" poll of 150 actors, directors, writers, producers, and critics ranked it the 12th-best British film ever.\nPlot.\nIn a railway station refreshment room, a man and a woman are sitting glumly at a table. One of the woman's friends comes in and immediately begins chatting away. After some terse pleasantries, the man leaves to catch his train. The woman explains that the man is about to move to Africa. After the man leaves, the woman abruptly disappears but soon returns, explaining that she wanted to see the express train pass by. After a short interval, the two women head for their own train.\nAt home, Laura Jesson, the woman at the table, sits in the living room with her husband Fred. Laura silently reflects on her recent experiences, which she retells in the form of a confession to her husband.\nLaura visits Milford every week to shop and watch a matin\u00e9e film. During one such outing she meets idealistic doctor Alec Harvey, who works at the local hospital on Thursdays. Alec charms her by gently removing a piece of grit from her eye.\nLaura continues visiting Milford on Thursdays. The following week, she runs into Alec at the chemist. The week after that, they eat lunch and watch a film together. Although they are both married with children, their innocent, casual relationship begins to deepen. The situation makes them uneasy, though they admit they love each other.\nLaura and Alec continue meeting in public until they unexpectedly run into some of Laura's friends, necessitating the first of many deceptions. Eventually, they agree to make love at the flat of Alec's friend Stephen, who has dinner plans. However, Stephen returns unexpectedly. Stephen overhears Laura sneaking out and subtly chides Alec for his infidelity. A distraught Laura wanders the streets for three hours until a concerned police officer urges her to go home.\nAt the railway station, Laura and Alec admit that their relationship is unworkable. For the sake of his family, Alec decides to end his relationship with Laura by taking a job in Johannesburg.\nThe next week, Laura and Alec have their final meeting in the railway station refreshment room, as previously shown in the opening scene. As they prepare to part for the last time, Laura's acquaintance Dolly Messiter interrupts them, oblivious to their anguish.\nAlec\u2019s train arrives before they can say a proper goodbye. He discreetly squeezes Laura\u2019s shoulder as he departs. Laura, overcome with emotion, nearly commits suicide by jumping in front of an express train. However, she gathers herself and returns home to her family.\nAt home, Fred acknowledges Laura's emotional distance, though whether he knows the cause remains unclear. He thanks her for coming back to him and she weeps in his arms.\nA parallel subplot involves the interactions of the station and refreshment room staff. Two of the staff flirt with each other but cannot engage in public displays of affection during work hours, which humorously contrasts with Laura and Alec's ability to meet openly with each other and inability to have a relationship outside of work hours.\nCast.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;* Celia Johnson as Laura Jesson\nAdaptation.\n\"Brief Encounter\" is based on No\u00ebl Coward's one-act play \"Still Life\" (1936), one of ten short plays in the cycle \"Tonight at 8.30\", designed for Gertrude Lawrence and Coward himself, to be performed in various combinations as triple bills. All scenes in \"Still Life\" are set in the refreshment room of the fictional Milford Junction railway station.\nAs is common in films adapted from stage plays, the film includes settings that are only mentioned in the play, such as Dr. Lynn's flat, Laura's home, a cinema, a restaurant and a branch of Boots the Chemist. Several scenes were added for the film, including a scene on a lake where Dr. Harvey gets his feet wet, Laura wandering alone in the dark and smoking on a park bench where she is confronted by a police officer, and a drive in the country in a hired car.\nSome scenes were altered to be less ambiguous and more dramatic in the film adaptation. The scene in which the lovers are about to commit adultery is toned down; in the play, it is left to the audience to decide whether they actually consummate their relationship, while in the film, they do not. In the film, Laura has only just arrived at Dr. Lynn's flat when the owner returns, prompting Dr. Harvey to quickly escort her out via the kitchen service door. Additionally, when Laura contemplates suicide by throwing herself in front of a train, the film makes her intention clearer through voice-over narration.\nIn the play, the characters at Milford station\u2014Mrs. Bagot, Mr. Godby, Beryl and Stanley\u2014are aware of the growing relationship between Laura and Alec and occasionally mention it in an offhand manner. In the film, these characters pay little attention to the couple. The film's final scene, where Laura embraces her husband after he acknowledges her emotional distance and possibly suspects the cause, is not present in the original play.\nTwo editions of Coward's original screenplay for the film adaptation are available, both listed in the bibliography.\nProduction.\nMuch of the film was shot at Carnforth railway station in Lancashire, then a junction on the London, Midland and Scottish Railway. Although it was a busy station, it was far enough away from major cities to avoid the blackout for film purposes, allowing shooting to take place in early 1945 before World War II had ended. At two points in the film, platform signs indicate local destinations such as Leeds, Bradford, Morecambe and Lancaster, even though Milford is intended to be in the home counties. No\u00ebl Coward provided the station announcements in the film. The station refreshment room was recreated in a studio. Carnforth station retains many of the period features from the time of filming and has become a place of pilgrimage for fans of the film. Some of the urban scenes were shot in London, Denham, and Beaconsfield, near Denham Studios.\nThe country bridge the lovers visit twice, including on their final day, is Middle Fell Bridge at Dungeon Ghyll in Cumbria.\nThe poem that Fred asks Laura to help him with for his crossword is by John Keats: \"When I have Fears that I may Cease to Be\". The quote Fred recites is \"When I behold, upon the night's starr'd face, huge cloudy symbols of a high romance\".\nIn addition to the Keats reference, there is a visual reference to an Arabic love poem. In Dr. Lynn's apartment, a wall hanging is prominently displayed twice\u2014first over the dining table when Laura enters, and later over Alec's left shoulder when Stephen confronts him.\nThe original choice for the role of Alec Harvey was Roger Livesey, but David Lean cast Trevor Howard after seeing him in \"The Way to the Stars\". Joyce Barbour was originally cast as Dolly, but Lean was dissatisfied with her performance, and she was replaced by Everley Gregg.\nMusic.\nExcerpts from Sergei Rachmaninoff's Piano Concerto No. 2 recur throughout the film, performed by the National Symphony Orchestra under Muir Mathieson, with Eileen Joyce as the pianist. Additionally, there is a scene in a tearoom where a salon orchestra plays \"Spanish Dance No. 5 (Bolero)\" by Moritz Moszkowski.\nRelease.\nBox office.\nAccording to trade papers, \"Brief Encounter\" was a \"notable box-office attraction\" and was the 21st most popular film at the British box office in 1946.\nCritical reception.\n\"Brief Encounter\" received widespread critical acclaim, with Johnson and Howard's performances earning high praise; although there were doubts that it would be \"generally popular\". \"Variety\" praised the film, stating, \"Coward's name and strong story spell nice US chances.\"\nIt was a moderate success in the UK and became a major hit in the US, leading to Johnson's nomination for the Academy Award for Best Actress.\nToday, \"Brief Encounter\" is widely acclaimed for its black-and-white cinematography and the evocative atmosphere created by its steam-age railway setting, elements particularly associated with David Lean's original version. On the review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes, the film holds an approval rating of 91% based on 46 reviews, with an average rating of 8.6/10. The site's critical consensus states: \"\"Brief Encounter\" adds a small but valuable gem to the Lean filmography, depicting a doomed couple's illicit connection with affecting sensitivity and a pair of powerful performances.\" On Metacritic, the film has a weighted average score of 92 out of 100, based on 16 critics, indicating \"universal acclaim.\"\nLegacy.\nIn her book \"No\u00ebl Coward\" (1987), Frances Gray notes that \"Brief Encounter\" is, after Coward\u2019s major comedies, his most prominent work. The film has frequently aired on television to high viewership consistently. Its story is that of an unconsummated affair between two married people [...] Coward is keeping his lovers in check because he cannot handle the energies of a less inhibited love in a setting shorn of the wit and exotic flavour of his best comedies [...] To look at the script, shorn of David Lean's beautiful camera work, deprived of an audience who would automatically approve of the final sacrifice, is to find oneself asking awkward questions (pp. 64\u201367).\n\"Brief Encounter\" has earned a lasting legacy in cinema history. In 1952, it was voted one of the 10 greatest films ever made in two separate critics' polls. In 1999, the British Film Institute ranked it #2 on the BFI Top 100 British films list, behind only \"The Third Man\", and in 2004 \"Total Film\" magazine named it the 44th greatest British film of all time. Film critic Derek Malcolm included it in his 2000 column \"The Century of Films\". British historian Thomas Dixon remarked that \"Brief Encounter\" \"has become a classic example of a very modern and very British phenomenon\u2014weeping over the stiff upper lip, crying at people not crying. The audiences for these wartime weepies could, through their own tears, provide something that was lacking in their own lives as well as those of the on-screen stoics they admired.\"\nDirector Robert Altman's wife Kathryn Altman said, \"One day, years and years ago, just after the war, [Altman] had nothing to do and he went to a theater in the middle of the afternoon to see a movie. Not a Hollywood movie: a British movie. He said the main character was not glamorous, not a babe. And at first he wondered why he was even watching it. But twenty minutes later, he was in tears, and had fallen in love with her. And it made him feel that it wasn't just a movie.\" The film was \"Brief Encounter\".\nThe film's influence extends into other works. The British play and film \"The History Boys\" features two characters reciting a passage from \"Brief Encounter\".\nThe episode \"Grief Encounter\" of the British comedy series \"Goodnight Sweetheart\" features a reference to Coward and includes a scene filmed at Milford railway station, echoing \"Brief Encounter\". Similarly, \"Mum's Army\", an episode of \"Dad's Army\", appears to be loosely inspired by the film.\n\"Brief Encounter\" also serves as a plot device in \"Mrs. Palfrey at the Claremont\" (2005), a comedy-drama film based on Elizabeth Taylor's 1971 novel. In the story, the aging widow Mrs. Palfrey reminisces about \"Brief Encounter\" as her and her late husband\u2019s favorite film, leading to a significant connection between her young friend and writer Ludovic Meyer and his eventual girlfriend.\nIn the 2012 \"Sight &amp; Sound\" polls of the world\u2019s greatest films, \"Brief Encounter\" received votes from 11 critics and three directors.\nSocial context.\nFrances Gray acknowledges a common criticism of the play: why do the characters not consummate the affair? Gray argues that the characters' restraint is rooted in class consciousness. While the working classes might be seen as vulgar and the upper classes as frivolous, the middle class, which sees itself as the moral backbone of society, upholds these values. Coward, whose principal audience was the middle class, was reluctant to question or jeopardize these norms.\nIn her narration, Laura emphasizes that what ultimately holds her back is not class consciousness, but her deep-seated horror at the thought of betraying her husband and her moral principles, despite being profoundly tempted by her emotions. This tension between desire and duty is a key element that has contributed to the film's enduring appeal.\nThe values that Laura precariously, but ultimately successfully, upholds were widely shared and respected at the time of the film's setting. For instance, the stigma associated with divorce was significant enough to cause Edward VIII to abdicate in 1936. Updating the story to a more contemporary setting might have rendered these values obsolete, thereby undermining the plot's credibility\u2014a factor that may explain why the 1974 remake failed to resonate as strongly.\nThe film was released against the backdrop of the Second World War, a period when \"brief encounters\" were common, and women experienced greater sexual and economic freedom than before. In \"British National Cinema\" (1997), Sarah Street argues that \"\"Brief Encounter\" articulated a range of feelings about infidelity that invited easy identification, whether it involved one's husband, lover, children, or country (p.\u00a055). In this context, feminist critics have interpreted the film as an attempt to stabilize relationships and restore the pre-war social order.\nIn his 1993 BFI book on the film, Richard Dyer notes that, with the rise of homosexual law reform, gay men also identified with the characters' plight, seeing it as analogous to their own social constraints in forming and maintaining relationships. Sean O'Connor further considers the film an \"allegorical representation of forbidden love,\" informed by Coward's experiences as a closeted gay man.\nFurther adaptations.\nRadio.\n\"Brief Encounter\" was adapted as a radio play on the 20 November 1946 episode of \"Academy Award Theater\", starring Greer Garson. It was also presented three times on \"The Screen Guild Theater\": on 12 May 1947 with Herbert Marshall and Lilli Palmer, on 12 January 1948 with Marshall and Irene Dunne, and on 11 January 1951 with Stewart Granger and Deborah Kerr. Additionally, \"Lux Radio Theater\" adapted the film on 29 November 1948 with Garson and Van Heflin, and again on 14 May 1951 with Olivia de Havilland and Richard Basehart.\nOn 30 October 2009, as part of the celebrations for the 75th anniversary of the BBC's Maida Vale Studios, Jenny Seagrove and Nigel Havers starred in a special Radio 2 production of \"Brief Encounter\", performed live from Maida Vale's studio 6 (MV6). The script used was a 1947 adaptation for radio by Maurice Horspool, which had been in the BBC's archives and had never been performed since its creation.\nIn addition, \"Theatre Guild on the Air\" broadcast two adaptations of \"Brief Encounter\" in its original form, \"Still Life\". The first aired on 6 April 1947 on ABC featuring Ingrid Bergman, Sam Wanamaker and Peggy Wood. The second aired on 13 November 1949 on NBC, starring Helen Hayes and David Niven.\nTheatre.\nThe first adaptation of \"Brief Encounter\" to source from both the screenplay and No\u00ebl Coward's original stage material was created by Andrew Taylor and starred Hayley Mills. This production embarked on its first national tour in 1996 and later transferred to the West End, where it played at the Lyric Theatre, Shaftesbury Avenue, in 2000, featuring Jenny Seagrove in the lead role.\nEmma Rice/Kneehigh Theatre adaptation\nThe Kneehigh Theatre production, adapted and directed by Emma Rice, was a unique blend of the film and Coward's original stage play, incorporating additional musical elements. Produced by David Pugh and Dafydd Rogers, the adaptation premiered at Birmingham Repertory Theatre in October 2007 and later at the West Yorkshire Playhouse before opening in February 2008 at the Haymarket Cinema in London, which was temporarily converted into a theatre for the play. The 2008 London cast included Amanda Lawrence, Tamzin Griffin, Tristan Sturrock, and Naomi Frederick in lead roles. The production ran until November 2008 and subsequently toured the UK from February to July 2009, with performances at venues including the Oxford Playhouse, Marlowe Theatre and Richmond Theatre. During the tour, the lead roles were played by Hannah Yelland and Milo Twomey.\nThe US premiere of the Kneehigh adaptation was held at the American Conservatory Theater in San Francisco from September to October 2009. The production later moved to St. Ann's Warehouse in Brooklyn, New York, for performances in December 2009 and January 2010, followed by a run at the Guthrie Theater in Minneapolis from February to April 2010.\nA Roundabout Theatre Company production of the Kneehigh adaptation opened at Studio 54 in New York City on 28 September 2010, starring Hannah Yelland, Tristan Sturrock, and other members of the London cast. The limited engagement closed on 2 January 2011, after 21 previews and 119 performances, including a four-week extension.\nAfter an Australian tour in the autumn of 2013, Kneehigh's \"Brief Encounter\" was staged at the Wallis Annenberg Center in Beverly Hills and the Shakespeare Theatre in Washington, D.C., in the spring of 2014.\nThe production returned to the UK in 2018, opening at Birmingham Repertory Theatre (where it originally premiered) and The Lowry in Salford in February, before returning to the Haymarket Cinema in London from March to September 2018.\nOpera.\nIn May 2009, Houston Grand Opera premiered a two-act opera titled \"Brief Encounter\", based on the film's story. The opera featured music by Andr\u00e9 Previn and a libretto by John Caird.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nStreaming audio"}
{"id": "70509", "revid": "8524693", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70509", "title": "Robert Southey", "text": "English romantic poet (1774\u20131843)\nRobert Southey (; 12 August 1774 \u2013 21 March 1843) was an English poet of the Romantic school, and Poet Laureate from 1813 until his death. Like the other Lake Poets, William Wordsworth and Samuel Taylor Coleridge, Southey began as a radical but became steadily more conservative as he gained respect for Britain and its institutions. Other romantics such as Byron accused him of siding with the establishment for money and status. He is remembered especially for the poem \"After Blenheim\" and the original version of \"Goldilocks and the Three Bears\".\nLife.\nRobert Southey was born in Wine Street, Bristol, to Robert Southey and Margaret Hill. He was educated at Westminster School, London (where he was expelled for writing an article in \"The Flagellant\", a magazine he originated, attributing the invention of flogging to the Devil), and at Balliol College, Oxford.\nSouthey went to Oxford with \"a heart full of poetry and feeling, a head full of Rousseau and Werther, and my religious principles shaken by Gibbon\". He later said of Oxford, \"All I learnt was a little swimming... and a little boating\". He did, however, write a play, \"Wat Tyler\" (which, in 1817, after he became Poet Laureate, was published, to embarrass him, by his enemies). Experimenting with a writing partnership with Samuel Taylor Coleridge, most notably in their joint composition of \"The Fall of Robespierre\", Southey published his first collection of poems in 1794. The same year, Southey, Coleridge, Robert Lovell and several others discussed creating an idealistic community (\"pantisocracy\") on the banks of the Susquehanna River in America.\nIn 1795 he married Edith Fricker, whose sister Sara married Coleridge. The same year, he travelled to Portugal, and wrote \"Joan of Arc\", published in 1796. He then wrote many ballads, went to Spain in 1800, and on his return settled in the Lake District.\nIn 1799, Southey and Coleridge were involved with early experiments with nitrous oxide (laughing gas), conducted by the Cornish scientist Humphry Davy.\nWhile writing prodigiously, he received a government pension in 1807, and in 1809 started a long association with the \"Quarterly Review\", which provided almost his only income for most of his life. He was appointed laureate in 1813, a post he came greatly to dislike.\nIn 1819 Southey accompanied the Scottish civil engineer Thomas Telford, whom Southey nicknamed the \u201cColossus of Roads\u201d on a tour of inspection of Telford\u2019s works in Scotland. These included the Caledonian Canal (which would open three years later) and a number of Telford's roads, bridges, and harbour works. Southey\u2019s account of the tour, \"Journal of a Tour in Scotland in 1819,\" gives detailed descriptions of Telford\u2019s engineering projects and records Southey\u2019s own impressions of the Scottish landscape and people.\nIn 1821, Southey wrote \"A Vision of Judgment\", to commemorate George III, in the preface to which he attacked Byron who, as well as responding with a parody, \"The Vision of Judgment\" (see below), mocked him frequently in \"Don Juan\".\nIn 1837, Edith died, and Southey remarried, to Caroline Anne Bowles, also a poet, on 4 June 1839. The marriage broke down, not least because of his increasing dementia. His mind was giving way when he wrote a last letter to his friend Walter Savage Landor in 1839, but he continued to mention Landor's name when generally incapable of mentioning anyone. He died on 21 March 1843 and was buried in the churchyard of Crosthwaite Church, Keswick, where he had worshipped for forty years. There is a memorial to him inside the church, with an epitaph written by his friend William Wordsworth.\nSouthey was also a prolific letter writer, literary scholar, essay writer, historian and biographer. His biographies include the life and works of John Bunyan, John Wesley, William Cowper, Oliver Cromwell and Horatio Nelson. The last has rarely been out of print since its publication in 1813 and was adapted as the 1926 British film \"Nelson\".\nHe was a generous man, particularly kind to Coleridge's abandoned family, but he incurred the enmity of many, including Hazlitt as well as Byron, who felt he had betrayed his principles in accepting pensions and the laureateship, and in retracting his youthful ideals.\nPolitics.\nAlthough originally a radical supporter of the French Revolution, Southey followed the trajectory of his fellow Romantic poets Wordsworth and Coleridge towards conservatism. Embraced by the Tory establishment as Poet Laureate, and from 1807 in receipt of a yearly stipend from them, he vigorously supported the Liverpool government. He argued against parliamentary reform (\"the railroad to ruin with the Devil for driver\"), blamed the Peterloo Massacre on an allegedly revolutionary \"rabble\" killed and injured by government troops, and spurned Catholic emancipation. In 1817 he privately proposed penal transportation for those guilty of \"libel\" or \"sedition\". He had in mind figures like Thomas Jonathan Wooler and William Hone, whose prosecution he urged. Such writers were guilty, he wrote in the \"Quarterly Review\", of \"inflaming the turbulent temper of the manufacturer and disturbing the quiet attachment of the peasant to those institutions under which he and his fathers have dwelt in peace.\" Wooler and Hone were acquitted, but the threats caused another target, William Cobbett, to emigrate temporarily to the United States.\nIn some respects, Southey was ahead of his time in his views on social reform. For example, he was an early critic of the evils the new factory system brought to early 19th-century Britain. He was appalled by the living conditions in towns like Birmingham and Manchester and especially by employment of children in factories and outspoken about them. He sympathised with the pioneering socialist plans of Robert Owen, advocated that the state promote public works to maintain high employment, and called for universal education.\nGiven his departure from radicalism, and his attempts to have former fellow travellers prosecuted, it is unsurprising that less successful contemporaries who kept the faith attacked Southey. They saw him as selling out for money and respectability.\nIn 1817, Southey was confronted with the surreptitious publication of a radical play, \"Wat Tyler\", which he had written in 1794 at the height of his radical period. This was instigated by his enemies in an attempt to embarrass the Poet Laureate and highlight his apostasy from radical poet to supporter of the Tory establishment. One of his most savage critics was William Hazlitt. In his portrait of Southey, in \"The Spirit of the Age\", he wrote: \"He wooed Liberty as a youthful lover, but it was perhaps more as a mistress than a bride; and he has since wedded with an elderly and not very reputable lady, called Legitimacy.\" Southey largely ignored his critics but was forced to defend himself when William Smith, a member of Parliament, rose in the House of Commons on 14 March to attack him. In a spirited response Southey wrote an open letter to the MP, in which he explained that he had always aimed at lessening human misery and bettering the condition of all the lower classes and that he had only changed in respect of \"the means by which that amelioration was to be effected.\" As he put it, \"that as he learnt to understand the institutions of his country, he learnt to appreciate them rightly, to love, and to revere, and to defend them.\"\nAnother critic of Southey in his later period was Thomas Love Peacock, who scorned him in the character of Mr. Feathernest in his 1817 satirical novel \"Melincourt\".\nHe was often mocked for what were seen as sycophantic odes to the king, notably in Byron's long ironic dedication of \"Don Juan\" to Southey. In the poem Southey is dismissed as insolent, narrow and shabby. This was based both on Byron's lack of respect for Southey's literary talent, and his disdain for what he perceived as Southey's hypocritical turn to conservatism later in life. Much of the animosity between the two men can be traced back to Byron's belief that Southey had spread rumours about him and Percy Bysshe Shelley being in a \"League of Incest\" during their time on Lake Geneva in 1816, an accusation that Southey strenuously denied.\nIn response, Southey attacked what he called the Satanic School among modern poets in the preface to his poem, \"A Vision of Judgement\", written after the death of George III. While not naming Byron, it was clearly directed at him. Byron retaliated with \"The Vision of Judgment\", a parody of Southey's poem.\nWithout his prior knowledge, the Earl of Radnor, an admirer of his work, had Southey returned as MP for the latter's pocket borough seat of Downton in Wiltshire at the 1826 general election, as an opponent of Catholic emancipation, but Southey refused to sit, causing a by-election in December that year, pleading that he did not have a large enough estate to support him through political life, or want to take on the hours full attendance required. He wished to continue living in the Lake District and preferred to defend the Church of England in writing rather than speech. He declared that \"for me to change my scheme of life and go into Parliament, would be to commit a moral and intellectual suicide.\" His friend John Rickman, a Commons clerk, noted that \"prudential reasons would forbid his appearing in London\" as a member.\nIn 1835, Southey declined the offer of a baronetcy, but accepted a life pension of \u00a3300 a year from Prime Minister Sir Robert Peel.\nReputation.\nCharles Lamb, in a letter to Coleridge, stated, \"With \"Joan of Arc\" I have been delighted, amazed. I had not presumed to expect of any thing of such excellence from Southey. Why the poem is alone sufficient to redeem the character of the age we live in from the imputation of degenerating in Poetry [...] On the whole, I expect Southey one day to rival Milton.\"\nRegarding \"Thalaba the Destroyer\", Ernest Bernhard-Kabisch pointed out that \"Few readers have been as enthusiastic about it as Cardinal Newman who considered it the most 'morally sublime' of English poems. But the young Shelley reckoned it his favourite poem, and both he and Keats followed its lead in some of their verse narratives.\"\nWhile Southey was writing \"Madoc\", Coleridge believed that the poem would be superior to the \"Aeneid\".\nRobert Southey had a notable influence on Russian literature. Pushkin highly appreciated his work and translated the beginning of the \"Hymn to the Penates\" and \"Madoc\", and was also inspired by the plot of \"Roderick\" to create an original poem on the same plot (\"\u0420\u043e\u0434\u0440\u0438\u043a\"). At the beginning of the 20th century, Southey was translated by Gumilyov and Lozinsky. In 1922, the publishing house \"Vsemirnaya Literatura\" published the first separate edition of Southey's ballads in Russia, compiled by Gumilyov. In 2006, a bilingual edition prepared by E. Witkowski was published, a significant part of which included new translations.\nSouthey was elected a member of the American Antiquarian Society in 1822. He was also a member of the Royal Spanish Academy.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70510", "revid": "4967956", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70510", "title": "Telenor", "text": "Norwegian telecommunications company\nTelenor ASA ( or ) is a Norwegian majority state-owned multinational telecommunications company headquartered at Fornebu in B\u00e6rum, close to Oslo. It is one of the world's largest mobile telecommunications companies with operations worldwide, but focused in Scandinavia and Asia. It has extensive broadband and TV distribution operations in four Nordic countries, and a 10-year-old research and business line for machine-to-machine technology. Telenor owns networks in 8 countries.\nTelenor is listed on the Oslo Stock Exchange and had a market capitalization in November 2015 of kr 225 billion, making it the third largest company listed on the OSE after DNB and Equinor (previously known as Statoil).\nHistory.\nTelegraph.\nTelenor started off in 1855, as a state-operated monopoly provider of telegraph services named Telegrafverket. The first Norwegian planning for a telegraph were launched within the Royal Norwegian Navy in 1848, but by 1852, the plans were public and the Parliament of Norway decided on a plan for constructing a telegraph system throughout the country. Televerket began by connecting Christiania (now Oslo) to Sweden (Norway was at that time in a union with Sweden) as well as Christiania and Drammen. By 1857, the telegraph had reached Bergen on the west coast via S\u00f8rlandet on the south coast, and by 1871, it had reached Kirkenes on the far north coast. Cable connections were opened to Denmark in 1867 and to Great Britain in 1869. The telegraph was most important for the merchant marine who now could use the electric telegraph to instantly communicate between different locations, and get a whole new advantage from better logistics.\nTelephone.\nThe first telephone service in Norway was offered in 1878, between Arendal and Tvedestrand, while the first international telephone service between Christiania and Stockholm was offered in 1893. Automation of the telephone system was started in 1920, and completed in 1985. In 1946, the first Telex service was offered, and in 1976, satellite telephone connections to the Norwegian merchant navy, at the time the largest in the world and to oil platforms in the North Sea were made operational. This is the start of Inmarsat Satellite Communication, and formed the first steps to digitalise the telephone network in 1980\u20131985.\nTeleverket opened its first manual mobile telephone system in 1966, being replaced with the automatic NMT system in 1981, and the enhanced NMT-900 in 1986. Norway was the first country in to get an automatic mobile telephone system. The digital GSM system came into use in 1993. The third generation of mobile technology with UMTS system began full operation 2004. The Opera web browser was created in 1994 by Jon Stephenson von Tetzchner and Geir Ivars\u00f8y during their tenure at Telenor, and Opera Software was established in 1995, when they went on to continue development of their browser. Telenor and Huawei conducted a successful test of 5G with 70\u00a0Gbit/s Speeds in Lab environment.\nDeregulation and internationalisation.\nThe corporation changed its name to Televerket in 1969. In 1994, then the Norwegian Telecom was established as a public corporation. The telecom sector in Norway, was deregulated in stages between 1994 and 1998. An attempt to merge Telenor with its counterpart in Sweden, Telia, failed in 1999, while both still were owned by their respective governments. On 4 December 2000, the company was partially privatised and listed on Oslo Stock Exchange and NASDAQ. The privatisation gave the company 15.6 billion\u00a0kr in new capital, with the Government of Norway owning 77.7 percent of the company. As of 2014, the Norwegian government holds 53.97 percent of the Telenor shares directly and another 4.66 percent through the Government Pension Fund Norway.\nIn the second half of the 1990s, Telenor began mobile operations in other countries: Russia (1994), Bangladesh, Greece, Ireland, Germany and Austria (1997), Ukraine (1998), Malaysia (1999), Denmark and Thailand (2000), Hungary (2002), Montenegro (2004), Pakistan (2004), Slovakia, Czech Republic, Serbia (2006), Myanmar (2014). Operations in Greece, Ireland and Germany were sold in 1999/2000, and profits were re-invested in emerging markets. In October 2005, Telenor acquired Vodafone Sweden, changing the name to Telenor in April 2006.\nGrameenphone was the first Telenor venture in the Asian telecom market and is now the largest mobile operator in Bangladesh, Telenor holds 55.8 per cent of the company. Grameenphone started trading its shares on the stock exchanges in Dhaka and Chittagong on 16 November 2009. The success of Grammeenphone lead to an increased focus on Asia, with successful entries into Malaysia, Thailand, Pakistan and Myanmar. Telenor also entered India, but had to withdraw from that market in 2017, with substantial losses.\nIn March 2018, Telenor sold its business in Southeast Europe (Bulgaria, Hungary, Montenegro and Serbia) to the PPF Group, for a sum of 2.8 billion euros in order to focus more on Asia and the Nordic market. \nIn 2019, Telenor bought DNA, the third largest mobile operator in Finland.\nOn 21 June 2021, Axiata, Telenor and Digi agree to a potential merger of Celcom and Digi to create a stronger telco in Malaysia, which if approved will be completed by the end of 2022. This come after advanced discussions two months earlier. The deal was approved by both Celcom and Digi shareholders on 18 November 2022. The merged company is named CelcomDigi. At completion, Axiata and Telenor will hold equal ownership of 33.1 percent each in the newly merged company. The merger was completed on 30 November 2022 and the company began its operation the next day.\nOn 22 November 2021, Telenor and Charoen Pokphand Group, officially announced they have agreed to explore a USD 8.6 billion merger plan between Thailand\u2019s second and third largest telecom operators (by subscribers), True Corporation (TRUE) and Total Access Communication (DTAC) \u2013 the proposed merger is subject to regulatory approvals. The merger was \"acknowledged\" by the regulator NBTC at a meeting on October 20, 2022. The newly merged company still retain the True Corporation name, which was founded on 1 March 2023 and it was listed on the Stock Exchange of Thailand under the stock ticker symbol TRUE on 3 March 2023.\nOperations.\nTelenor offers a full range of telecommunication services in the Nordic countries, including mobile and fixed telephony, Internet access and as well as cable TV access and content. Telenor still remains the largest actor in Norway despite competition from Telia and others.\nThe group holds a prominent position in the Scandinavian Broadband and TV market, both with regard to the number of subscribers and to the extent of coverage. The TV distribution is branded Allente. Telenor is also a prominent actor in Asia with operations in five different Asian countries.\nAt year-end 2021, Telenor held controlling interests in mobile operations in Norway, Denmark, Finland, Sweden, Thailand, Malaysia, Bangladesh, Myanmar and Pakistan. The Myanmar operation was announced sold in 2021, and the transaction completed in March 2022.\nTelenor Kystradio is responsible for the infrastructure for maritime radio communication in Norway, and also includes five staffed coast radio stations whose primary purpose is to monitor the maritime radio traffic (over e.g. VHF and MF bands) and to assist marine vessels in distress.\nIn 2022, Telenor established Telenor Amp, a business area managing companies adjacent to its core telecom operations. Amp follows a \u201cdevelop-or-divest\u201d strategy, focusing on areas such as IoT and security services. Its portfolio includes Telenor Connexion and, since 2024, the cybersecurity subsidiary Telenor Cyberdefence.\nResearch.\nTelenor Research is Telenor's corporate unit for research. The unit conducts research and delivers research based advice on topics such as market, technology, data analytics, innovation and organization. Telenor Research provides research based analysis and strategic recommendations to the Telenor Group, as well as to the individual Business Units across Telenor markets. Telenor Research's mission is to create business value for Telenor through applied research.\nInternet of Things (IoT) and Machine-to-machine.\nTelenor started exploring the M2M potentials in 2000, when Telenor R&amp;D established a project both aimed at technology, services and business models. This was further spurred when Telenor acquired the Swedish mobile company Europolitan, which contained parts of Vodafone's research capabilities in the area. As a result, two separate companies have been established: Telenor Connexion in Stockholm, Sweden (aiming higher up in the M2M value chain), and Telenor Objects (aiming further down in the value chain). The initiative has resulted in a substantial market share of Europe's fast-growing M2M market and is being used by Nissan in Europe to connect its customers' electric cars. As of 2017,Telenor Objects is no longer active.\nIn 2021, Telenor unified its IoT operations under the brand Telenor IoT, combining Telenor Connexion with other units into a single global team of about 200 specialists. Analysts have included Telenor in Gartner\u2019s Magic Quadrant for Managed IoT Connectivity Services and Transforma Insights\u2019 CSP IoT Peer Benchmarking 2024.In 2025, trade publications reported that Telenor IoT had surpassed 25 million SIMs deployed, and through a partnership with Verizon Business enabled customers to access local U.S. networks via eSIM.\nBroadcast.\nTelenor's wholly owned subsidiary Canal Digital is a leading TV content distributor in the Nordic region with about 2.7 million customers in 2011. On 13 April 2021, the merger of Canal Digital and Viasat in Allente was completed.\nTelenor also operates the national terrestrial broadcast network in Norway, through its subsidiary Norkring.\nThor is a family of satellites owned by Telenor. On 11 February 2008, the THOR 5 satellite was launched into geostationary orbit. The launch was provided by International Launch Services using a Proton-M launch vehicle built by Khrunichev Space Center. Telenor operates three satellites from its satellite control centre at Fornebu (THOR5, THOR6 and THOR7).\nFormer operations.\nTelenor has sold a number of divisions after its privatisation, including Bravida, the former installation division and Findexa, now part of Eniro that is responsible for telephone directories. The browser vendor Opera Software originated in Telenor's R&amp;D department. Telenor formerly provided a range of services related to satellite communication, including voice, television and data before its Telenor Satellite Services division was purchased by Vizada in 2007.\nTelenor has also previously been active in a number of international markets as a mobile phone network operator:\nControversy.\nOn 28 August 2025, it was announced that anti-coup activists in Justice for Myanmar accused Telenor of providing surveillance equipment and customer data to the Tatmadaw regime in a complaint to the Norwegian Police filed jointly with ICJ Norway. Telenor's data was also allegedly used by the Tatmadaw to track down 88 Generation Students member, Ko Jimmy on 13 February 2021.\nThe prime minister of Norway and two cabinet members have been questioned (in writing) by (parliament's) Standing Committee on Scrutiny and Constitutional Affairs; they have been asked to answer within 6 November; Furthermore, on 23 October, media said that \"Nobel Prize winner Aung San Suu Kyi\" was one of the victims of data violations.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70518", "revid": "15354706", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70518", "title": "Aether theory", "text": ""}
{"id": "70519", "revid": "2842084", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70519", "title": "Kaja Silverman", "text": "American art historian\nKaja Silverman (born September 16, 1947) is an American art historian and critical theorist. She is currently the Katherine and Keith L. Sachs Professor of Art History at the University of Pennsylvania. \nShe received B.A. and M.A. degrees in English from the University of California, Santa Barbara and a Ph.D. in English from Brown University. Thereafter, she taught at Yale University, Trinity College, Simon Fraser University, Brown University, the University of Rochester and for many years was the Class of 1940 Professor in the Rhetoric Department at the University of California, Berkeley. She was awarded a Guggenheim Fellowship in 2008, and is currently the holder of an Andrew W. Mellon Foundation Distinguished Achievement Award.\nWork.\nHer writing and teaching at the moment are focused primarily on photography, contemporary art, and painting. She is currently writing the second volume, \"A Three-Personed Picture: or the History of Photography Part 2,\" of a three part revisionary history and theory of photography. The first volume, \"Miracle of Analogy,\" was published in 2015.\nSilverman has written extensively on a wide range of figures including artists: Jean-Luc Godard, Gerhard Richter, Marcel Proust, Ranier Maria Rilke, Terrence Malick, James Coleman, Jeff Wall, Chantal Akerman, John Dugdale (photographer), and thinkers: Jacques Lacan, Friedrich Nietzsche, Sigmund Freud, Walter Benjamin, Martin Heidegger, Maurice Merleau-Ponty, Lou Andreas-Salom\u00e9.\nSilverman co-wrote \"Speaking About Godard\" with the German artist and filmmaker Harun Farocki.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70520", "revid": "753665", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70520", "title": "A Fisherman of the Inland Sea", "text": "Short story &amp; novellas collection\nA Fisherman of the Inland Sea is a 1994 collection of short stories and novellas by the American author Ursula K. Le Guin. The collection was second in the 1995 Locus Award poll in the collection category.\nContents.\nThe collection comprises eight works: \nDetails.\nThe First Contact with the Gorgonids.\n\"The First Contact with the Gorgonids\" is a running joke within Le Guin's work. The stand-alone story is set in present-day Australia, and depicts an arrogant but stupid American man and his downtrodden wife. This strongly feminist story has the couple make contact with aliens who the husband mistakes for Australian Aboriginals. The resulting farce sees the husband put in his place and for the triumphant wife the spoils of the encounter.\nNewton's Sleep.\nIn a postcataclysmic earth, society is rebuilt on an orbiting space station in the form of a new Utopia ruled by an elect group of scientists who have established reason as the guiding principle. The story tells of the conflict that arises when a resurgent religion begins.\nThe Ascent of the North Face.\nThis story is mock-heroic in character. Told in the style of Victorian Boys Own Ripping Yarns, the joke is in the fact the north face is not of some Himalayan mountain being scaled by westerners but Indian climbers and that the north face refers to the north face of a suburban house in Portland, Oregon near where Le Guin lived.\nThe Shobies' Story.\n\"The Shobies' Story\" is set in Le Guin's Hainish universe, and follows the protagonists of the first successful jump to a planet using Churten theory. They discover that their experience and memories of the planet are radically different. This matters because Churten theory is more philosophical than scientific. The dissonance between their perceptions of the planets creates massive existential rifts in the fabric of space and time. The story tells of the protagonist attempt to reconcile their perceptions of what happened and mend the rift.\nDancing to Ganam.\n\"Dancing to Ganam\" is also set in the Hainish universe, and forms a sequel to \"The Shobies' Story\".\nTwo humans (Shan and Tai) from a far future Earth, have arrived on the fictional planet Hain, heroes due to their being crew members of the first faster-than-light space flight, depicted in \"The Shobies' Story\". When they arrive, another Earth human called Dalzul has also arrived. Dalzul is charismatic and diplomatic and known for having saved thousands of children. He has just used the same faster than light technology to travel to a new planet but without the \"distortions\" of reality found in \"The Shobies Story\". When he arrived he found a planet called Ganam, an isolated world inhabited by pre-industrial humans.\nDalzul suggests that they join him on a return flight, Tai declines and Shan accepts. He suggests that during the flight they sing together to synchronize their perceptions of the flight, and this strategy seems to be successful. When they arrive they are honored and Dalzul is treated as a god-king. The longer they stay on the planet however, the more the crew find dissonances in reality causing confusion and uncertainty.\nDalzul is treated as a god and is taken to a ceremony he perceives to be a coronation but at which he is a sacrifice. It turns out that although their flight was successfully without distortions in the perception that plagued the Shobies' flight, Dalzul's ego had shaped his perception of Ganam culture away from reality.\nAnother Story or A Fisherman of the Inland Sea.\n\"Another Story or A Fisherman of the Inland Sea\" was written by Le Guin in 1994, and is also set in the Hainish universe. The title is a reference to the legend of Urashima Tar\u014d, which is described in the story.\nThe plot follows a scientist from the fictional planet O who turns his back on the quiet rural life of his planet to join in the development of a faster than light technology called Churten Theory. To do this he leaves for another planet called Hain, a journey that will take a long time and as a result he must say goodbye to everyone and everything he has ever known.\nWhen he arrives there is a message waiting for him which he does not read because it is too garbled. Gripped with a great remorse for what he has left he pours himself into his work and manages to make a massive leap in the understanding of Churten theory, but which unintentionally transports him back to the time and place that he left his home. There he re-establishes his life and relationships that he left behind and lives out his life in his home world. Many years in the future, on the day he would arrive in Hain he sends a message to himself, the garbled message he himself received so many years ago. That message is the story of his life and is itself the content of the story we are reading.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70521", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70521", "title": "Stanis\u0142awa Walasiewicz", "text": "Polish-American athlete (1911\u20131980)\nStanis\u0142awa Walasiewicz (3 April 1911 \u2013 4 December 1980), also known as Stefania Walasiewicz, and Stella Walsh, was a Polish-American track and field athlete, who became a women's Olympic champion in the 100 metres. Born in Poland and raised in the United States, she became an American citizen in 1947.\nBackground.\nWalasiewicz was born on 3 April 1911 in Wierzchownia (now Brodnica County), co-called Congress Poland. Her family emigrated to the United States when she was three months old. Her parents, Julian and Weronika Walasiewicz (in USA Veronica), settled in Cleveland, Ohio, where her father found a job as a steel mill worker. Her family called her \"Stasia\", a common Polish diminutive of her Christian name, which later led to the nickname Stella, as she was known in the United States of America.\nAthletic career.\nWalasiewicz started her athletic career at South High School, located in the historic Slavic Village neighborhood on the east side of Cleveland, Ohio. In 1927, she qualified for a place on the American Olympic team started by the \"Cleveland Press\". However, Walasiewicz was not an American citizen and could not obtain citizenship under the age of 21, so she could not compete. The success of Halina Konopacka, a Polish athlete who won gold in the discus throw at the 1928 Summer Olympics, inspired Walasiewicz to join the local branch of the Sok\u00f3\u0142 movement, a Polish sports and patriotic organization active among the Polish diaspora. During the Pan-Slavic meeting of the Sok\u00f3\u0142 movement in Pozna\u0144, she scored her first major international victories; she won five gold medals: in the 60 metre, 100 metre, 200 metre and 400 metre races, as well as the long jump. She was asked to stay in Poland and join the Polish national athletic team, and she continued to run in American challenges and games.\nWalasiewicz continued to compete as an amateur while working as a clerk in Cleveland. In the period leading up to the 1932 Summer Olympics, she won American national championships in the 100-yard dash (1930), 220 yard dash (1930\u201331), and long jump (1930). For her part in interstate athletic championships, the city of Cleveland awarded her a car. She was offered American citizenship; however, just two days before taking her oath of citizenship, she changed her mind and instead adopted Polish citizenship, offered to her by the Polish consulate in New York City. In 1930, she was chosen the most popular Polish athlete by readers of the (\"Sports Review\") daily.\nIn the 1932 Summer Olympics, Walasiewicz represented Poland. In the 100\u00a0m dash, Walasiewicz equaled then world record of 11.9 seconds and won the gold medal. On the same day, she finished 6th out of 9 in the discus throw event. Upon her return to Poland, she almost instantly became a well-known personality. She was welcomed by crowds in the port of Gdynia, and a few days later, she was awarded the Golden Cross of Merit for her achievements. She was again chosen the most popular Polish person in sports, and held that title for three years.\nIn Spring 1933, Walasiewicz appeared at the Championships of Warsaw, where she won nine gold medals in track and field, including 80 metres hurdling, 4 \u00d7 200 relay, and long jump. On 17 September 1933, in Pozna\u0144, she beat two world records in one day: 7.4 seconds for the 60\u00a0m and 11.8 seconds for the 100\u00a0m. Her Olympic success also won her a scholarship at the Warsaw Institute of Physical Education, where she met some of the most notable Polish athletes of the time, including Jadwiga Wajs, Felicja Schabi\u0144ska, Maria Kwa\u015bniewska, and Janusz Kusoci\u0144ski.\nIn the 1936 Olympics in Berlin, Walasiewicz attempted to defend her Olympic title for the 100 m dash, but Helen Stephens of the U.S. beat her by 0.02 seconds; Walasiewicz won the silver medal. Stephens was accused by a Polish newspaper reporter of being male and was given a genital inspection which confirmed her gender as female, ironic in view of Walasiewicz's ambiguous gender status.\nAfter the Olympic Games, Walasiewicz moved to the U.S. and resumed her amateur career. During and after World War II, she won American national championships in the 100 metres (1943, 1944 and 1948), the 200 metres (1939\u201340 and 1942\u20131948), the discus throw (1941\u20131942), and the long jump (1938\u20131946, 1948 and 1951).\nIn 1947, she accepted American citizenship, and she later married aviation draftsman Harry Olson in 1956. Although the marriage did not last long, she continued to use the name Stella Walsh Olson for the rest of her life. She won her last U.S. title in 1951 at the age of 40. She was inducted into the U.S. Track and Field Hall of Fame in 1975.\nPost-athletic career.\nAfter her retirement, she continued to be active in a variety of Polish sport associations in the U.S., where she organized championships and helped young athletes. She also funded a variety of awards for Polish sports people living in America. In 1974, Stella Walsh was inducted into the National Polish-American Sports Hall of Fame. Stella Walsh was a contestant on the 16 June 1954 episode of the radio quiz program \"You Bet Your Life\", hosted by Groucho Marx.\nDeath.\nWalsh was killed during an armed robbery in a parking lot in Cleveland, on December 4, 1980. She was buying ribbons for a welcoming ceremony for visiting Polish basketball players when the assault occurred.\nIntersex status.\nAn autopsy after Walsh's death showed that she was intersex, although her precise condition was not made clear. According to reports, she had a male reproductive system including a non-functioning underdeveloped penis, an abnormal urethra, small testes, and a small prostate. She lacked female sex organs, such as a vagina, uterus, or ovaries. Walsh also reportedly had genetic mosaicism. Most of her cells contained XY chromosomes, but some contained a single X0 chromosome. Cuyahoga County coroner Samuel Gerber said that Walasiewicz was \"socially, culturally and legally\" a woman, but that her sex would have been ambiguous at birth.\nThe neighborhood she grew up in was to an extent aware of her condition and saw no reason to bring it to outsiders attention. A childhood friend recalled her once saying aloud she wondered why God had done this to her.\nLegacy.\nIn Cleveland, on Broadway Avenue, there is a city-owned recreational center named after Stella Walsh. It is attached to Cleveland South High School. She is buried in Calvary Cemetery in Cleveland, Ohio.\nWalasiewicz was discussed on BBC Radio 4's \"The Long View\" in April 2019 when the contentious issue was the \"Gender in women's sport\". Stella was also the subject of the documentary \"Stella Walsh\" directed by Rob Lucas of \"American Stories\" fame. The documentary focused on her gender ambiguity and untimely death.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70522", "revid": "33092116", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70522", "title": "Pitmatic", "text": "Dialects spoken in former mining areas of Northumberland and Durham\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nPitmatic\u00a0\u2013 originally 'pitmatical'\u00a0\u2013 is a group of traditional Northern English dialects spoken in rural areas of the Great Northern Coalfield in England.\nOne lexical feature distinguishing Pitmatic from other Northumbrian dialects, such as Geordie and Mackem, is its use of the mining jargon prevalent in local collieries. For example, in Tyneside and Northumberland, \"Cuddy\" is a nickname for St. Cuthbert, while in Alnwick Pitmatic, a \"cuddy\" is a pit pony. According to the British Library's lead curator of spoken English, writing in 2019, \"Locals insist there are significant differences between Geordie and several other local dialects, such as Pitmatic and Mackem. Pitmatic is the dialect of the former mining areas in County Durham and around Ashington to the north of Newcastle upon Tyne, while Mackem is used locally to refer to the dialect of the city of Sunderland and the surrounding urban area of Wearside\".\nTraditionally, the dialect used the Northumbrian burr, wherein /r/ is realised as . This is now very rare. As a result of the burr, the traditional dialect undergoes the Nurse-north merger in words like \"forst\" 'first' and \"bord\" 'bird', which came about as a result of burr modification.\nDialectology.\nWhile Pitmatic was spoken by miners throughout the Great Northern Coalfield\u00a0\u2014\u00a0from Ashington in Northumberland to Fishburn in County Durham\u00a0\u2014\u00a0sources describe its particular use in the Durham collieries. Pitmatic is distinct from the traditional agricultural speech of the Wear and Tees valleys in County Durham, which is classified as part of the 'West Northern' dialect group. \nAccording to Bill Griffiths, the emergence of Pitmatic in County Durham is closely tied to the historical spread of heavy industry southward from the lower Tyne, beginning in the northern and western parts of County Durham and subsequently extending into the eastern districts. As industrialisation progressed, the speech of Tyneside, associated with the 'North Northern' dialect group, functioned as a superstrate, particularly among mobile industrial workers and in urbanised mining communities. This Tyneside superstrate came into contact with the older County Durham substrate, resulting in a series of contact varieties.\nDictionaries and compilations.\nAlthough he did not use the term \"Pitmatic\", Alexander J. Ellis's seminal survey of English dialects in the late nineteenth century included the language of \"Pitmen\", focusing on the region \"between rivers Tyne and Wansbeck\" and drawing on informants from Humshaugh, Earsdon, and Backworth. Dialect words in Northumberland and Tyneside, including many specific to the coal-mining industry, were collected by Oliver Heslop and published in two volumes in 1892 and 1894 respectively.\nA dictionary of East Durham Pitmatic spoken in Hetton-le-Hole, compiled by Rev. Francis M. T. Palgrave, was published in 1896 and reprinted in 1997. The heritage society of nearby Houghton-le-Spring produced a list of words and phrases in 2017 collected over the preceding five years. Harold Orton compiled a corpus (dataset) of dialect forms for 35 locations in Northumberland and northern Durham, known as the \"Orton Corpus\".\n\"Pit Talk in County Durham\", an illustrated, 90-page pamphlet by Dave Douglass, a local miner, was published in 1973. In 2007, Bill Griffiths produced a dictionary of Pitmatic where each entry includes information on a word's etymology; it was well reviewed. In an earlier work, Griffiths cited a newspaper of 1873 for the first recorded mention of the term \"pitmatical\".\nVocabulary.\nPitmatic words and expressions include:\nCulture.\nIn 2000, Melvyn Bragg presented a programme about Pitmatic on BBC Radio 4 as part of a series on English regional dialects.\nPitmatic is heard in parts of the of Ken Loach's 1975 series \"Days of Hope\", which was filmed around Esh Winning in Durham; the cast included local actor Alun Armstrong.\nThe poet, singer-songwriter and entertainer Tommy Armstrong worked mainly in Pitmatic and Geordie. British comedian Bobby Thompson, popular across North East England, was famous for his Pitmatic accent.\nRelated forms of English.\nOther Northern English dialects include:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70523", "revid": "50014652", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70523", "title": "Carolina Hurricanes", "text": "National Hockey League team in North Carolina, United States\nThe Carolina Hurricanes (colloquially known as the Canes) are a professional ice hockey team based in Raleigh, North Carolina. The Hurricanes compete in the National Hockey League (NHL) as a member of the Metropolitan Division in the Eastern Conference. The team plays its home games at the Lenovo Center.\nThe franchise was formed in 1971 as the New England Whalers of the World Hockey Association (WHA). The Whalers saw success immediately, winning the Eastern Division in the WHA's first three seasons and becoming the inaugural Avco World Trophy Champions to cap off the 1972\u201373 season. The Whalers again competed for the World Trophy in 1978, this time falling short to the Winnipeg Jets in a rematch of the 1973 Avco Cup Final. The franchise joined the NHL in 1979 as part of the NHL\u2013WHA merger, renaming themselves the Hartford Whalers. The team relocated to North Carolina in 1997, rebranding themselves as the Hurricanes. Carolina advanced to the Stanley Cup Final for the first time in 2002, where they lost to the Detroit Red Wings. The Hurricanes won the 2006 Stanley Cup over the Edmonton Oilers, giving the state of North Carolina its first major professional sports championship and its only major championship as of 2024-25.\nHistory.\nNew England/Hartford Whalers (1971\u20131997).\nThe New England Whalers were established in November 1971 when the World Hockey Association (WHA) awarded a franchise to begin play in Boston, Massachusetts. For the first two years of their existence, the club played their home games at the Boston Arena and Boston Garden. With the increasing difficulty of scheduling games at Boston Garden (owned by the NHL rival Boston Bruins), the owners decided to move the team to Hartford, Connecticut, beginning with the 1974\u201375 season. While waiting for the completion of a new arena in Hartford, the Whalers played the first part of the season at The Big E Coliseum in West Springfield, Massachusetts. On January 11, 1975, the team played its first game in front of a sellout crowd at the Hartford Civic Center Coliseum, and would maintain its home there through 1997.\nAs one of the most stable WHA teams, the Whalers, along with the Edmonton Oilers, Quebec Nordiques and Winnipeg Jets, were admitted to the NHL when the rival leagues merged in 1979. However, under pressure from the extant NHL team in the New England area, the Boston Bruins, the Whalers were compelled to rename the team the Hartford Whalers. The Whalers were never as successful in the NHL as they had been in the WHA, recording only three winning seasons. They peaked in the mid-to-late 1980s, winning their only playoff series in 1986 over the Nordiques before bowing out in the second round to the Montreal Canadiens, taking the Canadiens to overtime of game seven in the process. The next year, the club secured the regular season Adams Division title, only to fall to the Nordiques in six games in the first round of the playoffs. In 1992, the Whalers made the playoffs for the final time, but were bounced in the first round in seven games by the Canadiens. Two years later, the team hired Jim Rutherford as general manager, a position that he would hold within the franchise for twenty years.\nFor years, the organization maintained many Whalers connections among its off-ice personnel; in addition to many members of executive management and the coaching staff, broadcasters Chuck Kaiton, John Forslund and Tripp Tracy (at the time a minor-league player), and equipment managers Wally Tatomir, Skip Cunningham and Bob Gorman all made the move to North Carolina with the team. Finally, the old goal horn from the Hartford Civic Center remains in use at Lenovo Center. Kaiton and Forslund would both eventually leave the franchise; Kaiton in 2018 and Forslund in 2021.\nMove to North Carolina (1997\u20132001).\nThe Whalers were plagued for most of their existence by limited marketability. Hartford was the smallest American market in the league and was located on the traditional dividing line between the home territories for New York City and Boston teams. It did not help matters that the Hartford Civic Center was one of the smallest arenas in the league, seating under 16,000 spectators for hockey. The Whalers' off-ice problems were magnified when the start of the 1990s triggered a spike in player salaries.\nDespite assurances made when he purchased the team in 1994 that the Whalers would remain in Hartford at least through 1998, in March 1997, owner Peter Karmanos announced that the team would move elsewhere after the 1996\u201397 season because of the team's inability to negotiate a satisfactory construction and lease package for a new arena in Hartford. On May 6, 1997, Karmanos announced that the Whalers would move to the Research Triangle area of North Carolina and the new Entertainment and Sports Arena (ESA) in Raleigh. Due to the relatively short time frame for the move, Karmanos himself thought of and decided upon the new name for the club, the Carolina Hurricanes, rather than holding a contest as is sometimes done. Later that summer, the team dropped the Whalers' colors of blue, green and silver for a new black-and-red scheme, matching the colors of the North Carolina State University Wolfpack, with whose men's basketball team they would share the arena in Raleigh. The Hurricanes inherited the Whalers' place in the Northeast Division.\nUnfortunately for the team, the ESA would not be complete for two more years. The only arena in the Triangle area with an ice plant was 45-year-old Dorton Arena; at 5,100 seats, it was too small even for temporary use. The Hurricanes chose to play home games in Greensboro, 90 minutes west of Raleigh, for their first two seasons after the move. However, the team would be based in Raleigh and practice in nearby Hillsborough\u2014effectively saddling the Hurricanes with 82 road games for the next two years. This choice was disastrous for the franchise's attendance and reputation. With a capacity of over 21,000 people for ice hockey, the Greensboro Coliseum was the highest-capacity arena in the NHL. However, Triangle-area fans balked at making the 80-mile drive down I-40 to Greensboro. Likewise, fans from the Piedmont Triad mostly refused to support a lame-duck team that had displaced the popular Greensboro/Carolina Monarchs minor-league franchise. As a result, even with the first game hosting more than 18,000 fans, most games in Greensboro attracted crowds of 5,000 or fewer. The crowds looked even smaller than that in the cavernous environment. Furthermore, only 29 out of 82 games were televised (over-the-air and cable combined), and radio play-by-play coverage on WPTF was often preempted by Wolfpack basketball (for whose broadcasts WPTF was the flagship station), leaving these games totally unavailable to those who did not have a ticket. With by far the smallest season-ticket base in the NHL and attendance figures routinely well below the league average, \"Sports Illustrated\" ran a story titled \"Natural Disaster\", and ESPN anchors mocked the \"Green Acres\" of empty seats; in a 2006 interview, Karmanos admitted that \"as it turns out, [Greensboro] was probably a mistake.\" Under the circumstances, the Hurricanes managed to stay competitive, but still finished last in the Northeast Division with 74 points, nine points out of the playoffs.\nFor 1998\u201399, the Hurricanes curtained off most of the upper deck lowering the Coliseum's listed capacity to about 12,000. Attendance continued to lag. Most games attracted crowds of well under 5,000. Conversely, on the ice the Hurricanes' performance improved led by the return of longtime Whalers' captain Ron Francis, Keith Primeau's 30 goals, and Gary Roberts' 178 penalty minutes. They tallied their first winning season and playoff appearance since 1992. They also won the newly formed Southeast Division by eight points, only their second division title as an NHL team (following the 1987 Adams Division title as the Whalers). Tragedy struck hours after the team's first-round loss to the Bruins, when defenseman Steve Chiasson was thrown from his pickup truck and killed in a single-vehicle drunk-driving crash.\nThe team finally moved to their newly completed arena in Raleigh in 1999. They became the first major sports team to play in Raleigh, and remain the only such team there as of 2025.\nThe aforementioned season was marked by an ultimately franchise-altering mid-season trade which saw Primeau dealt to the Philadelphia Flyers for several players, including future captain Rod Brind'Amour. With the move to the new arena, the Hurricanes introduced the \"Storm Squad\", the first cheerleaders for professional ice hockey in North America. In 2000\u201301, the Hurricanes managed to claim the eighth seed, nosing out the Boston Bruins, and landed a first-round match-up with the defending champions, the New Jersey Devils. The Devils eliminated the Hurricanes in six games. Down 3\u20130 in the series, the Hurricanes extended it to a sixth game, thereby becoming only the 10th team in NHL history to do so. Game 6 in Raleigh featured their best playoff crowd that year, as well as their loudest. Despite the 5\u20131 loss, Carolina was given a standing ovation by their home crowd as the game ended, erasing some of the doubts that the city would not warm up to the team.\nStanley Cup Final and slow starts (2001\u20132006).\nThe Hurricanes made national waves for the first time in the 2002 playoffs. They survived a late charge from the Washington Capitals to win the division, but expectations were low entering the first round against the defending Eastern Conference champion New Jersey Devils. However, Arturs Irbe and Kevin Weekes were solid in goal and the Hurricanes won two games in overtime as they defeated the Devils in six games. Their second-round matchup was against the Montreal Canadiens, who were riding a wave of emotion after their captain Saku Koivu's return from cancer treatment. In the third period of game four in Montreal, down 2\u20131 in the series and 3\u20130 in the game, Carolina would tie the game and later win on Niclas Wallin's overtime goal. The game became known to Hurricanes fans as the \"Miracle at Molson\"; Carolina won the next two games by a combined 13\u20133 margin over a dejected Habs club to take the series.\nIn the conference finals, Carolina met the heavily favored Toronto Maple Leafs. In game 6 in Toronto, the Maple Leafs' Mats Sundin tied the game with 22 seconds remaining to send it to overtime, where Carolina's Martin Gelinas would score to send the franchise to their first Stanley Cup Final appearance. During this series, several Hurricanes fan traditions drew hockey-wide media attention for the first time: fans met the team at the Raleigh-Durham International Airport on the return from every road trip and echoed football-season habits honed for games across the parking lot by hosting massive tailgate parties before each home game, a relative novelty in the cold-weather-centric NHL. Inside the building, the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation's Don Cherry lauded the RBC Center as \"the loudest building in the NHL\", praise that would be echoed in 2006.\nIn the Stanley Cup Final, Carolina would face the Detroit Red Wings, thought to be the prohibitive favorite all year. Though the Hurricanes stunned the Wings in game one when Ron Francis scored in the first minute of overtime, Detroit stormed back to win the next four games. Game three in Raleigh featured a triple-overtime thriller eventually won by Detroit's Igor Larionov, the oldest player to score a last-round goal.\nThe Hurricanes looked poised to pick up where they left off in the 2002\u201303, but never recovered from a 10-loss January and finished dead last in the league with 61 points. After a similarly slow start to the 2003\u201304 season, Paul Maurice, who had been the team's coach since midway through their next-to-last season in Hartford, was fired and replaced with former New York Islanders bench boss Peter Laviolette. Under Laviolette, Weekes remained tough, but the offense was suspect; center Josef Vasicek led the team with a mere 19 goals and 26 assists for 45 points. Many of the new fans attracted to the team (and to hockey itself) during the 2002 playoff run lost interest and attendance declined. One of the few positive results of these losing years was the team's drafting of Eric Staal in 2003.\nStanley Cup champions.\nThe outcome of the 2004\u201305 NHL lockout led to the shrinking of the payroll to $26 million. The Hurricanes turned out to be one of the NHL's biggest surprises, turning in the best season in the franchise's 34-year history (including the years as the Whalers). They finished the regular season with a 52\u201322\u20138 record and 112 points, shattering the previous franchise records of 94 points (in the WHA) set by the 1972\u201373 Whalers and 93 points (in the NHL) set in 1986\u201387. It was the first time ever that the franchise had passed the 50-win and 100-point plateaus. The 112-point figure was good for fourth overall in the league, easily their highest overall finish as an NHL team (tied with the third-overall Dallas Stars in points, but with one fewer win than the Stars) and second in the East (one point behind the Ottawa Senators). The Hurricanes also ran away with their third Southeast Division title, finishing 20 points ahead of the Tampa Bay Lightning. Attendance increased from the 2003\u201304 season, averaging just under 15,600 per game, and the team made a profit for the first time since the move from Hartford.\nIn the playoffs, after losing the first two games of the conference quarterfinals series against the Montreal Canadiens, Laviolette lifted goalkeeper Martin Gerber, who had been struggling to regain his form after playing through a bout of intestinal flu, in favor of rookie Cam Ward. This proved to be a consequential decision, as the Hurricanes went on to win both games in Montreal, tying up the playoff series and turning the momentum around, winning the series on a game six overtime goal by Cory Stillman. Carolina then faced the New Jersey Devils in the conference semifinals, which proved surprisingly one-sided, as the Hurricanes beat the Devils in five games. Stillman struck again, once again scoring the series-winning goal.\nIn the conference finals, the Hurricanes faced the Buffalo Sabres, who had finished just one spot behind the Hurricanes in the overall standings. The contentious series saw both coaches \u2013 Lindy Ruff and Laviolette \u2013 taking public verbal shots at each other's team. In the deciding game seven, the Hurricanes rallied with three goals in the third to win by a score of 4\u20132. Rod Brind'Amour scored the game-winner as the Hurricanes reached the Stanley Cup Final for the second time in team history.\nThe Stanley Cup Final saw the Hurricanes face the Edmonton Oilers. The Hurricanes rallied from a 3\u20130 deficit in game one to win 5\u20134 after Rod Brind'Amour scored with 30 seconds left. In game 2, the Hurricanes shelled the Oilers 5\u20130 to take a two-game lead. The Oilers won game three in Edmonton, 2\u20131, as Ryan Smyth scored the game-winning goal with 2:47 left to play. Carolina rebounded in game four with a 2\u20131 victory, and came home with a chance to win the Cup on home ice. However, game five saw the Oilers come back with a stunning 4\u20133 overtime win on a shorthanded breakaway by Fernando Pisani. In game 6 in Edmonton, Carolina was soundly defeated 4\u20130; the only bright point for the Hurricanes was the return of forward Erik Cole from a broken neck that had sidelined him since March. In game 7, before the then second-largest home crowd in franchise history (18,978), the Hurricanes won 3\u20131, sealing the Hurricanes' first Stanley Cup championship in franchise history. Cam Ward was honored with the Conn Smythe Trophy for being the playoffs' most valuable player, becoming just the fourth rookie to be honored with the award. Several Hurricanes raised the Cup for the first time in their long NHL careers; Rod Brind'Amour and Bret Hedican had both played over 15 years without winning the Cup, while Glen Wesley, the last remaining member of the Hartford Whalers on the Hurricanes' roster, had waited 18 seasons. On the managerial side, general manager Jim Rutherford finally won the Cup in his twelfth year with the franchise since joining the Whalers in 1994.\nThe Hurricanes Stanley Cup championship marked the first professional major league sports title for a team from North Carolina. As well, they were the first NHL team to win the Stanley Cup despite losing at least nine playoff games in that year; the 2011 Boston Bruins, the 2014 Los Angeles Kings, the 2017 Pittsburgh Penguins, and the 2019 St Louis Blues are the only other teams to have achieved this feat.\nPost-championship slump (2006\u20132013).\nThe Hurricanes were unable to follow up their recent success. Losing four players to free agency in the off-season and 222-man games to injury during the 2006\u201307, the team struggled throughout the regular season, and once eliminated in the last game, the Hurricanes finished third in the Southeast and 11th overall in the Eastern Conference. This finish made them the first champions since the 1938\u201339 Chicago Black Hawks to have failed to qualify for the playoffs both the seasons before and after their championship season, and the third champion overall to not defend its title after both the Blackhawks and the 1995-96 New Jersey Devils. \nIn the 2007\u201308, Carolina again missed out as Washington Capitals stormed back to take the division title on the last day of the season, leaving the Hurricanes second in the division and ninth overall in the conference, and making the Hurricanes only the second club in NHL history to miss the playoffs for two seasons running after a Stanley Cup triumph.\nAfter a slow start to the 2008\u201309 season, Cup-winning coach Peter Laviolette was fired in early December and replaced by his own predecessor, Paul Maurice. Teetering on the edge of the playoff picture again, the club, on February 7, acquired utility forward Jussi Jokinen from the Tampa Bay Lightning in exchange for Wade Brookbank, Josef Melichar and Carolina's fourth-round draft pick in 2009, then reacquired winger Erik Cole from the Edmonton Oilers at the March trade deadline and proceeded on a 12\u20133\u20132 run to close out the season. The stretch run included nine straight wins, matching a franchise record from the 2005\u201306 season, and capped off a streak of 12 straight home wins, which set a new franchise mark. The team finished sixth in the Eastern Conference with 97 points, the second-most points in franchise history.\nThe Hurricanes' 2009 playoff run featured two tight series with dramatic finishes. Game 4 of the first-round matchup with the New Jersey Devils saw Stanley Cup playoff history when Jussi Jokinen scored with 0.2 seconds left in regulation to win the game, the latest regulation game-winning goal in NHL history. Then, in game 7, the Devils took a 3\u20132 lead into the final two minutes of the game at the Prudential Center in Newark before the Hurricanes struck. With 1:20 to play, Tim Gleason saved a puck on his knees at the right point, passed it to Joni Pitkanen on the left boards, who then hit game 4 hero Jussi Jokinen at the far post for the tying goal. Just 48 seconds later, Chad LaRose sprang Eric Staal for a solo down-ice rush to give the Hurricanes 4\u20133 game and series win; Staal's goal was the latest regulation game 7-winning goal in playoff history. The game 7 comeback would become known as the \"Shock at the Rock\". In the second-round matchup with the top-seeded Boston Bruins, the Hurricanes ran out to a 3\u20131 lead before the Bruins battled back for two wins. In game 7 in Boston, Scott Walker scored the game and series winner 18:46 into overtime to send Carolina to the conference finals against the Pittsburgh Penguins. The Penguins, though, put a decisive end to the Hurricanes' string, sweeping the series 4\u20130 on the way to their own Stanley Cup championship.\nAs a result of their surprise run, very few changes were made in the off-season. Veterans such as Aaron Ward, Andrew Alberts, and Stephane Yelle were brought in to help drive the team further, but things did not go according to plan. The Hurricanes experienced a 14-game losing streak spanning October and November, and midway through the year, the Hurricanes replaced their only post-lockout captain Rod Brind'Amour with Eric Staal. Despite improved play during the second half of the season, they could not overcome the deficit from early on in the season. The Hurricanes would end up with the seventh overall pick in the 2010 NHL entry draft, eventually selecting Jeff Skinner from the Kitchener Rangers of the Ontario Hockey League (OHL). Brind'Amour retired over the 2010 off-season to take a coaching job with the club.\nThe 2010\u201311 season was widely expected to be a transitional year from the veteran-heavy, high-salary club that opened 2009\u201310 to a younger, cheaper base. The Hurricanes contended for a playoff slot for the entire season aided by Skinner's emergence as an offensive phenomenon who, as the youngest player in the league, would lead all rookies in points. Raleigh hosted the 2011 NHL All-Star Game in January, and Eric Staal captained a team he selected (opposite a team selected by the Detroit Red Wings' Nicklas Lidstrom) that featured Skinner (the youngest All-Star in NHL history), Cam Ward, and (for the SuperSkills competition) defenseman Jamie McBain. The Hurricanes went into the final day of the season able to determine their own fate, but lost 6\u20132 to the Tampa Bay Lightning to finish ninth in the East. Skinner was awarded the Calder Memorial Trophy as rookie of the year, the first player in franchise history to receive that honor.\nIn December 2011, the Carolina Hurricanes fired coach Paul Maurice and hired Kirk Muller. On February 20, 2012, the Carolina Hurricanes signed Tim Gleason to a four-year, $16 million extension and two days later, on February 22, they also signed Tuomo Ruutu to a four-year, $19\u00a0million extension. Two months later the Carolina Hurricanes announced that they had signed Jiri Tlusty to a two-year deal that would pay him $1.5 million for 2012\u201313 and $1.7 million for 2013\u201314 (Gleason and Tlusty would eventually be traded to the Washington Capitals and the Winnipeg Jets over the next few seasons). Despite the signings of Gleason, Ruutu, and Tlusty, the Hurricanes would finish fifth in the Southeast Division and twelfth in the Eastern Conference during the 2011\u201312 season, which forced them to miss the playoffs for a third consecutive season.\nOn May 9, 2012, the 2006 Stanley Cup champions Hurricanes' game 7 victory was recognized as one of the NC Hall of Fame's \"Great Moments\" series. During the 2012 NHL entry draft, the Carolina Hurricanes traded Brandon Sutter, Brian Dumoulin and their 2012 first-round draft pick (Derrick Pouliot) to the Penguins in exchange for Jordan Staal, uniting the player with his older brother, Eric Staal. On March 25, 2013, the Hurricanes signed Alexander Semin to a five-year deal, worth $35 million. However, in the lockout-shortened 2012\u201313 season, the team would finish third in the Southeast Division and 13th in the Eastern Conference, which would make the team miss the playoffs for the fourth consecutive season after a strong start was cut short by an injury to starting goaltender Cam Ward.\nContinued decline and relocation rumors (2013\u20132017).\nBefore the 2013\u201314 season, the Hurricanes were realigned into the new Metropolitan Division. They would finish seventh in the division during the 2013\u201314 season (ahead of only the New York Islanders) and would miss the playoffs for the fifth consecutive season, which prompted management to fire head coach Kirk Muller. In addition, longtime general manager Jim Rutherford was moved to an advisory role after the season with longtime Whalers/Hurricanes star Ron Francis announced as his replacement on April 28, 2014.\nOn June 19, 2014, Bill Peters was named head coach, becoming the fifth head coach in franchise history. Peters' teams would not break the Hurricanes' playoff drought. During the 2014\u201315 season, the team finished last in the Metropolitan Division and would miss the playoffs for the sixth consecutive season. After team captain Eric Staal was traded to the New York Rangers at the trade deadline, the team finished sixth in the division during the 2015\u201316 season. Things did not improve in the 2016\u201317 season. The Hurricanes finished seventh in the division, missing the playoffs for the eighth consecutive season.\nThe Hurricanes also experienced uncertainty about their future in Raleigh during this time. Karmanos was looking to sell the team, something he'd been trying to do for years. Attendance at PNC Arena had declined at a consistent rate since 2009. It became so bad the team finished second-to-last in average league attendance in 2014 and 2015. Rumors started circulating in 2015 that the Hurricanes were possible contenders to move to either Las Vegas or Quebec City. The Quebec rumors in particular were widely reported, with the Hurricanes and the NHL both refuting the claims. Las Vegas would eventually gain an expansion team in the Vegas Golden Knights.\nTom Dundon and the \"Bunch of Jerks\" era (2017\u2013present).\nBefore the 2017\u201318 season, the Hurricanes unveiled new uniforms. On July 13, 2017, it was reported that Chuck Greenberg had sent Karmanos a letter of intent to buy the team for $500 million. Greenberg would ultimately back out of a deal. On December 7, 2017, it was announced that Thomas Dundon signed an agreement to purchase the Hurricanes, which ensured that the team would not be relocated. The deal was finalized on January 11, 2018, with Dundon becoming majority owner and having a 61 percent stake in the team, while Karmanos retained a minority interest. Dundon wasted little time in overhauling the Hurricanes' front office. On March 8, 2018, the team announced that general manager Ron Francis had been moved to the role of president of hockey operations. However, Sportsnet reporter Elliotte Friedman reported that the \"promotion\" was likely in name only, noting that there were rumblings Francis and Dundon did not see \"eye-to-eye\". Subsequently, coach Bill Peters resigned from his position on April 20, 2018, to pursue a similar opportunity with the Calgary Flames (he ultimately replaced Glen Gulutzan as the Flames' head coach three days later), and the Hurricanes officially fired Francis from the organization altogether on April 30, 2018, leaving vacancies in both the head coach and general manager positions.\nEarly in the Hurricanes' search for a replacement general manager, it was reported that Dundon's salary offerings for the position could be prohibitive in attracting quality candidates. Sportsnet's Nick Kypreos reported that the Hurricanes were offering \"in the ballpark of $400,000 a year\", a fraction of the salary figures of many other teams' coaches, let alone those of their general managers, who serve in a higher-ranking position. Leading up to Kypreos' report, candidates such as Nashville Predators assistant general manager Paul Fenton, New Jersey Devils assistant general manager Tom Fitzgerald, and Los Angeles Kings assistant general manager Mike Futa had all reportedly passed on the position.\nUltimately, on May 8, 2018, the Hurricanes announced the hiring of former Atlanta Thrashers general manager Don Waddell as team president and general manager. Waddell had previously been serving as the team's interim general manager since the promotion of Francis. At the same time, it was announced that former team captain Rod Brind'Amour had been named head coach, after serving with the team as an assistant coach since 2011. On April 4, 2019, the Hurricanes won 3\u20131 over the New Jersey Devils, clinching a playoff spot for the first time since 2009 and only the second time since their Cup win. During their stretch run, the Hurricanes gained notice for their on-ice victory celebrations, which they called \"Storm Surges\". This led Don Cherry of \"Hockey Night in Canada\" to call the Hurricanes a \"bunch of jerks\". The Hurricanes adopted \"Bunch of Jerks\" as a battle cry, even going as far as projecting it on the ice at PNC Arena before and after games. During the 2019 Stanley Cup playoffs, on April 24, the Hurricanes defeated the defending 2018 Stanley Cup champions, the Washington Capitals, 4\u20133 in double overtime in game seven, winning their first playoff series since 2009. The team would then go on to defeat the New York Islanders in four straight games in the second round, recording the first best-of-seven playoff series sweep in franchise history, and advancing to the conference finals for the first time since 2009. It was also the first time since 1993 that an opposing team (the Islanders), that swept their opponent in the first round, the Pittsburgh Penguins, would then go on to lose four straight and drop the series. This trend continued into the third round against the Hurricanes' favor as they themselves were swept by the Boston Bruins, thus losing the conference finals.\nOn February 22, 2020, on the 40th anniversary of the Miracle on Ice, Hurricanes emergency goaltender David Ayres became the first emergency goaltender in NHL history to win a game, a 6\u20133 win against the Toronto Maple Leafs, the team whose minor league affiliate he works for as a Zamboni driver and maintenance man. The season would come to an abrupt end on March 11 due to the COVID-19 pandemic. On August 3, 2020, Andrei Svechnikov became the first Hurricanes/Whalers player to score a hat trick in the postseason in a 4\u20131 win over the New York Rangers. By beating the Rangers, the Hurricanes made the playoffs for a second straight season. However, they lost to the Bruins in five games. The loss also marked the first time since the 2001 playoffs that the Hurricanes lost in the first round.\nThe 2020\u201321 season concluded with the Hurricanes winning the Central Division, their first division championship since winning the Southeast Division in 2006. It was also the first time since moving to Raleigh that they had qualified for the postseason three years in a row and the first time in the history of the franchise that a head coach had taken the team to the playoffs in three consecutive years. They defeated the Nashville Predators in the first round in six games but lost to the eventual champion Tampa Bay Lightning in the second round in five games. Defenseman Jaccob Slavin won the Lady Byng Memorial Trophy, notably only having two penalty minutes (PIM) for the entire season. Defenseman Dougie Hamilton was named to the NHL All-Star second team, and goaltender Alex Nedeljkovic was named to the NHL All-Rookie team and placed third in the Calder Memorial Trophy voting, while head coach Brind'Amour was awarded the Jack Adams Award, being the first in Hartford/Carolina history to receive it. On June 30, 2021, it was announced that Tom Dundon had purchased all remaining minority shares in the team.\nThe 2021 off-season saw the Hurricanes overhaul the roster, resulting in many players departing. Warren Foegele was traded to Edmonton for Ethan Bear, Ian Cole and Brendan Smith was signed to complement the depth on defense. The team also overhauled their goaltending, trading away Alex Nedeljkovic for a pick and signing Frederik Andersen and Antti Raanta as the new goalie tandem. In perhaps their most talked-about moves, the Hurricanes signed Tony DeAngelo and signed Jesperi Kotkaniemi to an offer sheet. The 2021\u201322 season concluded with the Hurricanes winning the Metropolitan Division for the first time in franchise history. This was the first time the Hurricanes had ever won division titles in back-to-back years since relocation. The Hurricanes finished the regular season with 54 wins, the most in franchise history. Andersen and Sebastian Aho each represented the team at the 2022 NHL All-Star Game. In the playoffs, the top-seeded Hurricanes defeated the Boston Bruins in the first round, before falling to the New York Rangers in seven games. \nIn the following season, the Hurricanes won their division. In the 2023 playoffs, they defeated the New York Islanders in six games in the first round, then defeated the New Jersey Devils in five games in the second round, but were swept by the Florida Panthers in the conference finals. \nIn the 2023\u201324 season, the Hurricanes finished second in the division. In the 2024 playoffs, they defeated the Islanders in the first round again, this time in five games, but then got eliminated by the Rangers in six games in the second round despite staving off elimination in the fourth and fifth games.\nLogos and uniforms.\nThe Hurricanes' primary logo has always been a stylized hurricane with a storm warning flag on a hockey stick as the secondary logo. A stylized black triangle sat behind the flag, referencing the Triangle region. After the team's first season in 1997, the team altered the color scheme to a slightly darker shade of red and kept the other colors.\nThe Carolina Hurricanes currently wear black uniforms at home and white uniforms on the road. While black is one of the team's core colors, until 2022, the Hurricanes kept its usage at a minimum, opting for red helmets, red shirts, and red pants while using black exclusively as a trim color along with silver. Nevertheless, the Hurricanes have worn black alternate uniforms for select games since 2007.\nOriginal uniforms.\nThe initial Hurricanes uniforms featured the primary logo in front with the secondary logo on the shoulders. One enduring feature of this uniform was the red and black storm warning flags that dot the tail along with silver, red, black and white stripes. In 2000, black trim was added on the player's name, and upon moving to Reebok's Edge template in 2007, piping was added on the shoulder yoke.\nIn 2008, the Hurricanes unveiled their first black alternate uniform, featuring the flag logo in front and the primary logo (recolored to dark grey) on the shoulders. As with the primary uniforms, warning flag patterns dot the tail, albeit recolored to silver and black. \"V\" stripes of red and silver accent the sleeves and socks.\nNew looks.\nIn 2013, the Hurricanes replaced their primary uniforms with a new set. The biggest changes for these uniforms included the omission of black and silver. On the red uniform, black was relegated exclusively to the neck piping, letter trim and logo, while on the white uniform, it was featured more prominently on the numbers and striping. Silver was almost completely removed from both the red and white uniforms except for the logo outline. In addition, a red nameplate with white letters and black trim was placed near the red shoulder yoke of the white uniforms. Both sets removed the flag logo and warning flag patterns while letters were updated to Univers Condensed font. The front logo also reduced in size compared to the prior set. Despite these changes, the Hurricanes continued to wear the prior black alternate uniform with this new set.\nUpon moving to Adidas' AdiZero template in 2017, the Hurricanes made little changes to their white uniform. However, their new red uniform brought back a few elements from the original set, including black striping and the warning flag pattern (now recolored with a dark red shade) on the tail.\nIn 2018, the Hurricanes unveiled a new black alternate uniform, featuring an updated flag logo corrected to a hurricane warning flag. This flag logo also became the new additional logo. On the dark grey shoulder yoke, the primary logo was placed on the right while the Flag of North Carolina was added to the left. Both logos were recolored in black and grey. The logo also features the state of North Carolina in the negative space between the flags. This alternate has since become the Hurricanes' primary home uniform during the playoffs.\nIn 2019, a new white uniform was released, replacing the one worn since 2013. This new uniform featured the \"CANES\" nickname written diagonally in front with the flag logo returning on the shoulders. The warning flag patterns and red letters with black trim also returned from the original set. The new uniform came at the behest of owner Tom Dundon, who was not a fan of the previous white uniform.\nThe Hurricanes have not worn variants of their uniforms often. On April 5, 2022, the Hurricanes wore their alternate black pants with the white road uniforms for the first time in a game against the Buffalo Sabres. Two nights later, also against the Sabres, the Hurricanes paired their alternate black helmets and pants with the primary red home uniform. On December 23, 2022, against the Pittsburgh Penguins, the Hurricanes began wearing red helmets with the white road uniforms; by 2023, the white road helmets were only worn sporadically, mainly in road games at the Calgary Flames and Detroit Red Wings who primarily wear red helmets at home.\nIn August 2022, the Hurricanes officially promoted their black uniform to their full time home uniform. They also brought back the original 1997\u20132007 red uniform as an alternate in commemoration of the 25th anniversary of the franchise in Carolina, wearing it for one season before replacing it with the modern red uniform they last wore in the 2021\u201322 season. Later that year, the Hurricanes unveiled their second \"Reverse Retro\" uniform, this time using a red version of the \"CANES\" diagonal wordmark uniform.\nFor the Hurricanes' appearances at the 2023 Stadium Series, they wore black uniforms with red accents, but without any white elements. The uniform features the primary logo in front and enlarged numbers.\nIn 2025, the Hurricanes updated their road white uniform, replacing the \"CANES\" diagonal wordmark with a recolored version of the Hurricanes logo minus the white elements. Updated fonts taken from the team's wordmark logo was used, along with a new Stormy patch on the right shoulder, and red and black stripes. The design was heavily influenced by the 2023 Stadium Series uniform.\nWhalers heritage uniform.\nIn 2018, the Hurricanes began wearing green \"Heritage\" uniforms from the team's Hartford years. In its first season, the throwbacks were used twice, both against the Boston Bruins; for the 2019\u201320 season, the Hurricanes wore them once at home against the Los Angeles Kings, and in the 2021\u201322 season, they wore them once against the New Jersey Devils. In 2022\u201323, the Hurricanes wore the Whalers \"Heritage\" uniform against the Bruins. During home games with the Whalers uniforms, the Brass Bonanza theme would be played after the horn.\nFor the 2020\u201321 season, the Hurricanes would wear a \"Reverse Retro\" uniform, using the template of the 1980s Whalers uniforms but with a grey base - grey being the only color used by both teams - as a nod to the 1992\u20131997 uniforms.\nIn the 2023\u201324 season, the Hurricanes resurrected the white version of the Whalers uniform, wearing them against the Devils. They also wore Cooperalls during warmups as a tribute. The white Whalers uniform returned the following season for one game against the Buffalo Sabres. Then in the 2025\u201326 season, the Hurricanes wore these uniforms for three games: once at home against the Utah Mammoth, and two games of a home-and-away series against the Colorado Avalanche, who wore their Quebec Nordiques baby blue uniforms in homage to both franchises' WHA and Adams Division history.\nSeason-by-season record.\n\"This is a list of the last five seasons completed by the Hurricanes. For the full season-by-season history, see List of Carolina Hurricanes seasons\"\n\"Note: GP = Games played, W = Wins, L = Losses, T = Ties, OTL = Overtime Losses, Pts = Points, GF = Goals for, GA = Goals against\"\nPlayers and personnel.\nCurrent roster.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Navbar-header/styles.css\"/&gt;\nRetired numbers.\nThe Carolina Hurricanes have retired four numbers: 2, 10, 12, and 17. In addition, Wayne Gretzky's No. 99 was retired for all NHL teams at the 2000 NHL All-Star Game.\nThe Hurricanes also honor three numbers within the organization, but do not display their banners publicly:\nWhen the Whalers moved to North Carolina to begin the 1997\u201398 NHL season, they returned the previously retired #2 for Rick Ley (D, 1972\u20131981) and #19 for John McKenzie (RW, 1977\u20131979) to circulation, while retaining Gordie Howe's #9 without public display. Glen Wesley (who wore No. 20 in Hartford) was the only Hurricane to wear #2 prior to its re-retirement; #19 has been issued to several players since the move.\nTeam captains.\n\"Note: This list of team captains does not include captains from the Hartford Whalers (NHL) and New England Whalers (WHA).\"\nHall of Famers.\nSix members of the Hockey Hall of Fame played for the team before the move to North Carolina: Gordie Howe, Mark Howe, Dave Keon, Bobby Hull, Brendan Shanahan, and Chris Pronger. In addition, longtime franchise radio play-by-play announcer Chuck Kaiton received the Foster Hewitt Memorial Award in 2004, an honor granted by the Hall of Fame.\nBroadcasters.\nThe regional broadcasting rights for the Carolina Hurricanes is presently held by FanDuel Sports Network South (formerly Bally Sports South). Color commentary for Bally Sports' broadcast is performed by Tripp Tracy or former player Shane Willis, while play-by-play is provided by Mike Maniscalco.\nChuck Kaiton was the team's radio play-by-play announcer from 1979 to 2018, dating to the team's days in Hartford. On the television side, John Forslund was the play-by-play voice of the franchise starting in 1995, but left prior to the 2020 Stanley Cup playoffs and has since moved to NBC and later with TNT and the Seattle Kraken. Since the 2018\u201319 season, the Hurricanes have simulcasted audio from the television broadcasts to a network of four stations fronted by WCMC-FM in Raleigh. Hurricanes games can also be heard on WWNB in New Bern, WECU in Greenville, and WZGV in Charlotte.\nFirst-round draft picks.\n\"Note: This list does not include selections of the Hartford Whalers.\"\nNHL awards and trophies.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-float/styles.css\" /&gt;\nStanley Cup\nPrince of Wales Trophy\nConn Smythe Trophy\nFrank J. Selke Trophy\nKing Clancy Memorial Trophy\nLady Byng Memorial Trophy\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-float/styles.css\" /&gt;\nLester Patrick Trophy\nCalder Memorial Trophy\nJack Adams Award\nWilliam M. Jennings Trophy\nFranchise records.\nScoring leaders.\nThese are the top-ten point-scorers in franchise (Hartford and Carolina) history. Figures are updated after each completed NHL regular season.\n\"Note: Pos = Position; GP = Games played; G = Goals; A = Assists; Pts = Points; P/G = Points per game\"\nIndividual and team records.\n\"Note: these records include those from the Hartford Whalers.\"\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nrole=\"presentation\" class=\"wikitable succession-box noprint\" style=\"margin:0.5em auto; font-size:small;clear:both;\""}
{"id": "70524", "revid": "18305070", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70524", "title": "Stella Walsh", "text": ""}
{"id": "70525", "revid": "39457116", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70525", "title": "Ulster Unionist Party", "text": "Political party in Northern Ireland\nThe Ulster Unionist Party (UUP) is a unionist political party in Northern Ireland. The UUP is the third oldest political party in the United Kingdom, and the oldest political party on the island of Ireland. The party was founded as the Ulster Unionist Council in 1905, emerging from the Irish Unionist Alliance in Ulster. Under Sir Edward Carson, it led unionist opposition to the Irish Home Rule movement. Following the partition of Ireland, it was the governing party of Northern Ireland between 1921 and 1972. It was supported by most unionist voters throughout the conflict known as the Troubles, during which time it was often referred to as the Official Unionist Party (OUP).\nUnder David Trimble, the party helped negotiate the Good Friday Agreement of 1998, which ended the conflict. Trimble served as the first First Minister of Northern Ireland from 1998 to 2002. However, it was overtaken as the largest unionist party in 2003 by the Democratic Unionist Party (DUP). As of 2022 it is the fourth-largest party in the Northern Ireland Assembly, after Sinn F\u00e9in, the DUP, and the Alliance Party. Since August 2024 the party has been led by Mike Nesbitt.\nBetween 1905 and 1972, its peers and MPs took the Conservative Party whip at Westminster, in effect functioning as the Northern Irish branch of the party. This arrangement came to an end in 1972 over disagreements over the Sunningdale Agreement. The two parties have remained institutionally separate ever since, with the exception of the 2009 to 2012 Ulster Conservatives and Unionists electoral alliance. The first-ever membership survey of the UUP, published in January 2019, suggested that 67% of its members were supportive of the Conservative Party.\nHistory.\nThe Ulster Unionist Party traces its formal existence back to the foundation of the Ulster Unionist Council in 1905. It is the oldest political party on the island of Ireland.\nBackground: 1886 to 1905.\nModern organised unionism emerged after William Ewart Gladstone's introduction in 1886 of the first of three Home Rule Bills in response to demands by the Irish Parliamentary Party. In 1891, the Irish Conservative Party came to an end, merged into a new Irish Unionist Alliance (IUA) which also included the Irish Liberal Unionists, the latter having split from the Liberal Party over the issue of home rule. While usually dominated by unionists from Ulster, the IUA was often led by southern unionists. There were also some eighty members of the House of Lords who affiliated themselves with the IUA.\nThe Ulster Defence Union was also formed on 17 March 1893 to oppose the Liberal government's plans for the Government of Ireland Bill 1893.\nAlthough most unionist support was based in Ulster, especially within areas that later became Northern Ireland, in the late 19th and early 20th century there were unionist enclaves throughout all of Ireland. Unionists in Dublin and County Wicklow and in parts of County Cork were particularly influential.\n1905 to 1921.\nIn September 1904, the Conservative government of Arthur Balfour published proposals for limited devolution to Ireland which would not amount to home rule. Coming from Conservatives, these led to great alarm among Irish unionists; in March 1905, the Ulster Unionist Council, which later became the Ulster Unionist Party, was formed as a co-ordinating organisation for a new form of local political activity. It largely subsumed the Ulster Defence Union.\nFrom the beginning, the new organization had a strong association with the Orange Order, a Protestant fraternal organisation. The original composition of the Ulster Unionist Council was 25% Orange delegates; however, this proportion was reduced through the years. The initial leadership of the Ulster unionists all came from outside what would later become Northern Ireland. In particular, from 1905 Colonel Saunderson was simultaneously leader of the Irish Unionist Alliance MPs and leader of the Ulster Unionist Council in Belfast. In 1906 he was succeeded in both roles by Walter Hume Long, a Dublin MP. Another Dubliner, Sir Edward Carson, one of the two Irish Unionist Alliance MPs for the Dublin University constituency, and Lord Midleton were also southern unionists active in both. Carson went on to become the first leader of the Ulster Unionist Party, from 1910. Throughout his years of leadership, he fought a sustained campaign against Irish Home Rule, including taking the lead in the formation of the Ulster Volunteers at the onset of the Home Rule Crisis in 1912.\nIn 1912, at Westminster the Home Rule Crisis led to the Liberal Unionist Party merging with the Conservatives, thus giving rise to the current name of the Conservative and Unionist Party, to which the Ulster Unionist Party was formally linked, to varying degrees, until 1985.\nAt the 1918 general election, Carson switched constituencies from Dublin University to Belfast Duncairn.\nAfter the Irish Convention of 1917\u20131918 failed to reach an understanding on home rule, and even more after the Partition of Ireland under the Government of Ireland Act 1920, Irish unionism in effect split. Many southern unionist politicians quickly became reconciled with the new Irish Free State, sitting in its Senate or joining its political parties, while in Northern Ireland the existence of a separate Ulster Unionist Party became entrenched as it took control of the new Government of Northern Ireland, established in 1921.\nCarson strongly opposed the partition of Ireland and the end of unionism as an all-Ireland political force, so he refused the opportunity to be Prime Minister of Northern Ireland or even to sit in the Northern Ireland House of Commons, citing a lack of connection with the new province. The leadership of the UUP and, subsequently, Northern Ireland, was taken by Sir James Craig.\nThe Stormont era: linked with the Conservative Party.\n1920\u20131963.\nUntil almost the very end of its period of power in Northern Ireland, the UUP was led by a combination of landed gentry (The 1st Viscount Brookeborough, Hugh MacDowell Pollock and James Chichester-Clark), aristocracy (Terence O'Neill) and gentrified industrial magnates (The 1st Viscount Craigavon and J. M. Andrews \u2013 nephew of The 1st Viscount Pirrie). Only its last Prime Minister, Brian Faulkner, was from a middle-class background. During this era, all but 11 of the 149 UUP Stormont MPs were members of the Orange Order, as were all Prime Ministers.\nSir James Craig, who in 1927 was created Viscount Craigavon, led the government of Northern Ireland from its inception until his death in November 1940 and is buried with his wife by the east wing of Parliament Buildings at Stormont. His successor, J. M. Andrews, was heavily criticised for appointing octogenarian veterans of Lord Craigavon's administration to his cabinet. His government was also believed to be more interested in protecting the statue of Carson at the Stormont Estate than the citizens of Belfast during the Belfast Blitz. A backbench revolt in 1943 resulted in his resignation and replacement by Sir Basil Brooke (later Viscount Brookeborough), although Andrews was recognised as leader of the party until 1946.\nLord Brookeborough, despite having felt that Craigavon had held on to power for too long, was Prime Minister for one year longer. During this time he was on more than one occasion called to meetings of the Grand Orange Lodge of Ireland to explain his actions, most notably following the 1947 Education Act which made the government responsible for the payment of National Insurance contributions of teachers in Catholic Church-controlled schools. Ian Paisley called for Brookeborough's resignation in 1953 when he refused to sack Brian Maginess and Clarence Graham, who had given speeches supporting re-admitting Catholics to the UUP. He retired in 1963 and was replaced by Terence O'Neill, who emerged ahead of other candidates, Jack Andrews and Faulkner.\n1963\u20131972.\nIn the 1960s, identifying with the civil rights movement of Martin Luther King Jr. and encouraged by attempts at reform under O'Neill, various organisations campaigned for civil rights, calling for changes to the system for allocating public housing and the voting system for the local government franchise, which was restricted to (disproportionately Protestant) rate payers. O'Neill had pushed through some reforms but in the process the Ulster Unionists became strongly divided. At the 1969 Stormont general election UUP candidates stood on both pro- and anti-O'Neill platforms. Several independent pro-O'Neill unionists challenging his critics, while the Protestant Unionist Party of Ian Paisley mounted a hard-line challenge. The result proved inconclusive for O'Neill, who resigned a short time later. His resignation was probably caused by a speech of James Chichester-Clark who stated that he disagreed with the timing, but not the principle, of universal suffrage at local elections.\nChichester-Clark won the leadership election to replace O'Neill and swiftly moved to implement many of O'Neill's reforms. Civil disorder continued to mount, culminating in August 1969 when Catholic Bogside residents clashed with the Royal Ulster Constabulary in Derry because of an Apprentice Boys of Derry march, sparking days of riots. Early in 1971, Chichester-Clark flew to London to request further military aid following the 1971 Scottish soldiers' killings. When this was all but refused, he resigned to be replaced by Brian Faulkner.\nFaulkner's government struggled though 1971 and into 1972. After Bloody Sunday, the British Government threatened to remove control of the security forces from the devolved government. Faulkner reacted by resigning with his entire cabinet, and the British Government suspended, and eventually abolished, the Northern Ireland Parliament, replacing it with Direct Rule.\nThe liberal unionist group, the New Ulster Movement, which had advocated the policies of Terence O'Neill, left and formed the Alliance Party of Northern Ireland in April 1970, while the emergence of Ian Paisley's Protestant Unionist Party continued to draw off some working-class and more loyalist support.\n1972\u20131995.\nIn June 1973 the UUP won a majority of seats in the new Northern Ireland Assembly, but the party was divided on policy. The Sunningdale Agreement, which led to the formation of a power-sharing Executive under Ulster Unionist leader Brian Faulkner, ruptured the party. In the 1973 elections to the Executive the party found itself divided, a division that did not formally end until January 1974 with the triumph of the anti-Sunningdale faction. Faulkner was then overthrown, and he set up the Unionist Party of Northern Ireland (UPNI). The Ulster Unionists were then led by Harry West from 1974 until 1979. In the February 1974 general election, the party participated in the United Ulster Unionist Council (UUUC) with Vanguard and the Democratic Unionist Party, successor to the Protestant Unionist Party. The result was that the UUUC won 11 out of 12 parliamentary seats in Northern Ireland on a fiercely anti-Sunningdale platform, although they barely won 50% of the overall popular vote. This result was a fatal blow for the Executive, which soon collapsed.\nUp until 1972 the UUP sat with the Conservative Party at Westminster, traditionally taking the Conservative parliamentary whip. To all intents and purposes the party functioned as the Northern Ireland branch of the Conservative Party. In 1972, in protest over the prorogation of the Parliament of Northern Ireland, the Westminster Ulster Unionist MPs withdrew from the alliance. The party remained affiliated to the National Union of Conservative and Unionist Associations, but in 1985, withdrew from it as well, in protest over the Anglo-Irish Agreement. Subsequently, the Conservative Party has organised separately in Northern Ireland, with little electoral success.\nUnder West's leadership, the party recruited Enoch Powell, who became Ulster Unionist MP for South Down in October 1974 after defecting from the Conservatives. Powell advocated a policy of 'integration', whereby Northern Ireland would be administered as an integral part of the United Kingdom. This policy divided both the Ulster Unionists and the wider unionist movement, as Powell's ideas conflicted with those supporting a restoration of devolved government to Northern Ireland. The party also made gains upon the break-up of the Vanguard Party and its merger back into the Ulster Unionists. The separate United Ulster Unionist Party (UUUP) emerged from the remains of Vanguard but folded in the early 1980s, as did the UPNI. In both cases the main beneficiaries of this were the Ulster Unionists, now under the leadership of James Molyneaux (1979\u201395).\nTrimble leadership.\nDavid Trimble led the party between 1995 and 2005. His support for the Belfast Agreement caused a rupture within the party into pro-agreement and anti-agreement factions. Trimble served as First Minister of Northern Ireland in the power-sharing administration created under the Belfast Agreement.\nUnusually for a unionist party, the UUP had a Catholic MLA in the Northern Ireland Assembly, Sir John Gorman until the 2003 election. In March 2005, the Orange Order voted to end its official links with the UUP. Trimble faced down Orange Order critics who tried to suspend him for his attendance at a Catholic funeral for a young boy killed by the Real IRA in the Omagh bombing. In a sign of unity, Trimble and President of Ireland Mary McAleese walked into the church together.\nIn the 2001 general election, the Ulster Unionists lost a number of seats belonging to UUP stalwarts; for example, John Taylor, the former deputy leader of the party, lost his seat of Strangford to Iris Robinson.\nThe party held six seats at Westminster immediately before the 2005 general election, down from seven after the previous general election following the defection of Jeffrey Donaldson in 2004. The election resulted in the loss of five of their six seats. The only seat won by an Ulster Unionist was North Down, by Sylvia Hermon, who had won the seat in the 2001 general election from Robert McCartney of UK Unionist Party. David Trimble himself lost his seat in Upper Bann and resigned as party leader soon after. The ensuing leadership election was won by Reg Empey.\nEmpey leadership.\nIn May 2006 UUP leader Empey attempted to create a new assembly group that would have included Progressive Unionist Party (PUP) leader David Ervine. The PUP is the political wing of the illegal Ulster Volunteer Force (UVF). Many in the UUP, including the last remaining MP, Sylvia Hermon, were opposed to the move. The link was in the form of a new group called the 'Ulster Unionist Party Assembly Group' whose membership was the 24 UUP MLAs and Ervine. Empey justified the link by stating that under the d'Hondt method for allocating ministers in the Assembly, the new group would take a seat in the Executive from Sinn F\u00e9in.\nFollowing a request for a ruling from the DUP's Peter Robinson, the Speaker ruled that the UUPAG was not a political party within the meaning of the Political Parties, Elections and Referendums Act 2000.\nThe party lost 9 seats in the 2007 Northern Ireland Assembly election, retaining 18 MLAs. Empey was the only leader of one of the four main parties not to be re-elected on first preference votes alone in the Assembly elections of March 2007.\nIn July 2008, the UUP and Conservative Party announced that a joint working group had been established to examine closer ties. On 26 February 2009, the Ulster Unionist Executive and area council of Northern Ireland Conservatives agreed to field joint candidates in future elections to the House of Commons and European Parliament under the name \"Ulster Conservatives and Unionists \u2013 New Force\" (UCUNF). The agreement meant that Ulster Unionist MPs could have sat in a Conservative Government, renewing the relationship that had broken down in 1974 over the Sunningdale Agreement and in 1985 over the Anglo-Irish Agreement. The UUP's sole remaining MP at the time, Sylvia Hermon, opposed the agreement, stating she would not be willing to stand under the UCUNF banner.\nIn February 2010, Hermon confirmed that she would not be seeking a nomination as a UCUNF candidate for the forthcoming general election. On 25 March 2010, she formally resigned from the party and announced that she would be standing as an independent candidate at the general election. As a result, the UUP were left without representation in the House of Commons for the first time since the party's creation. At the 2010 general election, UCUNF won no seats in Northern Ireland (while Hermon won hers as an independent). The UCUNF label was not used again.\nElliott leadership.\nFollowing the election, Empey resigned as leader. He was replaced by Tom Elliott as party leader in the subsequent leadership election. During the leadership election, it emerged that a quarter of the UUP membership came from Fermanagh and South Tyrone, the constituency of Elliott. The Dublin-based political magazine, \"the Phoenix\", described Elliott as a \"blast from the past\" and said that his election signified \"a significant shift to the right\" by the UUP. Shortly after his election, three 2010 general election candidates resigned: Harry Hamilton, Paula Bradshaw and Trevor Ringland. Bradshaw and Hamilton subsequently joined the Alliance Party.\nThe party lost two seats in the 2011 Assembly elections and won fewer votes than the nationalist Social Democratic and Labour Party (SDLP) (although it won more seats than the SDLP). Two of its candidates, Bill Manwaring and Lesley Macaulay, subsequently joined the Conservative Party. In the 2011 local elections it lost seats to the Alliance Party east of the Bann and was also overtaken by them on Belfast City Council.\nTom Elliott was criticised for comments he made in his victory speech where he described elements of Sinn F\u00e9in as \"scum\". Elliott resigned in March 2012 saying some people had not given him a 'fair opportunity' to develop and progress many party initiatives. Mike Nesbitt was elected leader on 31 March 2012, beating John McCallister, by 536 votes to 129.\nFirst Nesbitt leadership.\nIn the 2014 European election Jim Nicholson held his MEP seat, although his percentage of the vote decreased to 13.3% (\u22123.8%). The party gained 15 seats in the local elections that same day. They polled 16.1% (+0.9%), making it the only party to increase its vote share.\nAt the 2015 general election, the UUP returned to Westminster, gaining the South Antrim seat from the DUP and Fermanagh &amp; South Tyrone (where they had an electoral pact with the DUP not standing) from Sinn F\u00e9in.\nIn 2016, the UUP and the SDLP decided not to accept the seats on the Northern Ireland Executive to which they would have been entitled and to form an official opposition to the executive. This marked the first time that a devolved government in Northern Ireland did not include the UUP.\nIn the 2016 European Union referendum the UUP was the only unionist party to support the remain campaign, the UUP Executive passing a motion on 5 March 2016 that the party \"believes that on balance Northern Ireland is better remaining in the European Union, with the UK Government pressing for further reform and a return to the founding principle of free trade, not greater political union. The Party respects that individual members may vote for withdrawal.\"\nSwann leadership.\nAt the 2017 general election the UUP lost both of its Commons seats, losing South Antrim to the DUP and Fermanagh &amp; South Tyrone to Sinn F\u00e9in. The party polled 10.3% (\u22125.7%) and failed to take any other seats.\nIn the 2019 local elections the UUP polled 14.1% (\u22122.0) winning 75 council seats, 13 fewer than in 2014.\nThey lost their single MEP at the 2019 European Parliament elections following the retirement of Jim Nicholson. Danny Kennedy stood as the UUP candidate polling 9.3% (\u22124.0%). Steve Aiken succeeded Robin Swann as leader in November 2019.\nAiken leadership.\nThe party increased its vote share to 11.7% (+1.4%) in the 2019 general election, but failed to re-gain a seat. Their best result was in Fermanagh and South Tyrone, where Tom Elliott lost to Sinn F\u00e9in by 57 votes.\nBeattie leadership.\nSteve Aiken resigned on 8 May 2021, and Doug Beattie was elected as leader on 17 May 2021. Beattie, a former soldier, is perceived as a progressive unionist, and it was predicted that following his election as leader, the party would reclaim some of the centre ground that they had lost to the Alliance Party.\nAfter Beattie became leader, a number of new members joined the party including former Belfast PUP councillor Julie-Anne Corr-Johnston, Derry and Strabane DUP councillor Ryan McCready, former Independent Irish Senator Ian Marshall, Belfast Alliance Party councillor Carole Howard and Belfast PUP councillor John Kyle.\nIn October 2021, Newry and Mourne UUP councillor Harold McKee resigned from the party because of Beattie's promotion of 'liberal values'.\nIn January 2022, Beattie made what some saw as a misogynistic joke about DAERA minister Edwin Poots and his wife. After this, it was found that he had made other controversial jokes on social media, before entering politics, and he made a statement apologizing.\nThe party contested all 18 constituencies in the 2022 Assembly election. They received 96,390 votes, 11.2% of the total, down 1.7% from the 2017 Assembly election. They had 9 MLAs elected, down 1 from 2017 after Roy Beggs Jr lost his seat in East Antrim to Alliance.\nIn the 2023 local elections, Beattie characterised the election as a 'choice between delivery or dysfunction'. The UUP ran 101 candidates across the 11 councils, with a manifesto pledging 'city and growth deals', the appointment of 'prompt payment champions' to each council, 'below inflation rate rises' and the devolution of regeneration powers to councils. They received 81,282 votes, 10.9% of the total, down 3.2% from the 2019 local elections. The party had 54 councillors elected, down 21 from 2019.\nFollowing the losses for the UUP in the 2023 local elections, Beattie said that unionism was always likely to \"take a hit across the board\" due to Sinn F\u00e9in's gains.\nAhead of the 2024 general election, the UUP 'absolutely' ruled out an electoral pact with the DUP. Robbie Butler, the UUP's deputy leader, said that politics is about \"maximising and having confidence in your own voice.\" In January 2024, it was announced that Iraq veteran Tim Collins had joined the UUP and been selected as the party's prospective parliamentary candidate for the North Down constituency.\nIn May 2024, Antrim and Newtownabbey Councillor, Paul Michael quit the party following the decision to replace Robin Swann with Mike Nesbitt as Health Minister.\nThe UUP returned to Westminster following the 2024 general election and Robin Swann's victory in South Antrim. Beattie announced he was stepping down as leader in August 2024 and was succeeded by former leader Mike Nesbitt.\nSecond Nesbitt leadership.\nThe UUP's North Antrim MLA, Colin Crawford, announced in June 2025 that he was standing down following an internal disagreement over the party's response to the 2025 Northern Ireland riots. In July 2025, Andy Allen resigned as Ulster Unionist Chief Whip, leaving the position vacant as the party is struggling to find a replacement with a number of MLAs turning down the opportunity to succeed Allen.\nDeputy Leaders.\nThe UUP's Deputy Leader position was created following the adoption of a new Constitution on 29 March 2025. The UUP's first Deputy Leader was nominated and approved on 5 July 2025. Prior to the creation of the position, the person who was Deputy Leader of the Assembly Group or Parliamentary Party was often incorrectly called the UUP's Deputy Leader.\nStructure.\nThe UUP is organised around the Ulster Unionist Council, which was from 1905 until 2004 the only legal representation of the party. Following the adoption of a new Constitution in 2004, the UUP has been an entity in its own right, however the UUC still exists as the supreme decision-making body of the Party. In autumn 2007 the delegates system was done away with, and today all UUP members are members of the Ulster Unionist Council, with entitlements to vote for the Leader, party officers and on major policy decisions. The UUP's Executive Committee includes a delegates system with delegates and substitute delegates drawn from across the Party. The UUP's Management Board was created following the adoption of a new Constitution on 29 March 2025. It includes all elected and appointed party officers.\nThe UUP maintained a formal connection with the Orange Order from its foundation until 2005, and with the Apprentice Boys of Derry until 1975. While the party was considering structural reforms, including the connection with the Order, it was the Order itself that severed the connection in 2004. The connection with the Apprentice Boys was cut in a 1975 review of the party's structure as they had not taken up their delegates for several years beforehand.\nThere are four 'representative bodies', the Ulster Women's Unionist Council, the Ulster Young Unionist Council, the Westminster Ulster Unionist Association (the party's Great Britain branch) and the Ulster Unionist Councillors Association. Each constituency association and representative body elects a number of delegates to the executive committee, which governs many areas of party administration such as membership and candidate selection.\nYouth wing.\nThe UUP's youth organisation is the Young Unionists, which was re-constituted by young activists in March 2004 as a rebrand of the Ulster Young Unionist Council. The UYUC was formed in 1946 and disbanded twice, in 1974 and 2004. There are Young Unionist student associations in Queen's University Belfast and Ulster University.\nWomen's wing.\nThe Ulster Women\u2019s Unionist Council was established in 1911 to encourage women to development and contribute politically and to ensure representation of women at the highest levels within the party. The Dame Dehra Parker Programme has successfully developed the skills and increased the confidence of female members.\nLGBT+ wing.\nThe UUP formed a LGBT+ organisation in 2024 called Pride in the Union, led by the late David Trimble's daughter Vicky Trimble. The UUP have participated in Pride events for many years. Jeff Dudgeon who campaigned successfully for the decriminalisation of homosexuality is a member.\nRepresentatives.\nParliament of the United Kingdom.\nMembers of the House of Commons as elected in July 2024:\nThe party stood candidates in 17 of the 18 Northern Ireland constituencies in the 2024 election. The party announced it would not be standing a candidate in North Belfast.\nMembers of the House of Lords as of June 2024:\nNorthern Ireland Assembly.\nMembers of the Northern Ireland Assembly as of in August 2025:\nParty spokespersons.\nThe current Party spokespersons include:\nManagement Board (party officers).\nThe current party officers are:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70526", "revid": "14965160", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70526", "title": "Fault tree analysis", "text": "Failure analysis system used in safety engineering and reliability engineering\nFault tree analysis (FTA) is a type of failure analysis in which an undesired state of a system is examined. This analysis method is mainly used in safety engineering and reliability engineering to understand how systems can fail, to identify the best ways to reduce risk and to determine (or get a feeling for) event rates of a safety accident or a particular system level (functional) failure. FTA is used in the aerospace, nuclear power, chemical and process, pharmaceutical, petrochemical and other high-hazard industries; but is also used in fields as diverse as risk factor identification relating to social service system failure. FTA is also used in software engineering for debugging purposes and is closely related to cause-elimination technique used to detect bugs.\nIn aerospace, the more general term \"system failure condition\" is used for the \"undesired state\" / top event of the fault tree. These conditions are classified by the severity of their effects. The most severe conditions require the most extensive fault tree analysis. These system failure conditions and their classification are often previously determined in the functional hazard analysis.\nUsage.\nFault tree analysis can be used to:\nHistory.\nFault tree analysis (FTA) was originally developed in 1962 at Bell Laboratories by H.A. Watson, under a U.S. Air Force Ballistics Systems Division contract to evaluate the Minuteman I Intercontinental Ballistic Missile (ICBM) Launch Control System. The use of fault trees has since gained widespread support and is often used as a failure analysis tool by reliability experts. Following the first published use of FTA in the 1962 Minuteman I Launch Control Safety Study, Boeing and AVCO expanded use of FTA to the entire Minuteman II system in 1963\u20131964. FTA received extensive coverage at a 1965 System Safety Symposium in Seattle sponsored by Boeing and the University of Washington. Boeing began using FTA for civil aircraft design around 1966.\nSubsequently, within the U.S. military, application of FTA for use with fuses was explored by Picatinny Arsenal in the 1960s and 1970s. In 1976 the U.S. Army Materiel Command incorporated FTA into an Engineering Design Handbook on Design for Reliability. The Reliability Analysis Center at Rome Laboratory and its successor organizations now with the Defense Technical Information Center (Reliability Information Analysis Center, and now Defense Systems Information Analysis Center) has published documents on FTA and reliability block diagrams since the 1960s. MIL-HDBK-338B provides a more recent reference.\nIn 1970, the U.S. Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) published a change to 14 CFR 25.1309 airworthiness regulations for transport category aircraft in the Federal Register at 35 FR 5665 (1970-04-08). This change adopted failure probability criteria for aircraft systems and equipment and led to widespread use of FTA in civil aviation. In 1998, the FAA published Order 8040.4, establishing risk management policy including hazard analysis in a range of critical activities beyond aircraft certification, including air traffic control and modernization of the U.S. National Airspace System. This led to the publication of the FAA System Safety Handbook, which describes the use of FTA in various types of formal hazard analysis.\nEarly in the Apollo program the question was asked about the probability of successfully sending astronauts to the moon and returning them safely to Earth. A risk, or reliability, calculation of some sort was performed and the result was a mission success probability that was unacceptably low. This result discouraged NASA from further quantitative risk or reliability analysis until after the \"Challenger\" accident in 1986. Instead, NASA decided to rely on the use of failure modes and effects analysis (FMEA) and other qualitative methods for system safety assessments. After the \"Challenger\" accident, the importance of probabilistic risk assessment (PRA) and FTA in systems risk and reliability analysis was realized and its use at NASA has begun to grow and now FTA is considered as one of the most important system reliability and safety analysis techniques.\nWithin the nuclear power industry, the U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission began using PRA methods including FTA in 1975, and significantly expanded PRA research following the 1979 incident at Three Mile Island. This eventually led to the 1981 publication of the NRC Fault Tree Handbook NUREG\u20130492, and mandatory use of PRA under the NRC's regulatory authority.\nFollowing process industry disasters such as the 1984 Bhopal disaster and 1988 Piper Alpha explosion, in 1992 the United States Department of Labor Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) published in the Federal Register at 57 FR 6356 (1992-02-24) its Process Safety Management (PSM) standard in 19 CFR 1910.119. OSHA PSM recognizes FTA as an acceptable method for process hazard analysis (PHA).\nToday FTA is widely used in system safety and reliability engineering, and in all major fields of engineering.\nMethodology.\nFTA methodology is described in several industry and government standards, including NRC NUREG\u20130492 for the nuclear power industry, an aerospace-oriented revision to NUREG\u20130492 for use by NASA, SAE ARP4761 for civil aerospace, MIL\u2013HDBK\u2013338 for military systems, IEC standard IEC\u00a061025 is intended for cross-industry use and has been adopted as European Norm EN\u00a061025.\nAny sufficiently complex system is subject to failure as a result of one or more subsystems failing. The likelihood of failure, however, can often be reduced through improved system design. Fault tree analysis maps the relationship between faults, subsystems, and redundant safety design elements by creating a logic diagram of the overall system.\nThe undesired outcome is taken as the root ('top event') of a tree of logic. For instance, the undesired outcome of a metal stamping press operation being considered might be a human appendage being stamped. Working backward from this top event it might be determined that there are two ways this could happen: during normal operation or during maintenance operation. This condition is a logical OR. Considering the branch of the hazard occurring during normal operation, perhaps it is determined that there are two ways this could happen: the press cycles and harms the operator, or the press cycles and harms another person. This is another logical OR. A design improvement can be made by requiring the operator to press two separate buttons to cycle the machine\u2014this is a safety feature in the form of a logical AND. The button may have an intrinsic failure rate\u2014this becomes a fault stimulus that can be analyzed.\nWhen fault trees are labeled with actual numbers for failure probabilities, computer programs can calculate failure probabilities from fault trees. When a specific event is found to have more than one effect event, i.e. it has impact on several subsystems, it is called a common cause or common mode. Graphically speaking, it means this event will appear at several locations in the tree. Common causes introduce dependency relations between events. The probability computations of a tree which contains some common causes are much more complicated than regular trees where all events are considered as independent. Not all software tools available on the market provide such capability.\nThe tree is usually written out using conventional logic gate symbols. A cut set is a combination of events, typically component failures, causing the top event. If no event can be removed from a cut set without failing to cause the top event, then it is called a minimal cut set.\nSome industries use both fault trees and event trees (see Probabilistic Risk Assessment). An event tree starts from an undesired initiator (loss of critical supply, component failure etc.) and follows possible further system events through to a series of final consequences. As each new event is considered, a new node on the tree is added with a split of probabilities of taking either branch. The probabilities of a range of 'top events' arising from the initial event can then be seen.\nClassic programs include the Electric Power Research Institute's (EPRI) CAFTA software, which is used by many of the US nuclear power plants and by a majority of US and international aerospace manufacturers, and the Idaho National Laboratory's SAPHIRE, which is used by the U.S. Government to evaluate the safety and reliability of nuclear reactors, the Space Shuttle, and the International Space Station. Outside the US, the software http:// is a popular tool for fault tree and event tree analysis, and is licensed for use at more than 60% of the world's nuclear power plants for probabilistic safety assessment. Professional-grade free software is also widely available; SCRAM is an open-source tool that implements the Open-PSA Model Exchange Format open standard for probabilistic safety assessment applications.\nGraphic symbols.\nThe basic symbols used in FTA are grouped as events, gates, and transfer symbols. Minor variations may be used in FTA software.\nEvent symbols.\nEvent symbols are used for \"primary events\" and \"intermediate events\". Primary events are not further developed on the fault tree. Intermediate events are found at the output of a gate. The event symbols are shown below:\nThe primary event symbols are typically used as follows:\nAn intermediate event gate can be used immediately above a primary event to provide more room to type the event description.\nFTA is a top-to-bottom approach.\nGate symbols.\nGate symbols describe the relationship between input and output events. The symbols are derived from Boolean logic symbols:\nThe gates work as follows:\nTransfer symbols.\nTransfer symbols are used to connect the inputs and outputs of related fault trees, such as the fault tree of a subsystem to its system. NASA prepared a complete document about FTA through practical incidents.\nBasic mathematical foundation.\nEvents in a fault tree are associated with statistical probabilities or Poisson-Exponentially distributed constant rates. For example, component failures may typically occur at some constant failure rate \u03bb (a constant hazard function). In this simplest case, failure probability depends on the rate \u03bb and the exposure time t:\nformula_1\nwhere:\nformula_2 if formula_3\nA fault tree is often normalized to a given time interval, such as a flight hour or an average mission time. Event probabilities depend on the relationship of the event hazard function to this interval.\nUnlike conventional logic gate diagrams in which inputs and outputs hold the binary values of TRUE (1) or FALSE (0), the gates in a fault tree output probabilities related to the set operations of Boolean logic. The probability of a gate's output event depends on the input event probabilities.\nAn AND gate represents a combination of independent events. That is, the probability of any input event to an AND gate is unaffected by any other input event to the same gate. In set theoretic terms, this is equivalent to the intersection of the input event sets, and the probability of the AND gate output is given by:\nP (A and B) = P (A \u2229 B) = P(A) P(B)\nAn OR gate, on the other hand, corresponds to set union:\nP (A or B) = P (A \u222a B) = P(A) + P(B) - P (A \u2229 B)\nSince failure probabilities on fault trees tend to be small (less than .01), P (A \u2229 B) usually becomes a very small error term, and the output of an OR gate may be conservatively approximated by using an assumption that the inputs are mutually exclusive events:\nP (A or B) \u2248 P(A) + P(B), P (A \u2229 B) \u2248 0\nAn exclusive OR gate with two inputs represents the probability that one or the other input, but not both, occurs:\nP (A xor B) = P(A) + P(B) - 2P (A \u2229 B)\nAgain, since P (A \u2229 B) usually becomes a very small error term, the exclusive OR gate has limited value in a fault tree.\nQuite often, Poisson-Exponentially distributed rates are used to quantify a fault tree instead of probabilities. Rates are often modeled as constant in time while probability is a function of time. Poisson-Exponential events are modelled as infinitely short so no two events can overlap. An OR gate is the superposition (addition of rates) of the two input failure frequencies or failure rates which are modeled as Poisson point processes. The output of an AND gate is calculated using the unavailability (Q1) of one event thinning the Poisson point process of the other event (\u03bb2). The unavailability (Q2) of the other event then thins the Poisson point process of the first event (\u03bb1). The two resulting Poisson point processes are superimposed according to the following equations.\nThe output of an AND gate is the combination of independent input events 1 and 2 to the AND gate:\nFailure Frequency = \u03bb1Q2 + \u03bb2Q1 where Q = 1 - e-\u03bbt \u2248 \u03bbt if \u03bbt &lt; 0.001\nFailure Frequency \u2248 \u03bb1\u03bb2t2 + \u03bb2\u03bb1t1 if \u03bb1t1 &lt; 0.001 and \u03bb2t2 &lt; 0.001\nIn a fault tree, unavailability (Q) may be defined as the unavailability of safe operation and may not refer to the unavailability of the system operation depending on how the fault tree was structured. The input terms to the fault tree must be carefully defined.\nAnalysis.\nMany different approaches can be used to model a FTA, but the most common and popular way can be summarized in a few steps. A single fault tree is used to analyze one and only one undesired event, which may be subsequently fed into another fault tree as a basic event. Though the nature of the undesired event may vary dramatically, a FTA follows the same procedure for any undesired event; be it a delay of 0.25\u00a0ms for the generation of electrical power, an undetected cargo bay fire, or the random, unintended launch of an ICBM.\nFTA analysis involves five steps:\nComparison with other analytical methods.\nFTA is a deductive, top-down method aimed at analyzing the effects of initiating faults and events on a complex system. This contrasts with failure mode and effects analysis (FMEA), which is an inductive, bottom-up analysis method aimed at analyzing the effects of single component or function failures on equipment or subsystems. FTA is very good at showing how resistant a system is to single or multiple initiating faults. It is not good at finding all possible initiating faults. FMEA is good at exhaustively cataloging initiating faults, and identifying their local effects. It is not good at examining multiple failures or their effects at a system level. FTA considers external events, FMEA does not. In civil aerospace the usual practice is to perform both FTA and FMEA, with a failure mode effects summary (FMES) as the interface between FMEA and FTA.\nAlternatives to FTA include dependence diagram (DD), also known as reliability block diagram (RBD) and Markov analysis. A dependence diagram is equivalent to a success tree analysis (STA), the logical inverse of an FTA, and depicts the system using paths instead of gates. DD and STA produce probability of success (i.e., avoiding a top event) rather than probability of a top event.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70527", "revid": "33", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70527", "title": "Lindesfarne", "text": ""}
{"id": "70528", "revid": "1320336484", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70528", "title": "SeaTac, Washington", "text": "City in Washington, United States\nSeaTac () is a city in southern King County, Washington, United States. The city is an inner-ring suburb of Seattle and part of the Seattle metropolitan area. The name \"SeaTac\" is derived from Seattle\u2013Tacoma International Airport, itself a portmanteau of Seattle and Tacoma.\nThe city of SeaTac is in area and has a population of 31,454 according to the 2020 census. The city boundaries surround the Seattle\u2013Tacoma International Airport (approximately in area), which is owned and operated by the Port of Seattle. The city includes the communities of Angle Lake, Bow Lake, McMicken Heights and Riverton Heights, which were established before the city's incorporation. Residents voted for incorporation on March 14, 1989, and the city incorporated in February 1990.\nHistory.\nThe Highline area, which includes modern-day SeaTac, Burien, most of Des Moines, and unincorporated communities such as White Center and Boulevard Park, was settled by European Americans in the mid-1850s. The federal government finished construction of a military road from Fort Steilacoom to Fort Bellingham in 1860, passing through the Highline area to the east of modern-day SeaTac. One of the more prominent roads of travel from Seattle to Tacoma early in the 20th century is Des Moines Memorial Drive (originally called the High Line road), which passes directly through the middle of the region, particularly through SeaTac and Burien.\nIncorporating the area as a city was proposed by local residents in the 1980s, while a competing proposal sought annexation into Des Moines or another city. Local residents voted for incorporation on March 14, 1989, and the city incorporated on February 28, 1990. Des Moines amended their annexation territory following the decision. The original ballot used the name \"Sea-Tac\", but the incorporation petition to the county government omitted the hyphen. In 2014, Gavin Kelly of The Resolution Foundation wrote that \"A generation ago SeaTac was what Americans would call a middle-class town. A jet-fueller or baggage handler could earn a decent living.\"\nGovernment and infrastructure.\nLocal government.\nSeaTac is governed by a city council which consists of seven elected councilpersons. The city \"has contracted with the King County Sheriff's Office for law enforcement since incorporation in 1990.\" Deputies assigned to SeaTac wear city uniforms and drive patrol cars marked with the city logo. There are currently 51 patrol officers, detectives, and support staff assigned full-time to the city.\nIn January 2014 the SeaTac Fire Department entered a 20-year contract with Kent Fire Department Regional Fire Authority (RFA) to form the Puget Sound Regional Fire Authority. SeaTac's three fire stations, Station 45, 46, and 47, joined Kent's Station 73 to make up RFA's West Battalion.\nThe Seatac Municipal Court, located in the City Hall, is a court of limited jurisdiction. The judge is authorized by the Revised Code of Washington to preside over civil infractions, traffic infractions, criminal misdemeanor and gross misdemeanor violations, and civil orders for protection.\nPublic Works is responsible for planning, design, construction and maintenance of streets, transportation improvements, surface water utility, and solid waste and recycling programs.\nIn 2013, voters in the city narrowly passed a minimum wage of $15 per hour for employees of airport-related businesses, such as hotels, parking lots and car rental agencies. In a later appeals court decision, the $15 minimum wage was reversed for employees working entirely on Port of Seattle property within the city limits but still applies to employees of airport-related businesses in the city proper. Union workshops are exempt from the $15 minimum wage. However, the Washington Supreme Court in August 2015 reversed the King County Superior Court ruling, which said that SeaTac did not have authority to set a minimum wage at the airport. The Supreme Court rejected the argument that the wage did not apply because the airport is owned by the Port of Seattle. The Court stated that Proposition 1 can be enforced at Seattle\u2013Tacoma International Airport because there is no indication that it will interfere with airport operations and that federal labor law does not preempt the provision protecting workers from retaliation.\nFederal government presence.\nThe Riverton Heights Post Office is located in the city.\nThe National Transportation Safety Board operates the Seattle Aviation Field Office in the city.\nThe Federal Bureau of Prisons operates the Federal Detention Center, SeaTac in SeaTac.\nEconomy.\nThe city is home to over 900 licensed businesses, nearly 80 of which are Fortune 1000 companies. They employ nearly 40,000 employees in the city of SeaTac and generate local sales of approximately $3.7 billion.\nAlaska Airlines and Horizon Air are headquartered in the city. Four airlines have operations at 18000 Pacific Highway South (also known as 18000 International Boulevard) in the city, including Asiana Airlines, EVA Air, Hainan Airlines, and China Airlines.\nEconomic development.\nSeaTac's Department of Community and Economic Development was formed in early 2011 to create a one-stop permitting center, increase the level of service and assist in the facilitation of economic development by creating a more cohesive approach to real estate development and job creation. The new department has four divisions: Economic Development, Planning, Engineering Review, and Building Services.\nIn 2013, the City of SeaTac Proposition No. 1 passed with 50.64% of the vote to raise the minimum wage to $15 per hour.\nGeography and climate.\nAccording to the United States Census Bureau, the city has a total area of , of which, is land and is water.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAs of the 2022 American Community Survey, there are 11,414 estimated households in SeaTac with an average of 2.63 persons per household. The city has a median household income of $79,433. Approximately 11.3% of the city's population lives at or below the poverty line. SeaTac has an estimated 71.3% employment rate, with 25.4% of the population holding a bachelor's degree or higher and 84.2% holding a high school diploma.\nThe top five reported ancestries (people were allowed to report up to two ancestries, thus the figures will generally add to more than 100%) were English (50.1%), Spanish (16.3%), Indo-European (6.0%), Asian and Pacific Islander (11.9%), and Other (15.7%).\nThe median age in the city was 36.1 years.\n2020 census.\nAs of the 2020 census, there were 31,454 people, 11,093 households, and 6,700 families residing in the city. The population density was . There were 11,774 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the city was 31.81% White, 24.12% African American, 1.42% Native American, 18.39% Asian, 3.15% Pacific Islander, 11.98% from some other races and 9.14% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino people of any race were 19.40% of the population. 22.5% of residents were under the age of 18, 5.7% were under 5 years of age, and 12.8% were 65 and older. The gender makeup of the city was % male and 45.8% female.\n2010 census.\nAs of the 2010 census, there were 26,909 people, 9,533 households, and 5,913 families residing in the city. The population density was . There were 10,360 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the city was 45.94% White, 16.84% African American, 1.48% Native American, 14.53% Asian, 3.56% Pacific Islander, 11.64% from some other races and 6.01% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino people of any race were 20.34% of the population.\nThere were 9,533 households, of which 33.2% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 40.6% were married couples living together, 14.0% had a female householder with no husband present, 7.4% had a male householder with no wife present, and 38.0% were non-families. 28.8% of all households were made up of individuals, and 7.5% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.72 and the average family size was 3.38.\nThe median age in the city was 34.5 years. 23.1% of residents were under the age of 18; 10.3% were between the ages of 18 and 24; 31.8% were from 25 to 44; 25.2% were from 45 to 64; and 9.7% were 65 years of age or older. The gender makeup of the city was 52.4% male and 47.6% female.\n2000 census.\nAs of the 2000 census, there were 25,496 people, 9,708 households, and 5,960 families residing in the city. The population density was . There were 10,176 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the city was 62.86% White, 9.15% African American, 1.50% Native American, 11.07% Asian, 2.66% Pacific Islander, 6.41% from some other races and 6.35% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino people of any race were 12.95% of the population.\nThere were 9,708 households out of which 30.7% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 42.8% were married couples living together, 12.4% had a female householder with no husband present, and 38.6% were non-families. 30.2% of all households were made up of individuals and 6.8% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.53 and the average family size was 3.17.\nIn the city the population was spread out with 24.4% under the age of 18, 10.2% from 18 to 24, 34.5% from 25 to 44, 21.2% from 45 to 64, and 9.7% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 34 years. For every 100 females there were 110.7 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 111.8 males.\nThe median income for a household in the city was $41,202, and the median income for a family was $47,630. Males had a median income of $34,396 versus $28,984 for females. The per capita income for the city was $19,717. About 9.8% of families and 11.5% of the population were below the poverty line, including 15.5% of those under age 18 and 8.1% of those age 65 or over.\nThe most commonly spoken foreign languages in SeaTac are, in order, Spanish, Somali, and Punjabi.\nAs of 2000 the median income for a household in the city was $41,202, and the median income for a family was $47,630. Males had a median income of $34,396 versus $28,984 for females. The per capita income for the city was $19,717. About 9.8% of families and 11.5% of the population were below the poverty line, including 15.5% of those under age 18 and 8.1% of those age 65 or over.\nSeaTac's population has grown steadily since the 2000 Census, and is projected to grow 5.06% by 2022, a rate higher than the US rate of 3.77%, but lower than King County's 7.46%. SeaTac has considerable ethnic diversity. Only 51.76% of the age 5+ population reportedly spoke only English at home; some 13.90% spoke Spanish at home, considerably higher than King County's 6.82%, but only somewhat higher than the US's overall 13.16%. Languages spoken at home also include those from Asia-Pacific at 10.74%, Indo-European languages at 10.06%, and other languages at 13.54%.\nEducation.\nPrimary and secondary schools.\nHighline Public Schools is the school district with the majority of the city in its boundaries. Elementary schools serving the Highline sections of the city include Bow Lake Elementary School in SeaTac, Madrona Elementary School in SeaTac, McMicken Heights Elementary School in SeaTac, and Cedarhurst Elementary School in Burien. Most residents are zoned to Chinook Middle School and Tyee High School in the city, while some are zoned to Sylvester Middle School and Highline High School in Burien. With the opening of Glacier Middle School in north SeaTac, residents north of the airport are generally zoned there and subsequently to Highline High School given the proximity of that area to Burien.\nTyee Educational Complex housing three independent schools: The Academy of Citizenship and Empowerment, and Odyssey: The Essential School. It then has been transformed back to Tyee High School - a single school in the 2017\u201318 school year.\nIn 2004, Highline Public Schools reorganized some of its high schools, including Tyee, into having smaller programs on larger campuses.\nSmall portions of SeaTac are in the Kent School District and the Renton School District.\nPublic libraries.\nThe King County Library System operates the Valley View Library in SeaTac.\nParks and recreation.\nThe city operates seven city parks and operates two community center facilities.\nAngle Lake Park, a park at Angle Lake, has a barbecue area, a boat launch, a fishing pier, playground equipment, an open recreation area, swimming facilities, a stage, toilet facilities, and a spray park. In the swimming area lifeguards are on duty during the summer months.\nBow Lake Park, a park, consists of open space.\nDes Moines Creek Trail Park, consisting of , has a paved trail for bicyclists and pedestrians; off-street parking spaces are located at the trail head.\nThe Grandview Park, an off leash dog area, has open areas, benches, fencing, a kiosk, waste receptacles, \"sani-cans,\" and trails.\nThe McMicken Heights Park has an open area, playground equipment, and tennis courts.\nThe Neighborhood Park at SeaTac Community Center has a half court basketball court a skate park, playground equipment, a picnic area, a climbing boulder, and parking.\nThe North SeaTac Park has the SeaTac Community Center, baseball, soccer (football), and softball fields, a disk golf course, an outdoor basketball court, an open area, playground equipment, a picnic shelter, toilet facilities, BMX track and paved walking trails.\nThe Sunset Park has baseball/softball fields, soccer fields, tennis courts, toilet facilities, and paved walking trails.\nThe Valley Ridge Park has baseball/softball fields with synthetic turf, outdoor basketball courts, a community center, a hockey court, playground equipment, a skate park, soccer fields with synthetic turf, tennis courts, toilet facilities.\nThe Tyee Valley Golf Course is an 18-hole golf course and also served as the 1988 and 1989 USA Cross Country Championships running course.\nTransportation.\nSeaTac is served by three major highways: State Route 99 (International Boulevard), State Route 518, and the Airport Expressway. Portions of Interstate 5 and State Route 509 also lie within the city limits.\nAirports.\nThe city is served by the Seattle\u2013Tacoma International Airport, located within city limits.\nPublic transportation.\nThe city is also served by several public transportation services: Link light rail stops at two stations in the city, at SeaTac/Airport station and Angle Lake station; King County Metro operates several bus routes in the area, including the RapidRide A Line on International Boulevard and RapidRide F Line on Southcenter Boulevard; some Sound Transit Express regional bus routes terminate or serve the SeaTac area, primarily the airport and other transit hubs.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70529", "revid": "36320931", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70529", "title": "Celtic Christianity", "text": "Christianity in the Celtic language\u2013speaking world during the early Middle Ages\nCeltic Christianity is a form of Christianity that was common, or held to be common, across the Celtic-speaking world during the Early Middle Ages. The term Celtic Church is deprecated by many historians as it implies a unified and identifiable entity entirely separate from that of mainstream Western Christendom. For this reason, Brown (2003) notes a preference for the term Insular Christianity. As Patrick Wormald explained, \"One of the common misconceptions is that there was a \"Roman\" Church to which the \"Celtic\" Church was nationally opposed.\" \nSome writers have described a distinct \"Celtic Church\" uniting the Celtic peoples and distinguishing them from adherents of the Roman Church, while others classify Celtic Christianity as a set of distinctive practices occurring in those areas. Varying scholars reject the former notion, but note that there were certain traditions and practices present in both the Irish and British churches that were not seen in the wider Christian world.\nSuch practices include: a distinctive system for determining the dating of Easter, a style of monastic tonsure, a unique system of penance, and the popularity of going into \"exile for Christ\". Additionally, there were other practices that developed in certain parts of Great Britain and Ireland that were not known to have spread beyond particular regions. The term typically denotes the regional practices among the insular churches and their associates rather than actual theological differences.\nPopularized by German historian Lutz von Padberg, the term \"Iroschottisch\" is used to describe this supposed dichotomy between \"Irish-Scottish\" and \"Roman\" Christianity. As a whole, Celtic-speaking areas were part of Latin Christendom at a time when there was significant regional variation of liturgy and structure. But a general collective veneration of the Papacy was no less intense in Celtic-speaking areas.\nNonetheless, distinctive traditions developed and spread to both Ireland and Great Britain, especially in the 6th and 7th centuries. Some elements may have been introduced to Ireland by the Romano-British Saint Patrick, and later, others from Ireland to Great Britain through the Irish mission system of Saint Columba. However, the histories of the churches of the Irish, Welsh, Scots, Breton, Cornish, and Manx peoples diverge significantly after the 8th century. Interest in the subject has led to a series of Celtic Christian Revival movements, which have shaped popular perceptions of the Celts and their Christian religious practices.\nDefinitions.\nPeople have conceived of \"Celtic Christianity\" in different ways at different times. Writings on the topic frequently say more about the time in which they originate than about the historical state of Christianity in the early medieval Celtic-speaking world, and many notions are now discredited in modern academic discourse. One particularly prominent feature ascribed to Celtic Christianity is that it is supposedly inherently distinct from \u2013 and generally opposed to \u2013 the Catholic Church. Other common claims include that Celtic Christianity denied the authority of the Pope, was less authoritarian than the Catholic Church, more spiritual, friendlier to women, more connected with nature, and more comfortable dealing with Celtic polytheism. One view, which gained substantial scholarly traction in the 19th century, was that there was a \"Celtic Church\", a significant organised Christian body or denomination uniting the Celtic peoples and separating them from the \"Roman\" church of continental Europe. An example of this appears in Toynbee's \"Study of History\" (1934\u20131961), which identified Celtic Christianity with an \"Abortive Far Western Civilization\" \u2013 the nucleus of a new society, which was prevented from taking root by the Roman Church, Vikings, and Normans. Others have been content to speak of \"Celtic Christianity\" as consisting of certain traditions and beliefs intrinsic to the Celts.\nHowever, modern scholars have identified problems with all of these claims, and find the term \"Celtic Christianity\" problematic in and of itself. Modern scholarship roundly rejects the idea of a \"Celtic Church\" due to the lack of substantiating evidence. Indeed, distinct Irish and British church traditions existed, each with their own practices, and there was significant local variation even within the individual Irish and British spheres. While the Irish and British churches had some traditions in common, these were relatively few. Even these commonalities did not exist due to the \"Celticity\" of the regions, but due to other historical and geographical factors. Additionally, the Christians of Ireland and Britain were not \"anti-Roman\"; Celtic areas respected the authority of Rome and the papacy as strongly as any other region of Europe. Caitlin Corning further notes that the \"Irish and British were no more pro-women, pro-environment, or even more spiritual than the rest of the Church.\"\nDeveloping image of Celtic Christianity.\nCorning writes that scholars have identified three major strands of thought that have influenced the popular conceptions of Celtic Christianity:\nSome associate the early Christians of Celtic-speaking Galatia (purportedly recipients of Paul's Epistle to the Galatians) with later Christians of north-western Europe's Celtic fringe.\nHistory.\nBritain.\nAccording to medieval traditions, Christianity arrived in Britain in the 1st century. Gildas's 6th-century account dated its arrival to the latter part of the reign of the Roman emperor\u00a0Tiberius; an account of the seventy disciples discovered at Mount Athos in 1854 lists Aristobulus as \"bishop of Britain\". Medieval accounts of King\u00a0Lucius, Fagan and Deruvian, and Joseph of Arimathea, however, are now usually accounted as pious frauds.\nThe earliest certain historical evidence of Christianity among the Britons is found in the writings of such early Christian Fathers as Tertullian and Origen in the first years of the 3rd century, although the first Christian communities probably were established at least some decades earlier.\nInitially, Christianity was but one of a number of religions: in addition to the native and syncretic local forms of paganism, Roman legionaries and immigrants introduced other cults such as Mithraism. At various times, the Christians risked persecution, although the earliest known Christian martyrs in Britain \u2013 Saint Alban and \"Amphibalus\" \u2013 probably lived in the early 4th century. Julius and Aaron, citizens of Caerleon, were said to have been martyred during the Diocletianic Persecution, although there is no textual or archaeological evidence to support the folk etymology of Lichfield as deriving from another thousand martyrs during the same years.\nChristianization intensified with the legalisation of the Christian religion under Constantine the Great in the early 4th century and its promotion by subsequent Christian emperors. Three Romano-British bishops, including Archbishop\u00a0Restitutus of London, are known to have been present at the Synod of Arles in 314. Others attended the Council of Serdica in 347 and the Council of Ariminum in 360. A number of references to the church in Roman Britain are also found in the writings of 4th-century Christian fathers. Britain was the home of Pelagius, who opposed Augustine of Hippo's doctrine of original sin; St\u00a0Germanus was said to have visited the island in part to oppose the bishops who advocated his heresy.\nAround 367, the Great Conspiracy saw the troops along Hadrian's Wall mutiny, allowing the Picts to overrun the northern areas of Roman Britain (in some cases joining in), in concert with Irish and Saxon attacks on the coast. The Roman provinces seem to have been retaken by Theodosius the Elder the next year, but many Romano-Britons had already been killed or taken as slaves. In 407, Constantine\u00a0III declared himself \"emperor of the West\" and withdrew his legions to Gaul. The Byzantine historian Zosimus (c.\u2009500) stated that Constantine's neglect of the area's defence against Irish and Saxon raids and invasions caused the Britons and Gauls to fully revolt from the Roman Empire, rejecting Roman law and reverting to their native customs. In any case, Roman authority was greatly weakened following the Visigoths' sack of Rome in 410. Medieval legend attributed widespread Saxon immigration to mercenaries hired by the British king Vortigern. The Saxon communities followed a form of Germanic paganism, driving Christian Britons back to Wales, Cornwall, and Brittany or subjugating them under kingdoms with no formal church presence.\nFifth and sixth century Britain, although poorly attested, saw the Age of Saints among the Welsh. Saint Dubric, Saint Illtud, and others first completed the Christianization of Wales. Saint Dubricius (also known as Dyfrig), who had been bishop at the Roman British settlement of Ariconium (in present-day Herefordshire) in the mid-fifth century, founded a monastery at nearby Hentland. He ordained Samson of Dol, who went on to evangelize Brittany.\nUnwilling or unable to missionize among the Saxons in England, Briton refugees and missionaries such as Saint Patrick and Finnian of Clonard were then responsible for the Christianization of Ireland and made up the Seven Founder Saints of Brittany. The Irish in turn made Christians of the Picts and English. Saint Columba then began the conversion of the D\u00e1l Riata and the other peoples of Scotland, although native saints such as Mungo also arose. The history of Christianity in Cornwall is more obscure, but the native church seems to have been greatly strengthened by Welsh and Irish missionaries such as Saints\u00a0Petroc, Piran, and Breaca. Extreme weather (as around 535) and the attendant famines and disease, particularly the arrival of the Plague of Justinian in Wales around 547 and Ireland around 548, may have contributed to these missionary efforts.\nThere is also evidence for the continuation of Christianity in south and east Britain after the Anglo-Saxon settlement, for example with an active shrine to Saint Alban. There are references in Anglo-Saxon poetry, including \"Beowulf\", that show some interaction between pagan and Christian practices and values. While there is little scholarly focus on this subject, there is enough evidence from Gildas and elsewhere that it is safe to assume some continuing \u2013 perhaps more free \u2013 form of Christianity survived. Richard Whinder states \"(The Church's pre-Augustine) characteristics place it in continuity with the rest of the Christian Church in Europe at that time and, indeed, in continuity with the Catholic faith\u00a0... today.\"\nThe title of \"saint\" was used quite broadly by British, Irish, and English Christians. Extreme cases are Irish accounts of Gerald of Mayo's presiding over 3,300 saints and Welsh claims that Bardsey Island held the remains of 20,000. More often, the title was given to the founder of any ecclesiastical settlement, which would thenceforth be known as their \"llan\". Such communities were organized on tribal models: founding saints were almost invariably lesser members of local dynasties, they were not infrequently married, and their successors were often chosen from among their kin. In the 6th century, the \"Three Saintly Families of Wales\" \u2013 those of the invading Irish Brychan and Hen Ogledd's Cunedda Wledig and Caw of Strathclyde \u2013 displaced many of the local Silurian rulers in favor of their own families and clans. By some estimates, these traditions produced over 800 pre-congregational saints that were venerated locally in Wales, but invasions by Saxons, Irishmen, Vikings, Normans, and others destroyed many ecclesiastical records. Similarly, the distance from Rome, hostility to native practices and cults, and relative unimportance of the local sees has left only two local Welsh saints in the General Roman Calendar: Saints David and Winifred.\nInsular Christianity developed distinct traditions and practices, most pointedly concerning the \"computus\" of Easter, as it produced the most obvious signs of disunity: the old and new methods did not usually agree, causing Christians following one system to begin celebrating the feast of the Resurrection while others continued to solemnly observe Lent. Monasticism spread widely; the Llandaff Charters record over fifty religious foundations in southeast Wales alone. Although the \"clasau\" were rather modest affairs, great monasteries and monastic schools also developed at Llantwit Major (\"\"), Bangor, and Iona. The tonsure differed from that elsewhere and also became a point of contention. A distinction that became increasingly important was the nature of church organisation: some monasteries were led by married clergy, inheritance of religious offices was common (in Wales, as late as the 12th century), and illegitimacy was treated much more leniently with fathers simply needing to acknowledge the child for him to inherit an equal share with his brothers. Prior to their conquest by England, most churches have records of bishops and priests but not an established parish system. Pre-conquest, most Christians would not attend regular services but relied on members of the monastic communities who would occasionally make preaching tours through the area.\nWales.\nChristianity had entered Wales during Roman times, initially as an urban religion. At first it was banned by the authorities who were suspicious of its secrecy. The first Christian martyrs, in the fourth century in Wales were executed at the legionnaires' town of Caerleon (near present-day Newport in South Wales).\nBardsey Island has been an important religious site since the 6th century, when Saint Cadfan founded a monastery there. In medieval times it was a major centre of pilgrimage.\nThe saints seem often to have emerged from native tribal traditions. They were frequently from community nobility, but inspired by the Desert Fathers, they renounced the privileges of such positions to live remote, secluded, monastic lives. Their identity would emerge separately from the base established in England by Saint Augustine in 597\u00a0AD. Although little else is known about these people, their influence persists in place names all over Wales, pre-fixed by the word Llan: an old Welsh word referring to land consecrated for burials and churches.\nAt the end of the 6th century, Pope Gregory I dispatched a mission under Augustine of Canterbury to convert the Anglo-Saxons, establish new sees and churches throughout their territories, and reassert papal authority over the native church. Gregory intended for Augustine to become the metropolitan bishop over all of southern Britain, including the existing dioceses under Welsh and Cornish control. Augustine met with British bishops in a series of conferences \u2013 known as the Synod of Chester \u2013 that attempted to assert his authority and to compel them to abandon aspects of their service that had fallen out of line with Roman practice. The Northumbrian cleric Bede's \"Ecclesiastical History of the English People\" is the only surviving account of these meetings: according to it, some of the clerics of the nearest British province met Augustine at a site that was known thereafter as Augustine's Oak. Augustine focused on seeking assistance for his work among the Saxons and reforming the Britons' obsolete method for calculating Easter; the clerics responded that they would need to confer with their people and await a larger assembly. Bede relates that the bishops particularly consulted a hermit on how to respond. He told them to respond based on Augustine's conduct: were he to rise to greet them, they would know him for a humble servant of Christ and should submit to his authority but, were he to remain seated, they would know him to be arrogant and prideful and should reject him. As it happened, Augustine did keep his seat, provoking mistrust. In the negotiations that followed, he offered to allow the Britons to maintain all their native customs but three: they should adopt Rome's more advanced method of calculating the date of Easter, reform their baptismal ritual, and join the missionary efforts among the Saxons. The British clerics rejected all of these, as well as Augustine's authority over them. John Edward Lloyd argues that the primary reason for the British bishops' rejection of Augustine \u2013 and especially his call for them to join his missionary effort \u2013 was his claim to sovereignty over them, given that his see would be so deeply entwined with the Anglo-Saxon Kingdom of Kent.\nThe death of hundreds of British clerics to the pagan king \u00c6thelfrith of the Kingdom of Northumbria around 616 at the Battle of Chester was taken by Bede as fulfillment of the prophecy made by Augustine of Canterbury following the Synod of Chester. The prophecy stated that the British church would receive war and death from the Saxons if they refused to proselytise. Despite the inaccuracies of their system, the Britons did not adopt the Roman and Saxon until induced to do so around 768 by \"Archbishop\" Elfodd of \"Gwynedd\". The Norman invasion of Wales finally brought Welsh dioceses under England's control. The development of legends about the mission of Fagan and Deruvian and Philip the Apostle's dispatch of Joseph of Arimathea in part aimed to preserve the priority and authority of the native establishments at St David's, Llandaff, and Glastonbury. It was not until the death of Bishop Bernard (c.\u20091147) that St\u00a0Davids finally abandoned its claims to metropolitan status and submitted to the Province of Canterbury, by which point the popularity of Geoffrey of Monmouth's pseudohistorical \"Historia Regum Britanniae\" had begun spreading these inventions further afield. Such ideas were used by mediaeval anti-Roman movements such as the Lollards and followers of John Wycliffe, as well as by English Catholics during the English Reformation. The legend that Jesus himself visited Britain is referred to in William Blake's 1804 poem \"And did those feet in ancient time\". The words of Blake's poem were set to music in 1916 by Hubert Parry as the well-known song \"Jerusalem\".\nScotland.\nAccording to Bede, Saint Ninian was born about 360 in what is present day Galloway, the son of a chief of the Novantae, apparently a Christian. He studied under Martin of Tours before returning to his own land about 397. He established himself at Whithorn where he built a church of stone, \"Candida Casa\". Tradition holds that Ninian established an episcopal see at the Candida Casa in Whithorn, and named the see for Saint Martin of Tours. He converted the southern Picts to Christianity, and died around 432. Many Irish saints trained at the \"Candida Casa\", such as Tigernach of Clones, Ciar\u00e1n of Clonmacnoise, and Finnian of Movilla. Ninian's work was carried on by Palladius, who left Ireland to work among the Picts. The mission to the southern Picts apparently met with some setbacks, as Patrick charged Coroticus and the \"apostate Picts\" with conducting raids on the Irish coast and seizing Christians as slaves. Ternan and Saint Serf followed Palladius. Serf was the teacher of Saint Mungo, the apostle of Strathclyde, and patron saint of Glasgow.\nCornwall and West Devon.\nA Welshman of noble birth, Saint Petroc was educated in Ireland. He set out in a small boat with a few followers. In a type of \"peregrinatio\", they let God determine their course. The winds and tides brought them to the Padstow estuary. Kevin of Glendalough was a student of Petroc. Saint Endelienta was the daughter of the Welsh king Brychan. She also travelled to Cornwall \u2013 that is ancient Dumnonia \u2013 to evangelize the locals as did St Nonna mother of St David who travelled on to Brittany. Her brother Nectan of Hartland worked in Devon. Saint Piran is the patron saint of tin miners. An Irishman, Ciaran, he is said to have 'floated' across to Cornwall after being thrown into the sea tied to a millstone. He has been identified on occasion with Ciar\u00e1n of Saigir.\nIreland.\nBy the early fifth century, the religion had spread to Ireland, which had never been part of the Roman Empire. There were Christians in Ireland before Palladius arrived in 431 as the first missionary bishop sent by Rome. His mission does not seem to have been entirely successful. The subsequent mission of Saint Patrick, traditionally starting in 432,\nestablished churches in conjunction with \"civitates\" like his own in Armagh; small enclosures in which groups of Christians, often of both sexes and including the married, lived together, served in various roles and ministered to the local population. Patrick set up diocesan structures with a hierarchy of bishops, priests, and deacons. During the late 5th and 6th centuries true monasteries became the most important centres: in Patrick's own see of Armagh the change seems to have happened before the end of the 5th century, thereafter the bishop was the abbot also. Within a few generations of the arrival of the first missionaries the monastic and clerical class of the isle had become fully integrated with the culture of Latin letters. Besides Latin, Irish ecclesiastics developed a written form of Old Irish. Others who influenced the development of Christianity in Ireland include Brigid (c.\u2009451 \u2013 525), Saint Moluag (c. 510 \u2013 592, who evangelised in the area of present-day Scotland) and Saint Caill\u00edn (fl. c.\u2009570).\nUniversal practice.\nConnections with the greater Latin West brought the nations of Britain and Ireland into closer contact with the orthodoxy of the councils. The customs and traditions particular to Insular Christianity became a matter of dispute, especially the matter of the proper calculation of Easter. In addition to Easter dating, Irish scholars and cleric-scholars in continental Europe found themselves implicated in theological controversies but it is not always possible to distinguish when a controversy was based on matters of substance or on political grounds or xenophobic sentiments. Synods were held in Ireland, Gaul, and England (e.g. the Synod of Whitby) at which Irish and British religious rites were rejected but a degree of variation continued in Britain after the Ionan church accepted the Roman date.\nThe Easter question was settled at various times in different places. The following dates are derived from Haddan and Stubbs: southern Ireland, 626\u2013628; northern Ireland, 692; Northumbria (converted by Irish missions), 664; East Devon and Somerset, the Britons under Wessex, 705; the Picts, 710; Iona, 716\u2013718; Strathclyde, 721; North Wales, 768; South Wales, 777. Cornwall held out the longest of any, perhaps even, in parts, to the time of Bishop Aedwulf of Crediton (909).\nA uniquely Irish penitential system was eventually adopted as a universal practice of the Church by the Fourth Lateran Council of 1215.\nPan-Celtic traditions.\nCaitlin Corning identifies four customs that were common to both the Irish and British churches but not used elsewhere in the Christian world.\nEaster calculation.\nEaster was originally dated according to Hebrew calendar, which tried to place Passover on the first full moon following the Spring equinox but did not always succeed. In his \"Life of Constantine\", Eusebius records that the First Council of Nicaea (325) decided that all Christians should observe a common date for Easter separate from the Jewish calculations, according to the practice of the bishops of Rome and Alexandria. Calculating the proper date of Easter (\"computus\") then became a complicated process involving a lunisolar calendar, finding the first Sunday after an idealized Passover on the first full moon after the equinox.\nVarious tables were drawn up, aiming to produce the necessary alignment between the solar year and the phases of the calendrical moon. The less exact 8-year cycle was replaced by (or by the time of) Augustalis's treatise \"On the measurement of Easter\", which includes an 84-year cycle based on Meton. This was introduced to Britain, whose clerics at some point modified it to use the Julian calendar's original equinox on 25 March instead of the Nicaean equinox, which had already drifted to 21 March. This calendar was conserved by the Britons and Irish while the Romans and French began to use the Victorian cycle of 532 years. The Romans (but not the French) then adopted the still-better work of Dionysius in 525, which brought them into harmony with the Church of Alexandria.\nIn the early 600s Christians in Ireland and Britain became aware of the divergence in dating between them and those in Europe. The first clash came in 602 when a synod of French bishops opposed the practices of the monasteries established by St\u00a0Columbanus; Columbanus appealed to Pope Gregory I but received no answer and finally moved from their jurisdiction. It was a primary concern for St\u00a0Augustine and his mission, although Oswald's flight to D\u00e1l Riata and eventual restoration to his throne meant that Celtic practice was introduced to Northumbria until the 664 synod in Whitby. The groups furthest away from the Gregorian mission were generally the readiest to acknowledge the superiority of the new tables: the bishops of southern Ireland adopted the continental system at the Synod of Mag L\u00e9ne (c.\u2009630); the c.\u2009697 Council of Birr saw the northern Irish bishops follow suit. The abbey at Iona and its satellites held out until 716, while the Welsh did not adopt the Roman and Saxon \"computus\" until induced to do so around 768 by Elfodd, \"archbishop\" of Bangor.\nMonastic tonsure.\nAll monks of the period, and apparently most or all clergy, kept a distinct tonsure, or method of cutting one's hair, to distinguish their social identity as men of the cloth. In Ireland men otherwise wore longish hair, and a shaved head was worn by slaves.\nThe prevailing Roman custom was to shave a circle at the top of the head, leaving a halo of hair or \"corona\"; this was eventually associated with the imagery of Christ's crown of thorns. The early material referring to the Celtic tonsure emphasizes its distinctiveness from the Roman alternative and invariably connects its use to the Celtic dating of Easter. Those preferring the Roman tonsure considered the Celtic custom extremely unorthodox, and associated it with the form of tonsure worn by the heresiarch Simon Magus. This association appears in a 672 letter from Saint Aldhelm to King Geraint of Dumnonia, but it may have been circulating since the Synod of Whitby. The tonsure is also mentioned in a passage, probably of the 7th century but attributed wrongly to Gildas: \"Britones toti mundo contrarii, moribus Romanis inimici, non solum in missa sed in tonsura etiam\" (\"Britons are contrary to the whole world, enemies of Roman customs, not only in the Mass but also in regard to the tonsure\").\nThe exact shape of the Irish tonsure is unclear from the early sources, although they agree that the hair was in some way shorn over the head from ear to ear. In 1639 James Ussher suggested a semi-circular shape, rounded in the front and culminating at a line between the ears. This suggestion was accepted by many subsequent writers, but in 1703 Jean Mabillon put forth a new hypothesis, claiming that the entire forehead was shaven back to the ears. Mabillon's version was widely accepted, but contradicts the early sources. In 2003 Daniel McCarthy suggested a triangular shape, with one side between the ears and a vertex towards the front of the head. The \"Collectio canonum Hibernensis\" cites the authority of Saint Patrick as indicating that the custom originated with the swineherd of L\u00f3egaire mac N\u00e9ill, the king who opposed Patrick.\nPenitentials.\nIn Christian Ireland \u2013 as well as Pictish and English peoples they Christianised \u2013 a distinctive form of penance developed, where confession was made privately to a priest, under the seal of secrecy, and where penance was given privately and ordinarily performed privately as well. Certain handbooks were made, called \"penitentials\", designed as a guide for confessors and as a means of regularising the penance given for each particular sin.\nIn antiquity, penance had been a public ritual. Penitents were divided into a separate part of the church during liturgical worship, and they came to Mass wearing sackcloth and ashes in a process known as \"exomologesis\" that often involved some form of general confession. There is evidence that this public penance was preceded by a private confession to a bishop or priest (\"sacerdos\"), and it seems that, for some sins, private penance was allowed instead. Nonetheless, penance and reconciliation was prevailingly a public rite (sometimes unrepeatable), which included absolution at its conclusion.\nThe Irish penitential practice spread throughout the continent, where the form of public penance had fallen into disuse. Saint Columbanus was credited with introducing the \"medicamenta paentitentiae\", the \"medicines of penance\", to Gaul at a time when they had come to be neglected. Though the process met some resistance, by 1215 the practice had become established as the norm, with the Fourth Lateran Council establishing a canonical statute requiring confession at a minimum of once per year.\nPeregrinatio.\nA final distinctive tradition common across Britain and Ireland was the popularity of \"peregrinatio pro Christo\" (\"exile for Christ\"). The term \"peregrinatio\" is Latin, and referred to the state of living or sojourning away from one's homeland in Roman law. It was later used by the Church Fathers, in particular Saint Augustine of Hippo, who wrote that Christians should live a life of \"peregrinatio\" in the present world while awaiting the Kingdom of God. Augustine's version of \"peregrinatio\" spread widely throughout the Christian church, but it took two additional unique meanings in Celtic countries.\nIn the first sense, the penitentials prescribed permanent or temporary \"peregrinatio\" as penance for certain infractions. Additionally, there was a tradition of undertaking a voluntary \"peregrinatio pro Christo\", in which individuals permanently left their homes and put themselves entirely in God's hands. In the Irish tradition there were two types of such \"peregrinatio\", the \"lesser\" peregrinatio, involving leaving one's home area but not the island, and the \"superior\" peregrinatio, which meant leaving Ireland for good. This voluntary exile to spend one's life in a foreign land far from friends and family came to be termed the \"white martyrdom\".\nMost \"peregrini\" or exiles of this type were seeking personal spiritual fulfilment, but many became involved in missionary endeavours. The Briton Saint Patrick became the evangelist of Ireland during what he called his \"peregrinatio\" there, while Saint Samson left his home to ultimately become bishop in Brittany. The Irishmen Columba and Columbanus similarly founded highly important religious communities after leaving their homes. Irish-educated English Christians such as Gerald of Mayo, the Two Ewalds, Willehad, Willibrord, Wilfrid, Ceolfrith, and other English all followed these Irish traditions.\nOther British and Irish traditions.\nA number of other distinctive traditions and practices existed (or are taken to have existed) in Britain or Ireland, but are not known to have been in use across the entire region. Different writers and commenters have identified different traditions as representative of so-called Celtic Christianity.\nAlleged Coptic (Alexandrian) influences.\nOne tradition traces elements of Celtic Christianity in Ireland and in Gaul to the Coptic Church which developed in and around Alexandria in Egypt.\nMonasticism.\nMonastic spirituality came to Britain and then Ireland from Gaul, by way of L\u00e9rins, Tours, and Auxerre. Its spirituality was heavily influenced by the Desert Fathers. According to Richard Woods, the familial, democratic, and decentralized aspects of Egyptian Christianity were better suited to structures and values of Celtic culture than was a legalistic diocesan form. Monasteries tended to be cenobitical in that monks lived in separate cells but came together for common prayer, meals, and other functions. Some more austere ascetics became hermits living in remote locations in what came to be called the \"green martyrdom\". An example of this would be Kevin of Glendalough and Cuthbert of Lindisfarne.\nOne controversial belief is that the true ecclesiastical power in the Celtic world lay in the hands of abbots of monasteries, rather than bishops of dioceses. While this may have been the case for centuries in most of Ireland, it was never the rule throughout the Celtic world at large. It is certain that the ideal of monasticism was universally esteemed in Celtic Christianity. This was especially true in Ireland and areas evangelised by Irish missionaries, where monasteries and their abbots came to be vested with a great deal of ecclesiastical and secular power. Following the growth of the monastic movement in the 6th century, abbots controlled not only individual monasteries, but also expansive estates and the secular communities that tended them. As monastics, abbots were not necessarily ordained (i.e. they were not necessarily priests or bishops). They were usually descended from one of the many Irish royal families, and the founding regulations of the abbey sometimes specified that the abbacy should if possible be kept within one family lineage.\nThis focus on the monastery has led some scholars, most notably Kathleen Hughes, to argue that the monastic system came to be the dominant ecclesiastical structure in the Irish church, essentially replacing the earlier episcopal structure of the type found in most of the rest of the Christian world. Hughes argued that the \"paruchia\", or network of monasteries attached to an abbey, replaced the diocese as the chief administrative unit of the church, and the position of Abbot largely replaced that of bishop in authority and prominence. According to this model, bishops were still needed, since certain sacramental functions were reserved only for the ordained, but they had little authority in the ecclesiastical structure.\nHowever, more recent scholarship, particularly the work of Donnchadh \u00d3 Corr\u00e1in and Richard Sharpe, has offered a more nuanced view of the interrelationships between the monastic system and the traditional Church structures. Sharpe argues that there is no evidence that the \"paruchia\" overrode the diocese, or that the abbot replaced the Bishop; Bishops still exercised ultimate spiritual authority and remained in charge of the diocesan clergy. But either way, the monastic ideal was regarded as the utmost expression of the Christian life.\nThe focus on powerful abbots and monasteries was limited to the Irish Church, however, and not in Britain. The British church employed an episcopal structure corresponding closely to the model used elsewhere in the Christian world.\nIrish monasticism was notable for its permeability. In permeable monasticism, people were able to move freely in and out of the monastic system at different points of life. Young boys and girls would enter the system to pursue Latin scholarship. Students would sometimes travel from faraway lands to enter the Irish monasteries. When these students became adults, they would leave the monastery to live out their lives. Eventually, these people would retire back to secure community provided by the monastery and stay until their death. However, some would stay within the monastery and become leaders. Since most of the clergy were Irish, native traditions were well-respected. Permeable monasticism popularised the use of vernacular and helped mesh the norms of secular and monastic element in Ireland, unlike other parts of Europe where monasteries were more isolated. Examples of these intertwining motifs can be seen in the hagiographies of St. Brigid and St. Columba.\nThis willingness to learn, and also to teach, was a hallmark of the \"permeable monasticism\" that so characterised the Irish monastery. While a hermitage was still the highest form of dedication, the monasteries were very open to allowing students and children within the walls for an education, without requiring them to become monks. These students were then allowed to leave and live within the community, and were welcomed back in their old age to retire in peace. This style of monasticism allowed for the monastery to connect with, and become a part of, the community at large. The availability of the monks to the people was instrumental in converting Ireland from paganism to Christianity, allowing a blend of the two cultures.\nWales.\nAccording to hagiographies written some centuries later, Illtud and his pupils Saint David, Gildas, and Deiniol were leading figures in 6th-century Britain.\nNot far from Llantwit Fawr stood Cadoc's foundation of Llancarfan, founded in the latter part of the fifth century. The son of Gwynllyw, a prince of South Wales, who before his death renounced the world to lead an eremitical life, Cadoc followed his father's example and received the religious habit from St. Tathai, an Irish monk, superior of a small community at Swent near Chepstow, in Monmouthshire. Returning to his native county, Cadoc built a church and monastery, which was called Llancarfan, or the \"Church of the Stags\". Here he established a monastery, college and hospital. The spot at first seemed an impossible one, and an almost inaccessible marsh, but he and his monks drained and cultivated it, transforming it into one of the most famous religious houses in South Wales. His legend recounts that he daily fed a hundred clergy and a hundred soldiers, a hundred workmen, a hundred poor men, and the same number of widows. When thousands left the world and became monks, they very often did so as clansmen, dutifully following the example of their chief. Bishoprics, canonries, and parochial benefices passed from one to another member of the same family, and frequently from father to son. Their tribal character is a feature which Irish and Welsh monasteries had in common.\nIlltud, said to have been an Armorican by descent, spent the first period of his religious life as a disciple of St. Cadoc at Llancarvan. He founded the monastery at Llantwit Major. The monastery stressed learning as well as devotion. One of his fellow students was Paul Aurelian, a key figure in Cornish monasticism. Gildas the Wise was invited by Cadoc to deliver lectures in the monastery and spent a year there, during which he made a copy of a book of the Gospels, long treasured in the church of St. Cadoc. One of the most notable pupils of Illtyd was St.\u00a0Samson of Dol, who lived for a time the life of a hermit in a cave near the river Severn before founding a monastery in Brittany.\nSt David established his monastery on a promontory on the western sea. It was well placed to be a centre of Insular Christianity. When Alfred the Great sought a scholar for his court, he summoned Asser of Saint David's. Contemporary with David were Saint Teilo, Cadoc, Padarn, Beuno and Tysilio among them. It was from Illtud and his successors that the Irish sought guidance on matters of ritual and discipline. Finnian of Clonard studied under Cadoc at Llancarfan in Glamorgan.\nIreland.\nFinnian of Clonard is said to have trained the Twelve Apostles of Ireland at Clonard Abbey. \nThe achievements of insular art, in illuminated manuscripts like the Book of Kells, high crosses, and metalwork like the Ardagh Chalice remain very well known, and in the case of manuscript decoration had a profound influence on Western medieval art. The manuscripts were certainly produced by and for monasteries, and the evidence suggests that metalwork was produced in both monastic and royal workshops, perhaps as well as secular commercial ones.\nIn the 6th and 7th centuries, Irish monks established monastic institutions in parts of modern-day Scotland (especially Columba, also known as \"Colmcille\" or, in Old Irish, \"Colum Cille\"), and on the continent, particularly in Gaul (especially Columbanus). Monks from Iona Abbey under St. Aidan founded the See of Lindisfarne in Anglo-Saxon Northumbria in 635, whence Gaelic-Irish practice heavily influenced northern England.\nIrish monks also founded monasteries across the continent, exerting influence greater than many more ancient continental centres. The first issuance of a papal privilege granting a monastery freedom from episcopal oversight was that of Pope Honorius I to Bobbio Abbey, one of Columbanus's institutions.\nAt least in Ireland, the monastic system became increasingly secularised from the 8th century, as close ties between ruling families and monasteries became apparent. The major monasteries were now wealthy in land and had political importance. On occasion they made war either upon each other or took part in secular wars \u2013 a battle in 764 is supposed to have killed 200 from Durrow Abbey when they were defeated by Clonmacnoise. From early periods the kin nature of many monasteries had meant that some married men were part of the community, supplying labour and with some rights, including in the election of abbots (but obliged to abstain from sex during fasting periods). Some abbacies passed from father to son, and then even grandsons. A revival of the ascetic tradition came in the second half of the century, with the culdee or \"clients (vassals) of God\" movement founding new monasteries detached from family groupings.\nRule of Columbanus.\nThe monasteries of the Irish missions, and many at home, adopted the Rule of Saint Columbanus, which was stricter than the Rule of Saint Benedict, the main alternative in the West. In particular there was more fasting and an emphasis on corporal punishment. For some generations monks trained by Irish missionaries continued to use the Rule and to found new monasteries using it, but most converted to the Benedictine Rule over the 8th and 9th centuries.\nBaptism.\nBede implies that in the time of Augustine of Canterbury, British churches used a baptismal rite that was in some way at variance with the Roman practice. According to Bede, the British Christians' failure to \"complete\" the sacrament of baptism was one of the three specific issues with British practice that Augustine could not overlook. There is no indication as to how the baptism was \"incomplete\" according to the Roman custom. It may be that there was some difference in the confirmation rite, or that there was no confirmation at all. At any rate, it is unlikely to have caused as much discord as the Easter controversy or the tonsure, as no other source mentions it. As such there is no evidence that heterodox baptism figured in the practice of the Irish church. The Celtic Christians may have used triple immersion in Baptism, and may have been slow to adopt infant baptism.\nAccusations of Judaizing.\nA recurrent accusation levelled against the Irish throughout the Middle Ages is that they were Judaizers \u2013 that they observed certain religious rites after the manner of the Jews. The belief that Irish Christians were Judaizers can be observed in three main areas: the Easter Controversy, the notion that the Irish practised obsolete laws from the Old Testament and (not unrelated to this) the view that they adhered too closely to the Old Testament. Quite apart from the intricate theological concerns that underpinned the debate over Easter in early 7th-century Gaul, Columbanus also found himself accused of Quartodecimanism, a heresy whose central tenet was observing Easter on the same date as the eve of the Jewish Passover, namely the fourteenth day of the Jewish lunar month of Nisan. Although this accusation was raised at a time of heightened political tensions between Columbanus and the Gallic bishops, some historians have cautioned that it ought not be dismissed as a mere ruse because the Gauls may have been genuinely worried about blurring the boundaries between Gallic Christians and their Jewish neighbours. That the Irish practised obsolete Old Testament laws is another accusation that repeats itself a number of times in the early Middle Ages, most famously in the case of the 8th-century Irish charismatic preacher, Clement Scotus I (fl. 745), who was condemned as a heretic, in part for urging followers to follow Old Testament law in such controversial matters as obliging a man to marry his widowed sister-in-law upon his brother's death. One example for the Irish tendency to adhere closely to the Old Testament is the , a late 7th- or early 8th-century Irish canon law collection which was the first text of church law to draw heavily on the Bible, and in particular the Old Testament. In Scotland similar accusations surround the supposed cultural taboo concerning pork. The Celtic Church is also thought to have observed the seventh day as the Sabbath.\nInfluence on Christianity in the British Isles.\nAccording to John Bowden, \"the singing of metrical psalms, many of them set to old Celtic Christianity Scottish traditional and folk tunes\" is a feature that remains a \"distinctive part of Scottish Presbyterian worship\".\nCeltic Christian revivalism.\nIan Bradley notes that the recurrent interest in medieval insular Christianity has led to successive revival movements he terms \"Celtic Christian revivalism\". He notes the establishment of the Celtic Orthodox Church, which maintains a relationship with the Syriac Orthodox Church, as an effort to maintain the \"distinctive tenets of Celtic Christianity\" in an autocephalous Christian denomination.\nAccording to Bradley, most, though not all, revivalists are non-Celts for whom Celtic Christianity has an \"exotic and peripheral\" appeal. Adherents typically claim their revivals restore authentic practices and traits, though Bradley notes they reflect contemporary concerns and prejudices much more closely, and most are \"at least partially inspired and driven by denominational and national rivalries, ecclesiastical and secular power politics, and an anti-Roman Catholic agenda.\" Though often inaccurate or distorted, the beliefs of these movements have greatly influenced popular conceptions of historical Celtic Christianity.\nBradley traces the origins of Celtic Christian revivalism to the Middle Ages. In the 8th and 9th century, authors wrote idealised hagiographies of earlier saints, whose \"golden age\" of extraordinary holiness contrasted with the perceived corruption of later times. Similarly, the 12th- and 13th-century literary revival popularised and romanticised older Celtic traditions such as the Arthurian legend. These ideas were expanded during the English Reformation, as Protestant authors appropriated the concept of a \"Celtic Church\" as a native, anti-Roman predecessor to their own movement. Nevertheless, despite his scholarly deconstruction of much of the popular view of \"Celtic Christianity\", in work such as his \"Celtic Christian Communities: Live The Tradition\" Bradley argues that historically well-founded insights can be applied to re-imagine life and ministry in contemporary churches.\nIn the 18th and 19th centuries, antiquarianism, the Romantic movement, and growing nationalism influenced ideas about what was becoming known as \"Celtic Christianity\". Beginning in the early 20th century, a full-fledged revival movement began, centred on the island of Iona and influenced by the Irish Literary Revival and more general Christian revivals. By the end of the 20th century, another wave of enthusiasm began, this time influenced by New Age ideals. Today, a self-identification with and use of \"Celtic Christianity\" is common in countries such as Ireland, both among participants in established churches and independent groups.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\nPrimary sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSecondary sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70530", "revid": "34266803", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70530", "title": "List of governors of Texas", "text": "The governor of Texas is the chief executive officer of the U.S. state of Texas and the commander in chief of the state\u2019s military forces. The incumbent, Greg Abbott, is the forty-eighth governor to serve in the office since Texas' statehood in 1845.\nWhen compared to those of other states, the governorship of Texas has been described as one of relative weakness. In some respects, it is the lieutenant governor of Texas, who presides over the Texas Senate, who possesses greater influence to exercise their prerogatives.\nRick Perry is the longest-serving governor, having assumed the governorship in 2000 upon the exit of George W. Bush, who resigned to take office as the 43rd president of the United States. Perry was elected in 2002 and he was re-elected in 2006 and 2010 serving for 14 years before choosing to retire in 2014.\nAllan Shivers assumed the governorship upon the death of Beauford Jester in July 1949 and was elected in 1950 and re-elected in 1952 and 1954, serving for &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;7+1\u20442 years, making him the third longest serving governor before choosing to retire in 1956. Price Daniel was elected to the governorship in 1956 and re-elected in 1958 and 1960 before losing his re-election for an unprecedented fourth term in the 1962 Democratic primary, missing the runoff. John Connally was elected in 1962 and re-elected in 1964 and 1966 before choosing to retire in 1968, leaving office on January 21, 1969. Bill Clements served two non-consecutive four-year terms, having been elected in 1978 but lost re-election in 1982 before winning re-election in 1986, choosing to retire in 1990, previously held the record as the second longest-serving governor: both of Shivers and Clements' records were surpassed by Perry.\nCurrent governor Greg Abbott was elected in 2014 and re-elected in 2018 and again in 2022. He is the second longest-serving governor and on track to serve 12 years by January 19, 2027. He is currently seeking re-election to an unprecedented fourth term in 2026, which if completed, by January 21, 2031, will make him the state's longest-serving governor, surpassing Perry's 14 years.\nGovernors.\nTexas was annexed by the United States and admitted to the Union on December 29, 1845.\nThe governor is inaugurated on the third Tuesday of January every four years along with the lieutenant governor, and serves a term of four years. Prior to the present laws, in 1845, the state's first constitution established the office of governor, serving a term of two years, but no more than four years of every six. The 1861 constitution, following secession from the Union, established the first Monday of November following election as the term's start. Following the end of the American Civil War, the 1866 constitution increased term length to four years, limiting overall service to no more than eight years of every twelve, moving the term's start to the first Thursday following organization of the legislature, or \"as soon thereafter as practicable.\" The constitution of 1869, enacted during Reconstruction, removed term limitations, to this day making Texas one of sixteen states, territory or jurisdiction (including the U.S. Territory Puerto Rico and the District of Columbia with no limit on gubernatorial terms. The present constitution of 1876 returned terms to two years, but a 1972 amendment again returned them to four.\nIn the case of a vacancy in the office, the lieutenant governor becomes governor. Prior to a 1999 amendment, the lieutenant governor only acted as governor until the expiration of the term to which he succeeded. The governor and the lieutenant governor are not officially elected on the same ticket.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"template:sticky header/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70531", "revid": "40192293", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70531", "title": "Newcastle-upon-Tyne", "text": ""}
{"id": "70532", "revid": "13892963", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70532", "title": "Hope, Arkansas", "text": "Hope is a city in Hempstead County in southwestern Arkansas, United States. Hope is the county seat of Hempstead County and the principal city of the Hope Micropolitan Statistical Area, which includes all of Hempstead and Nevada counties. As of the 2010 census the population was 10,095, and in 2019 the population was estimated at 9,599.\nHope is the birthplace of three Arkansas governors: Bill Clinton (who was also President of the United States from 1993 to 2001), Mike Huckabee (who ran for the Republican presidential nomination in 2008 and 2016), and Sarah Huckabee Sanders (the incumbent governor and daughter of Mike Huckabee).\nHistory.\nHope began in 1873, when a railroad was built through the area. The town was named for Hope Loughborough, the daughter of a railroad executive. In the 1902\u20131903 timeframe, the St. Louis, San Francisco and New Orleans Railroad was built into town; that line is now operated by the Kiamichi Railroad.\nGeography.\nAccording to the United States Census Bureau, the city has a total area of , of which are land and , or 0.74%, are water.\nClimate.\nThe climate is characterized by hot, humid summers and generally mild to cool winters. According to the K\u00f6ppen Climate Classification system, Hope has a humid subtropical climate, abbreviated \"Cfa\" on climate maps.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\n2020 census.\nAs of the 2020 United States census, there were 8,952 people, 3,375 households, and 2,447 families residing in the city.\n2010 census.\nAs of the 2010 United States census, there were 10,095 people living in the city. The racial makeup of the city was 43.2% Black, 34.0% White, 0.2% Native American, 0.2% Asian, 0.1% Pacific Islander, 0.1% from some other race and 1.4% from two or more races. 20.8% were Hispanic or Latino of any race.\n2000 census.\nAs of the census of 2000, there were 10,616 people, 3,961 households, and 2,638 families living in the city. The population density was . There were 4,301 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the city was 47.71% White, 43.17% Black or African American, 0.38% Native American, 0.30% Asian, 0.03% Pacific Islander, 6.63% from other races, and 1.78% from two or more races. 13.48% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.\nThere were 3,961 households, out of which 34.3% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 40.8% were married couples living together, 21.0% had a female householder with no husband present, and 33.4% were non-families. Of 3,961 households, 192 are unmarried partner households: 175 heterosexual. 29.3% of all households were made up of individuals, and 13.8% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.61 and the average family size was 3.20.\nIn the city, the population was spread out, with 28.9% under the age of 18, 10.8% from 18 to 24, 27.3% from 25 to 44, 18.4% from 45 to 64, and 14.6% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 32 years. For every 100 females, there were 87.3 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 81.7 males.\nThe median income for a household in the city was $25,385, and the median income for a family was $28,445. Males had a median income of $23,525 versus $17,394 for females. The per capita income for the city was $12,783. About 22.3% of families and 27.2% of the population were below the poverty line, including 41.1% of those under age 18 and 17.3% of those age 65 or over.\nEconomy.\nHope is also known for growing watermelons and continues to produce records for the largest specimens in the world. The last record was set by Lloyd Bright in 2005 with a 268.8-pound watermelon. The Watermelon Festival is celebrated annually from Thursday-Saturday during the second week of August. The watermelon is used in the municipal logo and the Hope slogan: \"A Slice of the Good Life.\"\nEducation.\nPublic education at the elementary and secondary school level within the Hope city limits is provided by the Hope School District. Hope School District includes William Jefferson Clinton Primary School for kindergarten through fourth Grade, Beryl Henry Elementary School for fifth and sixth grade, Henry C. Yerger Middle School for seventh and eighth grade, and Hope High School for ninth through twelfth grades. Hope Academy of Public Service (HAPS) fifth through eighth grades, HAPS Freshman Academy ninth grade, HAPS Collegiate Academy tenth through twelfth grades.\nHope also has a private school, Garrett Memorial Christian School associated with Garrett Memorial Baptist Church.\nPost-secondary educational opportunity is provided by the University of Arkansas at Hope.\nThe Spring Hill School District, while having a Hope postal address, is based outside of the city limits.\nMedia.\nHope has three forms of local media. SWARK.Today and HopePrescott serve as the city's two Social Media News websites. HopePrescott also produces the city's newspaper. There are also at least three local radio stations in and around Hope. The city is served by local television stations from the Little Rock, Arkansas, Shreveport, Louisiana and Texarkana, Texas Ark-La-Tex markets. There are currently no local TV stations for Hope.\nInfrastructure.\nAirport.\nHope Municipal Airport is located on property that was once part of the Southwestern Proving Ground, one of six major military facilities in Arkansas during World War II.\nAt the time of its construction, the airport held claim of having the third longest runway in the United States. From 1942 to 1945 the airport and surrounding 50,078-acre Southwestern Proving Ground were used by the U.S. Army to test small arms ammunition, 20 to 155\u00a0mm projectiles, mortars, rockets, grenades, and up to 500-pound bombs. The City of Hope received the airport facility in 1947.\nPaul Klipsch, a United States Army Veteran who served at the site, was among those who started businesses in the re-purposed buildings. He established Klipsch speaker company there and was known to joke that his desk was not in the same spot as the one he had during his service. \"It was\" he said, \"on the other side of the room.\"\nIn the aftermath of Hurricane Katrina in 2005, FEMA used land near the airport as a staging area for manufactured homes intended as temporary housing for the hurricane victims; however, as of 2009, infrastructure and property damage remained so severe in the hurricane's path that many homes remained at the airport, eliciting criticism of the federal agency.\nRail service.\nIn October 2009, Amtrak added Hope to its timetable brochure for its \"Texas Eagle\" service. It began on April 4, 2013. The \"Texas Eagle\" travels daily in each direction between Chicago and San Antonio.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70533", "revid": "28438", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70533", "title": "Nosology", "text": "Branch of medicine that deals with classification of diseases\nNosology (from grc \" \"\u03bd\u03cc\u03c3\u03bf\u03c2\" (nosos)\"\u00a0'disease' and \" -\"\u03bb\u03bf\u03b3\u03af\u03b1\" (-logia)\"\u00a0'study of') is the branch of medical science that deals with the classification of diseases. Fully classifying a medical condition requires knowing its cause (and that there is only one cause), the effects it has on the body, the symptoms that are produced, and other factors. For example, influenza is classified as an infectious disease because it is caused by a virus, and it is classified as a respiratory infection because the virus infects and damages certain tissues in the respiratory tract. The more that is known about the disease, the more ways the disease can be classified nosologically.\nNosography is a description whose primary purpose is enabling a diagnostic label to be put on the situation. As such, a nosographical entity need not have a single cause. For example, inability to speak due to advanced dementia and an inability to speak due to a stroke could be nosologically different but nosographically the same.\nTypes of classification.\nDiseases may be classified by cause, pathogenesis (mechanism by which the disease progresses), or by symptom(s).\nAlternatively, diseases may be classified according to the organ system involved, though this is often complicated since many diseases affect more than one organ.\nTraditionally diseases were defined as syndromes by their symptoms. When more information is available, they are also defined by the damage they produce. When cause is known, they are better defined by their cause, though still important are their characteristics. This leads to a branching differentiation in which a clinical syndrome (pattern of signs and symptoms) can come to be understood as a nonspecific finding shared by a group of disease entities or endotypes. For example, concepts such as murrain and the grippe that were formerly undifferentiable to humans and thus understood as a single disease later can be logically unraveled as separate diseases with similar clinical presentations. Thus, nosology is dynamic, reclassifying as science advances.\nThe advent of molecular biology brought a further reclassification potential with the concept of molecularly defined diseases, defined by their molecular characteristics. This concept was introduced in 1949, with the seminal paper, \"Sickle Cell Anemia, a Molecular Disease\", in \"Science\" magazine, Linus Pauling, Harvey Itano and their collaborators laid the groundwork for establishing the field of molecular medicine. Molecular medicine, in concert with genetics and genomics as aspects of molecular biology, provided new instances of the theme that clinical presentations that humans formerly interpreted as a single disease can be subclassified into a group of disease entities or endotypes. For example, many OMIM database entries show the pattern of disease name XYZ with types identified as XYZ1 (involving sequence variants in gene A), XYZ2 (involving sequence variants in gene B), XYZ3 (involving sequence variants in gene C), XYZ4 (involving sequence variants in both genes B and C), and so on.\nCoding systems.\nSeveral classifications of diseases have been historically proposed, and normally all of them assign a code to every supported disease. Some of them codify diseases following the path of the classification tree, and others like SNOMED use a multifactor classification system.\nThe most known coding system is the World Health Organization ICD-Series, but there are other accepted classifications like DOCLE, NANDA or SNOMED. Historically there were others like the Berkson Coding System that are not maintained anymore.\nThere are also coding systems for symptoms present in the diseases and biological findings. They are normally included in medical dictionaries, also with a codification system. Some of them are MeSH (Medical Subject Headings), COSTART (Coding Symbols for Thesaurus of Adverse Reaction Terms) or MedDRA (Medical Dictionary for Regulatory Activities) Other systems like Current Procedural Terminology do not deal directly with diseases but with the related procedures.\nExtended nosology and general medical conditions.\nIn a wide sense, nosology deals not only with diseases, but with any kind of medical condition, like injuries, lesions or disorders.\nMedical conditions, like diseases, can be defined by cause, pathogenesis (mechanism by which the disease is caused), or by a collection of symptoms, medical signs and biomarkers, particularly when the other two definitions are not available (idiopathic diseases).\nFrom a nosological point of view, medical conditions can be divided in disorders, diseases, syndromes, lesions and injuries, each one with some specific meaning, as listed at \"Disease \u00a7 Terminology\".\nHistory.\nAncient medical treatises had a variety of different ways of classifying and grouping illnesses. Chinese texts like the \"Huangdi Neijing\" categorized diseases by which of the atmospheric influences was believed to be responsible for them. Many ancient Greek, Mesopotamian, Roman, and Egyptian authors categorized diseases by the body parts they affected, while others divided diseases into acute or chronic illnesses. Mental disorders were classified into categories like mania and paranoia by Hippocrates, and this system was utilized by later authors like Najib ad-Din Samarqandi.\nMany popular ancient disease classification systems largely relied upon humorism, which carried over into medieval times. Early attempts to develop more comprehensive approaches to the classification of diseases were made by Jean Fernel in the 16th century. Early modern nosological efforts grouped diseases by their symptoms, whereas modern systems focus on grouping diseases by the anatomy and cause involved.\nIn the 17th century, the English physician Thomas Sydenham was the first to propose a syndrome-based classification of diseases. For Sydenham a disease and a syndrome were equivalent concepts.\nIn the 18th century, the taxonomist Carl Linnaeus, Francois Boissier de Sauvages, and psychiatrist Philippe Pinel developed an early classification of physical illnesses. In the late 19th century, Emil Kraepelin and then Jacques Bertillon developed their own nosologies. Bertillon's work, classifying causes of death, was a precursor of the modern code system, the International Classification of Diseases.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70534", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70534", "title": "W. Edwards Deming", "text": "American engineer and statistician (1900\u20131993)\nWilliam Edwards Deming (October 14, 1900 \u2013 December 20, 1993) was an American business theorist, composer, economist, industrial engineer, management consultant, statistician, and writer. Educated initially as an electrical engineer and later specializing in mathematical physics, he helped develop the sampling techniques still used by the United States Census Bureau and the Bureau of Labor Statistics. He is also known as the father of the quality movement and was hugely influential in post-WWII Japan, credited with revolutionizing Japan's industry and making it one of the most dominant economies in the world. He is best known for his theories of management.\nOverview.\nDeming received a BS degree in electrical engineering from the University of Wyoming at Laramie (1921), an MS degree from the University of Colorado (1925), and a PhD from Yale University (1928). Both graduate degrees were in mathematics and physics. He had an internship at Western Electric's Hawthorne Works in Cicero, Illinois, while studying at Yale. He later worked at the U.S. Department of Agriculture and the Census Bureau. While working under Gen. Douglas MacArthur as a census consultant to the Japanese government, he was asked to teach a short seminar on statistical process control (SPC) methods to members of the Radio Corps, at the invitation of Homer Sarasohn. During this visit, he was contacted by the Union of Japanese Scientists and Engineers (JUSE) to talk directly to Japanese business leaders, not about SPC, but about his theories of management, returning to Japan for many years to consult. Later, he became a professor at New York University, while engaged as an independent consultant in Washington, D.C.\nDeming was the author of \"Quality Productivity and Competitive Position\", \"Out of the Crisis\" (1982\u20131986), and \"The New Economics for Industry, Government, Education\" (1993), and books on statistics and sampling.\nHe also played the flute and drums, and composed music throughout his life, including sacred choral compositions and an arrangement of \"The Star-Spangled Banner.\"\nIn 1993, he founded the W. Edwards Deming Institute in Washington, D.C., where the Deming Collection at the U.S. Library of Congress includes an extensive audiotape and videotape archive. The aim of the institute is to \"Enrich society through the Deming philosophy.\" \nDeming's teachings and philosophy are clearly illustrated by examining the results they produced after they were adopted by Japanese industry, as the following example (called the Ford-Mazda study) shows. Ford Motor Company was simultaneously manufacturing a car model with transmissions made in Japan (by Mazda) and the United States (by Ford). Soon after the car model was on the market (c.\u20091950), Ford customers were requesting the model with Japanese transmissions over the US-made transmissions, and they were willing to wait for the Japanese model. As both transmissions were made to the same specifications, Ford engineers could not understand the customer preference for the model with Japanese transmissions. Finally, Ford engineers decided to take apart the two different transmissions. The American-made car parts were all within specified tolerance levels. However, the Japanese car parts were virtually identical to each other, and much closer to the nominal values for the parts\u2014e.g., if a part was supposed to be one foot long, plus or minus 1/8 of an inch (300\u00a0mm \u00b1 3\u00a0mm)\u2014then the Japanese parts were all within , less variation. This made the Japanese cars run more smoothly and customers experienced fewer problems.\nIn his book \"The New Economics for Industry, Government, and Education\" Deming championed the work of Walter Shewhart, including statistical process control, operational definitions, and what Deming called the \"Shewhart Cycle\", which had evolved into Plan-Do-Study-Act (PDSA). Deming is well known for his work in Japan after WWII, particularly his work with the leaders of Japanese industry. That work began in July and August 1950, in Tokyo and at the Hakone Convention Center, when Deming delivered speeches on what he called \"Statistical Product Quality Administration\". Many in Japan credit Deming as one of the inspirations for what has become known as the Japanese post-war economic miracle of 1950 to 1960, when Japan rose from the ashes of war on the road to becoming the second-largest economy in the world through processes partially influenced by the ideas Deming taught:\nDeming is best known in the United States for his 14 Points (\"Out of the Crisis\", by W. Edwards Deming, preface) and his system of thought he called the \"System of Profound Knowledge\". The system includes four components or \"lenses\" through which to view the world simultaneously:\nDeming made a significant contribution to Japan's reputation for innovative, high-quality products, and for its economic power. He is regarded as having had more impact on Japanese manufacturing and business than any other individual not of Japanese heritage. Despite being honored in Japan in 1951 with the establishment of the Deming Prize, he was only just beginning to win widespread recognition in the United States at the time of his death in 1993. President Ronald Reagan awarded him the National Medal of Technology in 1987. The following year, the National Academy of Sciences gave Deming the Distinguished Career in Science award.\nEarly life.\nWilliam Edwards Deming was born in Sioux City, Iowa, but he was raised in Polk City, Iowa, on his grandfather Henry Coffin Edwards' chicken farm, then later on a farm purchased by his father in Powell, Wyoming. He was the son of William Albert Deming and Pluma Irene Edwards,\nHis parents were well-educated and emphasized the importance of education to their children. Pluma had studied in San Francisco and was a musician. William Albert had studied mathematics and law.\nHe was a direct descendant of John Deming, (1615\u20131705) an early Puritan settler and original patentee of the Connecticut Colony, and Honor Treat, the daughter of Richard Treat (1584\u20131669), an early New England settler, deputy to the Connecticut Legislature and also a patentee of the Royal Charter of Connecticut, 1662.\nCareer.\nDeming was a professor of statistics in New York University graduate school of business administration (1946\u20131993) and taught at Columbia University's graduate school of business (1988\u20131993). He also was a consultant for private business.\nIn 1927, Deming was introduced to Walter A. Shewhart of the Bell Telephone Laboratories by C.H. Kunsman of the United States Department of Agriculture (USDA). Deming found great inspiration in the work of Shewhart, the originator of the concepts of statistical control of processes and the related technical tool of the control chart, as Deming began to move toward the application of statistical methods to industrial production and management. Shewhart's idea of common and special causes of variation led directly to Deming's theory of management. Deming saw that these ideas could be applied not only to manufacturing processes, but also to the processes by which enterprises are led and managed. This key insight made possible his enormous influence on the economics of the industrialized world after 1950.\nIn 1936, he studied under Sir Ronald Fisher and Jerzy Sp\u0142awa-Neyman at University College, London, England.\nDeming edited a series of lectures delivered by Shewhart at USDA, \"Statistical Method from the Viewpoint of Quality Control\", into a book published in 1939. One reason he learned so much from Shewhart, Deming remarked in a videotaped interview, was that, while brilliant, Shewhart had an \"uncanny ability to make things difficult.\" Deming thus spent a great deal of time both copying Shewhart's ideas and devising ways to present them with his own twist.\nDeming developed the sampling techniques that were used for the first time during the 1940 U.S. Census, formulating the Deming-Stephan algorithm for iterative proportional fitting in the process. During World War II, Deming was a member of the five-man Emergency Technical Committee. He worked with H.F. Dodge, A.G. Ashcroft, Leslie E. Simon, R.E. Wareham, and John Gaillard in the compilation of the American War Standards (American Standards Association Z1.1\u20133 published in 1942) and taught SPC techniques to workers engaged in wartime production. Statistical methods were widely applied during World War II, but faded into disuse a few years later in the face of huge overseas demand for American mass-produced products.\nJapan.\nIn 1947, Deming was involved in early planning for the 1951 Japanese census. The Allied powers were occupying Japan, and he was asked by the United States Department of the Army to assist with the census. He was brought over at the behest of General Douglas MacArthur, who grew frustrated at being unable to complete so much as a phone call without the line going dead due to Japan's shattered postwar economy. While in Japan, his expertise in quality-control techniques, combined with his involvement in Japanese society, brought him an invitation from the Union of Japanese Scientists and Engineers (JUSE).\nJUSE members had studied Shewhart's techniques, and as part of Japan's reconstruction efforts, they sought an expert to teach statistical control. From June\u2013August 1950, Deming trained hundreds of engineers, managers, and scholars in SPC and concepts of quality. He also conducted at least one session for top management (including top Japanese industrialists of the likes of Akio Morita, the cofounder of Sony Corp.) Deming's message to Japan's chief executives was that improving quality would reduce expenses, while increasing productivity and market share. Perhaps the best known of these management lectures was delivered at the Mt. Hakone Conference Center in August 1950.\nA number of Japanese manufacturers applied his techniques widely and experienced heretofore unheard-of levels of quality and productivity. The improved quality combined with the lowered cost created new international demand for Japanese products.\nDeming declined to receive royalties from the transcripts of his 1950 lectures, so JUSE's board of directors established the Deming Prize (December 1950) to repay him for his friendship and kindness. Within Japan, the Deming Prize continues to exert considerable influence on the disciplines of quality control and quality management.\nIn 1960, the Prime Minister of Japan (Nobusuke Kishi), acting on behalf of Emperor Hirohito, awarded Deming Japan's Order of the Sacred Treasure, Second Class. The citation on the medal recognizes Deming's contributions to Japan's industrial rebirth and its worldwide success. The first section of the meritorious service record describes his work in Japan:\n*1947, Rice Statistics Mission member\n*1950, assistant to the Supreme Commander of the Allied Powers\n*instructor in sample survey methods in government statistics\nThe second half of the record lists his service to private enterprise through the introduction of epochal ideas, such as quality control and market survey techniques.\nAmong his many honors, an exhibit memorializing Deming's contributions and his famous Red Bead Experiment is on display outside the board room of the American Society for Quality.\nHe was inducted into the Automotive Hall of Fame in 1991.\nLater career.\nDavid Salsburg wrote:\n\"He was known for his kindness to and consideration for those he worked with, for his robust, if very subtle, humor, and for his interest in music. He sang in a choir, played drums and flute, and published several original pieces of sacred music.\"\nLater, from his home in Washington, D.C., Deming continued running his own consultancy business in the United States, largely unknown and unrecognized in his country of origin and work. In 1980, he was featured prominently in an NBC TV documentary titled \"If Japan can... Why can't we?\" about the increasing industrial competition the United States was facing from Japan. As a result of the broadcast, demand for his services increased dramatically, and Deming continued consulting for industry throughout the world until his death at the age of 93.\nFord Motor Company was one of the first American corporations to seek help from Deming. In 1981, Ford's sales were falling. Between 1979 and 1982, Ford had incurred $3 billion in losses. Ford's newly appointed Corporate Quality Director, Larry Moore, was charged with recruiting Deming to help jump-start a quality movement at Ford. Deming questioned the company's culture and the way its managers operated. To Ford's surprise, Deming talked not about quality, but about management. He told Ford that management actions were responsible for 85% of all problems in developing better cars. In 1986, Ford came out with a profitable line of cars, the Taurus-Sable line. In a letter to \"Autoweek\", Donald Petersen, then Ford chairman, said, \"We are moving toward building a quality culture at Ford and the many changes that have been taking place here have their roots directly in Deming's teachings.\" By 1986, Ford had become the most profitable American auto company. For the first time since the 1920s, its earnings had exceeded those of arch-rival General Motors (GM). Ford had come to lead the American automobile industry in improvements. Ford's following years' earnings confirmed that its success was not a fluke, for its earnings continued to exceed GM and Chrysler's.\nIn 1982, Deming's book \"Quality, Productivity, and Competitive Position\" was published by the MIT Center for Advanced Engineering, and was renamed \"Out of the Crisis\" in 1986. In it, he offers a theory of management based on his famous 14 Points for Management. Management's failure to plan for the future brings about loss of market, which brings about loss of jobs. Management must be judged not only by the quarterly dividend, but also by innovative plans to stay in business, protect investment, ensure future dividends, and provide more jobs through improved products and services. \"Long-term commitment to new learning and new philosophy is required of any management that seeks transformation. The timid and the fainthearted, and the people that expect quick results, are doomed to disappointment.\"\nIn 1982, Deming, along with Paul Hertz and Howard Gitlow of the University of Miami Graduate School of Business in Coral Gables, founded the W. Edwards Deming Institute for the Improvement of Productivity and Quality. In 1983, the institute trained consultants of Ernst and Whinney Management Consultants in the Deming teachings. E&amp;W then founded its Deming Quality Consulting Practice which is still active today.\nHis methods and workshops regarding Total Quality Management have had broad influence. For example, they were used to define how the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency's Underground Storage Tanks program would work.\nOver the course of his career, Deming received dozens of academic awards, including another, honorary, PhD from Oregon State University. In 1987, he was awarded the National Medal of Technology: \"For his forceful promotion of statistical methodology, for his contributions to sampling theory, and for his advocacy to corporations and nations of a general management philosophy that has resulted in improved product quality.\" In 1988, he received the Distinguished Career in Science award from the National Academy of Sciences.\nDeming continued to advise businesses large and small. From 1985 through 1989, Deming served as a consultant to Vernay Laboratories, a rubber manufacturing firm in Yellow Springs, Ohio, with fewer than 1,000 employees. He held several week-long seminars for employees and suppliers of the small company where his famous example \"Workers on the Red Beads\" spurred several major changes in Vernay's manufacturing processes.\nDeming joined the Graduate School of Business at Columbia University in 1988. In 1990, during his last year, he founded the W. Edwards Deming Center for Quality, Productivity, and Competitiveness at Columbia Business School to promote operational excellence in business through the development of research, best practices and strategic planning.\nIn 1990, Marshall Industries (NYSE:MI, 1984\u20131999) CEO Robert Rodin trained with the then 90-year-old Deming and his colleague Nida Backaitis. Marshall Industries' dramatic transformation and growth from $400 million to $1.8 billion in sales was chronicled in Deming's last book \"The New Economics\", a Harvard Case Study, and Rodin's book, \"Free, Perfect and Now\".\nIn 1993, Deming published his final book, \"The New Economics for Industry, Government, Education\", which included the System of Profound Knowledge and the 14 Points for Management. It also contained educational concepts involving group-based teaching without grades, as well as management without individual merit or performance reviews.\nAcademic contributions.\nThe philosophy of W. Edwards Deming has been summarized as follows:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Dr. W. Edwards Deming taught that by adopting appropriate principles of management, organizations can increase quality and simultaneously reduce costs (by reducing waste, rework, staff attrition and litigation while increasing customer loyalty). The key is to practice continual improvement and think of manufacturing as a system, not as bits and pieces.\"\nThe Deming System of Profound Knowledge.\n\"The prevailing style of management must undergo transformation. A system cannot understand itself. The transformation requires a view from outside. The aim of this chapter is to provide an outside view\u2014a lens\u2014that I call a system of profound knowledge. It provides a map of theory by which to understand the organizations that we work in.\"\n\"The first step is transformation of the individual. This transformation is discontinuous. It comes from understanding of the system of profound knowledge. The individual, transformed, will perceive new meaning to his life, to events, to numbers, to interactions between people.\"\n\"Once the individual understands the system of profound knowledge, he will apply its principles in every kind of relationship with other people. He will have a basis for judgment of his own decisions and for transformation of the organizations that he belongs to.\"\nDeming advocated that all managers need to have what he called a System of Profound Knowledge, consisting of four parts:\nHe explained, \"One need not be eminent in any part nor in all four parts in order to understand it and to apply it. The 14 points for management in industry, education, and government follow naturally as application of this outside knowledge, for transformation from the present style of Western management to one of optimization.\"\n\"The various segments of the system of profound knowledge proposed here cannot be separated. They interact with each other. Thus, knowledge of psychology is incomplete without knowledge of variation.\n\"A manager of people needs to understand that all people are different. This is not ranking people. He needs to understand that the performance of anyone is governed largely by the system that he works in, the responsibility of management. A psychologist that possesses even a crude understanding of variation as will be learned in the experiment with the Red Beads (Ch. 7) could no longer participate in refinement of a plan for ranking people.\"\nThe \"Appreciation of a system\" involves understanding how interactions (i.e., feedback) between the elements of a system can result in internal restrictions that force the system to behave as a single organism that automatically seeks a steady state. It is this steady state that determines the output of the system rather than the individual elements. Thus it is the structure of the organization rather than the employees, alone, which holds the key to improving the quality of output.\nThe \"Knowledge of variation\" involves understanding that everything measured consists of both \"normal\" variation due to the flexibility of the system and of \"special causes\" that create defects. Quality involves recognizing the difference to eliminate \"special causes\" while controlling normal variation. Deming taught that making changes in response to \"normal\" variation would only make the system perform worse. Understanding variation includes the mathematical certainty that variation will normally occur within six standard deviations of the mean.\nThe System of Profound Knowledge is the basis for application of Deming's famous 14 Points for Management, described below.\nKey principles.\nDeming offered 14 key principles to managers for transforming business effectiveness. The points were first presented in his book \"Out of the Crisis\" (p.\u00a023\u201324). Although Deming does not use the term in his book, it is credited with launching the Total Quality Management movement.\n\"Massive training is required to instill the courage to break with tradition. Every activity and every job is a part of the process.\"\nPDCA myth.\nIt is a common myth to credit Plan-Do-Check-Act (PDCA) to Deming. Deming always referred to the Cycle as the Shewhart Cycle for Continuous Learning and Improvement.\nIn the article on \"Clearing up myths about the Deming cycle and seeing how it keeps evolving\", by Ron Moen and Clifford Norman, they refer to the first origins of PDCA in the work of Galileo on Designed Experiments and Francis Bacon's work on Inductive learning. The basic idea of Scientific method being \u2013 making a hypothesis, conducting experiment, learning about hypothesis through experiment results. Later the idea seems to have inspired C I Lewis and through him to Shewhart, giving a clear account of evolution period from 17th century.\nDeming credits a 1939 work by Shewhart for the idea and over time eventually developed the Plan-Do-Study-Act (PDSA) cycle, which has the idea of deductive and inductive learning built into the learning and improvement cycle. Deming finally published the PDSA cycle in 1993, in \"The New Economics\" on p.\u00a0132.\nSeven Deadly Diseases.\nThe \"Seven Deadly Diseases\" include:\n\"A Lesser Category of Obstacles\" includes:\nDeming's advocacy of the Plan-Do-Study-Act cycle, his 14 Points and Seven Deadly Diseases have had tremendous influence outside manufacturing and have been applied in other arenas, such as in the relatively new field of sales process engineering.\nAnalysis of enzyme kinetic data.\nDeming's collaboration with Hans Lineweaver and Dean Burk is possibly the least known of his work as a statistician, but it is relevant to what has become the most highly cited paper ever published in the \"Journal of the American Chemical Society\", which was written after the authors had consulted Deming about the proper way to analyze their data. Although they are credited with the introduction of the \"double-reciprocal plot\", in which the reciprocal rate is plotted against the reciprocal substrate concentration, they estimated the kinetic parameters by weighted linear regression with weights of the fourth power of the rates, as recommended by Deming. Unfortunately this (essential) part of their approach was quickly forgotten.\nPersonal life.\nDeming married Agnes Bell in 1922. She died in 1930, a little more than a year after they had adopted a daughter, Dorothy (died 1984). Deming made use of various private homes to help raise the infant, and following his marriage in 1932 to Lola Elizabeth Shupe (died 1986), with whom he coauthored several papers, he brought her back home to stay. Lola and he had two more children, Diana (born 1934) and Linda (born 1943). Deming was survived by Diana and Linda, along with seven grandchildren.\nDeath.\nDeming died in his sleep at the age of 93 in his Washington home from cancer on December 20, 1993. When asked, toward the end of his life, how he would wish to be remembered in the U.S., he replied, \"I probably won't even be remembered.\" After a pause, he added, \"Well, maybe ... as someone who spent his life trying to keep America from committing suicide.\"\nReferences.\nNotes\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70537", "revid": "23908470", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70537", "title": "Rowan Williams", "text": "Archbishop of Canterbury from 2003 to 2012\nRowan Douglas Williams, Baron Williams of Oystermouth (born 14 June 1950), is a Welsh Anglican bishop, theologian and poet, who served as the 104th Archbishop of Canterbury from 2002 to 2012. Previously the Bishop of Monmouth and Archbishop of Wales, Williams was the first Archbishop of Canterbury in modern times not to be appointed from within the Church of England.\nWilliams's primacy was marked by speculation that the Anglican Communion (in which the Archbishop of Canterbury is the leading figure) was fragmenting over disagreements on contemporary issues such as homosexuality and the ordination of women. Williams worked to keep all sides in dialogue. Notable events during his time as Archbishop of Canterbury include the rejection by a majority of dioceses of his proposed Anglican Covenant and, in the final general synod of his tenure, his unsuccessful attempt to secure a sufficient majority for a measure to allow the appointment of women as bishops in the Church of England.\nHaving spent much of his earlier career as an academic at the universities of Cambridge and Oxford successively, Williams speaks three languages and reads at least nine.\nWilliams retired as Archbishop of Canterbury on 31 December 2012 and was succeeded by Justin Welby. On 26 December 2012, 10 Downing Street had announced Williams's elevation to the peerage as a life peer, so that he could continue to speak in the House of Lords. Following the creation of his title on 8 January and its gazetting on 11 January 2013, he was introduced to the temporal benches of the House of Lords as Baron Williams of Oystermouth on 15 January 2013, sitting as a crossbencher. Oystermouth is a district of Swansea.\nWilliams delivered the Gifford Lectures at the University of Edinburgh in 2013 and served as Master of Magdalene College, Cambridge, between 2013 and 2020. He took up the position of chancellor of the University of South Wales in 2014. He retired from the House of Lords on 31 August 2020 and from Magdalene College that autumn, returning to Abergavenny in his former Diocese of Monmouth.\nEarly life and ordination.\nWilliams was born on 14 June 1950 in Swansea, Wales, into a Welsh-speaking family. He was the only child of Nancy Delphine (known as \"Del\") (n\u00e9e Morris) and Aneurin Williams \u00a0\u2013 Presbyterians who became Anglicans in 1961. He was educated at the state sector Dynevor School, Swansea, before reading theology at Christ's College, Cambridge, where he graduated with starred first-class honours. He then went to Wadham College, Oxford, where he studied under A.\u00a0M. Allchin and graduated with a Doctor of Philosophy degree in 1975 with a thesis entitled \"The Theology of Vladimir Nikolaievich Lossky: An Exposition and Critique\".\nWilliams lectured and trained for ordination at the College of the Resurrection in Mirfield, West Yorkshire, for two years (1975\u20131977). In 1977, he returned to Cambridge to teach theology as a tutor (as well as chaplain and director of studies) at Westcott House; he was made a deacon in the chapel by Eric Wall, Bishop of Huntingdon, at Michaelmas (2 October). While there, he was ordained a priest the Petertide following (2 July 1978), by Peter Walker, Bishop of Ely, at Ely Cathedral.\nPrivate life.\nOn 4 July 1981, Williams married Jane Paul, a writer and lecturer in theology. They have two children.\nCareer.\nEarly academic career and pastoral ministry.\nWilliams did not have a formal curacy until 1980, when he served at St George's, Chesterton, Cambridge, until 1983, after having been appointed a university lecturer in divinity at Cambridge. In 1984 he became dean and chaplain of Clare College and, in 1986 at the age of 36, he was appointed to the Lady Margaret Professor of Divinity at Oxford, a position which brought with it appointment to a residentiary canonry of Christ Church Cathedral. In 1989 he received the degree of Doctor of Divinity (DD) and, in 1990, was elected a Fellow of the British Academy (FBA).\nEpiscopal ministry.\nOn 5 December 1991, Williams was elected Bishop of Monmouth in the Church in Wales: he was consecrated a bishop on 1 May 1992 at St Asaph Cathedral and enthroned at Newport Cathedral on 14 May. He continued to serve as Bishop of Monmouth after he was elected to also be the Archbishop of Wales in December 1999, in which capacity he was enthroned again at Newport Cathedral on 26 February 2000.\nIn 2002, he was announced as the successor to George Carey as Archbishop of Canterbury \u2014 the senior bishop in the Church of England. The Archbishop of Canterbury in England acts as a focus of unity recognised as \"primus inter pares\" (\"first among equals\") but does not exercise authority in Anglican provinces outside the Church of England. As a bishop of the disestablished Church in Wales, Williams was the first Archbishop of Canterbury since the English Reformation to be appointed to this office from outside the Church of England. His election by the chapter of Canterbury Cathedral was confirmed by nine bishops in the customary ceremony in London on 2 December 2002, when he officially became Archbishop of Canterbury. He was enthroned at Canterbury Cathedral on 27 February 2003 as the 104th Archbishop of Canterbury.\nThe translation of Williams to Canterbury was widely canvassed. As a bishop he had demonstrated a wide range of interests in social and political matters and was widely regarded, by academics and others, as a figure who could make Christianity credible to the intelligent unbeliever. As a patron of Affirming Catholicism, his appointment was a considerable departure from that of his predecessor and his views, such as those expressed in a widely published lecture on homosexuality were seized on by a number of evangelical and conservative Anglicans. The debate had begun to divide the Anglican Communion, however, and Williams, in his new role as its leader was to have an important role.\nAs Archbishop of Canterbury, Williams acted \"ex officio\" as visitor of King's College London, the University of Kent and Keble College, Oxford, governor of Charterhouse School, and, since 2005, as (inaugural) chancellor of Canterbury Christ Church University. In addition to these \"ex officio\" roles, Cambridge University awarded him an honorary doctorate in divinity in 2006; in April 2007, Trinity College and Wycliffe College, both associated with the University of Toronto, awarded him a joint Doctor of Divinity degree during his first visit to Canada since being enthroned and he also received honorary degrees and fellowships from various universities including Kent, Oxford, and Roehampton.\nWilliams speaks or reads eleven languages: English, Welsh, Spanish, French, German, Russian, Biblical Hebrew, Syriac, Latin, and both Ancient (koine) and Modern Greek. He learnt Russian in order to be able to read the works of Dostoevsky in the original. He has since described his spoken German as a \"disaster area\" and said that he is \"a very clumsy reader and writer of Russian\". He also stated that he knows some Italian, which means he knows twelve languages.\nWilliams is also a poet and translator of poetry. His collection \"The Poems of Rowan Williams\", published by Perpetua Press, was longlisted for the Wales Book of the Year award in 2004. Besides his own poems, which have a strong spiritual and landscape flavour, the collection contains several fluent translations from Welsh poets. He was criticised in the press for allegedly supporting a \"pagan organisation\", the Welsh Gorsedd of Bards, which promotes Welsh language and literature and uses druidic ceremonial but is actually not religious in nature.\nIn 2005, Prince Charles married Camilla Parker Bowles, a divorcee, in a civil ceremony. Afterwards, Williams gave the couple a formal service of blessing. In fact, the arrangements for the wedding and service were strongly supported by the Archbishop \"consistent with the Church of England guidelines concerning remarriage\". The \"strongly-worded\" act of penitence by the couple, a confessional prayer written by Thomas Cranmer, Archbishop of Canterbury, to King Henry VIII, was interpreted as a confession by the bride and groom of past sins, albeit without specific reference and going \"some way towards acknowledging concerns\" over their past misdemeanours.\nWilliams officiated at the wedding of Prince William and Catherine Middleton on 29 April 2011.\nOn 16 November 2011, Williams attended a special service at Westminster Abbey celebrating the 400th anniversary of the King James Bible in the presence of Queen Elizabeth, Prince Philip and Prince Charles, Patron of the King James Bible Trust.\nTo mark the ending of his tenure as Archbishop of Canterbury, Williams presented a BBC television documentary about Canterbury Cathedral, in which he reflected upon his time in office. Entitled \"Goodbye to Canterbury\", the programme was screened on 1 January 2013.\n2010 General Synod address.\nOn 9 February 2010, in an address to the General Synod of the Church of England, Williams warned that damaging infighting over the ordination of women as bishops and gay priests could lead to a permanent split in the Anglican Communion. He stressed that he did not \"want nor relish\" the prospect of division and called on the Church of England and Anglicans worldwide to step back from a \"betrayal\" of God's mission and to put the work of Christ before schism. But he conceded that, unless Anglicans could find a way to live with their differences over women as bishops and homosexual ordination, the church would change shape and become a multi-tier communion of different levels \u2013 a schism in all but name.\nWilliams also said that \"it may be that the covenant creates a situation in which there are different levels of relationship between those claiming the name of Anglican. I don\u2019t at all want or relish this, but suspect that, without a major change of heart all round, it may be an unavoidable aspect of limiting the damage we are already doing to ourselves.\" In such a structure, some churches would be given full membership of the Anglican Communion, while others had a lower-level form of membership, with no more than observer status on some issues. Williams also used his keynote address to issue a profound apology for the way that he had spoken about \"exemplary and sacrificial\" gay Anglican priests in the past. \"There are ways of speaking about the question that seem to ignore these human realities or to undervalue them,\" he said. \"I have been criticised for doing just this, and I am profoundly sorry for the carelessness that could give such an impression.\"\nSubsequent academic career.\nOn 17 January 2013, Williams was admitted as the 35th Master of Magdalene College, Cambridge and served until September 2020. He was also made an honorary Professor of Contemporary Christian Thought by the University of Cambridge in 2017. On 18 June 2013, the University of South Wales announced his appointment as its new chancellor, the ceremonial head of the university.\nIn 2015, it was reported that Williams had written a play called \"Shakeshafte\", about a meeting between William Shakespeare and Edmund Campion, a Jesuit priest and martyr. Williams suspects that Shakespeare was Catholic, though not a regular churchgoer. The play took to the stage in July 2016 and was received favourably.\nPatronage.\nWilliams is patron of the Canterbury Open Centre run by Catching Lives, a local charity supporting the destitute. He has also been patron of the Peace Mala Youth Project For World Peace since 2002, one of his last engagements as Archbishop of Wales being to lead the charity's launch ceremony. In addition, he is president of WaveLength Charity, a UK-wide organisation which gives TVs and radios to isolated and vulnerable people; every Archbishop of Canterbury since the charity's inception in 1939 has actively participated in this role.\nWilliams is also patron of the T. S. Eliot Society and delivered the society's annual lecture in November 2013.\nWilliams was also patron of the Birmingham-based charity The Feast, from 2010 until his retirement as Archbishop of Canterbury.\nWilliams has been a patron of the Cogwheel Trust, a local Cambridgeshire charity providing affordable counselling, since 2015 and is active in his support.\nOn 1 May 2013 he became chair of the board of trustees of Christian Aid. He is the Chair of Trustees of the Council for the Defence of the British Universities (CDBU).\nTogether with Grey Ruthven, 2nd Earl of Gowrie, and Sir Daniel Day-Lewis, Williams is a patron of the Wilfred Owen Association, formed in 1989 to commemorate the life and work of the World War I poet Wilfred Owen.\nHe is the visitor of the Oratory of the Good Shepherd, a dispersed Anglican religious community of male priests and lay brothers. He also acts as a visitor to the new monastic Holywell Community in Abergavenny.\nHe is also a patron of the Fellowship of Saint Alban and Saint Sergius which promotes ecumenical relationships between the Anglican and Orthodox churches.\nTheology.\nWilliams, a scholar of the Church Fathers and a historian of Christian spirituality, wrote in 1983 that orthodoxy should be seen \"as a tool rather than an end in itself...\" It is not something which stands still. Thus \"old styles come under increasing strain, new speech needs to be generated\". He sees orthodoxy as a number of \"dialogues\": a constant dialogue with Christ, crucified and risen; but also that of the community of faith with the world \u2013 \"a risky enterprise\", as he writes. \"We ought to be puzzled\", he says, \"when the world is not challenged by the gospel.\" It may mean that Christians have not understood the kinds of bondage to which the gospel is addressed. He has also written that \"orthodoxy is inseparable from sacramental practice... The eucharist is the paradigm of that dialogue which is 'orthodoxy'\". This stance may help to explain both his social radicalism and his view of the importance of the Church, and thus of the holding together of the Anglican communion over matters such as homosexuality: his belief in the idea of the Church is profound.\nJohn Shelby Spong once accused Williams of being a \"neo-medievalist\", preaching orthodoxy to the people in the pew but knowing in private that it is not true. In an interview with the magazine \"Third Way\", Williams responded:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I am genuinely a lot more conservative than he would like me to be. Take the Resurrection. I think he has said that of course I know what all the reputable scholars think on the subject and therefore when I talk about the risen body I must mean something other than the empty tomb. But I don't. I don't know how to persuade him, but I really don't.\nAlthough generally considered an Anglo-Catholic, Williams has broad sympathies. One of his first publications, in the largely evangelical Grove Books series, has the title \"Eucharistic Sacrifice: The Roots of a Metaphor\".\nMoral theology.\nWilliams's contributions to Anglican views of homosexuality were perceived as quite liberal before he became the Archbishop of Canterbury. These views are evident in a paper written by Williams called \"The Body's Grace\", which he originally delivered as the 10th Michael Harding Memorial Address in 1989 to the Lesbian and Gay Christian Movement, and which is now part of a series of essays collected in the book \"Theology and Sexuality\" (ed. Eugene Rogers, Blackwells 2002). At the Lambeth Conference in July 1998, then Bishop Rowan Williams of Monmouth abstained and did not vote in favour of the conservative resolution on human sexuality. These actions, combined with his initial support for openly gay Canon Jeffrey John, gained him support among liberals and caused frustration for conservatives.\nSocial views.\nHis interest in and involvement with social issues is longstanding. While chaplain of Clare College, Cambridge, Williams took part in anti-nuclear demonstrations at United States bases. In 1985, he was arrested for singing psalms as part of a protest organised by the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament at Lakenheath, an American air base in Suffolk; his fine was paid by his college. At this time he was a member of the left-wing Anglo-Catholic Jubilee Group headed by Kenneth Leech and he collaborated with Leech in a number of publications including the anthology of essays to commemorate the 150th anniversary of the Oxford Movement entitled \"Essays Catholic and Radical\" in 1983.\nHe was in New York at the time of September 2001 attacks, only yards from Ground Zero delivering a lecture; he subsequently wrote a short book, \"Writing in the Dust\", offering reflections on the event. In reference to Al Qaeda, he said that terrorists \"can have serious moral goals\" and that \"Bombast about evil individuals doesn't help in understanding anything.\" He subsequently worked with Muslim leaders in England and on the third anniversary of 9/11 spoke, by invitation, at the Al-Azhar University Institute in Cairo on the subject of the Trinity. He stated that the followers of the will of God should not be led into ways of violence. He contributed to the debate prior to the 2005 general election criticising assertions that immigration was a cause of crime. Williams has argued that the provisional adoption of Islamic sharia law as a valid means of arbitration (in matters such as marriage) among Muslim communities in the United Kingdom is \"unavoidable\", and should not be resisted.\nOn 15 November 2008 Williams visited the Balaji Temple in Tividale, West Midlands, on a goodwill mission to represent the friendship between Christianity and Hinduism. On 6 May 2010 Williams met Indian Islamic leader, Mohammed Burhanuddin, at \"Huseini Mosque\" in Northolt, London, to discuss the need for interfaith co-operation; and planted a \"tree of faith\" in the mosque's grounds to signify the many commonalities between the two religions.\nEconomics.\nIn 2002, Williams delivered the Richard Dimbleby lecture and chose to talk about the problematic nature of the nation-state but also of its successors. He cited the \"market state\" as offering an inadequate vision of the way a state should operate, partly because it was liable to short-term and narrowed concerns (thus rendering it incapable of dealing with, for instance, issues relating to the degradation of the natural environment) and partly because a public arena which had become value-free was liable to disappear amidst the multitude of competing private interests. (He noted the same moral vacuum in British society after his visit to China in 2006.) He is not uncritical of communitarianism, but his reservations about consumerism have been a constant theme. These views have often been expressed in quite strong terms; for example, he once commented that \"Every transaction in the developed economies of the West can be interpreted as an act of aggression against the economic losers in the worldwide game.\"\nWilliams has supported the Robin Hood tax campaign since March 2010, re-affirming his support in a November 2011 article he published in the \"Financial Times\". He is also a vocal opponent of tax avoidance and a proponent of corporate social responsibility, arguing that \"economic growth and prosperity are about serving the human good, not about serving private ends\".\nIraq War and possible attack on Syria or Iran.\nWilliams was to repeat his opposition to American action in October 2002 when he signed a petition against the Iraq War as being against United Nations (UN) ethics and Christian teaching, and \"lowering the threshold of war unacceptably\". Again on 30 June 2004, together with then-Archbishop of York, David Hope, and on behalf of all 114 Church of England bishops, he wrote to Tony Blair expressing deep concern about UK government policy and criticising the coalition troops' conduct in Iraq. The letter cited the abuse of Iraqi detainees, which was described as having been \"deeply damaging\" \u2014 and stated that the government's apparent double standards \"diminish the credibility of western governments\". In December 2006 he expressed doubts in an interview on the Today programme on BBC Radio 4 about whether he had done enough to oppose the war.\nOn 5 October 2007, Williams visited Iraqi refugees in Syria. In a BBC interview after his trip he described advocates of a United States attack on Syria or Iran as \"criminal, ignorant and potentially murderous\". He said, \"When people talk about further destabilization of the region and you read some American political advisers speaking of action against Syria and Iran, I can only say that I regard that as criminal, ignorant and potentially murderous folly.\" A few days earlier, the former US ambassador to the UN John R. Bolton had called for the bombing of Iran at a fringe meeting of the Conservative Party conference. In Williams's Humanitas Programme lecture at the University of Oxford in January 2014, he \"characterized the impulse to intervene as a need to be seen to do something rather than nothing\" and advocated for \"a religiously motivated nonviolence which refuses to idolise human intervention in all circumstances.\"\nUnity of the Anglican Communion.\nWilliams became Archbishop of Canterbury at a particularly difficult time in the relations of the churches of the Anglican Communion. His predecessor, George Carey, had sought to keep the peace between the theologically conservative primates of the communion such as Peter Akinola of Nigeria and Drexel Gomez of the West Indies and liberals such as Frank Griswold, the then primate of the US Episcopal Church.\nIn 2003, in an attempt to encourage dialogue, Williams appointed Robin Eames, Archbishop of Armagh and Primate of All Ireland, as chairman of the Lambeth Commission on Communion, to examine the challenges to the unity of the Anglican Communion, stemming from the consecration of Gene Robinson as Bishop of New Hampshire, and the blessing of same-sex unions in the Diocese of New Westminster. (Robinson was in a same-sex relationship.) The Windsor Report, as it was called, was published in October 2004. It recommended solidifying the connection between the churches of the communion by having each church ratify an \"Anglican Covenant\" that would commit them to consulting the wider communion when making major decisions. It also urged those who had contributed to disunity to express their regret.\nIn November 2005, following a meeting of Anglicans of the \"global south\" in Cairo at which Williams had addressed them in conciliatory terms, 12 primates who had been present sent him a letter sharply criticising his leadership which said that \"We are troubled by your reluctance to use your moral authority to challenge the Episcopal Church and the Anglican Church of Canada.\" The letter acknowledged his eloquence but strongly criticised his reluctance to take sides in the communion's theological crisis and urged him to make explicit threats to those more liberal churches. Questions were later asked about the authority and provenance of the letter as two additional signatories' names had been added although they had left the meeting before it was produced. Subsequently, the Church of Nigeria appointed an American cleric to deal with relations between the United States and Nigerian churches outside the normal channels. Williams expressed his reservations about this to the General Synod of the Church of England.\nWilliams later established a working party to examine what a \"covenant\" between the provinces of the Anglican Communion would mean in line with the Windsor Report.\nPosition on Freemasonry.\nIn a leaked private letter, Williams said that he \"had real misgivings about the compatibility of Masonry and Christian profession\" and that while he was Bishop of Monmouth he had prevented the appointment of Freemasons to senior positions within his diocese. The leaking of this letter in 2003 caused a controversy, which he sought to defuse by apologising for the distress caused and stating that he did not question \"the good faith and generosity of individual Freemasons\", not least as his father had been a Freemason. However, he also reiterated his concern about Christian ministers adopting \"a private system of profession and initiation, involving the taking of oaths of loyalty.\"\nOpinion about hijab and terrorism.\nWilliams objected to a proposed French law banning the wearing of the hijab, a traditional Islamic headscarf for women, in French schools. He said that the hijab and any other religious symbols should not be outlawed.\nWilliams also spoke up against the scapegoating of Muslims in the aftermath of the 7 July 2005 London bombings on underground trains and a bus, which killed 52 and wounded about 700. The initial blame was placed on Al-Qaeda, but Muslims at large were targeted for reprisals: four mosques in England were assaulted and Muslims were verbally insulted in streets and their cars and houses were vandalised. Williams strongly condemned the terrorist attacks and stated that they could not be justified. However, he added that \"any person can commit a crime in the name of religion and it is not particularly Islam to be blamed. Some persons committed deeds in the name of Islam but the deeds contradict Islamic belief and philosophy completely.\"\nCreationism.\nWilliams responded to a controversy regarding creationism being taught in privately sponsored academies saying that it should not be presented in schools as an alternative to evolution. When asked if he was comfortable with the teaching of creationism, he said \"I think creationism is, in a sense, a kind of category mistake, as if the Bible were a theory like other theories\" and \"My worry is creationism can end up reducing the doctrine of creation rather than enhancing it.\"\nWilliams has maintained traditional support amongst Anglicans and their leaders for the teaching of evolution as fully compatible with Christianity. This support has dated at least back to Frederick Temple's tenure as Archbishop of Canterbury.\nInterview with \"Emel\" magazine.\nIn November 2007, Williams gave an interview for \"Emel\" magazine, a British Muslim magazine. Williams condemned the United States and certain Christian groups for their role in the Middle East, while his criticism of some trends within Islam went largely unreported. As reported by \"The Times\", he was greatly critical of the United States, the Iraq War, and Christian Zionists, yet made \"only mild criticisms of the Islamic world\". He claimed \"the United States wields its power in a way that is worse than Britain during its imperial heyday\". He compared Muslims in Britain to the Good Samaritans, and praised the Muslim salat ritual of five prayers a day, but said in Muslim nations, the \"present political solutions aren't always very impressive\".\nSharia law.\nWilliams was the subject of a media and press furore in February 2008 following a lecture he gave to the Temple Foundation at the Royal Courts of Justice on the subject of \"Islam and English Law\". He raised the question of conflicting loyalties which communities might have, cultural, religious and civic. He also argued that theology has a place in debates about the very nature of law \"however hard our culture may try to keep it out\" and noted that there is, in a \"dominant human rights philosophy\", a reluctance to acknowledge the liberty of conscientious objection. He spoke of \"supplementary jurisdictions\" to that of the civil law. Noting the anxieties which the word sharia provoked in the West, he drew attention to the fact that there was a debate within Islam between what he called \"primitivists\" for whom, for instance, apostasy should still be punishable and those Muslims who argued that sharia was a developing system of Islamic jurisprudence and that such a view was no longer acceptable. He made comparisons with Orthodox Jewish practice (beth din) and with the recognition of the exercise of conscience of Christians.\nWilliams's words were critically interpreted as proposing a parallel jurisdiction to the civil law for Muslims (Sharia) and were the subject of demands from elements of the press and media for his resignation. He also attracted criticism from elements of the Anglican Communion.\nIn response, Williams stated in a BBC interview that \"certain provision[s] of sharia are already recognised in our society and under our law; ... we already have in this country a number of situations in which the internal law of religious communities is recognised by the law of the land as justified conscientious objections in certain circumstances in providing certain kinds of social relations\" and that \"we have Orthodox Jewish courts operating in this country legally and in a regulated way because there are modes of dispute resolution and customary provisions which apply there in the light of Talmud.\" Williams also denied accusations of proposing a parallel Islamic legal system within Britain. Williams also said of sharia: \"In some of the ways it has been codified and practised across the world, it has been appalling and applied to women in places like Saudi Arabia, it is grim.\"\nWilliams's position received more support from the legal community, following a speech given on 4 July 2008 by Nicholas Phillips, Lord Chief Justice of England and Wales. He supported the idea that sharia could be reasonably employed as a basis for \"mediation or other forms of alternative dispute resolution\". He went further to defend the position Williams had taken earlier in the year, explaining that \"It was not very radical to advocate embracing sharia law in the context of family disputes, for example, and our system already goes a long way towards accommodating the archbishop's suggestion.\"; and that \"It is possible in this country for those who are entering into a contractual agreement to agree that the agreement shall be governed by a law other than English law.\" However, some concerns have been raised over the question of how far \"embracing\" sharia law would be compliant with the UK's obligation under human rights law.\nIn March 2014, the Law Society of England and Wales issued instructions on how to draft sharia-compliant wills for the network of sharia courts which has grown up in Islamic communities to deal with disputes between Muslim families, and so Williams's idea of sharia in the UK was, for a time, seen to bear fruit. The instructions were withdrawn in November 2014.\nComments on the British government.\nOn 8 June 2011, Williams said that the British government was committing Britain to \"radical, long-term policies for which no-one voted\". Writing in the \"New Statesman\" magazine, Williams raised concerns about the coalition's health, education and welfare reforms. He said there was \"indignation\" due to a lack of \"proper public argument\". He also said that the \"Big Society\" idea was viewed with \"widespread suspicion\", noting also that \"we are still waiting for a full and robust account of what the Left would do differently and what a Left-inspired version of localism would look like\". The article also said there was concern that the government would abandon its responsibility for tackling child poverty, illiteracy and poor access to the best schools. He also expressed concern about the \"quiet resurgence of the seductive language of 'deserving' and 'undeserving' poor\" and the steady pressure to increase \"what look like punitive responses to alleged abuses of the system\". In response, David Cameron said that he \"profoundly disagreed\" with Williams's claim that the government was forcing through \"radical policies for which no one voted\". Cameron said that the government was acting in a \"good and moral\" fashion and defended the \"Big Society\" and the coalition's deficit reduction, welfare and education plans. \"I am absolutely convinced that our policies are about actually giving people a greater responsibility and greater chances in their life, and I will defend those very vigorously\", he said. \"By all means let us have a robust debate but I can tell you, it will always be a two-sided debate.\"\nOn 26 November 2013, at Clare College, Cambridge, Williams gave the annual T.\u00a0S. Eliot Lecture, with the title \"Eliot's Christian Society and the Current Political Crisis\". In this, he recalled the poet's assertion that a competent agnostic would make a better prime minister than an incompetent Christian. \"I don't know what he would make of our present prime minister\", he said. \"I have a suspicion that he might have approved of him. I don't find that a very comfortable thought.\"\nComments on antisemitism.\nIn August 2017, Williams condemned antisemitism and backed a petition to remove the works of David Irving and other Holocaust denial books from the University of Manchester. In a letter to the university, Williams said \"At a time when there is, nationally and internationally, a measurable rise in the expression of extremist views I believe this question needs urgent attention.\"\nClimate and ecological crisis.\nIn October 2018, he signed the call to action supporting Extinction Rebellion.\n2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine.\nIn March 2022, following the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine, Williams urged senior leaders of the Russian Orthodox Church Outside Russia to call for an immediate ceasefire in Ukraine and the re-opening of diplomatic engagement. On 3 April, on BBC Radio 4's \"Sunday\" programme, Williams said there was a strong case for expelling the Russian Orthodox Church from the World Council of Churches, saying, \"When a Church is actively supporting a war of aggression, failing to condemn nakedly obvious breaches of any kind of ethical conduct in wartime, then other Churches do have the right to raise the question\u2026 I am still waiting for any senior member of the Orthodox hierarchy to say that the slaughter of the innocent is condemned unequivocally by all forms of Christianity.\"\nOn 12 April 2022, Williams called for an Easter ceasefire in Ukraine. He gave his remarks in Chernivtsi, at the \"Faith in Ukraine\" event, organised by the Elijah Interfaith Institute and the Peace Department.\nLGBT rights.\nIn April 2022, Williams and several other UK religious leaders signed an open letter to the then-prime minister Boris Johnson, urging him to include a ban on conversion therapy targeting transgender people alongside planned legislation to ban conversion therapy targeting sexuality.\nEcumenism.\nWilliams did his doctoral work on the mid-20th-century Russian Orthodox theologian Vladimir Lossky. He is currently patron of the Fellowship of Saint Alban and Saint Sergius, an ecumenical forum for Orthodox and Western (primarily Anglican) Christians. He has expressed his continuing sympathies with Orthodoxy in lectures and writings since that time.\nWilliams has written on the Spanish Catholic mystic Teresa of \u00c1vila. On the death of Pope John Paul II, he accepted an invitation to attend his funeral, the first Archbishop of Canterbury to attend the funeral of a Pope since the break under Henry VIII. He also attended the inauguration of Pope Benedict XVI. During the Pope's state visit to the United Kingdom in September 2010, the two led a service together at Westminster Abbey.\nWilliams said in April 2010 that the child sexual abuse scandal in the Catholic Church in Ireland had been a \"colossal trauma\" for Ireland in particular. His remarks were condemned by the second most senior Catholic bishop in Ireland, the Archbishop of Dublin, Diarmuid Martin, who said that \"Those working for renewal in the Catholic Church in Ireland did not need this comment on this Easter weekend and do not deserve it.\"\nHonours and awards.\nIn 2024, he received an honorary doctorate from the Teresianum Pontificia Facolt\u00e0 Teologica Pontificio Istituto di Spiritualit\u00e0, Roma.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70541", "revid": "277086", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70541", "title": "John A. Costello", "text": "Taoiseach (1948\u20131951, 1954\u20131957)\nJohn Aloysius Costello (20 June 1891 \u2013 5 January 1976) was an Irish Fine Gael politician who served as Taoiseach from 1948 to 1951 and from 1954 to 1957. He was leader of the opposition from 1951 to 1954 and from 1957 to 1959 and attorney general from 1926 to 1932. He served as a Teachta D\u00e1la (TD) from 1933 to 1943 and from 1944 to 1969.\nEarly life.\nCostello was born on 20 June 1891, in Fairview, Dublin. He was the younger son of John Costello senior, a civil servant, and Rose Callaghan. He was educated at St Joseph's, Fairview and then moved to O'Connell School for senior classes. He later attended University College Dublin, where he graduated with a degree in modern languages and law. He studied at King's Inns to become a barrister, winning the Victoria Prize there in 1913 and 1914.\nCostello was called to the Irish Bar in 1914 and practised as a barrister until 1922.\nIrish Free State.\nIn 1922, Costello joined the staff at the office of the attorney general in the newly established Irish Free State. Three years later he was called to the inner bar, and the following year, 1926, he became attorney general upon the formation of the Cumann na nGaedheal government led by W. T. Cosgrave. While serving in this position he represented the Free State at Imperial Conferences and League of Nations meetings.\nHe was also elected a bencher of the Honourable Society of King's Inns. Costello lost his position as attorney general when Fianna F\u00e1il came to power in 1932. The following year, however, he was elected to D\u00e1il \u00c9ireann as a Cumann na nGaedheal TD. His party soon merged with other parties to form Fine Gael.\nBlueshirts speech.\nOn 28 February 1934, a D\u00e1il debate was held on a bill to outlaw the wearing of uniforms (specifically designed to curtail the Blueshirts, a uniformed movement then associated with Fine Gael and formed to defend their candidates, meeting and rallies from IRA attack). Costello made a speech opposing the bill that has generated controversy ever since. In response to an assertion by minister for justice P. J. Ruttledge, that the Blueshirts had fascist leanings like the Italian Blackshirts and German Brownshirts, and that other European nations had taken similar actions against similar organisations, Costello stated:\nThe remark was a small part of a much longer speech whose main point was that the bill was an unconstitutional overreaction by the Fianna F\u00e1il government and an unfair scapegoating of the Blueshirts movement. However, the quote has since been the subject of much debate regarding the extent to which the Blueshirts, and by extension Fine Gael \u2013 and Costello himself \u2013 had ties to European fascist movements.\nOther D\u00e1il activity.\nDuring the D\u00e1il debate on the Emergency Powers Act 1939, Costello was highly critical of the act's arrogation of powers, stating: { He lost his seat at the general election of 1943 but regained it when de Valera called a snap election in 1944. From 1944 to 1948, he was Fine Gael front-bench spokesman on External Affairs.\n1948 general election.\nIn 1948, Fianna F\u00e1il had been in power for sixteen consecutive years and had been blamed for a downturn in the economy following World War II. The general election results showed Fianna F\u00e1il short of a majority, but still by far the largest party and appearing to be headed for a seventh term in government.\nHowever, the other parties in the D\u00e1il realised that between them, they had only one seat fewer than Fianna F\u00e1il; if they banded together, they would be able to form a government with the support of seven Independent deputies. Fine Gael, the Labour Party, the National Labour Party, Clann na Poblachta and Clann na Talmhan joined to form the first inter-party government in the history of the Irish state.\nTaoiseach (1948\u20131951).\nSince Fine Gael was the largest party in the coalition government, it had the task of providing a suitable candidate for Taoiseach. The Fine Gael leader, Richard Mulcahy, was unacceptable to Clann na Poblachta and its deeply republican leader, Se\u00e1n MacBride. This was due to Mulcahy's record during the Irish Civil War. Instead, Fine Gael and Clann na Poblachta agreed on Costello as a compromise candidate. Costello had never held a ministerial position nor was he involved in the Civil War. When told by Mulcahy of his nomination Costello was appalled, being content with his life as a barrister and as a part-time politician. He was persuaded to accept the nomination as Taoiseach by close non-political friends.\nDeclaration of the republic.\nDuring the campaign, Clann na Poblachta had promised to repeal the External Relations Act of 1936 but did not make an issue of this when the government was being formed. However, Costello and his T\u00e1naiste, William Norton of the Labour Party, also disliked the act. During the summer of 1948, the cabinet discussed repealing the act; however, no firm decision was made.\nIn September 1948, Costello was on an official visit to Canada when a reporter asked him about the possibility of Ireland leaving the British Commonwealth. Costello, for the first time, declared publicly that the Irish government was indeed going to repeal the External Relations Act and declare Ireland a republic. It has been suggested that this was a reaction to offence caused by the Governor General of Canada at the time, the Earl Alexander of Tunis, who was of Northern Irish descent and who allegedly arranged to have placed symbols of Northern Ireland\u2014notably a replica of the famous Roaring Meg cannon used in the Siege of Derry\u2014in front of Costello at an official dinner. Costello made no mention of these aspects on the second reading of the Republic of Ireland Bill on 24 November and, in his memoirs, claimed that Alexander's behaviour had been perfectly civil and could have had no bearing on a decision which had already been made.\nThe news took the Government of the United Kingdom and even some of Costello's ministers by surprise. The former had not been consulted and, following the declaration of the Republic in 1949, the UK passed the Ireland Act that year. This recognised the Republic of Ireland and guaranteed the position of Northern Ireland within the United Kingdom for so long as a majority there wanted to remain in the United Kingdom. It also granted full rights to any citizens of the republic living in the United Kingdom. Ireland left the Commonwealth on 18 April 1949, when the Republic of Ireland Act 1948 came into force. Frederick Henry Boland, Secretary of the Department of External Affairs, said caustically that the affair demonstrated that \"the Taoiseach has as much notion of diplomacy as I have of astrology.\" The British envoy Lord Rugby was equally critical of what he called a \"slipshod and amateur\" move.\nMany nationalists now saw partition as the last obstacle on the road to total national independence. Costello tabled a motion of protest against partition on 10 May 1949, without result.\nMother and Child Scheme.\nIn 1950, the independent-minded Minister for Health, Noel Browne, introduced the Mother and Child Scheme. The scheme would provide mothers with free maternity treatment and their children with free medical care up to the age of sixteen, which was the normal provision in other parts of Europe at that time. The bill was opposed by doctors, who feared a loss of income, and Roman Catholic bishops, who opposed the lack of means testing envisaged and feared the scheme could lead to birth control and abortion. The cabinet was divided over the issue, many feeling that the state could not afford such a scheme priced at IR\u00a32,000,000 annually. Costello and others in the cabinet made it clear that in the face of such opposition, they would not support the Minister. Browne resigned from the government on 11 April 1951, and the scheme was dropped. He immediately published his correspondence with Costello and the bishops, something which had hitherto not been done. Derivatives of the Mother and Child Scheme would be introduced in the Public Health Acts of 1954, 1957 and 1970.\nCostello took the opportunity to reconfirm his beliefs in Catholicism on 12 April 1951, in his speech on Dr. Browne's resignation: {\nCoalition achievements.\nThe Costello government had several noteworthy achievements. The Industrial Development Authority and C\u00f3ras Tr\u00e1cht\u00e1la were established, and the Minister for Health, Noel Browne, with the new Streptomycin, brought about an advance in the treatment of tuberculosis. A major housebuilding programme was launched, which saw a tenfold increase in local authority new build. Increases in various kinds of pensions were carried out, together with a modification of the means test, and a bill providing for a weekly half-holiday for agricultural workers was also passed.\nIreland also joined a number of organisations such as the Organization for European Economic Co-operation and the Council of Europe. However, the government refused to join NATO, allegedly because the British remained in Northern Ireland. The scheme to supply electricity to even the remotest parts of Ireland was also accelerated.\nElection defeat.\nWhile the \"Mother and Child\" incident did destabilise the government to some extent, it did not lead to its collapse as is generally thought. The government continued; however, prices were rising, a balance of payments crisis was looming, and two TDs withdrew their support for the government. These incidents added to the pressure on Costello and so he decided to call a general election for June 1951. The result was inconclusive but Fianna F\u00e1il returned to power. Costello resigned as Taoiseach. It was at this election that Costello's son Declan was elected to the D\u00e1il.\nOver the next three years while Fianna F\u00e1il was in power a dual-leadership role of Fine Gael was taking place. While Richard Mulcahy was the leader of the party, Costello, who had proved his skill as Taoiseach, remained as parliamentary leader of the party. He resumed his practice at the Bar; what is arguably his most celebrated case, the successful defence of \"The Leader\" against a libel action brought by the poet Patrick Kavanagh, dates from this period. Kavanagh generously praised Costello's forensic skill, and the two men became friends.\nTaoiseach (1954\u20131957).\nAt the 1954 general election Fianna F\u00e1il lost power. A campaign dominated by economic issues resulted in a Fine Gael-Labour Party-Clann na Talmhan government coming to power. Costello was elected Taoiseach for the second time.\nThe government could do little to change the ailing nature of Ireland's economy, with emigration and unemployment remaining high, and external problems such as the Suez Crisis compounding the difficulty. Measures to expand the Irish economy such as export profits tax relief introduced in 1956 would take years to have a sizable impact. Costello's government did have some success with Ireland becoming a member of the United Nations in 1955, and a highly successful visit to the United States in 1956, which began the custom by which the Taoiseach visits the White House each Saint Patrick's Day to present the US President with a bowl of shamrock. Although the government had a comfortable majority and seemed set for a full term in office, a resumption of IRA activity in Northern Ireland and Great Britain caused internal strains (see Border Campaign). The government took strong action against the republicans.\nDespite supporting the government from the backbenches, Se\u00e1n MacBride, the leader of Clann na Poblachta, tabled a motion of no confidence, based on the weakening state of the economy and in opposition to the government's stance on the IRA. Fianna F\u00e1il also tabled its motion of no confidence, and, rather than face almost certain defeat, Costello again asked President Se\u00e1n T. O'Kelly to dissolve the Oireachtas. The general election which followed in 1957 gave Fianna F\u00e1il an overall majority and started another sixteen years of unbroken rule for the party. Some of his colleagues questioned the wisdom of Costello's decision to call an election; the view was expressed that he was tired of politics, and depressed by his wife's sudden death the previous year.\nRetirement.\nFollowing the defeat of his government, Costello returned to the bar. In 1959, when Richard Mulcahy resigned the leadership of Fine Gael to James Dillon, Costello retired to the backbenches. Costello could have become party leader had he been willing to act in a full-time capacity. He remained as a TD until 1969, when he retired from politics, being succeeded as Fine Gael TD for Dublin South-East by Garret FitzGerald, who himself went on to become Taoiseach in a Fine Gael-led government.\nDuring his career, he was presented with several awards from many universities in the United States. He was also a member of the Royal Irish Academy from 1948. In March 1975, he was made a freeman of the city of Dublin, along with his old political opponent \u00c9amon de Valera. He practised at the bar until a short time before his death, in Dublin, on 5 January 1976, at the age of 84.\nGovernments.\nThe following governments were led by Costello:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70543", "revid": "35498457", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70543", "title": "Marcan priority", "text": "Marcan priority (or Markan priority) is the hypothesis that the Gospel of Mark was the first of the three synoptic gospels to be written, and was used as a source by the other two (Matthew and Luke). It is a central element in discussion of the synoptic problem\u2014the question of the documentary relationship among these three gospels.\nMost scholars since the late 19th century have accepted the concept of Marcan priority, although a number of scholars support different forms of Marcan priority or reject it altogether. It forms the foundation for the widely accepted two-source theory.\nHistory.\nThe tradition handed down by the Church Fathers regarded Matthew as the first Gospel written in Hebrew, which was later used as a source by Mark and Luke. It is seen as early as in Irenaeus's book \"Against Heresies\". Augustine of Hippo wrote in the 5th century: \"Now, those four evangelists whose names have gained the most remarkable circulation over the whole world, and whose number has been fixed as four, ...are believed to have written in the order which follows: first Matthew, then Mark, thirdly Luke, lastly John.\" And: \"Of these four, it is true, only Matthew is reckoned to have written in the Hebrew language; the others in Greek. And however they may appear to have kept each of them a certain order of narration proper to himself, this certainly is not to be taken as if each individual writer chose to write in ignorance of what his predecessor had done...\".\nThis view of Gospel origins, however, began to be challenged in the late 18th century, when Gottlob Christian Storr proposed in 1786 that Mark was the first to be written.\nStorr's idea met with little acceptance at first, with most scholars favoring either Matthaean priority, under the traditional Augustinian hypothesis or the Griesbach hypothesis, or a fragmentary theory (according to which, stories about Jesus were recorded in several smaller documents and notebooks and combined by the evangelists to create the Synoptic Gospels). Working within the fragmentary theory, Karl Lachmann in 1835 compared the Synoptic Gospels in pairs and noted that, while Matthew frequently agreed with Mark against Luke in the order of passages and Luke agreed frequently with Mark against Matthew, Matthew and Luke rarely agreed with each other against Mark. Lachmann inferred from this that Mark best preserved a relatively fixed order of episodes in Jesus's ministry.\nIn 1838, two theologians, Christian Gottlob Wilke and Christian Hermann Weisse, independently extended Lachmann's reasoning to conclude that Mark not only best represented Matthew and Luke's source but also that Mark was Matthew and Luke's source. Their ideas were not immediately accepted, but Heinrich Julius Holtzmann's endorsement in 1863 of a qualified form of Marcan priority won general favor.\nThere was much debate at the time over whether Matthew and Luke used Mark itself or some Proto-Mark (Ur-Mark). In 1899 J. C. Hawkins took up the question with a careful statistical analysis and argued for Marcan priority without Proto-Mark, and other British scholars soon followed to strengthen the argument, which then received wide acceptance.\nMost scholars in the 20th century regarded Marcan priority as no longer a hypothesis but an established fact. Still, fresh challenges from B. C. Butler and William R. Farmer proved influential in reviving the rival hypothesis of Matthaean priority, and recent decades have seen scholars less certain about Marcan priority and more eager to explore all the alternatives.\nDependent hypotheses.\nIf Marcan priority is accepted, the next logical question is how to explain the extensive material, some 200 verses, shared between Matthew and Luke but not found at all in Mark\u2014the \"double tradition\". Furthermore, there are hundreds of instances where Matthew and Luke parallel Mark's account but agree against Mark in minor differences\u2014the \"minor agreements\". Different answers to this question give rise to different synoptic hypotheses.\nAlternatives.\nMarcan posteriority states that Mark's correspondence with other synoptics was due to Mark taking from them. The view of the Church Fathers such as Augustine was that the order in the New Testament was also the order of publication and inspiration \u2013 Matthew, then Mark, then Luke, then John. This is usually called the Augustinian hypothesis. A modern tweak of this view that maintains Matthaean priority is the two-gospel (Griesbach) hypothesis which holds that Mark used both Matthew and Luke as a source (thus, in order, Matthew\u2014Luke\u2014Mark). This view envisions a Mark who mostly collected the common material shared between Matthew and Luke.\nLucan priority has been revived in recent decades in the complex form of the Jerusalem school hypothesis, which also places Mark in the middle. Here, Mark uses Luke, then Matthew uses Mark but not Luke, while all three Synoptics draw from a hypothetical Greek translation of an earlier Hebrew work.\nSome theories deny literary priority to any one of the Synoptic Gospels, asserting that, whatever their chronological order of composition, none of them draws from any of the others. The multi-source hypothesis has each synoptic gospel combining a distinct mix of earlier documents, while the independence hypothesis denies any documentary relationship and regards each gospel as an original composition utilizing oral sources only.\nSome variations on Marcan priority propose an additional revision of Mark\u2014a \"Proto-Mark\" (\"Ur-Mark\") if earlier than the canonical Gospel, or a \"Deutero-Mark\" if later\u2014serving as a source for Matthew and/or Luke.\nEvidence.\nArguments for Marcan priority are usually made in contrast to its main rival, Matthaean priority, bringing into focus the question of whether Matthew was a source for Mark or vice versa. The evidence supporting Marcan priority is entirely internal.\nMany lines of evidence point to Mark having some sort of special place in the relationship among the Synoptics, as the \"middle term\" between Matthew and Luke. But this could mean that Mark is the common source of the other two (\"priority\"), or that it derives from both (\"posteriority\"), or even that it is an intermediary in transmission from one to the other\u2014in other words, many such arguments can support both Marcan priority and its rivals. Famously, the so-called \"Lachmann fallacy\", concerning the order of pericopae in Mark, was once used to argue for Marcan priority but is now seen as a largely neutral observation.\nModern arguments for or against Marcan priority tend to center on redactional plausibility, asking, for example, whether it is more reasonable that Matthew and Luke could have written as they did with Mark in hand, or that Mark could have written as he did with Matthew and Luke in hand, and whether any coherent rationale can be discerned underlying the redactional activity of the later evangelists.\nWhere matters of detailed wording are concerned, there is some uncertainty in the Gospel texts themselves, as textual criticism of the gospels is still an active field, which cannot even decide, for example, on Mark's original ending. Such issues often intersect with the synoptic problem; for example, B.\u00a0H. Streeter famously dismissed many of the \"minor agreements\" so troublesome for the two-source theory by appealing to textual corruption driven typically by harmonization.\nMarcan style.\nMark's style of Greek is unique among the Gospels. Some scholars have argued that Mark's style is unsophisticated and unrefined or awkward. But others find Mark's Greek very dense and detailed. Mark is full of Latinisms, in idioms and vocabulary. Mark tends to conjoin verbs and sentences with (, \"and\"); in fact, more than half the verses in Mark begin with . Mark is also notably fond of (, \"immediately\") and (, \"again\"), frequently uses dual expressions, and often prefers the historical present. In essence, then, Mark's style is not so much literary as thoroughly colloquial.\nThe parallel passages in Matthew and especially in Luke tend to be in a more polished and eloquent style of literary Greek. Where Mark uses an unusual word or expression, Matthew and Luke often substitute something more natural. Though they often add material of substance, they tend to trim down Mark's redundancies and verbosity and express his meaning more concisely.\nSupporters of Marcan priority see this as Matthew and Luke improving the style of the material they incorporate from Mark. Supporters of Marcan posteriority, however, see Mark as recasting material from Matthew and Luke in his own peculiar style, less like lofty literature and more in a vivid, fast-moving style befitting oral preaching.\nContent not present in Mark.\nMark's gospel is by far the shortest, just over half the length of Luke, and omits much found in Matthew and Luke. In fact, while the majority of Mark is included in the other two Synoptics, the additional material shared between Matthew and Luke only is quite extensive.\nWhile Marcan priority easily sees Matthew and Luke building upon Mark by adding new material, Marcan posteriority must explain some surprising omissions. Mark has no infancy narrative nor any version of the Lord's Prayer, for example.\nNor does Mark have more than a handful of unique pericopes. This is expected under Marcan priority, where Matthew has reused nearly everything he found in Mark, but if Mark was written last, it is harder to explain why so little new material was added.\nHowever, Mark's selection of material must be explained in either case, unless it is to be believed that the author of Mark knew nothing more about Jesus than what was written in Mark. Bauckham argues that Mark's content is limited to what Peter himself had witnessed, or at least learned from trusted associates. Powers argues that Mark's purpose is fundamentally kerygmatic, needing to hold the attention of outsiders hearing the Gospel preached for the first time, and so focuses on who Jesus was and what he did, eschewing the sort of lengthy teachings that dominate the double tradition and most of Special Matthew. So, with Mark's selection process better understood, these omissions per se are no longer viewed as such compelling evidence for Marcan priority.\nContent found only in Mark.\nThere are very few passages in Mark with no parallel in either Matthew or Luke, which makes them all the more significant:\nIf Mark is drawn from Matthew and Luke, it is hard to see why so little material would be added, if anything were going to added at all, and the choice of additions is also rather strange. On the other hand, if Mark was written first, it is easier to see why Matthew and Luke would omit these passages. These two healings are the only ones in the Synoptics involving the use of saliva (but cf. the healing of the man born blind in ), and the naked runaway is an obscure incident with no obvious meaning or purpose.\nThis does not tell the whole story, for altogether Mark has (depending on the method of counting) about 155 verses included in neither Matthew nor Luke\u2014nearly a quarter of the entire Gospel of Mark. Most of these are details omitted in the parallel passages, rather than distinct pericopes. In fact, apart from sayings material, nearly every pericope in Mark is longer than its parallels in Matthew and Luke. An illustrative example is the calming of the storm:\nMark's unique details tend to be, by necessity, non-essential ones. Marcan priority sees Matthew and Luke trimming away trivial narrative details in favor of the extensive material they wished to add elsewhere. But under Marcan posteriority, these details must have been added to Mark to make the stories more vivid and clear. In either case, Mark must have had an independent source (traditionally, Peter) spanning nearly the entire Gospel; but if so, Marcan posteriority requires a complex and skillful weaving together of this source with both Matthew and Luke, even within individual sentences, which would have been a challenging task.\nHard readings.\nOften the differences in Mark from the parallels in Matthew and Luke are \"hard readings\" (Lectio Difficilior), which seem to portray Jesus or the apostles in a negative light or in ways that a later redactor would likely find uncongenial. Marcan priority argues that these hard readings were more likely original to Mark and then smoothed out or omitted when Matthew and Luke encountered them, rather than added by Mark to accounts lacking them.\nNotable hard readings unique to Mark include:\nMarcan posteriority faces the harder task of accounting for these as Marcan changes, but does so by appealing to Mark's fondness for vivid detail and for starkly contrasting Jesus' teachings with the attitudes of those around him.\nOrder.\nComparing the sequential order of parallel pericopes among the three Synoptics, the arrangement often varies, but some general patterns emerge. Mark nearly always follows Matthew and Luke where they agree in order and one or the other when they disagree. On the other hand, the double tradition pericopae shared between Matthew and Luke show little agreement in order.\nSuch observations have been studied in detail for centuries, but the difficulty has been in how to interpret them. Marcan priority views this order as support for Matthew and Luke each building upon Mark; Marcan posteriority, however, sees this order as proof that Mark drew alternately from Matthew and Luke. Even the Augustinian hypothesis can see Mark adapting Matthew's order, then Luke adapting Mark's order.\nDualisms.\nMark displays a special fondness for \"dualisms\" of various kinds, one of which is repeating essentially the same thing in two adjacent phrases. In a majority of cases, the parallel passages in Matthew and Luke, if any, echo only one of the two, and it often happens that Matthew chooses one and Luke chooses the other. Some prominent examples:\nSupporters of Marcan posteriority advance these as clear cases of Mark conflating the parallel accounts from Matthew and Luke. Supporters of Marcan priority, on the other hand, point to a larger number of instances where both Matthew and Luke have chosen the same half of a Marcan dualism and argue that, when each gospel trimmed down these redundant expressions, sometimes by chance Matthew and Luke made opposite choices.\nRiley observes when Matthew has one or both halves of a Marcan dualism, it usually occurs where Matthew and Mark are following the same sequence; when Luke has one or both halves of a Marcan dualism, it always occurs where Luke and Mark are following the same sequence. This is expected under Marcan posteriority, assuming the Marcan account can more easily refer to Matthew from memory, but more difficult to explain under Marcan priority.\nEditorial fatigue.\nGoodacre lists a number of occasions where it appears that Matthew or Luke begin by altering Mark, but become fatigued and lapse into copying Mark directly, even when doing so is inconsistent with the changes they have already made. Alan Kirk, on the other hand, questions the idea that Matthew and Luke had a deficient concentration. Rather than redacting visually the evangelists used their memories to copy passages from Mark. Kirk argues that such skillful writers should not be accused of carelessness, and the instances of fatigue can be explained as a living reactualization of their sources.\nFor example, Matthew is more precise than Mark in the titles he gives to rulers, and initially gives Herod Antipas the correct title of \"tetrarch\", yet he lapses into calling him \"king\" at a later verse, apparently because he was copying Mark at that point.\nAnother example is Luke's version of the Parable of the Sower, regarding the seed sown on rocky ground, where Luke omits several elements of the parable, but then follows Mark in the parable's interpretation. Luke says merely that the seed withered for lack of moisture and does not mention the seed springing up quickly, nor the lack of roots, nor being scorched by the sun; yet these omissions remain in the interpretation as, respectively, receiving the word with joy, having no firm root, and the time of temptation.\nThis phenomenon, along with the lack of counterexamples of fatigue occurring in the opposite direction, supports Marcan priority.\nNaming of eyewitnesses.\nWhere Mark mentions someone by name, someone not well-known originally who could have been left anonymous, Bauckham argues that it is because his audience at the time could refer to them as living eyewitnesses. Several persons are named only in Mark:\nThe reverse situation of Matthew or Luke naming those unnamed in Mark never occurs. If, as Bauckham reasons, the reason for the omission of these names in Matthew and Luke is that these persons have since died, this phenomenon lends support to Mark being composed earliest.\nExternal evidence.\nThe early patristic evidence records a few traditions on the origins of the Synoptic Gospels. It never indicates that one gospel used another as a source and shows little concern even for their chronological order; the focus was rather on who composed them and on their apostolic authority. What evidence there is as to the order of composition or publication is seen as virtually unanimous agreement on placing Matthew first.\nThe earliest relevant source is Papias (c.\u2009105), whose surviving fragments report two notable facts, echoed by most later sources. The evangelist Mark, he says, was Peter's interpreter and compiled his Gospel from the preaching of Peter in Rome, which Peter then sanctioned for use in the churches. Matthew the Apostle, on the other hand, wrote his account himself in the \"Hebrew dialect\".\nThis account of the origin of Mark is seen as likely genuine by many scholars, though hardly all. If so, Mark's source is not the other two Synoptics but Peter\u2014unless Peter himself drew from them, as some propose.\nThe curious statement that Matthew's \"logia\" (as Papias calls it) was written in the \"Hebrew dialect\"\u2014the ordinary way of referring to either the Hebrew or the Aramaic language\u2014has been much discussed. The difficulty is that canonical Matthew is in Greek and does not appear to be a translation, nor is any such original Hebrew version known. Some scholars have argued that Papias simply meant \"a Semitic style\" in Greek. Other synoptic theorists have speculated on some role of this \"logia\" as a source for the canonical Gospels; the hypothesis, for example, that canonical Matthew was a recension of the \"logia\" making use also of Mark's Gospel was the original foundation for the two-source theory.\nEphrem the Syrian (c.\u2009350) is more explicit about the Gospels' languages: \"Matthew the Hebrew wrote this, and behold it was turned into Greek. [...] Matthew wrote the Gospel in Hebrew, Mark in Latin from Simon in the city of Rome, Luke in Greek,\" and this is echoed in many later sources such as Gregory of Nazianzus. Mark writing in Latin may have arisen merely by inference, but it is true that canonical Mark exhibits numerous Latinisms, and some have argued that indeed canonical Mark was translated from a Latin original. Most scholars, however, reject this view and consider the Greek original.\nIrenaeus (c.\u2009185), who knew the work of Papias, gives the first extant account of the origins of Luke (to which later sources add little) and of all four Gospels together: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;So Matthew, among the Hebrews in their own dialect, brought forth a writing of the Gospel, while Peter and Paul in Rome were evangelizing and founding the church. But after their departure Mark, the disciple and interpreter of Peter, himself handed what was preached by Peter down to us in writing. And Luke, the follower of Paul, set forth in a book the Gospel that was preached by him. Then John, the disciple of the Lord and also the one who leaned against his chest, also published the Gospel when residing in Ephesus of Asia.\nIt is doubtful whether Irenaeus intends a chronological order in this passage; \"while\" need not be understood temporally, and \"after their departure\" need not indicate the time of composition, but simply that the apostles' testimony survived in writing even after they themselves were gone. Elsewhere Irenaeus often prefers the order Matthew\u2014Luke\u2014Mark\u2014John when addressing the Gospels together, and this order thereafter recurs commonly in a wide variety of ancient sources. In fact, early Bibles and canons arranged the four Gospels in many different sequences, though most placed Matthew first among the Synoptics.\nFrom Clement (c.\u2009195), who probably also knew the work of Papias, comes a unique and much-discussed statement that the gospels with genealogies (i.e., Matthew and Luke) were \"written before\" (), in contrast to Mark. Farmer touted this as support for Marcan posteriority, but Carlson argued that the word was better interpreted as \"openly published\", in contrast to Mark's initially private circulation.\nOrigen (c.\u2009250), a pupil of Clement who also knew the work of Irenaeus well, enumerates the Gospels as follows: \"As learned by tradition\u2026 the first written was Matthew\u2026 the second, Mark\u2026 the third, Luke\u2026 after all of them, John.\" Most readers then and now have seen this as a clear statement of chronology, though some have doubted that was Origen's intent. In any case, this canonical order was increasingly well established by this time, and subsequent sources accepted this temporal sequence.\nAugustine (c.\u2009400) recites this traditional chronological order and adds his own influential inferences. Denying that each evangelist wrote in ignorance of his predecessors, he describes Mark as \"seemingly an attendant and epitomizer\" of Matthew. Later in the same work, Augustine revises his opinion and sees Mark as following not only Matthew but also Luke; Mark \"walks with both\". This is sometimes seen as the first suggestion that one Gospel used another as a source, but it is not at all clear whether Augustine had literary dependence in mind.\nIn summary, the external evidence stands against Matthew using Mark, inasmuch as Matthew was written first, and against Mark directly using Matthew, unless perhaps either of these canonical Gospels is a translation into Greek influenced by the other. The patristic consensus, rather, was literary independence. However, the value of this external evidence is uncertain; most synoptic scholars regard it as being of little help and focus almost entirely on the internal evidence instead.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\nHypothesis about Christian Bible Gospel of Mark"}
{"id": "70547", "revid": "125972", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70547", "title": "Breast cancer", "text": "Cancer that originates in mammary glands\nMedical condition&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nBreast cancer is a cancer that develops from breast tissue. Signs of breast cancer may include: a lump in the breast, a change in breast shape, dimpling of the skin, milk rejection, fluid coming from the nipple, a newly inverted nipple, or a red or scaly patch of skin. In those with distant spread of the disease, there may be bone pain, swollen lymph nodes, shortness of breath, or yellow skin.\nRisk factors for developing breast cancer include obesity, a lack of physical exercise, alcohol consumption, hormone replacement therapy during menopause, ionizing radiation, an early age at first menstruation, having children late in life (or not at all), older age, having a prior history of breast cancer, and a family history of breast cancer. About five to ten percent of cases are the result of an inherited genetic predisposition, including \"BRCA\" mutations among others. Breast cancer most commonly develops in cells from the lining of milk ducts and the lobules that supply these ducts with milk. Cancers developing from the ducts are known as ductal carcinomas, while those developing from lobules are known as lobular carcinomas. There are more than 18 other sub-types of breast cancer. Some, such as ductal carcinoma in situ, develop from pre-invasive lesions. The diagnosis of breast cancer is confirmed by taking a biopsy of the concerning tissue. Once the diagnosis is made, further tests are carried out to determine if the cancer has spread beyond the breast and which treatments are most likely to be effective.\nBreast cancer screening can be instrumental, given that the size of a breast cancer and its spread are among the most critical factors in predicting the prognosis of the disease. Breast cancers found during screening are typically smaller and less likely to have spread outside the breast. Training health workers to do clinical breast examination may have potential to detect breast cancer at an early stage. A 2013 Cochrane review found that it was unclear whether mammographic screening does more harm than good, in that a large proportion of women who test positive turn out not to have the disease. A 2009 review for the US Preventive Services Task Force found evidence of benefit in those 40 to 70 years of age, and the organization recommends screening every two years in women 50 to 74 years of age.\nThe medications tamoxifen or raloxifene may be used in an effort to prevent breast cancer in those who are at high risk of developing it. Surgical removal of both breasts is another preventive measure in some high risk women. In those who have been diagnosed with cancer, a number of treatments may be used, including surgery, radiation therapy, chemotherapy, hormonal therapy, and targeted therapy. Types of surgery vary from breast-conserving surgery to mastectomy. Breast reconstruction may take place at the time of surgery or at a later date. In those in whom the cancer has spread to other parts of the body, treatments are mostly aimed at improving quality of life and comfort.\nOutcomes for breast cancer vary depending on the cancer type, the extent of disease, and the person's age. The five-year survival rates in England and the United States are between 80 and 90%. In developing countries, five-year survival rates are lower. Worldwide, breast cancer is the leading type of cancer in women, accounting for 25% of all cases. In 2018, it resulted in two million new cases and 627,000 deaths. It is more common in developed countries, and is more than 100 times more common in women than in men. For transgender individuals on gender-affirming hormone therapy, breast cancer is five times more common in cisgender women than in transgender men, and 46 times more common in transgender women than in cisgender men.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSigns and symptoms.\nMost people with breast cancer have no symptoms at the time of diagnosis; their tumor is detected by a breast cancer screening test. For those who do have symptoms, a new lump in the breast is most common. Most breast lumps are not cancer, though lumps that are painless, hard, and with irregular edges are more likely to be cancerous. Other symptoms include swelling or pain in the breast; dimpling, thickening, redness, or dryness of the breast skin; and pain, or inversion of the nipple. Some may experience unusual discharge from the breasts, or swelling of the lymph nodes under the arms or along the collar bone.\nSome less common forms of breast cancer cause distinctive symptoms. Up to 5% of people with breast cancer have inflammatory breast cancer, where cancer cells block the lymph vessels of one breast, causing the breast to substantially swell and redden over three to six months. Up to 3% of people with breast cancer have Paget's disease of the breast, with eczema-like red, scaly irritation on the nipple and areola.\nAdvanced tumors can spread (metastasize) beyond the breast, most commonly to the bones, liver, lungs, and brain. Bone metastases can cause swelling, progressive bone pain, and weakening of the bones that leads to fractures. Liver metastases can cause abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting, and skin problems \u2013 rash, itchy skin, or yellowing of the skin (jaundice). Those with lung metastases experience chest pain, shortness of breath, and regular coughing. Metastases in the brain can cause persistent headache, seizures, nausea, vomiting, and disruptions to the affected person's speech, vision, memory, and regular behavior.\nScreening.\nBreast cancer screening refers to testing otherwise-healthy women for breast cancer in an attempt to diagnose breast tumors early when treatments are more successful. The most common screening test for breast cancer is low-dose X-ray imaging of the breast, called mammography. Each breast is pressed between two plates and imaged. Tumors can appear unusually dense within the breast, distort the shape of surrounding tissue, or cause small dense flecks called microcalcifications. Radiologists generally report mammogram results on a standardized scale \u2013 the six-point Breast Imaging-Reporting and Data System (BI-RADS) is the most common globally \u2013 where a higher number corresponds to a greater risk of a cancerous tumor.\nA mammogram also reveals breast density; dense breast tissue appears opaque on a mammogram and can obscure tumors. BI-RADS categorizes breast density into four categories. Mammography can detect around 90% of breast tumors in the least dense breasts (called \"fatty\" breasts), but just 60% in the most dense breasts (called \"extremely dense\"). Women with particularly dense breasts can instead be screened by ultrasound, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), or tomosynthesis, all of which more sensitively detect breast tumors.\nRegular screening mammography reduces breast cancer deaths by at least 20%. Most medical guidelines recommend annual screening mammograms for women aged 50\u201370. Screening also reduces breast cancer mortality in women aged 40\u201349, and some guidelines recommend annual screening in this age group as well. For women at high risk for developing breast cancer, most guidelines recommend adding MRI screening to mammography, to increase the chance of detecting potentially dangerous tumors. Regularly feeling one's own breasts for lumps or other abnormalities, called breast self-examination, does not reduce a person's chance of dying from breast cancer. Clinical breast exams, where a health professional feels the breasts for abnormalities, are common; whether they reduce the risk of dying from breast cancer is not known. Regular breast cancer screening is commonplace in most wealthy nations, but remains uncommon in the world's poorer countries.\nStill, mammography has its disadvantages. Overall, screening mammograms miss about 1 in 8 breast cancers, they can also give false-positive results, causing extra anxiety and making patients overgo unnecessary additional exams, such as bioposies.\nDiagnosis.\nThose who have a suspected tumor from a mammogram or physical exam first undergo additional imaging \u2013 typically a second \"diagnostic\" mammogram and ultrasound \u2013 to confirm its presence and location. A biopsy is then taken of the suspected tumor. Breast biopsy is typically done by core needle biopsy, with a hollow needle used to collect tissue from the area of interest. Suspected tumors that appear to be filled with fluid are often instead sampled by fine-needle aspiration. Around 10\u201320% of breast biopsies are positive for cancer. Most biopsied breast masses are instead caused by fibrocystic breast changes, a term that encompasses benign pockets of fluid, cell growth, or fibrous tissue.\nClassification.\nBreast cancers are classified by several grading systems, each of which assesses a tumor characteristic that impacts a person's prognosis. First, a tumor is classified by the tissue it arises from, or the appearance of the tumor tissue under a microscope. Most breast cancers (85%) are ductal carcinoma \u2013 derived from the lining of the mammary ducts. 10% are lobular carcinoma \u2013 derived from the mammary lobes \u2013 or mixed ductal/lobular carcinoma. Rarer types include mucinous carcinoma (around 2.5% of cases; surrounded by mucin), tubular carcinoma (1.5%; full of small tubes of epithelial cells), medullary carcinoma (1%; resembling \"medullary\" or middle-layer tissue), and papillary carcinoma (1%; covered in finger-like growths). Oftentimes a biopsy reveals cells that are cancerous but have not yet spread beyond their original location. This condition, called carcinoma in situ, is often considered \"precancerous\" rather than a dangerous cancer itself. Those with ductal carcinoma in situ (in the mammary ducts) are at increased risk for developing true invasive breast cancer \u2013 around a third develop breast cancer within five years. Lobular carcinoma in situ (in the mammary lobes) rarely causes a noticeable lump, and is often found incidentally during a biopsy for another reason. It is commonly spread throughout both breasts. Those with lobular carcinoma in situ also have an increased risk of developing breast cancer \u2013 around 1% develop breast cancer each year. However, their risk of dying of breast cancer is no higher than the rest of the population.\nInvasive tumor tissue is assigned a grade based on how distinct it appears from healthy breast. Breast tumors are graded on three features: the proportion of cancer cells that form tubules, the appearance of the cell nucleus, and how many cells are actively replicating. Each feature is scored on a three-point scale, with a higher score indicating less healthy looking tissue. A grade is assigned based on the sum of the three scores. Combined scores of 3, 4, or 5 represent grade 1, a slower-growing cancer. Scores of 6 or 7 represent grade 2. Scores of 8 or 9 represent grade 3, a faster-growing, more aggressive cancer.\nIn addition to grading, tumor biopsy samples are now tested by immunohistochemistry to determine if the tissue contains the proteins estrogen receptor (ER), progesterone receptor (PR), or human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2). Earlier ER and PR were quantified using standardized assays developed by New England Nuclear &amp; Wittliff. Tumors containing either ER or PR are called \"hormone receptor-positive\" and can be treated with hormone therapies. Around 15 to 20% of tumors contain HER2; these can be treated with HER2-targeted therapies. The remainder that do not contain ER, PR, or HER2 are called \"triple-negative\" tumors, and tend to grow more quickly than other breast cancer types.\nAfter the tumor is evaluated, the breast cancer case is staged using the American Joint Committee on Cancer and Union for International Cancer Control's TNM staging system. Scores are assigned based on characteristics of the tumor (T), lymph nodes (N), and any metastases (M). T scores are determine by the size and extent of the tumor. Tumors less than 2\u00a0centimeters (cm) across are designated T1. Tumors 2\u20135\u00a0cm across are T2. A tumor greater than 5\u00a0cm across is T3. Tumors that extend to the chest wall or to the skin are designated T4. N scores are based on whether the cancer has spread to nearby lymph nodes. N0 indicates no spread to the lymph nodes. N1 is for tumors that have spread to the closest axillary lymph nodes (called \"level I\" and \"level II\" axillary lymph nodes, in the armpit). N2 is for spread to the intramammary lymph nodes (on the other side of the breast, near the chest center), or for axillary lymph nodes that appear attached to each other or to the tissue around them (a sign of more severely affected tissue). N3 designates tumors that have spread to the highest axillary lymph nodes (called \"level 3\" axillary lymph nodes, above the armpit near the shoulder), to the supraclavicular lymph nodes (along the neck), or to both the axillary and intramammary lymph nodes. The M score is binary: M0 indicates no evidence metastases; M1 indicates metastases have been detected.\nTNM scores are then combined with tumor grades and ER/PR/HER2 status to calculate a cancer case's \"prognostic stage group\". Stage groups range from I (best prognosis) to IV (worst prognosis), with groups I, II, and III further divided into subgroups IA, IB, IIA, IIB, IIIA, IIIB, and IIIC. In general, tumors of higher T and N scores and higher grades are assigned higher stage groups. Tumors that are ER, PR, and HER2 positive are slightly lower stage group than those that are negative. Tumors that have metastasized are stage IV, regardless of the other scored characteristics.\nManagement.\nThe management of breast cancer depends on the affected person's health, the cancer case's molecular characteristics, and how far the tumor has spread at the time of diagnosis.\nLocal tumors.\nThose whose tumors have not spread beyond the breast often undergo surgery to remove the tumor and some surrounding breast tissue. The surgery method is typically chosen to spare as much healthy breast tissue as possible, removing just the tumor (lumpectomy) or a larger part of the breast (partial mastectomy). Those with large or multiple tumors, high genetic risk of subsequent cancers, or who are unable to receive radiation therapy may instead opt for full removal of the affected breast(s) (full mastectomy). To reduce the risk of cancer spreading, women will often have the nearest lymph node removed in a procedure called sentinel lymph node biopsy. Dye is injected near the tumor site, and several hours later the lymph node the dye accumulates in is removed.\nAfter surgery, many undergo radiotherapy to decrease the chance of cancer recurrence. Those who had lumpectomies receive radiation to the whole breast. Those who had a mastectomy and are at elevated risk of tumor spread \u2013 tumor greater than five centimeters wide, or cancerous cells in nearby lymph nodes \u2013 receive radiation to the mastectomy scar and chest wall. If cancerous cells have spread to nearby lymph nodes, those lymph nodes will be irradiated as well. Radiation is typically given five days per week, for up to seven weeks. Radiotherapy for breast cancer is typically delivered via external beam radiotherapy, where a device focuses radiation beams onto the targeted parts of the body. Instead, some undergo brachytherapy, where radioactive material is placed into a device inserted at the surgical site the tumor was removed from. Fresh radioactive material is added twice a day for five days, then the device is removed. Surgery plus radiation typically eliminates a person's breast tumor. Less than 5% of those treated have their breast tumor grow back. After surgery and radiation, the breast can be surgically reconstructed, either by adding a breast implant or transferring excess tissue from another part of the body.\nChemotherapy reduces the chance of cancer recurring in the next ten years by around a third. However, 1-2% of those on chemotherapy experience life-threatening or permanent side effects. To balance these benefits and risks, chemotherapy is typically offered to those with a higher risk of cancer recurrence. There is no established risk cutoff for offering chemotherapy; determining who should receive chemotherapy is controversial. Chemotherapy drugs are typically given in two- to three-week cycles, with periods of drug treatment interspersed with rest periods to recover from the therapies' side effects. Four to six cycles are given in total. Many classes of chemotherapeutic agents are effective for breast cancer treatment, including the DNA alkylating drugs (cyclophosphamide), anthracyclines (doxorubicin and epirubicin), antimetabolites (fluorouracil, capecitabine, and methotrexate), taxanes (docetaxel and paclitaxel), and platinum-based chemotherapies (cisplatin and carboplatin).\n Chemotherapies from different classes are typically given in combination, with particular chemotherapy drugs selected based on the affected person's health and the different chemotherapeutics' side effects. Anthrocyclines and cyclophosphamide cause leukemia in up to 1% of those treated. Anthrocyclines also cause congestive heart failure in around 1% of people treated. Taxanes cause peripheral neuropathy, which is permanent in up to 5% of those treated. The same chemotherapy agents can be given before surgery \u2013 called neoadjuvant therapy \u2013 to shrink tumors, making them easier to safely remove.\nFor those whose tumors are HER2-positive, adding the HER2-targeted antibody trastuzumab to chemotherapy reduces the chance of cancer recurrence and death by at least a third. Trastuzumab is given weekly or every three weeks for twelve months. Adding a second HER2-targeted antibody, pertuzumab slightly enhances treatment efficacy. In rare cases, trastuzumab can disrupt heart function, and so it is typically not given in conjunction with anthracyclines, which can also damage the heart.\nAfter their chemotherapy course, those whose tumors are ER-positive or PR-positive benefit from endocrine therapy, which reduces the levels of estrogens and progesterones that hormone receptor-positive breast cancers require to survive. Tamoxifen treatment blocks the ER in the breast and some other tissues, and reduces the risk of breast cancer death by around 40% over the next ten years. Chemically blocking estrogen production with GnRH-targeted drugs (goserelin, leuprolide, or triptorelin) and aromatase inhibitors (anastrozole, letrozole, or exemestane) slightly improves survival, but has more severe side effects. Side effects of estrogen depletion include hot flashes, vaginal discomfort, and muscle and joint pain. Endocrine therapy is typically recommended for at least five years after surgery and chemotherapy, and is sometimes continued for 10 years or longer.\nWomen with breast cancer who had a lumpectomy or a mastectomy and kept their other breast have similar survival rates to those who had a double mastectomy. There seems to be no survival advantage to removing the other breast, with only a 7% chance of cancer occurring in the other breast over 20 years.\nMetastatic disease.\nFor around 1 in 5 people treated for localized breast cancer, their tumors eventually spread to distant body sites \u2013 most commonly the nearby bones (67% of cases), liver (41%), lungs (37%), brain (13%), and peritoneum (10%). Those with metastatic disease can receive further chemotherapy, typically starting with capecitabine, an anthracycline, or a taxane. As one chemotherapy drug fails to control the cancer, another is started. In addition to the chemotherapeutic drugs used for localized cancer, gemcitabine, vinorelbine, etoposide, and epothilones are sometimes effective. Those with bone metastases benefit from regular infusion of the bone-strengthening agents denosumab and the bisphosphonates; infusion every three months reduces the chance of bone pain, fractures, and bone hypercalcemia.\nUp to 70% of those with ER-positive metastatic breast cancer benefit from additional endocrine therapy. Therapy options include those used in localized cancer, plus toremifene and fulvestrant, often used in combination with CDK4/6 inhibitors (palbociclib, ribociclib, or abemaciclib). When one endocrine therapy fails, most will benefit from transitioning to a second one. Some respond to a third sequential therapy as well. Adding an mTOR inhibitor, everolimus, can further slow the tumors' progression.\nThose with HER2-positive metastatic disease can benefit from continued use of trastuzumab, alone, in combination with pertuzumab, or in combination with chemotherapy. Those whose tumors continue to progress on trastuzumab benefit from HER2-targeted antibody drug conjugates (HER2 antibodies linked to chemotherapy drugs) trastuzumab emtansine or trastuzumab deruxtecan. The HER2-targeted antibody margetuximab can also prolong survival, as can HER2 inhibitors lapatinib, neratinib, or tucatinib.\nCertain therapies are targeted at those whose tumors have particular gene mutations: Alpelisib or capivasertib for those with mutations activating the protein PIK3CA. PARP inhibitors (olaparib and talazoparib) for those with mutations that inactivate BRCA1 or BRCA2. The immune checkpoint inhibitor antibody atezolizumab for those whose tumors express PD-L1. And the similar immunotherapy pembrolizumab for those whose tumors have mutations in various DNA repair pathways.\nImlunestrant (Inluriyo) was approved for medical use in the United States in September 2025.\nSupportive care.\nMany breast cancer therapies have side effects that can be alleviated with appropriate supportive care. Chemotherapy causes hair loss, nausea, and vomiting in nearly everyone who receives it. Antiemetic drugs can alleviate nausea and vomiting; cooling the scalp with a cold cap during chemotherapy treatments may reduce hair loss. Many complain of cognitive issues during chemotherapy treatment. These usually resolve within a few months of the end of chemotherapy treatment. Those on endocrine therapy often experience hot flashes, muscle and joint pain, and vaginal dryness/discomfort that can lead to issues having sex. Around half of women have their hot flashes alleviated by taking antidepressants; pain can be treated with physical therapy and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs; counseling and use of personal lubricants can improve sexual issues.\nIn women with non-metastatic breast cancer, psychological interventions such as cognitive behavioral therapy can have positive effects on outcomes such as cognitive impairment, anxiety, depression and mood disturbance, and can also improve the quality of life. Physical activity interventions, yoga and meditation may also have beneficial effects on health related quality of life, cognitive impairment, anxiety, fitness and physical activity in women with breast cancer following adjuvant therapy.\nIn-person and virtual peer support groups for patients and survivors of breast cancer can promote quality of life and companionship based on similar lived experiences. The potential benefits of peer support are particularly impactful for women with breast cancer facing additional unique challenges related to ethnicity and socioeconomic status. Peer support groups tailored to adolescents and young adult women can improve coping strategies against age-specific types of distress associated with breast cancer, including post-traumatic stress disorder and body image issues.\nPrognosis.\nBreast cancer prognosis varies widely depending on how far the tumor has spread at the time of diagnosis. Overall, 91% of women diagnosed with breast cancer survive at least five years from diagnosis. Those whose tumor(s) are completely confined to the breast (nearly two thirds of cases) have the best prognoses \u2013 over 99% survive at least five years. Those whose tumors have metastasized to distant sites have relatively poor prognoses \u2013 31% survive at least five years from the time of diagnosis. Triple-negative breast cancer (up to 15% of cases) and inflammatory breast cancer (up to 5% of cases) are particularly aggressive and have relatively poor prognoses. Those with triple-negative breast cancer have an overall five-year survival rate of 77% \u2013 91% for those whose tumors are confined to the breast; 12% for those with metastases. Those with inflammatory breast cancer are diagnosed after the cancer has already spread to the skin of the breast. They have an overall five-year survival rate of 39%; 19% for those with metastases. The relatively rare tumors with tubular, mucinous, or medullary growth tend to have better prognoses.\nIn addition to the factors that influence cancer staging, a person's age can also impact prognosis. Breast cancer before age 35 is rare, and is more likely to be associated with genetic predisposition to aggressive cancer. Conversely, breast cancer in those aged over 75 is associated with poorer prognosis.\nRisk factors.\nHormonal.\nUp to 80% of the variation in breast cancer frequency across countries is due to differences in reproductive history\nthat impact a woman's levels of female sex hormones (estrogens). Women who begin menstruating earlier (before age 12) or who undergo menopause later (after 51) are at increased risk of developing breast cancer. Women who give birth early in life are protected from breast cancer \u2013 someone who gives birth as a teenager has around a 70% lower risk of developing breast cancer than someone who does not have children. That protection wanes with higher maternal age at first birth, and disappears completely by age 35. Breastfeeding also reduces one's chance of developing breast cancer, with an approximately 4% reduction in breast cancer risk for every 12 months of breastfeeding experience. Those who lack functioning ovaries have reduced levels of estrogens, and therefore greatly reduced breast cancer risk.\nHormone replacement therapy for treatment of menopause symptoms can also increase a woman's risk of developing breast cancer, though the effect depends on the type and duration of therapy. Combined progesterone/estrogen therapy increases breast cancer risk \u2013 approximately doubling one's risk after 6\u20137 years of treatment (though the same therapy decreases the risk of colorectal cancer). Hormone treatment with estrogen alone has no effect on breast cancer risk, but increases one's risk of developing endometrial cancer, and therefore is only given to women who have undergone hysterectomies.\nIn the 1980s, the abortion\u2013breast cancer hypothesis posited that induced abortion increased the risk of developing breast cancer. This hypothesis was the subject of extensive scientific inquiry, which concluded that neither miscarriages nor abortions are associated with a heightened risk for breast cancer.\nThe use of hormonal birth control does not cause breast cancer for most women; if it has an effect, it is small (on the order of 0.01% per user\u2013year), temporary, and offset by the users' significantly reduced risk of ovarian and endometrial cancers. Among those with a family history of breast cancer, use of modern oral contraceptives does not appear to affect the risk of breast cancer.\nLifestyle.\nDrinking alcoholic beverages increases the risk of breast cancer, even among very light drinkers (women drinking less than half of one alcoholic drink per day). The risk is highest among heavy drinkers. Globally, about one in ten cases of breast cancer is caused by women drinking alcoholic beverages. Alcohol use is among the most common modifiable risk factors.\nObesity and diabetes increase the risk of breast cancer. A high body mass index (BMI) causes 7% of breast cancers while diabetes is responsible for 2%. At the same time the correlation between obesity and breast cancer is not at all linear. Studies show that those who rapidly gain weight in adulthood are at higher risk than those who have been overweight since childhood. Likewise, excess fat in the midriff seems to induce a higher risk than excess weight carried in the lower body. Dietary factors that may increase risk include a high-fat diet and obesity-related high cholesterol levels.\nDietary iodine deficiency may also play a role in the development of breast cancer.\nSmoking tobacco appears to increase the risk of breast cancer, with the greater the amount smoked and the earlier in life that smoking began, the higher the risk. In those who are long-term smokers, the relative risk is increased by 35% to 50%.\nA lack of physical activity has been linked to about 10% of cases. Sitting regularly for prolonged periods is associated with higher mortality from breast cancer. The risk is not negated by regular exercise, though it is lowered.\nActions to prevent breast cancer include not drinking alcoholic beverages, maintaining a healthy body composition, avoiding smoking and eating healthy food. Combining all of these (leading the healthiest possible lifestyle) would make almost a quarter of breast cancer cases worldwide preventable. The remaining three-quarters of breast cancer cases cannot be prevented through lifestyle changes.\nOther risk factors include circadian disruptions related to shift-work and routine late-night eating. A number of chemicals have also been linked, including polychlorinated biphenyls, polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons, and organic solvents. Although the radiation from mammography is a low dose, it is estimated that yearly screening from 40 to 80 years of age will cause approximately 225 cases of fatal breast cancer per million women screened.\nGenetics.\nAround 10% of those with breast cancer have a family history of the disease or genetic factors that put them at higher risk. Women who have had a first-degree relative (mother or sister) diagnosed with breast cancer are at a 30\u201350% increased risk of being diagnosed with breast cancer themselves. In those with zero, one or two affected relatives, the risk of breast cancer before the age of 80 is 7.8%, 13.3%, and 21.1% with a subsequent mortality from the disease of 2.3%, 4.2%, and 7.6% respectively.\nWomen with certain genetic variants are at higher risk of developing breast cancer. The most well known are variants of the BRCA genes \"BRCA1\" and \"BRCA2\". Women with pathogenic variants in either gene have around a 70% chance of developing breast cancer in their lifetime, as well as an approximately 33% chance of developing ovarian cancer. Pathogenic variants in \"PALB2\" \u2013 a gene whose product directly interacts with that of \"BRCA2\" \u2013 also increase breast cancer risk; a woman with such a variant has around a 50% increased risk of developing breast cancer. Variants in other tumor suppressor genes can also increase one's risk of developing breast cancer, namely \"p53\" (causes Li\u2013Fraumeni syndrome), \"PTEN\" (causes Cowden syndrome), and \"PALB1\".\nMedical conditions.\nBreast changes like atypical ductal hyperplasia found in benign breast conditions such as fibrocystic breast changes, are correlated with an increased breast cancer risk.\nDiabetes might also increase the risk of breast cancer. Autoimmune diseases such as lupus erythematosus seem also to increase the risk for the acquisition of breast cancer.\nWomen whose breasts have been exposed to substantial radiation doses before the age of 30 \u2013 typically due to repeated chest fluoroscopies or treatment for Hodgkin lymphoma \u2013 are at increased risk for developing breast cancer. Radioactive iodine therapy (used to treat thyroid disease) and radiation exposures after age 30 are not associated with breast cancer risk.\nPathophysiology.\nThe major causes of sporadic breast cancer are associated with hormone levels. Breast cancer is promoted by estrogen. This hormone activates the development of breast throughout puberty, menstrual cycles and pregnancy. The imbalance between estrogen and progesterone during the menstrual phases causes cell proliferation. Moreover, oxidative metabolites of estrogen can increase DNA damage and mutations. Repeated cycling and the impairment of repair process can transform a normal cell into pre-malignant and eventually malignant cell through mutation. During the pre-malignant stage, high proliferation of stromal cells can be activated by estrogen to support the development of breast cancer. During the ligand binding activation, the ER can regulate gene expression by interacting with estrogen response elements within the promotor of specific genes. The expression and activation of ER due to lack of estrogen can be stimulated by extracellular signals. The ER directly binding with the several proteins, including growth factor receptors, can promote the expression of genes related to cell growth and survival.\nBreast cancer, like other cancers, occurs because of an interaction between an environmental (external) factor and a genetically susceptible host. Normal cells divide as many times as needed, and stop. They attach to other cells and stay in place in tissues. Cells become cancerous when they lose their ability to stop dividing, to attach to other cells, to stay where they belong, and to die at the proper time.\nNormal cells will self-destruct (programmed cell death) when they are no longer needed. Until then, cells are protected from programmed death by several protein clusters and pathways. One of the protective pathways is the PI3K/AKT pathway; another is the RAS/MEK/ERK pathway. Sometimes the genes along these protective pathways are mutated in a way that turns them permanently \"on\", rendering the cell incapable of self-destructing when it is no longer needed. This is one of the steps that causes cancer in combination with other mutations. Normally, the \"PTEN\" protein turns off the PI3K/AKT pathway when the cell is ready for programmed cell death. In some breast cancers, the gene for the \"PTEN\" protein is mutated, so the PI3K/AKT pathway is stuck in the \"on\" position, and the cancer cell does not self-destruct.\nMutations that can lead to breast cancer have been experimentally linked to estrogen exposure. Additionally, G-protein coupled estrogen receptors have been associated with various cancers of the female reproductive system including breast cancer.\nAbnormal growth factor signaling in the interaction between stromal cells and epithelial cells can facilitate malignant cell growth. In breast adipose tissue, overexpression of leptin leads to increased cell proliferation and cancer.\nSome mutations associated with cancer, such as p53, \"BRCA1\" and \"BRCA2\", occur in mechanisms to correct errors in DNA. The inherited mutation in \"BRCA1\" or \"BRCA2\" genes can interfere with repair of DNA crosslinks and double-strand breaks (known functions of the encoded protein). These carcinogens cause DNA damage such as DNA crosslinks and double-strand breaks that often require repairs by pathways containing \"BRCA1\" and \"BRCA2\".\nGATA-3 directly controls the expression of estrogen receptor (ER) and other genes associated with epithelial differentiation, and the loss of GATA-3 leads to loss of differentiation and poor prognosis due to cancer cell invasion and metastasis.\nPrevention.\nLifestyle.\nWomen can reduce their risk of breast cancer by maintaining a healthy weight, reducing alcohol use, increasing physical activity, and breastfeeding. These modifications might prevent 38% of breast cancers in the US, 42% in the UK, 28% in Brazil, and 20% in China. The benefits with moderate exercise such as brisk walking are seen at all age groups including postmenopausal women. High levels of physical activity reduce the risk of breast cancer by about 14%. Strategies that encourage regular physical activity and reduce obesity could also have other benefits, such as reduced risks of cardiovascular disease and diabetes. A study that included data from 130,957 women of European ancestry found \"strong evidence that greater levels of physical activity and less sedentary time are likely to reduce breast cancer risk, with results generally consistent across breast cancer subtypes\".\nThe American Cancer Society and the American Society of Clinical Oncology advised in 2016 that people should eat a diet high in vegetables, fruits, whole grains, and legumes. Eating foods rich in soluble fiber contributes to reducing breast cancer risk. High intake of citrus fruit has been associated with a 10% reduction in the risk of breast cancer. Marine omega-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids appear to reduce the risk. High consumption of soy-based foods may reduce risk.\nPreventive surgery.\nRemoval of the breasts before breast cancer develops (called preventive mastectomy) reduces the risk of developing breast cancer by more than 95%. In women genetically predisposed to developing breast cancer, preventive mastectomy reduces their risk of dying from breast cancer. For those at normal risk, preventive mastectomy does not reduce their chance of dying, and so is generally not recommended. Removing the second breast in a person who has breast cancer (contralateral risk-reducing mastectomy or CRRM) may reduce the risk of cancer in the second breast, but it is not clear whether removing the second breast improves the chance of survival. An increasing number of women who test positive for faulty \"BRCA1\" or \"BRCA2\" genes choose to have risk-reducing surgery. The average waiting time for undergoing the procedure is two years, which is much longer than recommended.\nMedications.\nSelective estrogen receptor modulators (SERMs) reduce the risk of breast cancer but increase the risk of thromboembolism and endometrial cancer. There is no overall change in the risk of death. They are thus not recommended for the prevention of breast cancer in women at average risk but it is recommended they be offered for those at high risk and over the age of 35. The benefit of breast cancer reduction continues for at least five years after stopping a course of treatment with these medications. Aromatase inhibitors (such as exemestane and anastrozole) may be more effective than SERMs (such as tamoxifen) at reducing breast cancer risk and they are not associated with an increased risk of endometrial cancer and thromboembolism.\nEpidemiology.\nBreast cancer is the most common invasive cancer in women in most countries, accounting for 30% of cancer cases in women. In 2022, an estimated 2.3\u00a0million women were diagnosed with breast cancer, and 670,000 died of the disease. The incidence of breast cancer is rising by around 3% per year, as populations in many countries are getting older.\nRates of breast cancer vary across the world, but generally correlate with wealth. Around 1 in 12 women are diagnosed with breast cancer in wealthier countries, compared to 1 in 27 in lower income countries. Most of that difference is due to differences in menstrual and reproductive histories \u2013 women in wealthier countries tend to begin menstruating earlier and have children later, both factors that increase risk of developing breast cancer. People in lower income countries tend to have less access to breast cancer screening and treatments, and so breast cancer death rates tend to be higher. 1 in 71 women die of breast cancer in wealthy countries, while 1 in 48 die of the disease in lower income countries.\nBreast cancer predominantly affects women; less than 1% of those with breast cancer are men. Women can develop breast cancer as early as adolescence, but risk increases with age, and 75% of cases are in women over 50 years old. The risk over a woman's lifetime is approximately 1.5% at age 40, 3% at age 50, and more than 4% risk at age 70.\nHistory.\nBecause of its visibility, breast cancer was the form of cancer most often described in ancient documents. Because autopsies were rare, cancers of the internal organs were essentially invisible to ancient medicine. Breast cancer, however, could be felt through the skin, and in its advanced state often developed into fungating lesions: the tumor would become necrotic (die from the inside, causing the tumor to appear to break up) and ulcerate through the skin, weeping fetid, dark fluid.\nThe oldest discovered evidence of breast cancer is from Egypt and dates back 4200 years, to the Sixth Dynasty. The study of a woman's remains from the necropolis of Qubbet el-Hawa showed the typical destructive damage due to metastatic spread. The Edwin Smith Papyrus describes eight cases of tumors or ulcers of the breast that were treated by cauterization. The writing says about the disease, \"There is no treatment.\" For centuries, physicians described similar cases in their practices, with the same conclusion. Ancient medicine, from the time of the Greeks through the 17th century, was based on humoralism, and thus believed that breast cancer was generally caused by imbalances in the fundamental fluids that controlled the body, especially an excess of black bile. Alternatively it was seen as divine punishment.\nMastectomy for breast cancer was performed at least as early as AD 548, when it was proposed by the court physician Aetios of Amida to Theodora. It was not until doctors achieved greater understanding of the circulatory system in the 17th century that they could link breast cancer's spread to the lymph nodes in the armpit. In the early 18th century the French surgeon Jean Louis Petit performed total mastectomies that included removing the axillary lymph nodes, as he recognized that this reduced recurrence. Petit's work built on the methods of the surgeon Bernard Peyrilhe, who in the 17th century additionally removed the pectoral muscle underlying the breast, as he judged that this greatly improved the prognosis. But poor results and the considerable risk to the patient meant that physicians did not share the opinion of surgeons such as Nicolaes Tulp, who in the 17th century proclaimed \"the sole remedy is a timely operation.\" The eminent surgeon Richard Wiseman documented in the mid-17th century that following 12 mastectomies, two patients died during the operation, eight patients died shortly after the operation from progressive cancer and only two of the 12 patients were cured. Physicians were conservative in the treatment they prescribed in the early stages of breast cancer. Patients were treated with a mixture of detox purges, blood letting and traditional remedies that were supposed to lower acidity, such as the alkaline arsenic.\nWhen in 1664 Anne of Austria was diagnosed with breast cancer, the initial treatment involved compresses saturated with hemlock juice. When the lumps increased the King's physician commenced a treatment with arsenic ointments. The royal patient died in 1666 in atrocious pain. Each failing treatment for breast cancer led to the search for new treatments, spurring a market in remedies that were advertised and sold by quacks, herbalists, chemists and apothecaries. The lack of anesthesia and antiseptics made mastectomy a painful and dangerous ordeal. In the 18th century, a wide variety of anatomical discoveries were accompanied by new theories about the cause and growth of breast cancer. The investigative surgeon John Hunter claimed that neural fluid generated breast cancer. Other surgeons proposed that milk within the mammary ducts led to cancerous growths. Theories about trauma to the breast as cause for malignant changes in breast tissue were advanced. The discovery of breast lumps and swellings fueled controversies about hard tumors and whether lumps were benign stages of cancer. Medical opinion about necessary immediate treatment varied. The surgeon Benjamin Bell advocated removal of the entire breast, even when only a portion was affected.\nBreast cancer was uncommon until the 19th century, when improvements in sanitation and control of deadly infectious diseases resulted in dramatic increases in lifespan. Previously, most women had died too young to have developed breast cancer. In 1878, an article in \"Scientific American\" described historical treatment by pressure intended to induce local ischemia in cases when surgical removal were not possible. William Stewart Halsted started performing radical mastectomies in 1882, helped greatly by advances in general surgical technology, such as aseptic technique and anesthesia. The Halsted radical mastectomy often involved removing both breasts, associated lymph nodes, and the underlying chest muscles. This often led to long-term pain and disability, but was seen as necessary to prevent the cancer from recurring. Before the advent of the Halsted radical mastectomy, 20-year survival rates were only 10%; Halsted's surgery raised that rate to 50%.\nBreast cancer staging systems were developed in the 1920s and 1930s to determining the extent to which a cancer has developed by growing and spreading. The first case-controlled study on breast cancer epidemiology was done by Janet Lane-Claypon, who published a comparative study in 1926 of 500 breast cancer cases and 500 controls of the same background and lifestyle for the British Ministry of Health. Radical mastectomies remained the standard of care in the USA until the 1970s, but in Europe, breast-sparing procedures, often followed by radiation therapy, were generally adopted in the 1950s. In 1955 George Crile Jr. published \"Cancer and Common Sense\" arguing that cancer patients needed to understand available treatment options. Crile became a close friend of the environmentalist Rachel Carson, who had undergone a Halsted radical mastectomy in 1960 to treat her malign breast cancer. The US oncologist Jerome Urban promoted super radical mastectomies, taking even more tissue, until 1963, when the ten-year survival rates proved equal to the less-damaging radical mastectomy. Carson died in 1964 and Crile went on to published a wide variety of articles, both in the popular press and in medical journals, challenging the widespread use of the Halsted radical mastectomy. In 1973 Crile published \"What Women Should Know About the Breast Cancer Controversy\". When in 1974 Betty Ford was diagnosed with breast cancer, the options for treating breast cancer were openly discussed in the press. During the 1970s, a new understanding of metastasis led to perceiving cancer as a systemic illness as well as a localized one, and more sparing procedures were developed that proved equally effective.\nIn the 1980s and 1990s, thousands of women who had successfully completed standard treatment then demanded and received high-dose bone marrow transplants, thinking this would lead to better long-term survival. However, it proved completely ineffective, and 15\u201320% of women died because of the brutal treatment. The 1995 reports from the Nurses' Health Study and the 2002 conclusions of the Women's Health Initiative trial conclusively proved that HRT significantly increased the incidence of breast cancer.\nSociety and culture.\nBefore the 20th century, breast cancer was feared and discussed in hushed tones, as if it were shameful. As little could be safely done with primitive surgical techniques, women tended to suffer silently rather than seeking care. When surgery advanced, and long-term survival rates improved, women began raising awareness of the disease and the possibility of successful treatment. The \"Women's Field Army\", run by the American Society for the Control of Cancer (later the American Cancer Society) during the 1930s and 1940s was one of the first organized campaigns. In 1952, the first peer-to-peer support group, called \"Reach to Recovery\", began providing post-mastectomy, in-hospital visits from women who had survived breast cancer.\nThe breast cancer movement of the 1980s and 1990s developed out of the larger feminist movements and women's health movement of the 20th century. This series of political and educational campaigns, partly inspired by the politically and socially effective AIDS awareness campaigns, resulted in the widespread acceptance of second opinions before surgery, less invasive surgical procedures, support groups, and other advances in care.\nPink ribbon.\nA pink ribbon is the most prominent symbol of breast cancer awareness. Pink ribbons, which can be made inexpensively, are sometimes sold as fundraisers, much like poppies on Remembrance Day. They may be worn to honor those who have been diagnosed with breast cancer, or to identify products that the manufacturer would like to sell to consumers that are interested in breast cancer. In the 1990s, breast cancer awareness campaigns were launched by US-based corporations. As part of these cause-related marketing campaigns, corporations donated to a variety of breast cancer initiatives for every pink ribbon product that was purchased. The \"Wall Street Journal\" noted that \"the strong emotions provoked by breast cancer translate to a company's bottom line\". While many US corporations donated to existing breast cancer initiatives, others such as Avon established their own breast cancer foundations on the back of pink ribbon products.\nWearing or displaying a pink ribbon has been criticized by the opponents of this practice as a kind of slacktivism, because it has no practical positive effect. It has also been criticized as hypocrisy, because some people wear the pink ribbon to show good will towards women with breast cancer, but then oppose these women's practical goals, like patient rights and anti-pollution legislation. Critics say that the feel-good nature of pink ribbons and pink consumption distracts society from the lack of progress on preventing and curing breast cancer. It is also criticized for reinforcing gender stereotypes and objectifying women and their breasts. Breast Cancer Action launched the \"Think Before You Pink\" campaign in 2002 against pinkwashing, to target businesses that have co-opted the pink campaign to promote products that cause breast cancer, such as alcoholic beverages.\nBreast cancer culture.\nIn her 2006 book \"Pink Ribbons, Inc.: Breast Cancer and the Politics of Philanthropy\" Samantha King claimed that breast cancer has been transformed from a serious disease and individual tragedy to a market-driven industry of survivorship and corporate sales pitch. In 2010 Gayle Sulik argued that the primary purposes or goals of breast cancer culture are to maintain breast cancer's dominance as the pre-eminent women's health issue, to promote the appearance that society is doing something effective about breast cancer, and to sustain and expand the social, political, and financial power of breast cancer activists. In the same year Barbara Ehrenreich published an opinion piece in \"Harper's Magazine\", lamenting that in breast cancer culture, breast cancer therapy is viewed as a rite of passage rather than a disease. To fit into this mold, the woman with breast cancer needs to normalize and feminize her appearance, and minimize the disruption that her health issues cause anyone else. Anger, sadness, and negativity must be silenced. As with most cultural models, people who conform to the model are given social status, in this case as cancer survivors. Women who reject the model are shunned, punished and shamed. The culture is criticized for treating adult women like little girls, as evidenced by \"baby\" toys such as pink teddy bears given to adult women.\nEmphasis.\nIn 2009 the US science journalist Christie Aschwanden criticized that the emphasis on breast cancer screening may be harming women by subjecting them to unnecessary radiation, biopsies, and surgery. One-third of diagnosed breast cancers might recede on their own. Screening mammography efficiently finds non-life-threatening, asymptomatic breast cancers and precancers, even while overlooking serious cancers. According to the cancer researcher H. Gilbert Welch, screening mammography has taken the \"brain-dead approach that says the best test is the one that finds the most cancers\" rather than the one that finds dangerous cancers.\nIn 2002 it was noted that as a result of breast cancer's high visibility, the statistical results can be misinterpreted, such as the claim that one in eight women will be diagnosed with breast cancer during their lives \u2013 a claim that depends on the unrealistic assumption that no woman will die of any other disease before the age of 95. By 2010 the breast cancer survival rate in Europe was 91% at one years and 65% at five years. In the USA the five-year survival rate for localized breast cancer was 96.8%, while in cases of metastases it was only 20.6%. Because the prognosis for breast cancer was at this stage relatively favorable, compared to the prognosis for other cancers, breast cancer as cause of death among women was 13.9% of all cancer deaths. The second most common cause of death from cancer in women was lung cancer, the most common cancer worldwide for men and women. The improved survival rate made breast cancer the most prevalent cancer in the world. In 2010 an estimated 3.6\u00a0million women worldwide have had a breast cancer diagnosis in the past five years, while only 1.4\u00a0million male or female survivors from lung cancer were alive.\nHealth disparities in breast cancer.\nThere are ethnic disparities in the mortality rates for breast cancer as well as in breast cancer treatment. Breast cancer is the most prevalent cancer affecting women of every ethnic group in the United States. Breast cancer incidence among Black women aged 45 and older is higher than that of white women in the same age group. White women aged 60\u201384 have higher incidence rates of breast cancer than Black women. Despite this, Black women at every age are more likely to die of breast cancer.\nBreast cancer treatment has improved greatly over the years, but Black women are still less likely to obtain treatment compared to white women. Risk factors such as socioeconomic status, late-stage, or breast cancer at diagnosis, genetic differences in tumor subtypes, and differences in healthcare access all contribute to these disparities. Socioeconomic determinants affecting the disparity in breast cancer illness include poverty, culture, and social injustice. In Hispanic women, the incidence of breast cancer is lower than in non-Hispanic women, but is often diagnosed at a later stage than white women with larger tumors.\nBlack women are usually diagnosed with breast cancer at a younger age than white women. The median age of diagnosis for Black women is 59, in comparison to 62 in White women. The incidence of breast cancer in Black women has increased by 0.4% per year since 1975 and 1.5% per year among Asian/Pacific Islander women since 1992. Incidence rates were stable for non-Hispanic White, Hispanics, and Native American women. The five-year survival rate is noted to be 81% in Black women and 92% in White women. Chinese and Japanese women have the highest survival rates.\nDisparities in breast cancer screenings.\nLow-income, immigrant, disabled, and racial and sexual minority women are less likely to undergo breast cancer screening and thus are more likely to receive late-stage diagnoses. Ensuring equitable health care, including breast cancer screenings, can positively affect these disparities.\nEfforts to promote awareness about the significance of screenings, such as informational materials, are ineffective in reducing these disparities. Successful methods directly address the barriers that prevent access to screenings, such as language barriers or lack of health insurance.\nThrough community outreach in under-served communities, patient navigators and advocates can offer women personalized assistance with attending screening and follow-up appointments. However, the long-term benefits are unclear, primarily due to a lack of resources and staff to sustain these community-based solutions. Legislation that requires mandatory insurance coverage of language assistance and mammograms has also increased screening rates, particularly among ethnic minority communities. Innovative solutions proven effective include mobile screening vehicles, telehealth consultations, and online tools to assess potential risks and signs of breast cancer.\nDisparities in breast cancer research.\nA diverse pool of participants in breast cancer research facilitates the investigation of the disease's unique risks and development patterns in ethnic minority populations. These populations experience better health outcomes from medical treatments designed based on research with diverse patient representation.\nWithin the United States, less than 3% of patients in clinical trials identify as Black, despite representing 12.7% of the national population. Hispanic and indigenous women are also significantly underrepresented in breast cancer research. Lengthy involvement in clinical trials without financial compensation discourages the participation of low-income women unable to miss work or afford traveling expenses. Monetary compensation, language interpreters, and patient navigators can increase the diversity of participants in research and clinical trials.\nSpecial populations.\nMen.\nBreast cancer is relatively uncommon in men, but it can occur. Typically, a breast tumor appears as a lump in the breast. Men who develop gynecomastia (enlargement of the breast tissue due to hormone imbalance) are at increased risk, as are men with disease-associated variations in the \"BRCA2\" gene, high exposure to estrogens, or men with Klinefelter syndrome (who have two copies of the X chromosome, and naturally high estrogen levels). Treatment typically involves surgery, followed by radiation if needed. Around 90% men's tumors are ER-positive, and are treated with endocrine therapy, typically tamoxifen. The disease course and prognosis is similar to that in women of similar age with similar disease characteristics.\nPregnant women.\nDiagnosing breast cancer in pregnant women is often delayed as symptoms can be masked by pregnancy-related breast changes. The diagnostic path is the same as in non-pregnant women, except that radiography of the abdomen is avoided. Chemotherapy is avoided during the first trimester, but can be safely administered through the rest of the pregnancy term. anti-HER2 treatments and endocrine therapies are delayed until after delivery. These treatments given after delivery can cross into the breast milk, and so breast feeding is generally not possible. The prognosis for pregnant women with breast cancer is similar to non-pregnant women of similar age.\nResearch.\nTreatments are being evaluated in clinical trials. This includes individual drugs, combinations of drugs, and surgical and radiation techniques Investigations include new types of targeted therapy, cancer vaccines, oncolytic virotherapy, gene therapy and immunotherapy.\nThe latest research is reported annually at scientific meetings such as that of the American Society of Clinical Oncology, San Antonio Breast Cancer Symposium, and the St. Gallen Oncology Conference in St. Gallen, Switzerland. These studies are reviewed by professional societies and other organizations, and formulated into guidelines for specific treatment groups and risk category.\nFenretinide, a retinoid, is also being studied as a way to reduce the risk of breast cancer. In particular, combinations of ribociclib plus endocrine therapy have been the subject of clinical trials.\nA 2019 review found moderate certainty evidence that giving people antibiotics before breast cancer surgery helped to prevent surgical site infection (SSI). Further study is required to determine the most effective antibiotic protocol and use in women undergoing immediate breast reconstruction.\nCryoablation.\nAs of 2014 cryoablation is being studied to see if it could be a substitute for a lumpectomy in small cancers. There is tentative evidence in those with tumors less than 2\u00a0centimeters across. It may also be used in those in who surgery is not possible. Another review states that cryoablation looks promising for early breast cancer of small size.\nBreast cancer cell lines.\nPart of the current knowledge on breast carcinomas is based on in vivo and in vitro studies performed with cell lines derived from breast cancers. These provide an unlimited source of homogenous self-replicating material, free of contaminating stromal cells, and often easily cultured in simple standard media. The first breast cancer cell line described, BT-20, was established in 1958. Since then, and despite sustained work in this area, the number of permanent lines obtained has been strikingly low (about 100). Indeed, attempts to culture breast cancer cell lines from primary tumors have been largely unsuccessful. This poor efficiency was often due to technical difficulties associated with the extraction of viable tumor cells from their surrounding stroma. Most of the available breast cancer cell lines issued from metastatic tumors, mainly from pleural effusions. Effusions provided generally large numbers of dissociated, viable tumor cells with little or no contamination by fibroblasts and other tumor stroma cells. Many of the currently used BCC lines were established in the late 1970s. A very few of them, namely MCF-7, T-47D, MDA-MB-231 and SK-BR-3, account for more than two-thirds of all abstracts reporting studies on mentioned breast cancer cell lines, as concluded from a Medline-based survey. mPEG-PCL-DDAB nanoparticles were designed for simultaneous delivery of anti-IGF-1R siRNA and lycopene to MCF-7 breast cancer cells. This dual-delivery system significantly enhanced apoptosis induction and cell cycle arrest by suppressing IGF-1R and potentiating lycopene's anticancer effects.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70548", "revid": "28481209", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70548", "title": "Messianic Judaism", "text": "Abrahamic sect\nMessianic Judaism is a syncretic Protestant Christian religious sect that incorporates elements of Jewish practice. It considers itself to be a form of Judaism but is generally considered to be a form of Christianity, including by all mainstream Jewish religious movements. Its roots are in Christian missionary activity aimed at Jews in the 19th and 20th centuries, particularly in North America.\nMessianic Jews believe that Jesus was the Messiah and a divine being in the form of God the Son (a member of the Trinity), some of the most defining distinctions between Christianity and Judaism. Messianic Judaism is also generally considered a Protestant Christian sect by scholars and other Christian groups.\nIt emerged in the United States between the 1960s and 1970s from the earlier Hebrew Christian movement, and was most prominently propelled through the non-profit organization Jews for Jesus founded in 1973 by Martin \"Moishe\" Rosen, an American minister in the Conservative Baptist Association.\nMessianic Jews adhere to conventional Christian doctrine, including the concept of salvation by believing in Jesus (referred to by the Hebrew name among adherents) as the Jewish Messiah and humanity's redeemer, and in the spiritual authority of the Bible (including the Hebrew Bible and New Testament).\nIn Hebrew, Messianics tend to identify themselves with the terms (, lit.\u2009'believers') and (, lit.\u2009'Jews') in opposition to being identified as (, lit.\u2009'Christians'). Jewish organizations inside and outside of Israel reject this framing. The Supreme Court of Israel declared Messianic Judaism a Christian sect for purposes of the Law of Return.\nDemographics.\nFrom 2003 to 2007, the movement grew from 150 Messianic houses of worship in the United States to as many as 438, with over 100 in Israel and more worldwide; congregations are often affiliated with larger Messianic organizations or alliances. As of 2012[ [update]], Messianic population estimates were between 175,000 and 250,000 members in the United States. As of 2025, Messianic populations include roughly 30,000 members in Israel, and an estimated total worldwide membership of up to 1.5 million.\nHistory.\nPre-19th century.\nEfforts by Jewish Christians to proselytize to Jews began in the 1st century, when Paul the Apostle preached at the synagogues in each city that he visited. However, by the 4th century CE, non-biblical accounts of missions to the Jews do not mention converted Jews playing any leading role in proselytization. Notable converts from Judaism who attempted to convert other Jews are more visible in historical sources beginning around the 13th century when Jewish convert Pablo Christiani attempted to convert other Jews. This activity, however, typically lacked any independent Jewish-Christian congregations and was often imposed through force by organized Christian churches.\n19th and early 20th centuries.\nIn the 19th century, some groups attempted to create congregations and societies of Jewish converts to Christianity, though most of these early organizations were short-lived. Early formal organizations run by converted Jews include the Anglican London Society for promoting Christianity among the Jews of Joseph Frey (1809), which published the first Yiddish New Testament in 1821; the \"Beni Abraham\" association, established by Frey in 1813 with a group of 41 Jewish Christians who started meeting at Jews' Chapel, London for prayers Friday night and Sunday morning; and the London Hebrew Christian Alliance of Great Britain founded by Dr. Carl Schwartz in 1866.\nThe September 1813 meeting of Frey's \"Beni Abraham\" congregation at the rented \"Jews' Chapel\" in Spitalfields is sometimes pointed to as the birth of the semi-autonomous Hebrew Christian movement within Anglican and other established churches in Britain. However, the minister of the chapel at Spitalfields evicted Frey and his congregation three years later, and Frey severed his connections with the society. A new location was found and the Episcopal Jew's Chapel Abrahamic Society registered in 1835.\nIn Eastern Europe, Joseph Rabinowitz established a Hebrew Christian mission and congregation called \"Israelites of the New Covenant\" in Kishinev, Bessarabia, in 1884. In 1865, Rabinowitz created a sample order of worship for Sabbath morning service based on a mixture of Jewish and Christian elements. Mark John Levy pressed the Church of England to allow members to embrace Jewish customs.\nIn the United States, a congregation of Jewish converts to Christianity was established in New York City in 1885. In the 1890s, immigrant Jewish converts to Christianity worshipped at the Methodist \"Hope of Israel\" mission on New York's Lower East Side while retaining some Jewish rites and customs. In 1895, the 9th edition of Hope of Israel's \"Our Hope\" magazine carried the subtitle \"A Monthly Devoted to the Study of Prophecy and to Messianic Judaism\", the first use of the term \"Messianic Judaism\". In 1894, Christian missionary Leopold Cohn, a convert from Judaism, founded the Brownsville Mission to the Jews in the Brownsville section of Brooklyn, New York as a Christian mission to Jews. After several changes in name, structure, and focus, the organization is now called Chosen People Ministries.\nIn the early 1900s, there was a community of Messianic Jews in South Africa representing themselves as \"Christian Jews\" whose goal was to create a \"true and genuine Christ-loving Jewish Christian Synagogue\".\nMissions to the Jews saw a period of growth between the 1920s and the 1960s. In the 1940s and 1950s, missionaries in Israel, including the Southern Baptists, adopted the term (, \"messianics\") to counter negative connotations of the word (, \"Christians\"). The term was used to designate all Jews who had converted to Protestant Evangelical Christianity.\nModern-day Messianic Judaism movement, 1960s onwards.\nThe Messianic Jewish movement emerged in the United States in the 1960s. Prior to this time, Jewish converts assimilated into gentile Christianity, as the church required abandoning their Jewishness and assuming gentile ways to receive baptism. Peter Hocken postulates that the Jesus movement, which swept the nation in the 1960s, triggered a change from Hebrew Christians to Messianic Jews and was a distinctly charismatic movement. These Jews wanted to \"stay Jewish while believing in Jesus\". This impulse was amplified by the results of the Six-Day War and the restoration of Jerusalem to Jewish control.\nFoundational organizations.\nIn 2004, there were 300 Messianic congregations in the United States, with roughly half of all attendants being Gentiles and roughly one-third of all congregations comprising 30 or fewer members. Many of these congregations belong to the International Association of Messianic Congregations and Synagogues (IAMCS), the Union of Messianic Congregations (UMJC), or Tikkun International.\nThe Messianic Jewish Alliance of America (MJAA) began in 1915 as the Hebrew Christian Alliance of America (HCAA). As the idea of maintaining Jewish identity spread in the late 1960s, the Hebrew Christian Alliance of America (HCAA) changed its name to the Messianic Jewish Alliance of America (MJAA). David Rausch writes that the change \"signified far more than a semantical expression\u2014it represented an evolution in the thought processes and religious and philosophical outlook toward a more fervent expression of Jewish identity.\" As of 2005[ [update]], the MJAA was an organization of Jewish members who welcome non-Jews as \"honored associates\". In 1986, the MJAA formed a congregational branch called the International Alliance of Messianic Congregations and Synagogues (IAMCS).\nIn June 1979, 19 congregations in North America met at Mechanicsburg, Pennsylvania, and formed the Union of Messianic Jewish Congregations (UMJC). In 2022, it would have 75 congregations in 8 countries.\nIn 2016, Douglas Hamp founded The Way Congregation near Denver, CO. with the concept of recognizing fundamentalist Christian beliefs and yet embracing One Law Theology, Two House Theology (see sections below), and Commonwealth Theology. Their website states the fellowship was founded \"to serve as a bridge between the Jews and the gentile Church.\" Non-Jewish congregants are not encouraged to convert to Judaism and Jewish attendants are encouraged to celebrate their Jewish heritage. Hamp blames the heretic Marcion for mainstream Christianity's juxtaposition of Law and Grace. On the other hand, the Congregation meets on the Sabbath, celebrates the Feasts, and teaches conformance to the Dietary Laws given through Moses.\nMessianic Seal of Jerusalem.\nThe Messianic Seal of Jerusalem is a symbol used by Messianic Judaism. It is a depiction of the temple menorah, an ancient symbol used by Jews, together with the \"ichthys\", a depictive representation of Christianity, with a Star of David at the intersection.\nThere is an ongoing dispute as to whether the seal dates from the 1st century CE or if it is a 20th-century invention.\nOther symbols of Messianic Judaism include a cross inside a Star of David; a dolphin; and a lit menorah.\nTheology and core doctrines.\nThe Trinity.\nMany Messianic Jews affirm the doctrine of the Trinity: God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Spirit as three representations of the same divinity.\nScriptures and writings.\nThe Bible.\nBoth the Hebrew Bible and the New Testament are usually considered to be the established and divinely inspired biblical scriptures by Messianic Jews. With a few exceptions, Messianic believers generally consider the written Torah, the five books of Moses, to remain in force as a continuing covenant, revised by Jesus and the Apostles in the New Testament, that is to be observed both morally and ritually. Jesus did not annul the Torah, but its interpretation is revised through the Apostolic scriptures.\nJewish oral tradition.\nThere is no unanimity among Messianic congregations on the issue of the Talmud and the Oral Torah. There are congregations which believe that adherence to the Oral Law, as encompassed by the Talmud, is against Messianic beliefs. Similarly, there are congregations which deny the authority of the Pharisees, believing that they were superseded, and their teachings contradicted, by Messianism. There are adherents which call rabbinic commentaries such as the Mishnah and the Talmud \"dangerous\", and state that followers of rabbinic and halakhic explanations and commentaries are not believers in Jesus as the Messiah. Other congregations are selective in their applications of Talmudic law, and may believe that the rabbinic commentaries such as the Mishnah and the Talmud, while historically informative and useful in understanding tradition, are not normative and may not be followed where they differ from the New Testament. Still others encourage a serious observance of Jewish halakha.\nMessianic publications.\nDavid H. Stern has released a one-volume Jewish New Testament Commentary, providing explanatory notes from a Messianic Jewish point of view. Other New Testament commentary authors include Arnold Fruchtenbaum of Ariel Ministries, who has written commentaries on the Epistles, Judges and Ruth, Genesis, and 7 systematic doctrinal studies.\nSin and atonement.\nSome Messianic believers define sin as transgression of the Law of God and include the concept of original sin. Some adherents atone for their sins through prayer and repentance \u2013 the acknowledgment of the wrongdoing and seeking forgiveness for their sins (especially on Yom Kippur, the Day of Atonement). Disagreeing with these rites and practices, other Messianics hold to a belief that all sin (whether committed yet or not) is already atoned for because of Jesus's death and resurrection.\nEvangelism and attitudes toward Jews and Israel.\nMessianic Jews believe God's people have a responsibility to spread his name and fame to all nations. It is believed that the Children of Israel were, remain, and will continue to be the chosen people of the God, and are central to his plans for existence. Most Messianic believers, whether Jewish or non-Jewish, can be said to oppose supersessionism (popularly referred to as replacement theology), the view that the Church has replaced Israel in the mind and plans of God.\nAccording to certain branches of Messianic Judaism, Jews are individuals who have one or more Jewish parents, or who have undergone halakhic conversion to Judaism.\nOne Law theology.\nOne Law theology (also known as \"One Torah for All\") teaches that anyone who is a part of Israel is obligated to observe the Covenant and its provisions as outlined in the Torah. Dan Juster of Tikkun, and Russ Resnik of the UMJC, have argued against the One Law movement's insistence on gentiles being required to observe the entirety of Torah in the same way as Jews. Tim Hegg responded to their article defending what he believes to be the biblical teaching of \"One Law\" theology and its implications concerning the obligations of Torah obedience by new Messianic believers from the nations. The Coalition of Torah Observant Messianic Congregations (CTOMC) likewise rejects bi-lateral Ecclesiology in favor of the One Torah for All (One Law) position.\nTwo House theology.\nProponents of Two House theology espouse their belief that the phrase \"House of Judah\" in scripture refers to Jews, while \"the House of Israel\" refers to the Ten Lost Tribes of Israel, or Ephraim. Where scripture states the House of Israel and Judah will again be \"one stick\" (), it is believed to be referring to the End Times, immediately prior to the Second Coming, when many of those descended from Israel will come back to Israel. Advocates of this theology postulate that the reason so many gentiles convert to Messianic Judaism is that the vast majority of them are truly Israelites. Like One Law groups, the Two House movement has many superficial similarities to Messianic Judaism, such as their belief in the ongoing validity of the Mosaic Covenant. While much of the Two House teaching is based on interpretations of Biblical prophecy, the biggest disagreements are due to inability to identify the genealogy of the Lost Tribes. Organizations such as the Messianic Jewish Alliance of America and Union of Messianic Jewish Congregations have explicitly opposed the Two House teaching.\nSupersessionism.\nHistorically, Christianity has taught supersessionism (replacement theology), which implies or outright states that Christianity has superseded Judaism, and that the Mosaic Covenant of the Hebrew Bible has been superseded by the New Covenant of Jesus, wherein salvation is brought about by the grace of God, and not by obedience to the Torah. This is generally complemented with the concept of God having transferred the status of \"God's people\" from the Jews to the Christian Church. Messianic Jews, in varying degrees, challenge both thoughts, and instead believing that although Israel has rejected Jesus, it has not forfeited its status as God's chosen people. Often cited is : \"for God's gifts and his call are irrevocable\". The core of supersessionism, in which the Mosaic Covenant is canceled, is less agreed upon. Though the mitzvot may or may not be seen as necessary, most are still followed, especially the keeping of Shabbat and other holy days.\nEschatology.\nAll Messianic Jews hold to certain eschatological beliefs such as the End of Days, the Second Coming of Jesus as the conquering Messiah, the re-gathering of Israel, a rebuilt Third Temple, a resurrection of the dead, and many believe in the Millennial Sabbath, although some are Amillenialist. Some Messianic Jews believe that all of the Jewish holidays, and indeed the entire Torah, intrinsically hint at the Messiah, and thus no study of the End Times is complete without understanding the major Jewish Festivals in their larger prophetic context. To certain believers, the feasts of Pesach and Shavuot were fulfilled in Jesus's first coming, and Rosh Hashanah, Yom Kippur, and Sukkot will be at his second. Some also believe in a literal 7000-year period for the human history of the world, with a Millennial Messianic kingdom prior to a final judgment.\nReligious practices.\nTorah observance.\nThere is a variety of practice within Messianic Judaism regarding the strictness of Torah observance. Generally, Torah observant congregations observe Jewish prayers, biblical feasts, and the Sabbath. While most traditional Christians deny that the ritual laws and specific civil laws of the Torah apply to gentiles, some Messianic believers say certain passages regarding Torah observance in the New Testament are cited by as proof that the Torah was not abolished for Jews. They say that in , Jewish believers in Jerusalem are described as \"zealous for the Law\".\nSabbath and holiday observances.\nSome Messianic Jews observe Shabbat on Saturdays. Worship services are generally held on Friday evenings () or Saturday mornings. According to the Southern Baptist Messianic Fellowship (SBMF), services are held on Saturday to \"open the doors to Jewish people who also wish to keep the Sabbath\". The liturgy used is similar to that of a Jewish with some important differences including the omission of \"salvation by works\" as the Messianic belief is salvation through Jesus. Other branches of the movement have attempted to \"eliminate the elements of Christian worship [such as frequent communion] that cannot be directly linked to their Jewish roots\". Almost all such congregations in Israel observe Jewish holidays, which they understand to have their fulfillment in Jesus.\"\nThe Messianic Jewish Rabbinical Council recommends the observance of Jewish holidays. Most larger Messianic Jewish congregations follow Jewish custom in celebrating the three biblical feasts (Pesach, Shavuot, and Sukkot), as well as Yom Kippur and Rosh Hashanah.\nDietary laws.\nThe observance of the dietary laws is a subject of continued debate among Messianic Jews. Some Messianic believers keep kosher purely for the purposes of evangelism to Jewish people. Most avoid pork and shellfish, but there is disagreement on more strict adherence to kosher dietary laws.\nConversion to Messianic Judaism.\nLarge numbers of those calling themselves Messianic Jews are not of Jewish descent, but join the movement as they \"enjoy the Messianic Jewish style of worship\". Messianic perspectives on \"Who is a Jew?\" vary. The Messianic Jewish Rabbinical Council says a Jew is one born to a Jewish mother or who has converted to Judaism. Copying from the Reform stream of Judaism, the council also says a Jew is one who was born to a Jewish father but not a Jewish mother on the condition that the family of the child, or the individual as an adult, has undertaken public and formal acts of identification of the individual with the Jewish faith and people. The MJAA accepts gentiles into their congregations, but views gentiles and Jews as spiritually distinct and conversion as an \"unbiblical practice\".\nBaptism.\nMessianic Jews practice baptism, calling it a (\"cistern\", from ) rather than the term (\"baptism\" () in the Hebrew New Testament).\nCircumcision.\nSome within the Ephraimite movement seek to convert themselves for identification with Israel, but most Messianic governing bodies acknowledge the presence of gentiles in the congregations, and do not see a need for them to convert to worship in the Messianic style and understanding. When conversion is sincerely desired by a gentile Messianic believer, Messianic Jewish halachic standards (including circumcision) are imposed to maintain integrity among the world Messianic Jewish community.\nUse of Hebrew names and vocabulary in English.\nThe movement generally avoids common Christian terms, such as Jesus, Christ, or cross and prefers to use Hebrew or Aramaic terms.\nCulture.\nMusic.\nMessianic Jewish hymns differ from evangelical Christian ones in their focus on Israel's role in history and messianic hope. Other differences include reference to Jesus\u2014usually using the name \u2014as the \"Savior of Israel\". Messianic hymnals often incorporate Israeli songs. The movement has several recording artists who consider their music to be Messianic in message, such as Joel Chernoff of the duo Lamb, Ted Pearce, and Chuck King.\nReception.\nAmong mainstream Christianity.\nIn the United States, the emergence of the Messianic Jewish movement created some stresses with other Jewish-Christian and missionary organization. In 1975, the Fellowship of Christian Testimonies to the Jews condemned several aspects of the Messianic Jewish movement.\nIn Israel, the linguistic distinction between Messianic Jews and mainstream Christians is less clear, and the name (, 'messianic') is commonly used by churches in lieu of (, 'Christian'). The Israel Trust of the Anglican Church, based at Christ Church, Jerusalem, an organization that is ecumenical in outlook and operates an interfaith school in Jerusalem, gives some social support to Messianic Jews in Israel.\nAmong Jews.\nAs in traditional Jewish objections to Christian theology, opponents of Messianic Judaism hold that Christian proof texts, such as prophecies in the Hebrew Bible purported to refer the Messiah's suffering and death, have been taken out of context and misinterpreted. Jewish theology rejects the idea that the Messiah, or any human being, is a divinity. Belief in the Trinity is considered idolatrous by most rabbinic authorities. Even if considered (literally, \"partnership\")\u2014an association of other individuals with the God of Israel\u2014this is only permitted for gentiles, and that only according to some rabbinic opinions. It is universally considered idolatrous for Jews. Further, Judaism does not view the role of the Messiah to be the salvation of the world from its sins, an integral teaching of Christianity and Messianic Judaism.\nJewish opponents of Messianic Judaism often focus their criticism on the movement's radical ideological separation from traditional Jewish beliefs, stating that the acceptance of Jesus as Messiah creates an insuperable divide between the traditional messianic expectations of Judaism, and Christianity's theological claims. They state that while Judaism is a messianic religion, its messiah is not Jesus, and thus the term is misleading. All denominations of Judaism, as well as national Jewish organizations, reject Messianic Judaism as a form of Judaism. The Central Conference of American Rabbis states that \"'Jewish Christians' or 'Messianic Jews' have never been considered believers in Judaism.\" Regarding this divide, Reconstructionist Rabbi Carol Harris-Shapiro said: \"To embrace the radioactive core of goyishness\u2014Jesus\u2014violates the final taboo of Jewishness. ... Belief in Jesus as Messiah is not simply a heretical belief, as it may have been in the first century; it has become the equivalent to an act of ethno-cultural suicide.\"\nB'nai Brith Canada considers Messianic activities as antisemitic incidents. Rabbi Tovia Singer, founder of the anti-missionary organization Outreach Judaism, noted of a Messianic religious leader in Toledo: \"He's not running a Jewish synagogue. ... It's a church designed to appear as if it were a synagogue and I'm there to expose him. What these irresponsible extremist Christians do is a form of consumer fraud. They blur the distinctions between Judaism and Christianity in order to lure Jewish people who would otherwise resist a straightforward message.\"\nAssociation by a Jewish politician with a Messianic religious leader, inviting him to pray at a public meeting, even though made in error, resulted in nearly universal condemnation by Jewish congregations in Detroit in 2018, as the majority opinion in both Israeli and American Jewish circles is to consider Messianic Judaism as Christianity and its followers as Christians.\nIn 1999, Pardes Shalom Cemetery in Toronto, Canada, barred Reverend Malvern Jacobs from being buried in the cemetery as Jacobs had converted to Christianity and become a Messianic Jewish minister and dean of Canada Christian College's Jewish Studies department. Pardes Shalom locked its gates to prevent Jacobs's casket and his funeral procession of 400 mourners from entering the cemetery.\nA small minority of Jewish scholars, notably Dan Cohn-Sherbok, have accepted the practice of Messianic Judaism as a legitimate Jewish religious expression within a \"pluralistic model\" of Judaism. By contrast, most other Jewish thinkers have placed Messianic Judaism outside of mainstream Jewish legitimacy and within the camp of the Christian faith. Some, like David Novak and Michael Wyschogrod, have come to the conclusion that Messianic Jews are still halachically Jews even though Messianic Judaism is not at all Jewish. In regard to Jews who convert to Christianity, Novak writes that \"these great existential decisions are not meant to be cost-free. In any religious conversion, something is gained and something lost.\"\nResponse of Israeli government.\nMessianic Jews are considered eligible for the State of Israel's Law of Return only if they can also claim Jewish descent. An assistant to one of the two lawyers involved with an April 2008 Supreme Court of Israel case explained to the \"Jerusalem Post\" that Messianic Jews who are not Jewish according to Jewish rabbinic law, but who had sufficient Jewish descent to qualify under the Law of Return, could claim automatic new immigrant status and citizenship despite being Messianic. The state of Israel grants (right of return) and citizenship to Jews, and to those with Jewish parents or grandparents who are not considered Jews according to halakha, such as people who have a Jewish father but a non-Jewish mother. The old law had excluded any \"person who has been a Jew and has voluntarily changed his religion\", and an Israeli Supreme Court decision in 1989 had ruled that Messianic Judaism constituted another religion. However, on April 16, 2008, the Supreme Court of Israel ruled in a case brought by a number of Messianic Jews with Jewish fathers and grandfathers. Their applications for had been rejected on the grounds that they were Messianic Jews. The argument was made by the applicants that they had never been Jews according to , and were not therefore excluded by the conversion clause. This argument was upheld in the ruling.\nThe International Religious Freedom Report 2008, released by the Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights, and Labor in the US, stated that discrimination against Messianic Jews in Israel was increasing. Some acts of violence have also occurred; in one incident on March 20, 2008, a bomb concealed as a Purim gift basket was delivered to the house of a prominent Messianic Jewish family in Ariel, in the West Bank, which severely wounded the son. Eventually, Yaakov Teitel was arrested for the attempted murder.\nThis antagonism has led to harassment and some violence, especially in Israel, where there is a large and militant Orthodox community. Several Orthodox organizations, including Yad L'Achim and Lehava, are dedicated to rooting out missionary activity in Israel, including the Messianic Jewish congregations. One tactic is to plaster posters asking Israelis to boycott shops where Messianic Jews are owners or employees; another is to report Messianic Jews to the Interior ministry, which is charged with enforcing an Israeli law forbidding proselytizing. In another incident, the mayor of Or Yehuda, a suburb of Tel Aviv, held a public book-burning of literature passed out to Ethiopian immigrants. He later apologized for the action. On other occasions, Lehava activists attempted to interrupt Messianic Jewish and violently harass the participants.\nResponse of US governments.\nThe US Navy made a decision that Messianic Jewish chaplains must wear as their insignia the Christian cross, and not the tablets of the law, the insignia of Jewish chaplains. According to Yeshiva World News, the Navy Uniform Board commanded that Michael Hiles, a candidate for chaplaincy, wear the Christian insignia. Hiles resigned from the program, rather than wear the cross. Eric Tokajer, a spokesman for the Messianic Jewish movement, responded that \"This decision essentially bars Messianic Jews from serving as chaplains within the U.S. Navy because it would require them to wear an insignia inconsistent with their faith and belief system.\"\nA Birmingham, Alabama, police employee's religious discrimination case was settled in her favor after she filed suit over having to work on the Jewish Sabbath.\nMessianic organizations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWorks cited.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70549", "revid": "51032389", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70549", "title": "Margaret Tudor", "text": "Queen of Scotland from 1503 to 1513\nMargaret Tudor (29 November 1489 \u2013 18 October 1541) was Queen of Scotland from 1503 until 1513 by marriage to James IV. She then served as regent of Scotland during her son's minority, and fought to extend her regency. Margaret was the eldest daughter and second child of Henry VII of England and Elizabeth of York, and the elder sister of Henry VIII. By her line, the House of Stuart eventually acceded to the throne of England and Ireland, in addition to Scotland.\nMargaret married James IV at the age of 13, in accordance with the Treaty of Perpetual Peace between England and Scotland. Together, they had six children, though only one of them reached adulthood. Margaret's marriage to James linked the royal houses of England and Scotland, which a century later resulted in the Union of the Crowns. Following the death of James IV at the Battle of Flodden in 1513, Margaret, as queen dowager, was appointed as regent for their son James V. A pro-French party took shape among the nobility, urging that the king's closest male relative, John Stewart, Duke of Albany, should replace Margaret as regent. In seeking allies, Margaret turned to the Douglases, and in 1514 she married Archibald Douglas, 6th Earl of Angus, with whom she had one daughter, Margaret Douglas. Margaret's marriage to Angus alienated other powerful nobles and saw Albany take her place as regent. In 1524, Margaret, with the help of the Hamiltons, removed Albany from power in a coup d'\u00e9tat while he was in France, and was recognised by Parliament as regent, then later as chief counsellor to James V when he came of age.\nIn 1527, Pope Clement VII approved Margaret's annulment from Angus. The following year, she married Henry Stewart, whom the King created Lord Methven. Through her first and second marriages, Margaret was the grandmother of both Mary, Queen of Scots, and Henry Stuart, Lord Darnley.\nEarly life.\nMargaret was born on 29 November 1489 in the Palace of Westminster in London to King Henry VII and his wife, Elizabeth of York. She was their second child and firstborn daughter. Her siblings included Arthur, Prince of Wales, the future King Henry VIII, and Mary, who would briefly become Queen of France. Margaret was baptised in St. Margaret's, Westminster on St Andrew's Day. She was named after Margaret Beaufort, Countess of Richmond and Derby, her paternal grandmother. Her nurse was Alice Davy, who later joined the household of Catherine of Aragon.\nOn 30 September 1497, James IV's commissioner, the Spaniard Pedro de Ayala concluded a lengthy truce with England, and the marriage with Margaret became a serious possibility. James was in his late twenties and still unmarried. Pedro de Ayala heard that both Elizabeth of York and Margaret Beaufort opposed the marriage, contending that Margaret was too young to become a mother. The Italian historian Polydore Vergil said that some of the English royal council objected to the match, saying that it would bring the Stewarts directly into the line of English succession, to which the wily and astute Henry replied:What then? Should anything of the kind happen (and God avert the omen), I foresee that our realm would suffer no harm, since England would not be absorbed by Scotland, but rather Scotland by England, being the noblest head of the entire island, since there is always less glory and honour in being joined to that which is far the greater, just as Normandy once came under the rule and power of our ancestors the English.\nOn 24 January 1502, Scotland and England concluded the Treaty of Perpetual Peace, the first peace agreement between the two realms in over 170 years. The marriage treaty was concluded the same day and was viewed as a guarantee of the new peace. Margaret, who was still a child, remained in England, but was now known as the \"Queen of Scots\".\nMarriage and progress.\nThe marriage was completed by proxy on 25 January 1502 at Richmond Palace. Henry pledged a \u00a310,000 dowry, while James promised his bride \u00a31,000 Scots per annum together with lands and castles yielding a further yearly income of \u00a36,000. The Earl of Bothwell was proxy for the Scottish king and wore a gown of cloth-of-gold at the ceremony in the Queen's great chamber. He was accompanied by Robert Blackadder, archbishop of Glasgow, and Andrew Forman, postulate of Moray. The herald, John Young, reported that \"right notable jousts\" followed the ceremony. Prizes were awarded the next morning, and the tournament continued another day.\nThe new queen was provided with a large wardrobe of clothes, and her crimson state bed curtains made of Italian sarcenet were embroidered with red Lancastrian roses. Clothes were also made for her companion, Lady Catherine Gordon, the widow of Perkin Warbeck. The clothes were embroidered by John Flee. In May 1503, James IV confirmed her possession of lands and houses in Scotland, including Methven Castle, Stirling Castle, Doune Castle, Linlithgow Palace and Newark Castle in Ettrick Forest, with the incomes from the corresponding earldom and lordship lands.\nLater in 1503, months after the death of her mother, Margaret left England for Scotland; her progress was a grand journey northward. She left Richmond Palace on 27 June with Henry VII, and they travelled first to Collyweston in Northamptonshire. At York a plaque commemorates the exact spot where the Queen of Scots entered its gates. After crossing the border at Berwick upon Tweed on 1 August 1503, Margaret was met by the Scottish court at Lamberton. At Dalkeith Palace, James came to kiss her goodnight. He came again to console her on 4 August after a stable fire had killed some of her favourite horses. Her riding gear, including a new sumpter cloth or pallion of cloth-of-gold worth \u00a3127 was destroyed in the fire.\nAt a meadow a mile from Edinburgh, there was a pavilion where Sir Patrick Hamilton and Patrick Sinclair played and fought in the guise of knights defending their ladies. On 8 August 1503, the marriage was celebrated in person in Holyrood Abbey. The rites were performed by the archbishop of Glasgow and Thomas Savage, archbishop of York, and Margaret was anointed during the ceremony. Two days later, on St Lawrence's day, Margaret went to mass at St Giles', the town's Kirk, as her first public appointment. The details of the proxy marriage, progress, arrival, and reception in Edinburgh were recorded by the Somerset Herald, John Young.\nOne English guest recorded the menu of the banquet in a copy of the \"Great Chronicle of London\". Dishes included solan geese with sauce, baked apples and pears, and jelly moulded with the arms of England and Scotland. In the English parliament, Thomas More opposed Henry VII's plan for a tax to recover expenses for the wedding. Margaret's crown was made by an Edinburgh goldsmith, John Currour. In the days after the wedding, Currour provided her with rings, a heart of gold, an image of the Virgin Mary, and a gold cross.\nReign of James IV.\nBy her marriage contract, Margaret was allowed a household with 24 English courtiers or servants. These included her cook Hunt, her chamberer Margaret, John Camner who played the lute, her ushers Hamnet Clegg and Edmund Livesay, and her ladies in waiting, Margaret Dennet, Eleanor Johns, Eleanor Verney, Agnes Musgrave, and Elizabeth Berlay. Some of her ladies in waiting had been members of the household of Elizabeth of York. Richard Justice and Harry Roper worked in the wardrobe, making her sheets, washing clothes, mending her tapestries and perfuming them with violet powder. Roper had been Page of the Beds to Elizabeth of York, and Justice was her Page of Robes. Roper returned to England to serve Catherine of Aragon. Elizabeth Maxtoun, a Scottish woman, washed the queen's linen. Rich fabrics were provided by an Italian merchant Jerome Frescobaldi. After a few years, she employed a Scottish cook Alexander Kerse. Some members of her household were described in a humorous poem by William Dunbar, \"Ane Dance in the Quenis Chalmer\".\nOn Maundy Thursday, known as Skyre Thursday or \"Cena Domini\", it was the custom for the monarch and consort to give gifts to the poor and symbolically wash their feet. On 4 April 1504 Margaret gave 15 poor women blue gowns, shoes, a purse with 15 English pennies, and a wooden tankard with a jug and a plate, a token of the Last Supper. The number of poor women matched her age. Another custom was to give gifts on New Year's Day, and James IV gave Margaret two sapphire rings in 1504. In 1507 James IV gave her a \"serpent's tongue\" (really a shark tooth) set in gold with precious stones, which was believed to guard against poison. She gave a French knight Antoine d'Arces a gold salt cellar with an image of the Virgin Mary. In January 1513 the gifts included gold rings for eight ladies of her chamber, made by John Aitkin, a goldsmith who worked in Stirling Castle, and the \"two black ladies\" Ellen and Margaret More were given 10 gold French crowns.\nMargaret suffered from nosebleeds, and an apothecary William Foular provided a bloodstone or heliotrope as a remedy. Foular also sent the queen medicinal spices including pepper, cinnamon, \"cubebarum\", and \"galiga\", with glass urinals. Margaret went on pilgrimages to Whitekirk in East Lothian, and to the shrine of Saint Adrian on the Isle of May. In July 1507, after recovering from a period of ill-health, she went to Whithorn in Galloway, dressed in green velvet and riding on a saddle covered with the pelt of a reindeer, accompanied by her ladies and the court musicians.\nThe king named the Scottish warship \"Margaret\" after her. The treaty of 1502, far from being perpetual, barely survived the death of Henry VII in 1509. His successor, the young Henry VIII, had little time for his father's cautious diplomacy, and was soon heading towards a war with France, Scotland's historic ally. In 1513, James invaded England to honour his commitment to the Auld Alliance, only to meet death and disaster at the Battle of Flodden. Margaret had opposed the war, but was still named in the royal will as regent for the infant king, James V, for as long as she remained a widow.\nRegency and second marriage.\nParliament met at Stirling not long after Flodden, and confirmed Margaret in the office of regent. A woman was rarely welcome in a position of supreme power, and Margaret was the sister of an enemy king, which served to compound her problems. Before long a pro-French party took shape among the nobility, urging that she should be replaced by John Stewart, Duke of Albany, the closest male relative to the infant prince, and now third in line to the throne.\nAlbany, who had been born and raised in France, was seen as a living representative of the Auld Alliance, in contrast with the pro-English Margaret. She is considered to have acted calmly and with some degree of political skill. By July 1514, she had managed to reconcile the contending parties, and Scotland \u2013 along with France \u2013 concluded peace with England that same month. But in her search for political allies among the fractious Scottish nobility she took a fatal step, allowing good sense and prudence to be overruled by emotion and the personal magnetism of Archibald Douglas, 6th Earl of Angus.\nIn seeking allies Margaret turned more and more to the powerful House of Douglas. She found herself particularly attracted to the Earl of Angus, whom even his uncle, the cleric and poet Gavin Douglas, called a \"young witless fool\". Margaret and Douglas were secretly married in the parish church of Kinnoull, near Perth, on 6 August 1514. Not only did this alienate the other noble houses but it immediately strengthened the pro-French faction on the council, headed by James Beaton, Archbishop of Glasgow. By the terms of the late king's will she had sacrificed her position as Regent of Scotland, and before the month was out, she was obliged to consent to the appointment of Albany.\nIn September, the Privy Council decided that she had also forfeited her rights to the supervision of her sons, whereupon in defiance she and her allies took the princes to Stirling Castle. In November, Margaret devised a code for letters sent to Henry VIII, saying that those signed \"Your loving sister, Margaret R\" would be genuine, and others might be the result of coercion by her enemies.\nEscape to England and birth of last child.\nAlbany arrived in Scotland in May 1515, and was finally installed as regent in July. The Scots, believing that a man of his eminence was needed to keep order in the country against England, persuaded the French to allow the duke to cross to Scotland; he landed in Dumbarton on 18 May 1515 with eight ships bearing supplies and French soldiers. His first task was to get custody of James and Alexander, politically essential for the authority of the regency. Margaret, after some initial defiance, surrendered at Stirling in August. With the princes in the hands of their uncle, Margaret, now expecting a child by Angus, retired to Edinburgh. For some time her brother had been urging her to flee to England with her sons; but she had steadily refused to do so, fearing such a step might lead to James's loss of the Scottish crown.\nHowever, once Margaret's two sons were in the custody of their uncle, Margaret secretly accepted her brother's offer of her personal safety at the English Court. Pregnant with Angus' child, Margaret feared for her life under the rule of the Privy Council of Scotland. As queen dowager she was forced to beg permission from the Privy Council even to travel. She obtained permission to go to Linlithgow Palace for her lying-in.\nShe escaped to Tantallon Castle and then, via Blackadder Castle and Coldstream Priory, crossed the border to England. She left valuable costume and jewels behind at Tantallon, including several velvet hoods embroidered with pearls with jewel-set front borders called \"chaffrons\", and a silk hat with a diamond jewel that had been a present from Louis XII of France. Her jewels were later collected by Thomas Dacre's agent, John Whelpdale, the Master of College of Greystoke.\nMargaret was received by Thomas Dacre, Henry's Warden of the Marches, and taken to Harbottle Castle in Northumberland. Here in early October she gave birth to Lady Margaret Douglas, the future Countess of Lennox and mother of Henry Stuart, Lord Darnley, cousin and second husband to Mary, Queen of Scots, and father of the future James VI. Margaret was in a lot of pain after the birth and may have been suffering from sciatica. By 21 November she had travelled the 5 miles to Brinkburn Priory, but it was the end of the month before Dacre received her at Morpeth Castle. During the queen's stay there, Dacre and Thomas Magnus persuaded her to sign a memorandum of complaint about her treatment by Albany. On 18 December, while she lay seriously ill at Morpeth, Margaret's second son, Alexander, died.\nWhile still in the north of England, Queen Margaret learned of the death of her younger son, Alexander. Dacre hinted that Albany \u2013 cast in the role of Richard III \u2013 was responsible. Margaret, even in her vulnerable state, refused to accept this, saying that if he really aimed at securing the throne for himself the death of James would have suited his purpose better. It was also at this time that she at last began to get the measure of Angus, who, with an eye on his own welfare, returned to Scotland to make peace with the Regent, \"which much made Margaret to muse\". When Henry VIII learned that Angus would not be accompanying his sister to London he said, \"Done like a Scot\". However, all of Angus's power, wealth and influence was in Scotland; to abandon the country would mean possible forfeiture for treason. In this regard he would have had before him the example of his kinsman James Douglas, 9th Earl of Douglas, who had fled to England the previous century, living out his life as a landless mercenary.\nPolitics and decline of second marriage.\nMargaret was well received by Henry and, to confirm her status, was lodged in Scotland Yard, the ancient London residence of the Scottish kings, and at Baynard's Castle. In May 1517, having spent a year in England, she returned north, after a treaty of reconciliation had been worked out by Albany, Henry and Cardinal Wolsey. Albany was temporarily absent in France \u2013 where he renewed the Auld Alliance once more and arranged for the future marriage of James V \u2014 but the queen dowager was received at the border on 15 June by Sieur de la Bastie, Albany's deputy, as well as by her husband.\nAlthough Margaret and Angus were temporarily reconciled, it was not long before their relationship entered a phase of terminal decline. She discovered that while she was in England her husband had been living with Lady Jane Stewart, a former lover. This was bad enough; what was worse, he had been living on his wife's money. In October 1518, she wrote to her brother, hinting at divorce:\"I am sore troubled with my Lord of Angus since my last coming into Scotland, and every day more and more, so that we have not been together this half-year\u2026 I am so minded that, an I may by law of God and to my honour, to part with him, for I wit well he loves me not, as he shows me daily.\"\nThis was a difficult issue for Henry; a man of conservative and orthodox belief, he was opposed to divorce on principle\u00a0\u2013 which was highly ironic, considering his later marital career. Just as important, Angus was a useful ally and an effective counter-weight to Albany and the pro-French faction. Angered by his attitude, Margaret drew closer to the Albany faction and joined others in calling for his return from France. Albany, seemingly in no hurry to return to the fractious northern kingdom, suggested that she resume the regency herself. The dispute between husband and wife was set to dominate Scottish politics for the next three years, complicated even more by a bitter feud between Angus and James Hamilton, 1st Earl of Arran; with bewildering rapidity Margaret sided with one and then the other.\nAlbany finally arrived back in Scotland in November 1521 and Margaret established cordial relations with him. From exile in England, Gavin Douglas, the Bishop of Dunkeld, spread scurrilous rumours that their relationship embraced more than politics. Angus went into exile while the Regent\u00a0\u2013 with the full cooperation of the queen dowager\u00a0\u2013 set about restoring order to a country riven by three years of intense factional conflict. Albany was useful to Margaret: he was known to have influence in Rome, which would help ease her application for a divorce. Angus and his allies spread the rumour that the two were lovers, and Lord Dacre wrote to Wolsey predicting that James would be murdered and Albany would become king and marry Margaret. But there is no evidence that the relationship between the two was ever more than one of calculated self-interest.\nMargaret's coup.\nIn most essentials, Margaret remained an Englishwoman in attitude and outlook, and sought a better understanding between the land of her birth and her adopted home. Necessity demanded an alliance with Albany and the French faction, especially after the devastating border wars with England in the early 1520s.\nBut no sooner was Albany off the scene than she set about organising a party of her own. In 1524, the Regent was finally removed from power in a simple but effective coup d'\u00e9tat. Albany wished that James would be kept at Stirling Castle. When he returned to France (where he was to die in 1536), Margaret, with the help of Arran and the Hamiltons, brought James, now 12 years old, from Stirling to Edinburgh.\nIn August, Parliament declared the regency at an end, and James was elevated to full kingly powers. In practice, he would continue to be governed by others, his mother above all. When Beaton objected to the new arrangements, Margaret had him arrested and thrown into jail. In November, Parliament formally recognised Margaret as the chief councillor to the King.\nMargaret's alliance inevitably alienated other noble houses. Her situation was not eased when her brother, Henry VIII, allowed Angus to return to Scotland. Both of these factors were to some degree beyond her control. The most damaging move of all was not. She formed a new attachment, this time to Henry Stewart, a younger brother of Lord Avondale.\nStewart was promoted to senior office, angering the Earl of Lennox, among others, who promptly allied with her estranged husband. That same November, when Parliament confirmed Margaret's political office, her war with Angus descended into a murderous farce. When he arrived in Edinburgh with a large group of armed men, claiming his right to attend Parliament, she ordered cannons to be fired on him from both the Castle and Holyrood House. When the two English ambassadors present at court, Thomas Magnus and Roger Radclyff, objected that she should not attack her lawful husband she responded in anger, telling them to \"go home and not meddle with Scottish matters\".\nAngus withdrew for the time being, but under pressure from various sources, the Queen finally admitted him to the council of regency in February 1525. It was all the leverage he needed. Taking custody of James, he refused to give him up, exercising full power on his behalf for a period of three years. James' experience during this time left him with an abiding hatred of the house of Douglas.\nDivorce and remarriage.\nMargaret attempted to resist but was forced to bend to the new political realities. Besides, by this time her desire for a divorce had become obsessive, taking precedence over all other matters. She was prepared to use all arguments, including the widespread myth that James IV had not been killed at Flodden. Despite the coup of 1524, she corresponded warmly with Albany, who continued his efforts on her behalf in Rome. In March 1527, Pope Clement VII granted her petition. Because of the political situation in Europe at the time it was not until December that she learned of her good fortune. She married Henry Stewart on 3 March 1528, ignoring the pious warnings of Cardinal Wolsey that marriage was \"divinely ordained\" and his protests against the \"shameless sentence sent from Rome\".\nIn June 1528, James V finally freed himself from the tutelage of Angus \u2013 who once more fled into exile \u2013 and began to rule in his own right. Margaret was an early beneficiary of the royal coup, as she and her husband emerged as the leading advisors to the king. James created Stewart Lord Methven \"for the great love he bore to his dearest mother\". It was rumoured \u2013 falsely \u2013 that the Queen favoured a marriage between her son and her niece Mary Tudor. She was instrumental in bringing about the Anglo-Scottish peace agreement of May 1534.\nThe central aim of Margaret's political life \u2013 besides assuring her own survival \u2013 was to bring about a better understanding between England and Scotland, a position she held to through some difficult times. James was suspicious of Henry, especially because of his continuing support for Angus, a man he loathed with a passion. Even so, in early 1536 his mother persuaded him to meet with her brother. It was her moment of triumph and she wrote to Henry and Thomas Cromwell, now his chief advisor, saying that it was \"by advice of us and no other living person\". She was looking for a grand occasion on the lines of the Field of Cloth of Gold, and spent a huge sum in preparation. In the end it came to nothing because there were too many voices raised in objection and because James would not be managed by his mother or anyone else. In a private interview with the English ambassador, William Howard, her disappointment was obvious \u2013 \"I am weary of Scotland\", she confessed. Her weariness even extended to betraying state secrets to Henry.\nLord Methven proved himself to be even worse than Angus in his desire both for other women and for his wife's money. Margaret was once again eager for divorce but proceedings were frustrated by James, whom she believed her husband had bribed. At one point she ran away toward the border, only to be intercepted and brought back to Edinburgh. Time and again she wrote to Henry with complaints about her poverty and appeals for money and protection. In the first months of 1536, Henry VIII sent her \u00a3200 and a parcel of luxury fabrics including lengths of purple cloth, tawny cloth of gold tissue, russet tinsel, satin, and velvet. The fabric was for the costume to wear to welcome her son's bride Madeleine of Valois. \nIn July 1537, Ralph Sadler brought her \u00a3200. Queen Madeleine died on 7 July. In October, Margaret wrote that she wished for ease and comfort at the \"age of forty years and nine\" instead of being obliged \"to follow her son about like a poor gentlewoman\". Margaret asked Henry VIII to send money and silver plate to help welcome her widowed son's new bride Mary of Guise to Scotland in June 1538. The two women established a good understanding. Mary made sure that her mother-in-law, who had now been reconciled with Methven, made regular appearances at court and it was reported to Henry that \"the young queen was all papist, and the old queen not much less.\"\nAccounts mention a companion of the \"old queen\", Margaret Hamilton, who received a gift of 22 shillings in March 1540. In the spring and summer of 1541, Margaret spent time with James V and Mary of Guise at Stirling Castle, providing support after the death of their infant sons.\nDeath.\nMargaret died at Methven Castle on 18 October 1541. Henry Ray, the Berwick Pursuivant, reported that she had palsy (possibly resulting from a stroke) on Friday and died on the following Tuesday. As she thought she would recover she did not trouble to make a will. She sent for King James, who was at Falkland Palace, but he did not come in time. Near the end she wished that the friars who attended her would seek the reconciliation of the King and the Earl of Angus. She hoped the King would give her possessions to her daughter, Lady Margaret Douglas. James arrived after her death, and he ordered Oliver Sinclair and John Tennent to pack up her belongings for his use. As a dowager queen, Margaret had received the rental money of the crown lands of Stirlingshire. After her death, this money was added to the king's income.\nMargaret was buried at the Charterhouse in Perth (demolished during the Reformation, 1559, its site now occupied by the former King James VI Hospital). The funeral ceremony itself was possibly not as elaborate as that held in Edinburgh for Madeleine of Valois in 1537, but James V and his household were provided with expensive black clothes for a mourning period.\nIssue.\nIn 1503, Margaret married King James IV. They had six children, of whom only one survived infancy:\nIn 1514, Margaret married Archibald Douglas, 6th Earl of Angus, and had one child:\nIn 1528, Margaret married Henry Stewart, 1st Lord Methven. They had no issue.\nSources.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWorks cited.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70551", "revid": "19992876", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70551", "title": "Florida Panthers", "text": "National Hockey League team\nThe Florida Panthers are a professional ice hockey team based in the Miami metropolitan area. The Panthers compete in the National Hockey League (NHL) as a member of the Atlantic Division in the Eastern Conference. The team initially played its home games at Miami Arena before moving to what is now known as Amerant Bank Arena in 1998. Located in Sunrise, Florida, the franchise is the southernmost team in the NHL. The Panthers are one of two NHL franchises based in Florida, with the other being the Tampa Bay Lightning.\nThe team's local broadcasting rights were held by Bally Sports Florida (formerly SportsChannel and Fox Sports Florida) from 1996 to 2024 when they made a new broadcast deal with Scripps Sports. The Panthers are primarily affiliated with two minor league teams: the Charlotte Checkers of the American Hockey League (AHL) and the Savannah Ghost Pirates of the ECHL.\nThe Panthers began playing in the 1993\u201394 season, when they set the record for the most points by an expansion team in its inaugural season, which was later surpassed by the Vegas Golden Knights in 2017\u201318. In 1996, the team made their first appearance in the Stanley Cup playoffs, reaching the 1996 Stanley Cup Final before falling to the Colorado Avalanche. Between 1997 and 2021, the Panthers only qualified for the Stanley Cup playoffs six times, not winning a playoff series in that span.\nSince the 2021\u201322 season, the Panthers have found considerable postseason success. They won their first playoff series in two decades in 2022, and appeared in the Stanley Cup Final for three straight seasons from 2023 to 2025, winning their first Stanley Cup in franchise history in 2024, and repeating as champions in 2025.\nHistory.\nEarly years (1992\u20132000).\nBlockbuster Video magnate Wayne Huizenga was awarded an NHL franchise for Miami on December 10, 1992, the same day the Walt Disney Company earned the rights to start a team in Anaheim that would become the Mighty Ducks. At the time, Huizenga owned both the newly founded Florida Marlins of Major League Baseball (MLB) and a share of the National Football League (NFL)'s Miami Dolphins. The entry fee was $50 million. Huizenga announced the team would play at the Miami Arena, sharing the building with the National Basketball Association (NBA)'s Miami Heat, until a new arena was built. Offices for the team were only established in June 1993, while vice president of business operations Dean Jordan conceded that \"none of the business people, myself included, knew anything about hockey.\" The new franchise would be the first professional ice hockey team in Miami since the folding of the Tropical Hockey League in 1939.\nHuizenga initially wanted to name the team the \"Block Busters\" in honor of his video rental chain. The team would have the same colors as the video rental chain (blue and gold) and even a uniform concept was designed. In the end, the NHL rejected the nickname.\nOn April 20, 1993, a press conference in Fort Lauderdale announced that the team would be named Florida Panthers, with former New York Islanders general manager Bill Torrey as president and Bobby Clarke as general manager. The team is named for the Florida panther, an endangered species of large cat endemic to the nearby Everglades region. Once the logos and uniforms were unveiled on June 15, the team also announced its financial commitment to the panther preservation cause. Huizenga had held the Panthers trademark since 1991, when he purchased it from a group of Tampa investors who sought to create an MLB team in the Tampa Bay area.\nThe new franchise joined the NHL for participation in the 1993\u201394 season, along with the Mighty Ducks of Anaheim. The Panthers' and Ducks' rosters were filled in both the expansion draft and the 1993 NHL entry draft in June 1993, hosted by Quebec City; that draft produced ten players who would eventually be a part of the 1996 Eastern Conference-winning team.\nThe Panthers' first major stars were former New York Rangers goaltender John Vanbiesbrouck, rookie Rob Niedermayer and forward Scott Mellanby, who scored 30 goals in Florida's inaugural season. Their first game was a 4\u20134 tie on the road against the Chicago Blackhawks, while their first win was a 2\u20130 shutout of the Tampa Bay Lightning in the Thunderdome before a then-NHL record crowd of 27,227. The Panthers had one of the most successful first seasons of any expansion team in league history, finishing just two points below .500 and narrowly missing out on the final 1994 playoff spot in the Eastern Conference. Their first-year success was attributed mainly to the trap defense that first-year coach Roger Neilson implemented. This conservative style was widely criticized by NHL teams; some even suggested that the Panthers were ruining the game. While the team executives expected the audience to consist of mostly \"snowbird\" Canadians living in Florida, the Floridians soon embraced the Panthers. Helped by Miami's other teams having middling performances, the club averaged 94% capacity at the 14,500-seat Miami Arena, and sold 8,500 season tickets in 100 days.\nIn August 1994, general manager Clarke left to work for the Philadelphia Flyers; Bryan Murray was brought in from the Detroit Red Wings as his replacement. After another close brush with the playoffs, finishing the lockout-shortened 1994\u201395 season again in ninth, Neilson was fired following an argument with Murray regarding Ed Jovanovski, whom the Panthers chose as the number one overall pick at the 1994 NHL entry draft. Doug MacLean, who had been the team's player development director, was promoted to coach. The team then acquired Ray Sheppard from the San Jose Sharks at the NHL trade deadline and looked toward the playoffs for the first time.\nThe Rat Trick and a trip to the 1996 Stanley Cup Final.\nA very unusual goal celebration developed in Miami during the 1995\u201396 season. On the night of the Panthers' 1995\u201396 home opener, a rat scurried across the team's locker room. Scott Mellanby reacted by \"one-timing\" the rat against the wall, killing it. That night, he scored two goals, which Vanbiesbrouck quipped was \"a rat trick.\" Two nights later, as the story found its way into the world, a few fans threw rubber rats on the ice in celebration of a goal. The rubber rat count went from 16 for the third home game to over 2,000 during the playoffs.\nIn the 1996 playoffs, as the fourth seed in the Eastern Conference, the Panthers faced the Boston Bruins in the first round and won in five games. Bill Lindsay's series-clinching goal is still a trademark image for the run the third-year franchise went on. The Panthers went on to upset the top-seeded Philadelphia Flyers in six games followed by the second-seeded Pittsburgh Penguins in seven (with Tom Fitzgerald scoring what would end up being the game-winning goal) to reach the 1996 Stanley Cup Final against the Colorado Avalanche, another team making its first Stanley Cup Final appearance. The Avalanche, however, swept the Panthers in four games. Despite losing in the Cup Final series, the Panthers set a record for most wins by an expansion team in their first postseason appearance with 12 victories (this record would later be broken by the Vegas Golden Knights during their inaugural season in 2017\u201318). For his team's surprising success, Bryan Murray was honored as NHL Executive of the Year.\nThe Panthers began the next season with a 12-game unbeaten streak, but faded in the second half of the season after trading second line center Stu Barnes. They lost in five games in the first round of the playoffs to the Wayne Gretzky-led New York Rangers. The team would plummet in the 1997\u201398 season. After a 7\u201312\u20134 start, the Panthers fired Doug MacLean, replacing him for the season with general manager Bryan Murray. The change did not aid matters, as Florida posted a franchise-worst 24\u201343\u201315 record, including a 15-game winless streak. This season also marked the end of goaltender John Vanbiesbrouck's time in Florida; in the midst of that streak, he was shelled by the Chicago Blackhawks and never played another game for the Panthers. In the following off-season, Vanbiesbrouck signed with the Flyers as a free agent.\nNew arena and a decade of struggles (1998\u20132010).\nThe Panthers moved into the brand new National Car Rental Center (now known as Amerant Bank Arena) in 1998. In 1998\u201399, they acquired Pavel Bure (the \"Russian Rocket\"), in a blockbuster trade with the Vancouver Canucks. They then reached the playoffs again in 1999\u20132000, losing in a first round sweep to the eventual Stanley Cup champion New Jersey Devils. The team slumped in 2000\u201301. Afterward, Huizenga sold the Panthers to an ownership group led by Alan Cohen. The following season, 2001\u201302, the Panthers had their worst record ever. Bure struggled despite being reunited with his brother Valeri, and was traded to the Rangers at the 2002 trade deadline.\nThe Panthers then began eyeing defenseman Jay Bouwmeester, who was widely tipped to be picked first overall pick at the 2002 NHL entry draft. However, then-general manager Rick Dudley sent Florida's first pick to the Columbus Blue Jackets, who selected winger Rick Nash, and in return, the Panthers received the right to trade first-round selections with the Blue Jackets in the 2003 NHL entry draft, a right which was not exercised when the Panthers received the first overall selection in 2003 as well. The Atlanta Thrashers, after picking goaltender Kari Lehtonen second overall, announced that the Panthers had given them two draft picks to guarantee that Bouwmeester would still be available for Florida's selection. Bouwmeester was selected third overall by the Panthers. Said then-head coach Mike Keenan, \"We shouldn't have done that ... Jay would have been number-one if we'd kept that pick.\"\nIn 2003, the Panthers hosted the NHL All-Star weekend in which the Western Conference earned a 6\u20135 victory after the first overtime shootout in All-Star history. The West overcame a four-goal outburst by Thrashers winger Dany Heatley, who took home MVP honors in his first All-Star appearance.\nOn June 23, 2006, the Panthers were again involved in a blockbuster trade with Vancouver, sending Roberto Luongo, Lukas Krajicek and a sixth-round draft pick (Sergei Shirokov) in exchange for Todd Bertuzzi, Alex Auld and Bryan Allen. This trade has been regarded by some as one of the worst trades in professional sports history \u2013 Luongo, who was at the prime of his career, was one of the League's top goaltenders, while Bertuzzi played just a handful of games for Florida before getting injured. He would later be traded to Detroit Red Wings at the trade deadline for Shawn Matthias. Additionally, Auld ended up a poor replacement for Luongo, and was ultimately let go after one season with the team.\nOn June 22, 2007, the Panthers were involved in yet another draft-day deal involving a goaltender. The team acquired Tomas Vokoun from the Nashville Predators in exchange for three draft picks \u2013 a first-round pick in 2008, a second-round pick in 2008 and a conditional second-round pick that could be used in 2007 or 2008. The move would eventually pay off when Vokoun was selected to the Eastern Conference All-Star Team. On July 28, 2007, Florida unveiled their new jerseys to over 11,000 fans at the BankAtlantic Center during the first intermission of the Panthers' 1996 Reunion game. Star forwards Nathan Horton and Stephen Weiss were both in full gear to help showcase the sweater changes.\nIn June 2008, the Panthers traded their captain Olli Jokinen to the Phoenix Coyotes for a second-round draft pick and defensemen Keith Ballard and Nick Boynton. The Panthers finished the 2008\u201309 season with a strong 41\u201330\u201311 record and 93 points, their second-highest finish in franchise history. Despite this, however, the Panthers missed the playoffs for an eighth-straight season, the then-longest streak in the NHL.\nIn November 2009, Cliff Viner and Stu Siegel became the new majority owners. On November 23, 2009, the Panthers made their third jersey, ridding red from the alternate jersey, replacing it with powder blue. The Panthers missed the playoffs for the ninth consecutive time in the 2009\u201310 season, making them the first team in NHL history to do so in one city.\nDale Tallon era (2010\u20132020).\nThe Blueprint (2010\u20132016).\nPanthers management hired Dale Tallon as the team's new general manager on May 17, 2010, replacing Randy Sexton, whose contract was expiring at the end of June. Tallon rebuilt the team with 2010 draft picks Erik Gudbranson, Nick Bjugstad and Quinton Howden, as well as the acquisition of players, including Steve Bernier, Michael Grabner, Marty Reasoner, Ryan Carter and Sergei Samsonov. All of the above-mentioned players, however, were traded at the 2011 trade deadline or released during the 2011 off-season, save for Gudbranson, Bjugstad and Howden. At the end of the 2010\u201311 season, just Stephen Weiss and David Booth remained from the pre-lockout era Panthers roster.\nOn June 1, 2011, Kevin Dineen, head coach of the American Hockey League (AHL)'s Portland Pirates, was named to be the 11th head coach of the Panthers. The team also rebranded their image, releasing a new home jersey, predominantly red with navy blue sleeves, and eliminating the navy blue piping on the road jersey; this new jersey replaced the navy blue one as the main home jersey. The 2011 off-season saw the acquisitions of Scottie Upshall, Tomas Fleischmann, Sean Bergenheim, Marcel Goc, Matt Bradley, Ed Jovanovski, Jose Theodore, Kris Versteeg, Tomas Kopecky and Brian Campbell.\nAfter several more trades and over 300-man-games lost to injury throughout the season, the Panthers were able to finish first in the Southeast Division, marking the end of their record-setting decade-long postseason drought. The Panthers won the first-ever division title in franchise history with a 4\u20131 victory over the Carolina Hurricanes on April 7, 2012. However, the Panthers were eliminated in the first round of the playoffs by the eventual Eastern Conference champion New Jersey Devils, losing at home in double overtime of game 7.\nIn the lockout-shortened 2012\u201313 season, the Panthers had an abysmal season. Unable to regain their form from last season, the Panthers suffered key injuries and fell back down into the basement with the worst record in the League. In the 2013\u201314 season, the Panthers failed to gain any momentum and finished 29th out of 30 teams. The team then fired head coach Kevin Dineen and replaced him with Peter Horachek. At the trade deadline, the Panthers reacquired Roberto Luongo from Vancouver. The Panthers would relieve Horachek of his duties at the end of the season, replacing him with former Columbus Blue Jackets head coach Gerard Gallant. The team also received the first overall pick in the 2014 NHL entry draft, using it to select Barrie Colts defenseman Aaron Ekblad.\nThe Panthers' 2014\u201315 home opener on October 12, 2014, set a team record for the lowest attendance at a home opener, with only 11,419 spectators in attendance. The team's next game against the Ottawa Senators marked the team's lowest attendance ever, with only 7,311 in attendance. Despite finishing with a record of 38\u201329\u201315, the Panthers missed the 2015 playoffs by seven points.\nOn December 8, 2015, the Panthers announced that they signed a 13-year lease, and an $86 million funding agreement with Broward County and would have a new logo and uniforms after the 2015\u201316 season. Their original logo had remained almost unchanged since their first season in 1993.\nIn the 2015\u201316 season, the team set a franchise record with a 12-game win streak. They also set a franchise record for most wins in a regular season with 47 wins and won their division for the second time in their existence. However, the Panthers lost to the New York Islanders in six games in the first round of the playoffs; this would be the first playoff series win for the Islanders since the 1992\u201393 season. Head coach Gerard Gallant was nominated as a finalist for the Jack Adams Award, which recognizes the NHL Coach of the Year.\nFront office miscues (2016\u20132020).\nThe 2016\u201317 season began with the promotion of general manager Dale Tallon to an executive position within the organization and assistant general manager Tom Rowe was promoted to general manager. After an 11\u201310\u20131 start to the season, the Panthers fired head coach Gerard Gallant and general manager Tom Rowe took over as interim head coach. At the end of the season, Rowe was relieved of his duties as both coach and general manager and was named special advisor to Tallon, who returned to positions of team president and general manager. On June 12, 2017, the Panthers named Bob Boughner as their new head coach.\nIn the 2017 NHL expansion draft, the Panthers left Jonathan Marchessault and Reilly Smith unprotected, despite the fact they both had 30-goal seasons on their resumes. In return for the unprotected players, the Vegas Golden Knights sent the Panthers a 2018 fourth-round draft pick, leaving the Panthers with the extra salary cap space. The Panthers instead chose to protect Nick Bjugstad, Mark Pysyk, and Alex Petrovic who all were eventually traded or no longer on the team within the next two years. The expansion draft would later haunt the Panthers in the 2023 Stanley Cup Final as the Vegas Golden Knights would defeat the Panthers in five games with Marchessault winning the Conn Smythe Trophy and Smith scoring the series-clinching goal.\nThe 2017\u201318 season began with a 19\u201322\u20136 record leading up to the 2018 NHL All-Star Game. The Panthers then went on a 25\u20138\u20132 run in their last 35 games, ending up one point short of a playoff berth. Their 44\u201330\u20138 record earned 96 regular season points, tying the league record of the 2014\u201315 Boston Bruins and the 2018\u201319 Montreal Canadiens for the team with the most regular season points to miss the postseason.\nOn April 7, 2019, the Panthers fired Boughner after the team failed to qualify for the playoffs for the third straight season. The next day, Joel Quenneville was named the 16th head coach of the Panthers. Longtime goaltender Roberto Luongo retired at the conclusion of the 2018\u201319 season. Tallon made a splash on the first day of free agency to replace the retired Luongo and signed two-time Vezina Trophy-winning goaltender Sergei Bobrovsky to a seven-year deal. At the time of the signing, Bobrovsky's contract was deemed a risk and gamble due to the contract value, Bobrovsky's inconsistent play, and his age.\nOn August 10, 2020, after nine years as general manager, the Panthers and Tallon mutually agreed to part ways, following the team's elimination in the 2020 Stanley Cup playoffs. In Tallon's tenure, the Panthers qualified for the Stanley Cup playoffs three times, in 2012, 2016, and 2020 with the Panthers never advancing past the first round, leaving the Panthers without a playoff series win since 1996.\nArrival of Bill Zito and Stanley Cup champions (2020\u2013present).\n2020\u20132022: Presidents' Trophy and return to playoffs.\nPanthers management hired Bill Zito to succeed Tallon as the team's general manager on September 2, 2020. During the shortened 2020\u201321 season, the Panthers compiled 79 points in 56 games played, finishing the season in second place in the temporary Central Division, one point behind the Carolina Hurricanes. As such, they were pitted against division and statewide rival, the Tampa Bay Lightning, in the first round of the 2021 playoffs. They were defeated in six games by the eventual Stanley Cup champions, for yet another first round exit.\nIn the 2021\u201322 season, Quenneville led the Panthers to a 7\u20130\u20130 record through the team's first seven games, but he would resign from his coaching duties as a result of the fallout from the 2010 Chicago Blackhawks sexual assault scandal on October 28, 2021. The next day, the Panthers named former NHL player Andrew Brunette their interim head coach. On April 3, 2022, the Panthers became the first team during the 2021\u201322 season to clinch a playoff berth, when they defeated the Buffalo Sabres at home, 5\u20133. This victory was also Florida's 48th of the season, breaking their previous record set during 2015\u201316 season. Three weeks later, on April 21, 2022, following a 5\u20132 victory over the Detroit Red Wings, the Panthers crowned themselves as Atlantic Division champions for the first time since the 2015\u201316 season. The victory was also Florida's 12th consecutive, dating back to a 7\u20134 win over the Montreal Canadiens on March 29. This win streak matched another one achieved during the 2015\u201316 season, tying the franchise record. With the win, the Panthers improved to a stellar 56\u201315\u20136 record, tallying 118 points, and overcoming the Colorado Avalanche in the quest for the Presidents' Trophy. After an Avalanche defeat, and a Panthers 4\u20130 victory over the Ottawa Senators on April 28, the Panthers clinched the Presidents' Trophy for the first time in franchise history. They would end the regular season with 122 points, with a 58\u201318\u20136 record, the best record registered in the league since division rivals Tampa Bay Lightning in 2018\u201319. On May 13, the Panthers advanced past the first round for the first time in 26 years, dating back to the 1996 conference finals, by beating the Washington Capitals in six games, eliminating them with a 4\u20133 overtime victory. However, the Panthers were swept in four games by the archrival the Tampa Bay Lightning in the second round. Florida went completely dry offensively, scoring only three goals throughout the whole four-game series.\n2022\u2013present: Three consecutive Stanley Cup Final series and back-to-back championships.\nAfter being swept in the second round by the Lightning, general manager Bill Zito decided to move on from interim head coach Andrew Brunette. On June 22, 2022, the Panthers hired Paul Maurice to be the franchise's 18th head coach. Later that same off-season, the Panthers traded away Hart Memorial Trophy nominee forward Jonathan Huberdeau, defenseman MacKenzie Weegar, a first-round pick, and prospect Cole Schwindt to the Calgary Flames in exchange for forward Matthew Tkachuk and a mid-round draft pick. The Tkachuk\u2013Hubderdeau trade saw two 100-point NHL scorers traded for each other for the first time since 1988, when Wayne Gretzky was traded for Jimmy Carson. This trade was also the first sign-and-trade in NHL history as Tkachuk was a restricted free agent at the time. The hiring of head coach Maurice and the Tkachuk trade proved to be successful in the following seasons.\nFor the 2022\u201323 season, the Panthers looked to carry on their positive regular season streak. However, the team was hampered by injuries, most notably to star center Aleksander Barkov, who was sidelined for a large portion of the season. Despite being outside of playoff contention by February 2023, the Panthers slowly gained momentum, aided by Barkov's return, and eventually finished the season with a 42\u201332\u20138 record, good enough for 92 points and the second wild card spot and eighth seed in the Eastern Conference overall, one point ahead of the Pittsburgh Penguins and Buffalo Sabres. As such, they were set to battle the record-breaking, 135-point Boston Bruins in the 2023 first round. As the heavy underdogs in the series, the Panthers were down 3\u20131 after losing game 4 at home. However, they won game 5 in overtime, 4\u20133 at the TD Garden, and game 6, 7\u20135, at home to tie the series at 3. In the definitive game 7, the Panthers led 2\u20130 after the second period, but were down 3\u20132 with under two minutes left in the third period, facing elimination. However, after goaltender Sergei Bobrovsky left the net to bring an extra skater to the ice, Brandon Montour scored with under a minute left to play to send the game to overtime. In overtime, despite a few saves by Bruins goaltender Jeremy Swayman, Carter Verhaeghe scored to win the game 4\u20133 and stun the Bruins, setting up a second round matchup against the Toronto Maple Leafs. In the second round, the Panthers continued their positive streak, defeating the Maple Leafs in five games. The Panthers played their longest game in franchise history on May 18, against the Carolina Hurricanes in the conference finals, which resulted in a 3\u20132 Panthers victory with Matthew Tkachuk scoring the game-winning goal with 12.7 seconds left in quadruple overtime. The Panthers would then sweep the Hurricanes in four games which included a goal by Tkachuk with 4.3 seconds left in game 4. This would be the first time the Panthers had ever swept a playoff series. They advanced to the 2023 Stanley Cup Final, where they lost to the Vegas Golden Knights in five games.\nFor the 2023\u201324 season, the Panthers were expected to regress in results, as it was believed their aggressive forechecking and stout defense would be figured out by rival teams. However, the Panthers once again enjoyed a successful season. They went 52\u201324\u20136 for 110 points, star center Sam Reinhart netted 57 goals (behind Auston Matthews for the league lead), and overtook the Boston Bruins in the last regular season game for the Atlantic Division crown, their third in franchise history. Barkov became the franchise's all-time points leader in a 5\u20132 win over the Detroit Red Wings on March 20. The Panthers defeated the Toronto Maple Leafs 5\u20132 at home, while the Bruins were ousted by the Ottawa Senators, 3\u20131, to win the division. In the first round of the 2024 playoffs, the Panthers played against their rivals, the Tampa Bay Lightning, and won the series in five games. In the next round, the Panthers played the Boston Bruins again, this time winning the series in six games. In the conference finals, they won the six-game series against the New York Rangers, advancing to the Stanley Cup Final for the second straight year, where they defeated the Edmonton Oilers in seven games to win their first Stanley Cup in franchise history.\nIn the 2024\u201325 season, the Panthers placed third in the Atlantic Division and fifth in the Eastern Conference. The team dealt with injuries towards the end of the season, including to star forward Matthew Tkachuk and defenseman Dmitry Kulikov. Tkachuk was injured during the 4 Nations Face-Off, but he returned for the playoffs. Longtime defenseman Aaron Ekblad was suspended 20 games for violating the NHL/NHLPA Performance Enhancing Substances Program. The Panthers once again met their cross-state rival the Tampa Bay Lightning in the first round of the playoffs, with Florida winning a five-game series. In the second round, the Panthers crossed paths with the Toronto Maple Leafs. Despite falling down 2\u20130 in the series, the Panthers won four out of the next five games. In the conference finals, Florida faced the Carolina Hurricanes whom the Panthers defeated in the 2023 conference finals. After taking a 3\u20130 series lead, the Panthers would go on to win the series in five games, clinching their third consecutive conference championship and a trip to the 2025 Stanley Cup Final. In the Stanley Cup Final, the Panthers defeated the Edmonton Oilers in a rematch of the previous year's Cup Final in six games to win their second straight Stanley Cup and repeat as Stanley Cup champions.\nTeam identity.\nLogos, colors, and uniforms.\nThe Florida Panthers have had just two primary logos over the course of their history. Their first logo, used from 1993 to 2016, depicted a leaping panther. Other logos from the era included an alternate version of the \"leaping panther\" logo, this time holding a pair of broken hockey sticks, and a logo depicting a yellow sun behind a hockey stick and a palm tree. The \"leaping panther\" logo was redesigned and relegated to an alternate logo when the Panthers unveiled a new logo in the 2016\u201317 season. The current primary logo is a shield with the profile of a panther head below the word \"Florida\"; the same logo with the word \"Panthers\" above is also used interchangeably. When used as the jersey crest, the \"Panthers\" variant is used on home jerseys and the \"Florida\" variant is used on away jerseys.\nThe Panthers' first uniform set was used from 1993 to 2007. The red road and white home uniforms featured the leaping panther crest in front and the alternate palm tree logo on the shoulders. Diagonal stripes accentuated the sleeves and the yoke design was triangular in shape. Yellow and navy were used as accent colors.\nIn 1998, the Panthers debuted an alternate navy uniform, with the front crest depicting the leaping panther holding a pair of broken hockey sticks. Prior to the 2003\u201304 season, the navy uniform became the primary home uniform while the red uniform was relegated to alternate status. The crests on both uniforms were also switched.\nAdopting the Reebok Edge template in 2007, the Panthers revealed new uniform designs. The navy and white uniforms sported a thicker stripe on each sleeve along with added piping.\nIn 2009, the Panthers unveiled a navy alternate uniform, featuring a roundel crest depicting a panther head surrounded by the team name. Powder blue replaced red as trim color and the alternate \"FLA\" sunshine logo was placed on the shoulders. This uniform was used for three seasons.\nBefore the 2011\u201312 season, the Panthers retired their primary navy uniforms and returned to wearing red uniforms at home. The piping on the chest was also eliminated.\nThe Panthers overhauled their visual design prior to the 2016\u201317 season, replacing yellow with flat gold as trim color. Red uniforms featured the shield logo with the team name, while the white uniforms used the variation with the state name. An alternate logo featuring the flag of Florida below a crawling panther is added on the sleeves. Both sets feature thick contrasting stripes on the chest and sleeves. The basic design was retained once Adidas took over as supplier prior to the 2017\u201318 season.\nFor the 2020\u201321 season, the Panthers released a \"Reverse Retro\" alternate uniform, essentially a recoloring of the team's original uniform. In this case, the Panthers wore their original 1990s \"leaping panther\" uniform, but with a navy base and flat gold replacing yellow as a trim color. A second \"Reverse Retro\" uniform was unveiled, again using the same 1990s-era template but with a powder blue base (a nod to the 2009\u201312 navy alternates) and the alternate palm tree, sun and stick logo in front.\nFor the Panthers' appearance at the 2026 NHL Winter Classic, they wore red uniforms with cream letters, navy blue and gold stripes. A variation of the \"leaping panther\" crest is rendered in chain-stitched felt.\nMascots.\nThe Panthers have two mascots: Stanley C. Panther and Viktor E. Ratt.\nStanley C. Panther is a large anthropomorphic Florida panther and is the Panther's official mascot. He is named for the Stanley Cup. Further, Stanley C. Panther was introduced during the 1995\u201396 season. He was named by Darrel Ambrosini, a then-five-year-old fan of the team who creatively came up with the mascot's moniker.\nViktor E. Ratt was introduced in October 2014 after much debate and honors the club's 1996 Stanley Cup Final run where rats were tossed on ice. He is an anthropomorphic rat.\nBroadcasting.\nTelevision.\nThe Panthers' designated television market includes South Florida. In July 2024, amid Bally Sports's bankruptcy, the Panthers announced an agreement with the E.W. Scripps Company and its Scripps Sports division, under a multi-year deal beginning in the 2024\u201325 season. Scripps' Miami-Fort Lauderdale station WSFL-TV serves as flagship station of the Panthers' television network, while WHDT airs games in the Stuart\u2013West Palm Beach market. WFTX-DT3 airs games in the Fort Myers-Naples market. The Panthers stream in-market games on Panthers+.\nFrom its inaugural season through 2023\u201324, Bally Sports Florida (formerly Fox Sports Florida and SportsChannel Florida) was the regional television rightsholder for all Panthers games not broadcast exclusively by the NHL's national television partners.\nPanthers games on TV are called by Steve Goldstein on play-by-play, and Randy Moller on color.\nRadio.\nThe team has a radio deal with Audacy, Inc. to broadcast Panther games on the radio. Audacy airs the team's games on WQAM 560 repeating on 96.5 (HD2) and 99.9 (HD2) in Broward/Dade, WBZT 1230 repeating on 98.7 (HD2) in West Palm Beach, WCTH-FM 100.3 in the Florida Keys, and WCZR-FM 101.7 in the Treasure Coast.\nPanthers games on radio are called by Doug Plagens on play-by-play, and Bill Lindsay on color.\nMinor league affiliates.\nIn September 2020, the Panthers reached an agreement to partner with the Charlotte Checkers of the AHL to be the Panthers' top affiliate. The Checkers receive many of the team's top prospects and draft picks to further their development. The length of the multi-year affiliation was not announced.\nIn June 2024, the Panthers announced an affiliation agreement with the Savannah Ghost Pirates of the ECHL. The length of the multi-year affiliation was not announced. The Florida Everblades were the Panthers' ECHL affiliate for the 2022\u201323 and 2023\u201324 seasons.\nSeason-by-season record.\n\"This is a partial list of the last five seasons completed by the Panthers. For the full season-by-season history, see List of Florida Panthers seasons.\"\n\"Note: GP = Games played, W = Wins, L = Losses, T = Ties, OTL = Overtime Losses, Pts = Points, GF = Goals for, GA = Goals against\"\nPlayers and personnel.\nCurrent roster.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Navbar-header/styles.css\"/&gt;\nTeam captains.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nHead coaches.\nPaul Maurice has been the head coach of the Panthers since June 22, 2022.\nGeneral managers.\nBill Zito has been the general manager of the Panthers since September 2, 2020.\nLeague and team honors.\nAwards and trophies.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-float/styles.css\" /&gt;\nStanley Cup\nPrince of Wales Trophy\nPresidents' Trophy\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-float/styles.css\" /&gt;\nMaurice \"Rocket\" Richard Trophy\nLady Byng Memorial Trophy\nCalder Memorial Trophy\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-float/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBill Masterton Memorial Trophy\nFrank J. Selke Trophy\nKing Clancy Memorial Trophy\nConn Smythe Trophy\nFirst-round draft picks.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nHockey Hall of Fame inductees.\nThe Florida Panthers have an affiliation with a number of inductees to the Hockey Hall of Fame. Inductees affiliated with the Panthers include eight former players and two builders of the sport. Builders that have an affiliation with the Panthers include former head coach Roger Nielson, and Bill Torrey, former general manager of the Panthers. Former play-by-play commentator, Dave Strader was also a recipient of the Foster Hewitt Memorial Award from the Hockey Hall of Fame, for his contributions in hockey broadcasting.\nPlayers\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nBuilders\nStatistics and records.\nFranchise regular season scoring leaders.\nThese are the top-ten point-scorers in franchise history. Figures are updated after each completed NHL regular season.\n\"Note: Pos = Position; GP = Games Played; G = Goals; A = Assists; Pts = Points; P/G = Points per game\"\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nFranchise playoff scoring leaders.\nThese are the top-ten playoff point-scorers in franchise playoff history. Figures are updated after each completed NHL season.\n\"Note: Pos = Position; GP = Games Played; G = Goals; A = Assists; Pts = Points; P/G = Points per game\"\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nFranchise individual records.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nOther honors.\nFeatured as cover athlete of \"NHL 97\" video game: John Vanbiesbrouck.\nFeatured as cover athlete of \"NHL 26\" video game: Matthew Tkachuk.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nrole=\"presentation\" class=\"wikitable succession-box noprint\" style=\"margin:0.5em auto; font-size:small;clear:both;\""}
{"id": "70553", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70553", "title": "Ceviche", "text": "Dish of marinated raw seafood\nCeviche, cebiche, sebiche, or seviche () is a cold dish consisting of fish or shellfish marinated in citrus and seasonings. Different versions of ceviche are part of the culinary cultures of various Latin American countries along the Pacific Ocean where each one is native, including Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Ecuador, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, Mexico, Puerto Rico, Nicaragua, Panama, and Peru. Ceviche is considered the national dish of Peru and is recognized by UNESCO as an expression of Peruvian traditional cuisine and an Intangible Cultural Heritage of Humanity.\nThe fish or shellfish in ceviche is not served raw like sashimi; the citric acid from the citrus marinade causes the proteins in the seafood to become denatured, resulting in the dish appearing to be \"cooked\" without the application of heat. The fish is typically cured in lemon or sour lime juice, although sour orange was historically used. The dressing also includes some local variety of chili pepper or chili, replaced by mustard in some parts of Central America. The marinade usually also includes sliced or chopped onions and chopped cilantro, though in some regions such as Mexico, tomatoes, avocadoes, and tomato sauce may be included.\nCeviche is often eaten as an appetizer; if eaten as a main dish, it is usually accompanied by side dishes that complement its flavors, such as sweet potato, lettuce, maize, avocado, or fried plantains, among various other accompaniments.\nEtymology.\nThe first documented evidence of the term is from 1820, in the patriotic song \",\" considered the first Peruvian national anthem.\nAccording to the Royal Spanish Academy, the word might have the same etymology as the Spanish term , which derives from Mozarabic , in turn descending from Andalusian Arabic , which also derives from Classical Arabic (, meaning meat cooked in vinegar). It is ultimately from the unattested Middle Persian , from (\"vinegar\") and (\"soup\"), which also yielded the Persian word (, a soup made with meat and vinegar). Another hypothesis is that it derives from the Quechua word , meaning fresh fish.\nThe name of the dish is spelled variously as , , , or , but the most common spelling is \"ceviche\" with \"v\", such as in Peru, which is an alternative spelling accepted by the Royal Spanish Academy. There are also other local variants of the name, including and .\nHistory.\nVarious explanations of the dish's origins exist, with Peruvian researchers favoring a pre-Hispanic origin. According to some historic sources from Peru, the Caral civilization that developed in central Peru between 3500 BC to 1800 BC has left evidence of the use and consumption of raw Peruvian anchovy with chili and salt, according to the investigations of archaeologist Ruth Shady. Another predecessor of ceviche originated among the Moche, a coastal civilization that began to flourish in present-day northern Peru nearly 2,000 years ago. The Moche used the fermented juice from the local banana passionfruit. Recent investigations further show that during the Inca Empire, fish was marinated with \"chicha\", an Andean fermented beverage. Different chronicles also report that along the Incan coast before the arrival of Spaniards, fish was consumed with salt and \"aj\u00ed\".\nThe dish is popular in the Pacific coastal regions of western South America. The technique of macerating raw fish and meat in vinegar, citrus, and spices (escabeche) was brought to the Americas from Spain and is linked to the Muslim heritage in Spanish cuisine. However, archeological records suggest that something resembling ceviche may have been indigenous to western South America as early as 2,000 years ago.\nNevertheless, some historians believe that ceviche originated during colonial times in present-day Peru and Ecuador. They propose that a predecessor to the dish was brought to the area by Andalusian women of Moorish background who accompanied the Conquistadors and that this dish eventually evolved into what is now considered ceviche. The Peruvian chef Gast\u00f3n Acurio further explains that the dominant position that Lima held throughout four centuries as the capital of the Viceroyalty of Peru, which at one point included most of western South America, allowed for popular dishes such as ceviche to be brought to other administrative provinces in the region, and in time becoming local cuisine incorporating regional flavors and styles.\nNational Geographic and Taste Atlas recognize the origin of ceviche in Peru. The Peruvian origin of the dish is supported by chefs including the Chilean Christopher Carpentier and the Spaniard Ferran Adri\u00e0, who in an interview stated, \"Cebiche was born in Peru, and so the authentic and genuine [cebiche] is Peruvian.\"\nThe first recipe for this dish was published by Manual Atanasio Fuentes in \"The Guide of Lima.\"\nIts origin is also attributed to places ranging from Central America to Polynesia. In Ecuador, it may have had its origins in coastal civilizations, as Ecuador shares cultural heritages (such as the Inca Empire) and a wide variety of fish and shellfish with Peru. The Ecuadorian position traces the origin of ceviche to the harvest of the Spondylus shell in the years 3500\u00a0BC to 1500\u00a0BC in the Valdivia culture, whose diet used marine products that were later used in ceviche. The Spanish, who brought citrus fruits such as the lime from Europe, may have originated the dish in Spain with roots in Moorish cuisine. Peruvian historian Juan Jos\u00e9 Vega supports the theory put forward by Fernando Rueda Garc\u00eda, historian of M\u00e1laga and a member of the Andalusian Ethnology Commission, who suggests that it was Moorish slaves who created ceviche by mixing local and foreign ingredients that were arriving on the Iberian Peninsula.\nPreparation and variants.\nCeviche is marinated in a citrus-based mixture, with lemons and limes most commonly used. In addition to adding flavor, the citric acid causes the proteins in the seafood to become denatured, resulting in the dish appearing to be cooked without the application of heat. Because the dish is eaten raw and not cooked with heat, it must be prepared fresh and consumed immediately to minimize the risk of food poisoning. Acid marinades will not kill bacteria or parasitic worms, unlike the heat of cooking. Traditional-style ceviche was marinated for about three hours. Modern-style ceviche, popularized in the 1970s, usually has a very short marinating period. The appropriate fish can marinate in the time it takes to mix the ingredients, serve, and carry the ceviche to the table.\nAccompaniments to ceviche vary greatly by region: in Ecuador, ceviche is served with fried plantains, popcorn, or tostones; in Colombia, Panama, and Guatemala, it is served with saltine crackers, though in the north cookies or toast are used as a garnish; in Mexico, it is served with corn tostadas or crackers; in Panama, the spicy chombo chili pepper is sometimes added to taste; and in Peru, it is served with boiled root vegetables (such as sweet potatoes, cassava, or rarely potatoes), grains or seeds such as boiled or roasted corn, legumes, fried plantains, seaweed, or lettuce; sometimes it can also be accompanied by \"chilcano\" (broth made from fish heads).\nMost Latin American countries have given ceviche its own touch of individuality by adding their own particular garnishes.\nSouth America.\nIn Peru, ceviche has been declared part of the country's national heritage and has even had a holiday declared in its honor. The classic Peruvian ceviche is composed of chunks of raw fish, marinated in freshly squeezed key lime, with sliced onions, chili peppers, salt and pepper. Corvina or cebo (sea bass) was the fish traditionally used. The mixture was traditionally marinated for several hours and served at room temperature, with chunks of corn on the cob and slices of cooked sweet potato. Regional or contemporary variations include garlic, fish bone broth, minced Peruvian \"aj\u00ed limo\", or the Andean chili \"rocoto\", toasted corn or \"cancha\" and \"yuyo\" (seaweed). A specialty of Trujillo is ceviche prepared from shark (\"tollo\" or \"tojo\"). \"Lenguado\" (sole) is often used in Lima. The modern version of Peruvian ceviche, similar to the method used in making Japanese sashimi, consists of fish marinated for a few minutes and served promptly. It was developed in the 1970s by Peruvian-Japanese chefs, including Dario Matsufuji and Humberto Sato. Many Peruvian \"cevicher\u00edas\" serve a small glass of the marinade, which is called \"leche de tigre\" or \"leche de pantera\", as an appetizer along with the fish.\nAccording to an Inter-American Development Bank (IDB) study of innovation in Peruvian cuisine and its connection with Peruvian cultural diversity (2022), the great variety of ceviches offered by Peruvian marine cuisine is an example of the gastronomic impact of cultural diversity throughout its territory, in which fishers, farmers, and chefs come together. In his 2015 book \"Ceviche Power\", Gaston Acurio documents the different nuances through a tour of the ceviche route through Tumbes, Piura, Lambayeque, La Libertad, Ancash, the Lima coast, Lima, Ica, Arequipa, Moquegua and Tacna. This great diversity has motivated chefs to create new types of ceviches.\nIn Ecuador, the classic ceviche is made up of pieces of fish pickled in lemon juice and cooked or shrimp cooked using the tomato juice or water along with the shrimp shells, with sliced red onions, sliced tomatoes, salt, pepper, cilantro, and oil. The mixture is traditionally marinated for several hours and served with a bowl of toasted corn kernels as a side dish; fried green plantain chunks called \"patacones\", or thinly sliced plantain chips called \"chifles\". In some regions, ceviche is served with rice on the side. Ceviches in Ecuador are seasoned with tomato sauce, mustard, and oil. The Manab\u00ed style, made with lemon juice, salt, and the juice provided by the cooked shrimp itself, and sometimes topped with peanut butter, is very popular. Occasionally, ceviche is made with various types of local shellfish, such as black clam (cooked or raw), oysters (cooked or raw), spondylus (raw), barnacles (cooked percebes), among others mostly cooked. Well-cooked sea bass (corvina) or bicuda (picudo), octopus, and crab ceviches are also common in Ecuador. In all ceviches, red onion, lemon juice, cilantro, salt, and oil are ubiquitous ingredients.\nIn Chile, ceviche is often made with fillets of halibut or Patagonian toothfish and marinated in lime and grapefruit juices; finely minced garlic and red chili peppers and often fresh mint and cilantro are added. On Easter Island, the preferred fish is tuna, marinated in lemon juice and coconut milk.\nIn Colombia, cebiches or shrimp cocktails, oysters, crabs, squid, chipi chipi, among others, and combinations of them are prepared. The sauce includes tomato sauce, mayonnaise, garlic sauce, cilantro, chopped white onion, lemon juice, among other seasonings. They are accompanied with salty soda cracker.\nNorth and Central America and the Caribbean.\nIn Mexico, the U.S., and some parts of Central America, it is served either in cocktail cups with tostadas or as a tostada topping and taco filling. In Mexico, when served in a cup with tomato sauce, it is called a ceviche cocktail. Shrimp, octopus, squid, tuna, and mackerel are also popular bases for Mexican ceviche. The marinade ingredients include salt, lime, onion, chili peppers, avocado, and cilantro (coriander). Cut olives and tomatoes are often added to the preparation.\nIn El Salvador and Nicaragua, one popular ceviche recipe is \"ceviche de concha negra\" (\"black conch ceviche\"), known in Mexico as \"pata de mula\" (\"mule's foot\"). It is dark, nearly black, with a distinct look and flavor. It is prepared with lime juice, onion, yerba buena, salt, pepper, tomato, Worcestershire sauce, and sometimes picante (any hot sauce or any kind of hot pepper) as desired.\nThe dish includes marinated fish, lime juice, salt, ground black pepper, finely minced onions, cilantro, and finely minced peppers in Nicaragua and Costa Rica. It is usually served in a cocktail glass with a lettuce leaf and soda crackers on the side, as in Mexico. Popular condiments are tomato ketchup, mayonnaise, and Tabasco sauce. The fish is typically tilapia or corvina, although mahi-mahi, shark, and marlin are also popular.\nIn Panama, ceviche is prepared with lemon juice, chopped onion, celery, cilantro, assorted peppers, and sea salt. Ceviche made with corvina (white sea bass) is very popular and is served as an appetizer in most local restaurants. It is also commonly prepared with octopus, shrimp, and squid or served with small pastry shells called \"canastitas.\"\nIn the Caribbean, ceviche is often made using mahi-mahi prepared with lime juice, salt, onion, green pepper, habanero, and a touch of allspice. Squid and tuna are also popular. In Puerto Rico and other places in the Caribbean, the dish is prepared with coconut milk. In the Bahamas and south Florida, a conch ceviche, conch salad, is popular. It is prepared by marinating diced fresh conch in lime, chopped onions, and bell pepper. Diced pequin pepper or Scotch bonnet pepper is often added for spice. In south Florida, it is common to encounter a variation to which tomato juice has been added.\nHealth risks.\nAside from contaminants, raw seafood can also be the vector for various pathogens, viral and bacterial, as well as larger parasitic creatures. According to the Food and Drug Administration and studies since 2009, specific microbial hazards in ceviche include \"Anisakis simplex\", \"Diphyllobothrium\" spp., \"Pseudoterranova decipiens\" and \"P. cattani\", and \"Vibrio parahaemolyticus\". Anisakiasis is a zoonotic disease caused by the ingestion of larval nematodes in raw seafood dishes such as ceviche. The Latin American cholera outbreaks in the 1990s may have been attributed to the consumption of raw cholera-infested seafood that was eaten as ceviche.\nThe American Dietetic Association urges women to avoid ceviche during pregnancy due to the health risks it introduces if not prepared properly.\nUNESCO Intangible Cultural Heritage of Humanity.\nIn December 2023, the practices and meanings associated with the preparation and consumption of ceviche, were recognized by UNESCO as an expression of Peruvian traditional cuisine and an Intangible Cultural Heritage of Humanity. The statement was made within the framework of the eighteenth session of its Intergovernmental Committee for the Safeguarding of the Intangible Cultural Heritage. As a basis for its decision, it was considered that the preparation and consumption of ceviche in Peru, \"entail specific practices, knowledge and meanings at each stage, from fishing to cultivating the ingredients and preparing the dish. As recipes vary from one region to the next, the dish also strengthens regional cultural identity\".\nIn awarding the honor to Peru's ceviche, UNESCO highlighted the role of the dish in Peru's cultural identity, the importance of artisanal sustainable fishers and traditional female ceviche cooks in cevicher\u00edas, regional variations of the dish, and how the knowledge of ingredients and techniques are passed down through families in Peru.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70554", "revid": "46628330", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70554", "title": "Olympia", "text": "Olympia may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "70556", "revid": "47220715", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70556", "title": "List of winners and nominated authors of the Booker Prize", "text": "The following is a list of winners and shortlisted authors of the Booker Prize for Fiction. The prize has been awarded each year since 1969 to the best original full-length novel, written in the English language, by a citizen of the Commonwealth of Nations or the Republic of Ireland. In 2014, it was opened for the first time to any work published in the United Kingdom and written in (not translated into) the English language.\nThere have been three special awards celebrating the Booker's history. In 1993, the \"Booker of Bookers\" prize was awarded to Salman Rushdie for \"Midnight's Children\" (the 1981 winner) as the best novel to win the award in its first 25 years. \"Midnight's Children\" also won a public vote in 2008, on the prize's fortieth anniversary, for \"The Best of the Booker\". In 2018 a special \"Golden Booker\" was awarded celebrating 50 years of the award; this was won by Michael Ondaatje for \"The English Patient\".\nWinners, shortlists and longlists.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWriters with multiple awards.\nFive authors have won the award twice:\nWriters with multiple nominations.\nThe following writers have received two or more nominations:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70559", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70559", "title": "Ovo-lacto", "text": ""}
{"id": "70560", "revid": "39088972", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70560", "title": "Maximilian Kolbe", "text": "Polish Franciscan friar, martyr, and saint (1894\u20131941)\nMaximilian Maria Kolbe (born Raymund Kolbe; ; 8 January 1894 \u2013 14 August 1941) was a Polish Conventual Franciscan friar, priest, missionary, and martyr. He volunteered to die in place of a man named Franciszek Gajowniczek in the German death camp of Auschwitz, located in German-occupied Poland during World War II. He had been active in promoting the veneration of the Immaculate Virgin Mary, founding and supervising the monastery of Niepokalan\u00f3w near Warsaw, operating an amateur-radio station (SP3RN), and founding or running several other organizations and publications.\nOn 10 October 1982, Pope John Paul II canonized Kolbe and declared him a martyr of charity. The Catholic Church venerates him as the patron saint of amateur radio operators, drug addicts, political prisoners, families, journalists, and prisoners. John Paul II declared him \"the patron of our difficult century\". His feast day is 14 August, the day of his martyrdom.\nDue to Kolbe's efforts to promote consecration and entrustment to Mary, he is known as an \"apostle of consecration to Mary\".\nEarly life.\nRaymund Kolbe was born on 8 January 1894 in Zdu\u0144ska Wola, in the Kingdom of Poland, then a puppet state of the Russian Empire. He was the second son of weaver Julius Kolbe and midwife Maria D\u0105browska. His father was an ethnic German, and his mother was Polish. Raymund had four brothers, two of whom died of tuberculosis. Shortly after his birth, his family moved to Pabianice in Poland.\nIn 1903, when he was age nine, Kolbe experienced a vision of the Virgin Mary. He later described this incident:\nThat night I asked the Mother of God what was to become of me. Then she came to me holding two crowns, one white, the other red. She asked me if I was willing to accept either of these crowns. The white one meant that I should persevere in purity and the red that I should become a martyr. I said that I would accept them both.\nFranciscan friar.\nIn 1907, Kolbe and his elder brother Francis joined the Order of Friars Minor Conventual, known as the Conventual Franciscans. They enrolled at the Conventual Franciscan minor seminary in Lw\u00f3w, in present-day Ukraine, later that year. In 1910, the Franciscans allowed Raymund Kolbe to enter the novitiate, where he chose a religious name, Maximilian. He professed his first vows to the order in 1911, and his final vows in 1914, adopting the additional name of Maria (Mary).\nWorld War I.\nThe Franciscans sent Kolbe to Rome in 1912 to attend the Pontifical Gregorian University. While he was studying at the Gregorian, World War I broke out in 1914. The next year, Kolbe's father, Julius, joined the Polish Legions, a unit in the Austro-Hungarian Army led by J\u00f3zef Pi\u0142sudski. Julius was captured later that year by the Imperial Russian Army and was hanged as a traitor. The news of his father's execution traumatized Kolbe.\nKolbe earned a Doctor of Philosophy from the Gregorian in 1915. Kolbe then continued his studies at the Pontifical University of St. Bonaventure in Rome, where he earned a doctorate in theology in either 1919 or 1922. During this period, he became active in the consecration and entrustment to Mary.\nWhile in Rome, Kolbe witnessed vehement demonstrations by Freemasons against Pope Pius X and later Pope Benedict XV. According to Kolbe:\nThey placed the black standard of the \"Giordano Brunisti\" under the windows of the Vatican. On this standard the archangel, Michael, was depicted lying under the feet of the triumphant Lucifer. At the same time, countless pamphlets were distributed to the people in which the Holy Father (i.e., the Pope) was attacked shamefully.\nTo counter these demonstrations, Kolbe started the \"Militia Immaculatae\" (Army of the Immaculate One) on 16 October 1917. This was a group of Catholics who prayed for the conversion of sinners and enemies of the Catholic Church, specifically the Freemasons, through the intercession of the Virgin Mary. So serious was Kolbe about this goal that he added a line to the Miraculous Medal prayer:\nO Mary, conceived without sin, pray for us who have recourse to thee. \"And for all those who do not have recourse to thee; especially the Freemasons and all those recommended to thee\".\nDuring this period, Kolbe proposed that the entire Franciscan Order be consecrated to the Immaculate by an additional vow. The idea was well received, but faced the hurdles of approval by the hierarchy of the order and the lawyers and was never adopted.\nPriesthood.\nIn 1918, Kolbe was ordained a priest. In July 1919, after the end of World War I, he returned to Poland to teach at the Krak\u00f3w Seminary. The Second Polish Republic had won its independence from the Russian Republic in 1918. While in Krak\u00f3w, Kolbe was active in promoting the veneration of the Immaculate Virgin Mary. He was strongly opposed to socialist and communist movements that had surfaced in Poland after the war.\nIn 1922, a recurrence of tuberculosis forced Kolbe to leave the seminary.\nIn January 1922, Kolbe founded the monthly periodical \"Rycerz Niepokalanej\" (\"Knight of the Immaculata\"), a devotional publication based on the French \"Le Messager du Coeur de Jesus\" (\"Messenger of the Heart of Jesus\"). From 1922 to 1926, he operated a religious publishing press in Grodno in present-day Belarus. As his activities grew in scope, in 1927 he founded a new Conventual Franciscan monastery at Niepokalan\u00f3w near Warsaw. It became a major religious publishing centre. A junior seminary was opened there two years later.\nMissionary work in Asia.\nDuring the 1920s, Kolbe encountered a group of Japanese Catholics studying in Poland. They lamented the lack of Catholic missionaries in Japan, prompting Kolbe to consider making a missionary trip to East Asia. Kolbe arrived in 1930 in Shanghai, then part of the Republic of China. However, his mission failed to gather a following there, prompting him to move to Japan. Kolbe soon acquired a basic literacy in Japanese. In 1931, Kolbe founded a Franciscan monastery, \"Mugenzai no Sono\" (, transl.\u2009Garden of the Immaculata), outside Nagasaki. The monastery soon began publishing a Japanese edition of the \"Knight of the Immaculata\".\nIn mid-1932, Kolbe left Japan for Malabar, then part of British India, where he founded another monastery.\nReturn to Poland.\nMeanwhile, in his absence the monastery at Niepokalan\u00f3w began to publish a daily newspaper \"Ma\u0142y Dziennik\" (\"the Small Diary\"), in alliance with the political group National Radical Camp (\"Ob\u00f3z Narodowo Radykalny\"). This publication reached a circulation of 137,000, and nearly double that, 225,000, on weekends. Kolbe returned to Poland in 1933 for a general chapter of the order in Krak\u00f3w. Kolbe returned to Japan and remained there until called back to attend the Provincial Chapter in Poland in 1936. There he was appointed guardian of Niepokalan\u00f3w, thus precluding his return to Japan. In 1938, he started a radio station at Niepokalan\u00f3w, \"Radio Niepokalan\u00f3w\". He held an amateur radio licence, with the call sign SP3RN.\nWorld War II.\nThe invasion of Poland on 1 September 1939 by the German Army signaled the start of World War II. Kolbe was one of the few priests who remained in the monastery, where he organized a temporary hospital. After the Germans captured Niepokalan\u00f3w, they arrested Kolbe on 19 September 1939. While in custody, Kolbe refused to sign the Deutsche Volksliste (German People's List). Doing so would have given him rights similar to those of German citizens in exchange for recognizing his ethnic German ancestry. The Germans released him on 8 December 1939.\nUpon his release, he continued work at his friary where he and other friars provided shelter to refugees from Greater Poland, including 2,000 Jews whom he hid from Nazi persecution in the Niepokalan\u00f3w friary. Kolbe received permission to continue publishing religious works, though significantly reduced in scope. The monastery continued to act as a publishing house, issuing a number of publications considered anti-Nazi.\nArrest and imprisonment.\nOn 17 February 1941, the Gestapo shut down the monastery and arrested Kolbe along with four others. He was incarcerated in the Pawiak prison in Warsaw. On 28 May 1941, the Germans transferred Kolbe to the Auschwitz concentration camp as prisoner 16670.\nArriving at Auschwitz, Kolbe started ministering to his fellow prisoners. He was subjected to violent harassment by the guards, including beatings and lashings. On one occasion, sympathetic inmates smuggled the wounded Kolbe to a prisoner hospital.\nMartyrdom at Auschwitz.\nAt the end of July 1941, a prisoner successfully escaped from Auschwitz. In reprisal, the deputy camp commander, \"SS-Hauptsturmf\u00fchrer\" Karl Fritzsch, ordered guards to pick ten men to be starved to death in an underground bunker. When selected, Franciszek Gajowniczek, a Polish Catholic, cried out, \"My wife! My children!\" At that moment, Kolbe volunteered to take his place.\nAn assistant janitor later testified that Kolbe led the prisoners in prayer from his prison cell. Each time the guards checked on him, he was standing or kneeling in the middle of the cell, calmly looking at those who entered. After the group had been starved and deprived of water for two weeks, only Kolbe and three others remained alive.\nImpatient to empty the bunker, the guards gave the four remaining prisoners lethal injections of carbolic acid. Kolbe is said to have raised his left arm and calmly waited for it. Maximilian Kolbe died on 14 August 1941. He was cremated on 15 August, which happened to be the feast day of the Assumption of Mary.\nCanonization.\nThe cause for Kolbe's beatification was opened at a local level on 3 June 1952. On 12 May 1955, Kolbe was recognized by Pope Pius XII as a servant of God. Kolbe was declared venerable by Pope Paul VI on 30 January 1969 and beatified as a confessor of the faith by the same pope in 1971. The miracles used to confirm Kolbe's beatification were the July 1948 cure of intestinal tuberculosis in Angela Testoni and the August 1950 cure of calcification of the arterial sclerosis of Francis Ranier. Both individuals attributed their cures to Kolbe's intercession by their prayers to him.\nKolbe was canonized by Pope John Paul II on 10 October 1982. The pope declared him as a confessor and a martyr of charity. Franciszek Gajowniczek, the man Kolbe saved at Auschwitz, survived the Holocaust and was present as a guest at both the beatification and the canonization ceremonies.\nThe feast of Saint Maximilian Kolbe was added to the General Roman Calendar. He is one of 10 20th-century martyrs depicted in statues above the Great West Door of the Anglican Westminster Abbey in London.\nKolbe is remembered in the Calendar of saints of the Church of England with a commemoration on 14 August.\nControversies.\nKolbe's recognition as a martyr generated some controversy within the Catholic Church. While his self-sacrifice at Auschwitz was considered saintly and heroic, he was not killed as a result of \"odium fidei\" (\"hatred of the faith\"), but as the result of his act of charity toward another man. Pope Paul VI recognized this distinction at Kolbe's beatification, naming him a confessor and a \"martyr of charity\". John Paul II, however, overruled the commission he had established (which agreed with the earlier assessment of heroic charity). John Paul II wanted to make the point that the Nazis' systematic hatred of whole categories of humanity was inherently also a hatred of religious (Christian) faith; he said that Kolbe's death equated to earlier examples of religious martyrdom.\nAccusations of antisemitism.\nKolbe's alleged antisemitism was a source of controversy in the 1980s in the aftermath of his canonization. In 1926, in the first issue of the monthly \"Knight of the Immaculate\", Kolbe said he considered Freemasons \"as an organized clique of fanatical Jews, who want to destroy the church.\" In a 1924 column, he cited the \"Protocols of the Elders of Zion\" as an \"important proof\" that \"the founders of Zionism intended, in fact, the subjugation of the entire world\", but that \"not even all Jews know this\". In a calendar that the publishing house of his organization, the Militia of the Immaculate, published in an edition of a million in 1939, Kolbe wrote, Atheistic Communism seems to rage ever more wildly. Its origin can easily be located in that criminal mafia that calls itself Freemasonry, and the hand that is guiding all that toward a clear goal is international Zionism. Which should not be taken to mean that even among Jews one cannot find good people. In his periodicals, Kolbe published articles about topics such as a Zionist plot for world domination. Slovenian philosopher Slavoj \u017di\u017eek criticized Kolbe's activities as \"writing and organizing mass propaganda for the Catholic Church, with a clear anti-Semitic and anti-Masonic edge.\" In contrast, a writer for online EWTN stated that the \"Jewish question played a very minor role in Kolbe's thought and work\" and that \"only thirty-one out of over 14,000 of his letters reference the Jewish people or Judaism, and most express a missionary zeal and concern for their spiritual welfare\".\nDuring World War II, Kolbe's monastery at Niepokalan\u00f3w sheltered Jewish refugees. According to the testimony of a local, \"When Jews came to me asking for a piece of bread, I asked Father Maximilian if I could give it to them in good conscience, and he answered me, 'Yes, it is necessary to do this because all men are our brothers.'\"\nRelics.\nFirst-class relics of Kolbe exist, in the form of hairs from his head and beard, preserved without his knowledge by two friars at Niepokalan\u00f3w who served as barbers in his friary between 1930 and 1941. Since his beatification in 1971, more than 1,000 such relics have been distributed around the world for public veneration. \nSecond-class relics, such as his personal effects, clothing and liturgical vestments, are preserved in his monastery cell and in a chapel at Niepokalan\u00f3w, where they may be venerated by visitors.\nInfluence.\nKolbe influenced his own Order of Conventual Franciscan friars, as the Militia Immaculatae movement had continued. In recent years, new religious and secular institutes have been founded, inspired by this spiritual way. Among these are the Missionaries of the Immaculate Mary \u2013 Fr. Kolbe, the Franciscan Friars of Mary Immaculate, and a parallel congregation of religious sisters and others. The Franciscan Friars of Mary Immaculate are taught basic Polish so they can sing the traditional hymns Kolbe sang in his native tongue.\nAccording to the friars:\nOur patron, St. Maximilian Kolbe, inspires us with his unique Mariology and apostolic mission, which is to bring all souls to the Sacred Heart of Christ through the Immaculate Heart of Mary, Christ's most pure, efficient, and holy instrument of evangelization \u2013 especially those most estranged from the Church.\nKolbe's views into Marian theology echo today through their influence on Vatican II. His image may be found in churches across Europe and throughout the world. Several churches in Poland are under his patronage, such as the Sanctuary of Saint Maxymilian in Zdu\u0144ska Wola and the Church of Saint Maxymilian Kolbe in Szczecin. A museum, Museum of St. Maximilian Kolbe \"There was a Man\", was opened in Niepokalan\u00f3w in 1998.\nIn 1963, Rolf Hochhuth published \"The Deputy\", a play influenced by Kolbe's life, and dedicated to him. In 2000, the National Conference of Catholic Bishops (US) designated Marytown in Libertyville, Illinois home to a community of Conventual Franciscan friars, as the National Shrine of St. Maximilian Kolbe.\nIn 1991, Krzysztof Zanussi released a biographical Polish film about Kolbe, \"\", with Edward \u017bentara as Kolbe. The Polish Senate declared 2011 to be the year of Kolbe.\nIn 2023, the Mexican production company Dos Corazones Films released the animated feature film \"Max\", which recounts part of Kolbe's life.\nThe 2025 film \"Triumph of the Heart\" tells the story of Kolbe's final weeks in the Block 11 starvation chamber. The film was written and directed by Anthony D'Ambrosio and stars Marcin Kwasny.\nImmaculata prayer.\nKolbe composed the Immaculata prayer as a prayer of consecration to the Immaculata.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70565", "revid": "37666339", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70565", "title": "Itaipu Dam", "text": "Dam along the Brazil\u2013Paraguay border\nThe Itaipu Dam ( ; ; ) is a hydroelectric dam on the Paran\u00e1 River located on the border between Brazil and Paraguay. It is the third-largest hydroelectric dam in the world in terms of produced energy.\nThe name \"Itaipu\" was taken from an island that existed near the construction site. In the Guarani language, means \"the sounding stone.\" As of 2020, the Itaipu Dam's hydroelectric power plant produced the second-largest amount of electricity of any hydroelectric power plant in the world, with its electricity production being only surpassed by the Three Gorges Dam plant in China. Additionally, Itaipu also holds the 45th largest reservoir in the world.\nWith its construction completed in 1984, it is a binational undertaking run by Brazil and Paraguay at the border between the two countries, north of the Friendship Bridge. The project ranges from Foz do Igua\u00e7u, in Brazil, and Ciudad del Este in Paraguay, in the south to Gua\u00edra and Salto del Guair\u00e1 in the north. The installed generation capacity of the plant is 14\u00a0GW, with 20 generating units providing 700 MW each with a hydraulic design head of . In 2016, the plant employed 3038 workers.\nOf the twenty generator units currently installed, ten generate at 50\u00a0Hz for Paraguay and ten generate at 60\u00a0Hz for Brazil. Since the output capacity of the Paraguayan generators far exceeds the load in Paraguay, most of their production is exported directly to the Brazilian side, from where two 600\u00a0kV HVDC lines, each approximately long, carry the majority of the energy to the S\u00e3o Paulo/Rio de Janeiro region where the terminal equipment converts the power to 60\u00a0Hz.\nHistory.\nNegotiations between Brazil and Paraguay.\nThe concept behind the Itaipu Power Plant was the result of serious negotiations between the two countries during the 1960s. The \"Ata do Igua\u00e7u\" (Igua\u00e7u Act) was signed on July 22, 1966, by the Brazilian and Paraguayan Ministers of Foreign Affairs, Juracy Magalh\u00e3es and Ra\u00fal Sapena Pastor. This was a joint declaration of the mutual interest in studying the exploitation of the hydro resources that the two countries shared in the section of the Paran\u00e1 River starting from and including the \"Salto de Sete Quedas\", to the \"Igua\u00e7u River\" watershed. The treaty that gave origin to the power plant was signed in 1973.\nThe terms of the treaty, which expired in 2023, have been the subject of widespread discontent in Paraguay. The government of President Lugo vowed to renegotiate the terms of the treaty with Brazil, which long remained hostile to any renegotiation.\nIn 2009, Brazil agreed to a fairer payment of electricity to Paraguay and also allowed Paraguay to sell excess power directly to Brazilian companies instead of solely through the Brazilian electricity monopoly.\nConstruction starts.\nIn 1970, the consortium formed by the companies ELC Electroconsult S.p.A. (from Italy) and IECO (from the United States) won the international competition for the realization of the viability studies and for the elaboration of the construction project. Design studies began in February 1971. On April 26, 1973, Brazil and Paraguay signed the Itaipu Treaty, the legal instrument for the hydroelectric exploitation of the Paran\u00e1 River by the two countries. On May 17, 1974, the Itaipu Binacional entity was created to administer the plant's construction. The construction began in January of the following year. Brazil's (and Latin America's) first electric car was introduced in late 1974; it received the name \"Itaipu\" in honor of the project.\nParan\u00e1 River rerouted.\nOn October 14, 1978, the Paran\u00e1 River had its route changed, which allowed a section of the riverbed to dry so the dam could be built there.\nAgreement by Brazil, Paraguay, and Argentina.\nThe construction of the dam was first contested by Argentina, but the negotiations and resolution of the dispute ended up setting the basis for Argentine\u2013Brazilian integration later on.\nAn important diplomatic settlement was reached with the signing of the \"Acordo Tripartite\" by Brazil, Paraguay, and Argentina, on October 19, 1979. This agreement established the allowed river levels and how much they could change as a result of the various hydroelectric undertakings in the watershed that was shared by the three countries.\nFormation of the lake.\nThe reservoir began its formation on October 13, 1982, when the dam works were completed and the side canal's gates were closed. Throughout this period, heavy rains and flooding accelerated the filling of the reservoir as the water rose and reached the gates of the spillway on October 27.\nStart of operations.\nOn May 5, 1984, the first generation unit started running in Itaipu. The first 18 units were installed at the rate of two to three a year; the last two of these started running in the year 1991.\nCapacity expansion in 2007.\nThe last two of the 20 electric generation units started operations in September 2006 and in March 2007, thus raising the installed capacity to 14 GW and completing the power plant. This increase in capacity allows 18 generation units to run permanently while two are shut down for maintenance. Due to a clause in the treaty signed between Brazil, Paraguay, and Argentina, the maximum number of generating units allowed to operate simultaneously cannot exceed 18 (see the agreement section for more information).\nThe rated nominal power of each generating unit (turbine and generator) is 700 MW. However, because the head (difference between reservoir level and the river level at the bottom of the dam) that actually occurs is higher than the designed head (), the power available exceeds 750 MW half of the time for each generator.\nEach turbine generates around 700 MW; by comparison, all the water from the Igua\u00e7u Falls would have the capacity to feed only two generators.\nNovember 2009 power failure.\nOn November 10, 2009, transmission from the plant was completely disrupted, possibly due to a storm damaging up to three high-voltage transmission lines. Itaipu itself was not damaged. This caused massive power outages in Brazil and Paraguay, blacking out the entire country of Paraguay for 15 minutes, and plunging Rio de Janeiro and S\u00e3o Paulo into darkness for more than 2 hours. 50 million people were reportedly affected. The blackout occurred at 22:13 local time. It affected the southeast of Brazil most severely, leaving S\u00e3o Paulo, Rio de Janeiro, and Esp\u00edrito Santo completely without electricity. Blackouts also swept through the interior of Rio Grande do Sul, Santa Catarina, Mato Grosso do Sul, Mato Grosso, the interior of Bahia, and parts of Pernambuco, energy officials said. By 00:30, power had been restored to most areas.\nWonder of the Modern World.\nIn 1994, the American Society of Civil Engineers elected the Itaipu Dam as one of the seven modern Wonders of the World. In 1995, the American magazine \"Popular Mechanics\" published the results.\nSocial and environmental impacts.\nWhen construction of the dam began in 1971, approximately 10,000 families living beside the Paran\u00e1 River were displaced because of the construction.\nThe world's largest waterfall by volume, the Gua\u00edra Falls, was inundated by the newly formed Itaipu reservoir. The Brazilian government later liquidated the Gua\u00edra Falls National Park. A few months before the reservoir was filled, 80 people died when an overcrowded bridge overlooking the falls collapsed, as tourists sought a last glimpse of the falls.\nThe Gua\u00edra Falls was an effective barrier that separated freshwater species in the upper Paran\u00e1 basin (with its many endemics) from species found below it, and the two are recognized as different ecoregions. After the falls disappeared, many species formerly restricted to one of these areas have been able to invade the other, causing problems typically associated with introduced species. For example, more than 30 fish species that formerly were restricted to the region below the falls have been able to invade the region above.\nThe American composer Philip Glass has written a symphonic cantata named \"Itaipu\" in honor of the structure.\nThe Santa Maria Ecological Corridor now connects the Igua\u00e7u National Park with the protected margins of Lake Itaipu, and via these margins with the Ilha Grande National Park.\nStatistics.\nGeneration.\n tright\" style=\"width:272px;\"&gt;\nInside the dam structure\nAlthough its designed peak generating capacity is only 14,000 MW, behind the 22,500 MW Three Gorges Dam, the dam formerly held the record for energy production with 101.6 TWh produced in 2016. This record was beaten in 2020, when the Three Gorges Dam produced a new record 111.8 TWh after extensive monsoon rainfall that year.\nIn the period 2012\u20132021, the Itaipu Dam maintained the second-highest average annual hydroelectric production in the world, averaging 89.22 TWh per year, second to the 97.22 TWh per year average of the Three Gorges Dam in that period.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70566", "revid": "10202399", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70566", "title": "Valpara\u00edso", "text": "Second largest city in Chile\nValpara\u00edso ( or ; ) is a major city, commune, seaport, and naval base facility in the Valpara\u00edso Region of Chile. Valpara\u00edso was originally named after Valpara\u00edso de Arriba, in Castile-La Mancha, Spain.\nGreater Valpara\u00edso is the second-most populous metro area in the country. Valparaiso is the second-largest city in the metro area (behind Vi\u00f1a del Mar). It is located about northwest of Santiago, by road, and is one of the Pacific Ocean's most important seaports. Valpara\u00edso is the capital of Chile's second most-populated administrative region and has been the Chilean Navy headquarters since 1817, as well as being the seat of the National Congress of Chile since 1990.\nValpara\u00edso played an important geopolitical role in the second half of the 19th century when it served as a major stopover for ships traveling between the Atlantic and Pacific oceans via the Straits of Magellan. The area experienced rapid growth during its golden age as a magnet for European immigrants, when the city was known by international sailors as \"Little San Francisco\" and \"jewel of the Pacific\". Notable developments during this bustling period include Latin America's oldest stock exchange, the continent's first volunteer fire department, Chile's first public library, and the oldest Spanish language newspaper in continuous publication in the world, . In 2003, the historic quarter of Valpara\u00edso was declared a UNESCO World Heritage Site.\nThe twentieth century was unfavorable to Valpara\u00edso, as many wealthy families abandoned the city. The opening of the Panama Canal in 1914, and the associated reduction in ship traffic, dealt a serious blow to the region's shipping- and port-based economy. By the 21st century, the port of San Antonio had surpassed Valpara\u00edso in trade volume (TEU) handled, leading to the questioning of its traditional moniker of \"Puerto Principal\" (\"principal port\") of Chile.\nBetween 2000 and 2015, the city experienced a recovery, attracting artists, tourists, and cultural entrepreneurs, who settled after they were attracted by the city's hillside historic districts. Today, many thousands of people visit Valpara\u00edso each month, from Chile and abroad to enjoy the city's labyrinth of cobbled alleys and colorful buildings. The Port of Valpara\u00edso still continues to be a major distribution center for container traffic, copper, and fruit exports. It also receives growing attention from cruise ships that visit during the South American summer. Most significantly, Valpara\u00edso has transformed itself into a major educational and entertainment hub, with four large traditional universities, and several large vocational colleges.\nWhile the city is well-known for its artisans and bohemian culture, it is also famous as the home of several highly-regarded music festivals and other artistic events. The largest, and arguably most iconic, is the annual \"Vi\u00f1a Del Mar International Song Festival\" (often simply called \"Vi\u00f1a\" or \"Vi\u00f1a Del Mar\"). Typically held in March, in a recently refurbished, 40,000-capacity amphitheater, \"Vi\u00f1a\" is one of the biggest annual economic boosts to the region, as the event usually sells-out completely, and thousands of attendees and workers will travel to and stay in the city and metro area. In addition to showcasing numerous performers of many styles, and awarding various prizes, the internationally-televised and live-streamed festival is typically headlined by superstar musicians, from both the Spanish- and English-speaking worlds.\nHistory.\nSome older works starting with Benjam\u00edn Vicu\u00f1a Mackenna (1869) claim that Valpara\u00edso was within the range of the Chango people, but clear evidence for this is lacking.\nThe Bay of Valpara\u00edso's first ethnically identifiable population were Picunche natives, known for their agriculture. Spanish explorers, considered the first European discoverers of Chile, arrived in 1536, aboard the \"Santiaguillo\", a supply ship sent by Diego de Almagro. The \"Santiaguillo\" carried men and supplies for Almagro's expedition, under the command of Juan de Saavedra, who named the town after his native village of Valpara\u00edso de Arriba in Cuenca Province, Spain.\nDuring Spanish colonial times, Valpara\u00edso remained a small village, with only a few houses and a church. On some occasions she was attacked by English pirates and privateers, such as Francis Drake with his ship \"Golden Hind\" in 1578 and later his cousin Richard Hawkins with his ship \"Dainty\" in 1594. Drake's sack of Valpara\u00edso gave origin to the legend about Cueva del Pirata.\nIn 1810, a wealthy merchant built the first pier in the history of Chile and the first during the colonial era. In its place today, stands the building of El Mercurio de Valpara\u00edso. The ocean then rose to this point. Reclamation of land from the sea moved the coastline five blocks away. Between 1810 and 1830, he built much of the existing port of the city, including much of the land reclamation work that now comprises the city's commercial center. In 1814, the naval Battle of Valpara\u00edso was fought offshore of the town, between American and British ships involved in the War of 1812. After Chile's independence from Spain (1818), beginning the Republican Era, Valpara\u00edso became the main harbour for the nascent Chilean navy, and opened international trade opportunities that had been formerly limited to Spain and its other colonies. \nValpara\u00edso soon became a desired stopover for ships rounding South America via the Straits of Magellan and Cape Horn. It gained particular importance supporting and supplying the California gold rush (1848\u20131858). As a major seaport, Valpara\u00edso received immigrants from many European countries, mainly from Britain, Germany, France, Switzerland, and Italy. German, French, Italian, and English were commonly spoken among its citizens, who founded and published newspapers in these languages.\nValpara\u00edso found maritime competition with Callao (Per\u00fa). Both cities sought to be the dominant port on the Pacific Coast of South America during the period of time known as the High Trade (1880\u20131930). The British community, \"La Colonia Britanica\", prospered in Valpara\u00edso between the 1820s and 1920s. Firms such as Antony Gibbs &amp; Sons, Duncan Fox, and Williamson-Balfour Company were doing business in the town, which had become a significant trading center by 1840, with 166 British ships, out of a total of 287, anchored in its port. The British settled on Cerro Alegre (Mount Pleasant) and Cerro Concepci\u00f3n. The Association of Voluntary Firemen was created in 1851, a telegraph service to Santiago was operating by 1852, and Chile's first telephone service was set up in 1880. The British Hospital was founded in 1897, and the British Arch, \"Arco Brit\u00e1nico\", was erected in 1911. However, by 1895, Italian immigrants exceeded the British, and both the Italians and Germans were in larger numbers by 1907. By 1920, both the Italians and Spanish outnumbered the British, and the primary British community within Chile resided in Santiago.\nInternational immigration transformed the local culture from Spanish origins and Amerindian origins, in ways that included the construction of the first non-Catholic cemetery of Chile, the Dissidents' Cemetery. Football (soccer) was introduced to Chile by English immigrants; and the first private Catholic school in Chile, \"Le Coll\u00e8ge des Sacr\u00e9s C\u0153urs\" (\"Sacred Hearts College\") and its accompanying Sacred Hearts Church, by French immigrants. Immigrants from Scotland and Germany founded the first private secular schools (The Mackay School and \"Die Deutsche Schule\", respectively). Immigrants formed the first volunteer fire-fighting units (still a volunteer activity in Chile). Their buildings reflected a variety of European styles, making Valpara\u00edso more varied than some other Chilean cities.\nOn 16 August 1906, a major earthquake struck Valpara\u00edso; there was extensive property damage and thousands of deaths. The Chilean doctor, Carlos Van Buren, of U.S. descent, was involved in the medical care of earthquake victims. He later established the Hospital Carlos Van Buren in 1912.\nThe golden age of Valpara\u00edso's commerce ended after the opening of the Panama Canal in 1914. Shipping shifted to the canal as captains sought to avoid the risks of the Strait of Magellan. The port's use and traffic declined significantly, causing a decline in the city's economy. The opening of the Panama Canal was one of the most critical events in the shaping of Valpara\u00edo's economy. Since the turn of the 21st century, shipping has increased in the last few decades with fruit exports, opening the Chilean economy to world commerce, and larger-scale, Post-Panamax ships that do not fit the Panama Canal.\n19th century.\nOn 28 March 1814, the USS \"Essex\" was defeated by British frigates \"Phoebe\" and \"Cherub\" during the War of 1812, leading to the deaths of 58 US Marines. Captain David Porter, a survivor of this attack, retired to Portersville, Indiana and requested to change the name to Valparaiso, commemorating the only naval battle he ever lost. By 2 August 1820, the Liberating Expedition of Peru sailed from Valpara\u00edso.\nAt 10:30 pm on the evening of 19 November 1822, Valpara\u00edso experienced a violent earthquake that left the city in ruins; of the 16,000 residents, casualties included at least 66 adults and 12 children, as well as 110 people wounded. The next day, a meteor trail was visible from Quillota to Valpara\u00edso, seen as a religious experience for much of the population. In 1826, the Royal Navy Great Britain established a South America Station in Valpara\u00edso to maintain British naval interest in the region. It remained until 1865, when it was moved to Esquimalt, British Columbia. On 12 September 1827, , the oldest circulating newspaper in the Spanish language worldwide, was established.\nIn May 1828, a constitutional convention began regular meetings in the church of San Francisco. By August 9, the Constitution of the Republic of Chile was fully drafted and disseminated. On 6 June 1837, Minister Diego Portales was shot on orders of Captain Santiago Flor\u00edn https:// at the port by Baron Hill on suspicion of promoting conspirators who opposed the Peru-Bolivian Confederation, considered a turning point of Chilean public opinion and the purpose of the war.\nBy 1851, the first fire brigade in the country was formed. In 1852, potable running water became available, as well as the first telegraph service in Latin America, between the city and Santiago. Four years later streetlights with 700 gas lanterns, were installed. In 1861, the first tram company was formed, mostly using horses or mules to draw them, and fully established over the next few years. In 1852, British shipping company Williamson, Balfour &amp; C\u00eda was established in Valpara\u00edso to handle trade in the region.\nTaking advantage of the total lack of defenses, a Spanish fleet commanded by Casto M\u00e9ndez N\u00fa\u00f1ez bombarded the city during the Chincha Islands War in 1866. Chilean merchant ships were sunk, except for those vessels whose captains hoisted foreign flags. A merger of the National Steamship Company and Chilean Steamship Company, the South American Steamship Company was created as a national response to the increasing dominance of the Pacific Steam Navigation Company in 1872. In 1880 the Chilean Telephone Company was formed by Americans Joseph Husbands, Peter MacKellar, James Martin, and the U.S. consul Lucius Foot, the first official telephone company in the country. Three years later on the first of December, Concepci\u00f3n funicular opened, the first of many hydraulic systems. After the country's independence and its consequent openness to international trade, Valpara\u00edso became an important port of call on trade routes through the Eastern Pacific. Many immigrants settled there, mostly from Europe and North America, and they helped include Valpara\u00edso and Chile in the Industrial Revolution sweeping other parts of the world. That created a different city with civil, financial, commercial, and industrial institutions, many of which still exist today.\nPopulation increases resulted. The city reached more than 160,000 inhabitants in the late nineteenth century, making it necessary to use the steep hills for more houses, mansions and even cemeteries. The lack of available land caused the city authorities and developers to reclaim low lying tidal marshland (polders) upon which to build administrative, commercial and industrial infrastructure.\n20th century.\nThe twentieth century began with the first big protest of dockworkers, Chile on 15 April 1903, due to complaints by dockers about their excessive working hours and demands for higher wages, requests that were ignored by employers, creating a tense situation that led to serious violence on 12 May. There were protests and the burning of the CSAV offices and several people were shot and killed. All this prompted intervention by the state. This protest was important for the future of Trade Unionism in the country.\nThat same year, electric trams were introduced.\nThe 1906 Valpara\u00edso earthquake caused severe damage throughout the city on 16 August, which was at that time the heart of the Chilean economy. The damage was valued at hundreds of millions of pesos of the time, and human victims were counted at 3,000 dead and over 20,000 injured. After the removal of the debris, reconstruction work began which included the widening of streets, culverting and covering streams, (Jaime and Delicias\u2013and creating the avenues Francia and Argentina respectively). The main street of the city (Pedro Montt) was laid and Plaza O'Higgins was created; a hill was removed to allow the passage of Colon Street. The damaged Edwards mansion was demolished and in its place, the present Cathedral of Valpara\u00edso was built and, among many other works it gave shape to the Almendral Valpara\u00edso area.\nIn 1910, the port expansion work of the city began and ended in 1930. A long breakwater was built, along with piers and docking terminals. The Imperial German East Asia Squadron engaged the British West Indies Squadron on 1 November 1914 at the Battle of Coronel off the coast of Valparaiso, sinking two British cruisers. After the battle the East Asia Squadron stayed in Valparaiso Harbor before continuing to the Falklands.\n21st century.\nChile's legislature along with other institutions of national importance like the National Customs Service, the National Fish and Aquaculture Ministry, the Ministry of Culture and the Barracks General of the Chilean Navy are sited in the city. In addition to the capital of the Valpara\u00edso Region hosts the Regional Administration and government. In 2003, Valpara\u00edso became an UNESCO World Heritage Centre. This title was awarded to Valparaiso for its unique urban form, as well as its clear maintained historical background as a colorful port city. In becoming a World Heritage Center, Valpara\u00edso is tasked with maintaining its cultural heritage, through the maintenance of its historic infrastructure, like its Ascensores.\nOn 13 April 2014, a huge brush fire burned out of control, destroying 2,800 homes and killing 16 people, forcing President Michelle Bachelet to declare it a disaster zone. In early February 2024, a huge brush fire burned through Valparaiso and central Chile, killing at least 131 people.\nGeography.\nValpara\u00edso is located in central Chile, to the north west of the capital Santiago. Like most of Chile, it is vulnerable to earthquakes. Before the earthquake of February 27, 2010, which measured 8.8 on the moment magnitude scale, the last catastrophic earthquake to strike Valpara\u00edso devastated the city in August 1906, killing nearly 3,000 people. Other significant earthquakes to affect the city were the 1730 Valpara\u00edso earthquake and the 1985 Algarrobo earthquake.\nDesventuradas Islands.\nThe Desventuradas Islands are administered as part of Valpara\u00edso.\nGeology.\nBecause of Valpara\u00edso's proximity to the Peru\u2013Chile Trench, the city is vulnerable to earthquakes. The Peru\u2013Chile Trench stores large amounts of energy for a very long time and sometimes ruptures after short intervals in a violent earthquake.\nClimate.\nValpara\u00edso has a very mild warm-summer Mediterranean climate (K\u00f6ppen climate classification: Csb). The summer is essentially dry, but the city is affected by fogs from the Humboldt Current during most of the year. In the winter, rainfall can occasionally be extremely heavy when a powerful frontal system crosses central Chile, but frequency of such rains varies greatly from year to year. Monthly average temperatures vary just around 6\u00a0\u00b0C between the coolest and the warmest month, from in January to in July. Snowfall occurs rarely in the highest parts of the city. In winter, strong winds can lead to wind chill temperatures below freezing.\nCityscape.\nNicknamed \"The Jewel of the Pacific\", Valpara\u00edso was declared a world heritage site based upon its improvised urban design and unique architecture. In 1996, the World Monuments Fund declared Valpara\u00edso's unusual system of funicular lifts (steeply inclined carriages) one of the world's 100 most endangered historical treasures. In 1998, grassroots activists convinced the Chilean government and local authorities to apply for UNESCO world heritage status for Valpara\u00edso. Valpara\u00edso was declared a World Heritage Site in 2003. Built upon dozens of steep hillsides overlooking the Pacific Ocean, Valpara\u00edso has a labyrinth of streets and cobblestone alleyways, embodying a rich architectural and cultural legacy. Valpara\u00edso is protected as a UNESCO World Heritage Site.\nSince its status as a World Heritage Site, Valpara\u00edso has made several changes to its urban fabric in the process of maintaining its cultural heritage.\nLandmarks include:\nDemographics.\nAlthough technically only Chile's sixth largest city, with an urban area population of 295,918 (296,655 in municipality), the Greater Valpara\u00edso metropolitan area, including the neighboring cities of Vi\u00f1a del Mar, Conc\u00f3n, Quilpu\u00e9, and Villa Alemana is the second largest in the country (951,311 inhabitants).\nAccording to the 2017 census of the National Statistics Institute, the commune of Valpara\u00edso spans an area of and has 296,655 inhabitants (144,945 men and 151,710 women). Of these, 295,918 (99.8%) lived in urban areas and 737 (0.2%) in rural areas. The population grew by 7.49% (20,673 persons) between the 2002 and 2017 censuses.\nResidents of Valpara\u00edso are commonly called \"porte\u00f1os\" (feminine: \"porte\u00f1as\"), spanish for \"port dweller\".\nGovernment.\nAs a commune, Valpara\u00edso is a third-level administrative division of Chile administered by a municipal council, headed by an \"alcalde\" (mayor) who is directly elected every four years. For the 2024\u20132028 term, the mayor is Camila Nieto Hern\u00e1ndez (FA). The communal council has the following members:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nWithin the electoral divisions of Chile, Valpara\u00edso is represented in the Chamber of Deputies by Andr\u00e9s Celis (RN), Hotuiti Teao (Ind./EVOP), Luis S\u00e1nchez (REP), Tom\u00e1s Lagomarsino (PR), Tom\u00e1s de Rementer\u00eda (PS), Camila Rojas (FA), Jorge Brito (FA), and Luis Cuello (PCCh) for the 2022\u20132026 term, as part of the 7th electoral district, together with Juan Fern\u00e1ndez, Isla de Pascua, Vi\u00f1a del Mar, Conc\u00f3n, Algarrobo, Cartagena, Casablanca, El Quisco, El Tabo, San Antonio, and Santo Domingo. In the Senate, the commune is represented by Francisco Chahu\u00e1n (RN), Kenneth Pugh (RN), Isabel Allende (PS), Juan Latorre (FA), and Ricardo Lagos Weber (PPD) for the 2018\u20132026 term, as part of the 6th senatorial constituency (Valpara\u00edso Region).\nThe Chilean Congress meets in a modern building in the Almendral section of Valpara\u00edso, after relocation from Santiago during the last years of the dictatorship of General Augusto Pinochet. Although congressional activities were to be legally moved by a ruling in 1987, the newly built site only began to function as the seat of Congress during the government of Patricio Aylwin in 1990.\nEconomy.\nAs of 2018, there were 8126 registered companies in Valpara\u00edso. The Economic Complexity Index (ECI) that year was 1.99, while the economic activities with the highest Revealed Comparative Advantage (RCA) indices were photocopying services (56.79), rental of air transport equipment (54.05), and cargo handling (38.6).\nPort of Valpara\u00edso.\nThe first ship to arrive in Valpara\u00edso was the Santiaguillo in 1536, supporting the expedition of Diego de Almagro.\nIn 1810, a wealthy merchant built the first dock in Chile\u2019s history \u2014 and the first of the colonial era \u2014 at the site where the building of \"El Mercurio de Valpara\u00edso\" now stands, as at that time the sea reached that point (today it is five blocks farther due to land reclamation works).\nBetween 1910 and 1930, much of the current port infrastructure was built, including large-scale land reclamation.\nToday, the Port of Valpara\u00edso is divided into ten berths: berths 1\u20135 are operated by Terminal Pac\u00edfico Sur S.A., and berths 6\u201310 by the Valpara\u00edso Port Company (EPV). The last two include a pier and serve as public promenades and a cruise terminal. In the near future, urban redevelopment projects are planned for this area.\nValpara\u00edso is Chile\u2019s main container and passenger port, transferring 10 million tons annually and receiving about 50 cruise ships and 150,000 passengers each season.\nAlthough Valpara\u00edso hosts the port, the city does not directly benefit from its revenues, as all proceeds go to the national treasury. Furthermore, the municipality has no decision-making authority over port operations or appointments, which lie entirely with the national government.\nTourism.\nThe unique geography of Valpara\u00edso, where the hills meet the coast, provides striking views from hill to sea. Scenic spots such as the Portales, Esperanza, O\u2019Higgins, and Marina Mercante viewpoints, and promenades like 21 de Mayo, Yugoslavo, Gervasoni, Atkinson, and Dimalow, offer panoramic views of the port city. During New Year\u2019s Eve celebrations, these areas are filled with visitors seeking the best view of the fireworks show.\nWalking through the oldest hills \u2014 Cerro Alegre and Cerro Concepci\u00f3n \u2014 reveals colonial English architecture, 19th-century churches, and contemporary museums, gardens, and small squares. Around the hills and the El Almendral area are several museums, including:\nCommerce.\nCurrently, Valpara\u00edso has 3 shopping malls, 4 strip centers, 4 major commercial avenues, and 1 outlet:\nInternational relations.\nThe city of Valpara\u00edso hosts several international relations institutions, such as the Regional Unit for International Affairs (URAI) of the Regional Government of Valpara\u00edso, responsible for analyzing and managing the region\u2019s bilateral and multilateral relations with Latin America and the rest of the world; the International Relations Units of the Chamber of Deputies of Chile and the Senate of Chile; the International Affairs Unit of the Ministry of Cultures, Arts and Heritage; the International Affairs Unit of the Undersecretariat for Fisheries and Aquaculture of Chile; the Department of International Relations of the General Staff of the Chilean Navy; the Department of International Affairs of the General Directorate of the Maritime Territory and Merchant Marine (DIRECTEMAR); the International Relations Commission of the Regional Council of Valpara\u00edso; the regional office of ProChile; and the Directorate of Economic Development and Cooperation of the Municipality of Valpara\u00edso.\nMigration management.\nIn the area of international relations and migration management, the main actors in Valpara\u00edso are the regional office of the National Migration Service, the Department of Migration and International Police of the Investigations Police of Chile, and the Municipal Migrant Office of Valpara\u00edso.\nInternationalization in higher education.\nIn the field of international relations and higher education, the main actors in Valpara\u00edso are the International Relations Commission of the Valpara\u00edso Council of University Rectors; the Directorate of Institutional Relations of the University of Valpara\u00edso, the General Directorate of International Affairs of the Pontifical Catholic University of Valpara\u00edso, the General Directorate of International Affairs of the University of Playa Ancha, and the Office of International Affairs of the Federico Santa Mar\u00eda Technical University.\nTransport.\nA commuter rail service, the Valpara\u00edso Metro, opened to the public on 24 November 2005. The creation of this system involved updating parts of the Valpara\u00edso-Santiago Railway, originally built in 1863. The Valpara\u00edso Metro constitutes the so-called \"fourth stage\" (\"Cuarta Etapa\") of Metropolitan improvements. The Metro now connects the city core of Valpara\u00edso with Vi\u00f1a del Mar and other cities. It extends along most of Gran Valpara\u00edso, and is the second underground urban rail system in operation in Chile (after Santiago's), as it includes a tunnel section that crosses Vi\u00f1a del Mar's commercial district. The proposed Santiago\u2013Valpara\u00edso railway line would link Valpara\u00edso and Santiago in around 45 minutes.\nPublic transport within Valpara\u00edso itself is provided primarily by buses, trolleybuses and funiculars. The buses provide an efficient and regular service to and from the city centre and the numerous hills where most people live, as well as to neighbouring towns while more distant towns are served by long-distance coaches. Buses are operated by several private companies and regulated by the Regional Ministry of Transport, which controls fares and routes. The Valpara\u00edso trolleybus system has been in operation since 1952, and in 2019 it continues to use some of its original vehicles, built in 1952 by the Pullman-Standard Company, along with an assortment of other vehicles acquired later. Some of Valpara\u00edso's Pullman trolleybuses are even older, built in 1946\u201348, having been acquired secondhand from Santiago in the 1970s. The surviving Pullman trolleybuses are the oldest trolleybuses still in normal service anywhere in the world, and they were collectively declared National Historic Monuments by the Chilean government in 2003.\nValpara\u00edso's road infrastructure has been undergoing improvement, particularly with the completion of the \"Curauma \u2014 Placilla \u2014 La P\u00f3lvora\" freeway bypass, which will allow trucks to go directly to the port facility over a modern highway and through tunnels, without driving through the historic and already congested downtown streets. In addition, roads to link Valpara\u00edso to San Antonio, Chile's second-largest port, and the coastal towns in between (Laguna Verde, Quintay, Algarrobo, and Isla Negra, for example), are also under construction. Travel between Valpara\u00edso and Santiago takes about 80 minutes via a modern toll highway.\nInternal passenger air services to Valpara\u00edso are provided through the airport at Quintero which is some distance from the city but now served by good roads. The great majority of foreign visitors arrive through Santiago or on cruise liners.\nFuniculars.\nBecause of the slopes of the hills, many of the surrounding areas of Valpara\u00edso are inaccessible by public transport. That is why \"elevators\" serve the function of communicating the high part of the city with the plan, besides being a strong holiday highlight. The only elevator that can truly be called as such, is the \"Ascensor Polanco\", because it is vertical. Meanwhile, the rest are cable cars but traditionally called elevators. Several of those funiculars \u2013 locally called \"ascensores\" \u2013 provide public transport service between the central area and the lower slopes of the surrounding hills, the first of which (Ascensor Concepci\u00f3n, also known as Ascensor Turri) opened in 1883, operated by steam, is still in service. The Cerro Cordillera elevator was built in 1887. As many as 28 different funicular railways have served Valpara\u00edso at one time or another, of which 14 were still in operation in 1992 and still around 12 in 2010.\nValpara\u00edso has fifteen lifts declared Historical Monuments by the National Monuments Council. Five are municipal property and the remaining belong to four private companies. The elevators are elevators municipal Baron, El Peral, Polanco, Queen Victoria and St. Augustine. As for the rest, lifts Florida, Butterflies and Nuns are owned by the National Elevator Company SA; Artillery, Concepci\u00f3n and Mountains belong to the Society of Mechanical Lifts Valpara\u00edso Holy Spirit, Larra\u00edn and Villaseca (stopped for repairs) are the property of Valpara\u00edso Elevators Company SA, and Dairy (stopped by fire) belongs to the Society of Dairy Cerro Lifts Ltd.\nAs a part of its 2003 declaration as a UNESCO World Heritage Site, Valpara\u00edso has promised to replace and maintain its several funiculars. The funiculars were identified as an important cultural artifact.\nValpara\u00edso public transportation statistics.\nThe average amount of time people spend commuting with public transit in Valpara\u00edso and Vi\u00f1a del Mar, for example to and from work, on a weekday is 68 min. 15% of public transit riders, ride for more than 2 hours every day. The average amount of time people wait at a stop or station for public transit is 13 min, while 15% of riders wait for over 20 minutes on average every day. The average distance people usually ride in a single trip with public transit is 7\u00a0km, while 12% travel for over 12\u00a0km in a single direction.\nPort of Valpara\u00edso.\nThe port of Valpara\u00edso is divided into ten sites, of which sites 1,2,3,4 and 5 are administered by \"South Pacific Terminal SA\" and sites 6,7,8,9 and 10 for \"Valpara\u00edso Port Company\". The last two sites include a dock and are used as public walks and cruise passenger terminal.\nValpara\u00edso is the main container and passenger port in Chile, transferring 10\u00a0million tons annually, and serves about 50 cruises and 150,000 passengers.\nCulture.\nDuring Valpara\u00edso's golden age (1848\u20131914), the city received large numbers of immigrants, primarily from Europe. The immigrant communities left a unique imprint on the city's noteworthy architecture. Each community built its own churches and schools, while many also founded other noteworthy cultural and economic institutions. The largest immigrant communities came from Britain, Germany, and Italy, each developing their own hillside neighbourhood, preserved today as National Historic Districts or \"Zonas T\u00edpicas\".\nDuring the second half of the 20th century, Valpara\u00edso experienced a great decline, as wealthy families de-gentrified the historic quarter, moving to bustling Santiago or nearby Vi\u00f1a del Mar. By the early 1990s, much of the city's unique heritage had been lost and many Chileans had given up on the city. But in the mid-1990s, a grassroots preservation movement blossomed in Valpara\u00edso where nowadays also a vast number of murals created by graffiti artists can be viewed on the streets, alleyways and stairways.\n\"The Fundaci\u00f3n Valpara\u00edso\" (Valpara\u00edso Foundation), founded by the North American poet Todd Temkin, has executed major neighborhood redevelopment projects; has improved the city's tourist infrastructure; and administers the city's jazz, ethnic music, and opera festivals; among other projects. Some noteworthy foundation projects include the World Heritage Trail, Opera by the Sea, and Chile's \"Cultural Capital\". During recent years, Mr. Temkin has used his influential Sunday column in El Mercurio de Valpara\u00edso to advocate for many major policy issues, such as the creation of a \"Ley Valpara\u00edso\" (Valpara\u00edso Law) in the Chilean Congress, and the possibility that the Chilean government must guarantee funding for the preservation of Valpara\u00edso's beloved funicular elevators.\nValpara\u00edso's newspaper, is the oldest Spanish-language newspaper in circulation in the world.\nThe \"Fundacion LUKAS\" maintains the drawings and paintings of the cartoonist Renzo Antonio Giovanni Pecchenino Raggi (stage name LUKAS), who came to symbolize Valpara\u00edso in popular culture, in a new restored building overlooking the bay.\nValpara\u00edso is also home to the so-called \"School of Valpara\u00edso\", which is in fact the Faculty of Architecture &amp; Urbanism of the Pontificia Universidad Cat\u00f3lica de Valpara\u00edso. The \"School of Valpara\u00edso\" was in the 1960s and 1970s one of the most experimental, avant-garde and controversial Architectural schools in the country.\nValpara\u00edso stages a major festival attended by hundreds of thousands of participants on the last three days of every year. The festival culminates with a \"New Year's by the Sea\" fireworks show, the biggest in all of Latin America, attended by a million tourists who fill the coastline and hillsides with a view of the bay. Even though everyone calls it the Valpara\u00edso Fireworks, it is, in fact, a fireworks display running along a great part of the coast from Valpara\u00edso, past Vi\u00f1a del Mar and all the way to Conc\u00f3n.\nIn 2003, the Chilean Congress declared Valpara\u00edso to be \"Chile's Cultural Capital\" and home for the nation's new cultural ministry.\nValpara\u00edso offers various urban nightlife activities. Traditional bars and nightclubs can be found near Plaza Sotomayor. A vivid guide to Valpara\u00edso can be found in the novels of Cayetano Brule, the private detective who lives in a Victorian house in the picturesque Paseo Gervasoni in Cerro Concepci\u00f3n.\nHealth system.\nThe public healthcare system mainly relies on the Hospital Carlos Van Buren located at the plan and Hospital Valpara\u00edso (officially Hospital Eduardo Pereira) located at St. Roque Hill. There are also several clinics including Universidad de Chile's Clinica Bar\u00f3n, Hospital Aleman (due to close), and the former Naval Hospital on Playa Ancha Hill.\nSports.\nValpara\u00edso has several public sports venues and facilities, including a growing network of cycle routes.\nValpara\u00edso was one of the host cities of the official 1959 Basketball World Cup, where Chile won the bronze medal.\nThe \"Valpara\u00edso Downhill\" is a mountain bike race that takes place in February. Riders race through the city streets tackling the steps and alleys, finding their own way through the ramps and jumps down to the \"plan\" (Valpara\u00edso's \"lowlands\").\nThe Valpara\u00edso Downhill has been described by Chop MTB as \"the craziest urban downhill race of all\".\nSince 2005, a series of running events has taken place in the city with 5\u00a0km, 10\u00a0km, 21\u00a0km and marathon distances. The race starts at Muelle Bar\u00f3n and the course runs along the seafront, crossing diverse architectural and geographical landmarks.\nThe final stage of the 2014 Dakar Rally ended up at Valpara\u00edso's Plaza Sotomayor in the heart of the old town, surrounded by historic buildings. Ignacio Casale, the Chilean winner of the 2014 Quad category, was cheered here in the streets by the Valpara\u00edso crowd.\nEducation.\nEducational establishments.\nAt primary school level, Valpara\u00edso boasts some of the most emblematic schools in the region, such as the Liceo Eduardo de la Barra and Salesian College Valpara\u00edso. Other landmarks of the city schools are the Mary Help of Christians School, San Rafael Seminary, the Lyc\u00e9e Jean d'Alembert, Colegio San Pedro Nolasco, Scuola Italiana Arturo Dell' Oro and Deutsche Schule Valpara\u00edso, among others. Many of the schools named in the plan are located directly in the city, especially in the Almendral neighborhood.\nIn addition, Valpara\u00edso was the birthplace of many private schools founded by the European colonies, as the German School, the Alliance Francaise, Mackay College (now located in the neighboring resort of Vi\u00f1a del Mar) and the College of the Sacred Hearts of Valpara\u00edso, that operating since 1837 is the oldest private school in South America.\nUniversity establishments.\nValpara\u00edso has many institutions of higher education, including some of the most important universities of Chile, called \"traditional universities\", like the Pontifical Catholic University of Valpara\u00edso, the University of Valpara\u00edso, the Playa Ancha University and the Federico Santa Mar\u00eda Technical University. The main building of this last is visible from much of the city, as it is located on the front of the hill 'Cerro Placeres', and has characteristic Tudor Gothic and Renaissance architecture. The city has many nontraditional colleges of varying size, quality and focus.\nNotable residents.\nValpara\u00edso is the birthplace of many historically significant figures, including:\nIt has also been the residence of many writers such as the Chilean poet Pablo Neruda, the Nicaraguan poet Rub\u00e9n Dar\u00edo and the American poet Marion Manville Pope.\nPuerto Rican pro-independence leader Segundo Ruiz Belvis died in the city in November 1867.\nTwin towns \u2013 sister cities.\nValpara\u00edso is twinned with:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nPartnerships.\nValpara\u00edso cooperates with:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70568", "revid": "1123", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70568", "title": "Postscript programming language", "text": ""}
{"id": "70570", "revid": "40567980", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70570", "title": "Combined nuclear and steam propulsion", "text": ""}
{"id": "70573", "revid": "90028", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70573", "title": "Kirchhoffs Current Law", "text": ""}
{"id": "70574", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70574", "title": "Robert Wilhelm Bunsen", "text": ""}
{"id": "70575", "revid": "50743750", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70575", "title": "Kirov-class battlecruiser", "text": "Class of Russian battlecruisers\nThe Kirov\" class, Soviet designation Project 1144 \"Orlan (), is a class of nuclear-powered guided-missile heavy cruisers of the Soviet Navy and Russian Navy, the largest and heaviest surface combatant warships (i.e. not an aircraft carrier or amphibious assault ship) in operation in the world. Among modern warships, they are second in size only to large aircraft carriers; they are similar in size to a World War I-era battleship. Defence commentators in the West often refer to these ships as battlecruisers \u2013 due to their size and general appearance. The Soviet classification of the ship-type is \"heavy nuclear-powered guided-missile cruiser\" ().\nThe appearance of the \"Kirov\" class (first exemplar commissioned in 1979) played a key role in the recommissioning of the s by the United States Navy in the 1980s.\nThe \"Kirov\" class hull-design was also used for the Soviet nuclear-powered command and control ship SSV-33 \"Ural\".\nHistory.\nOriginally built for the Soviet Navy, the class is named after the first of a series of four ships constructed, , named \"Kirov\" until 1992. Original plans called for construction of five ships. The fifth vessel was planned to be named \"Fleet Admiral of the Soviet Union Kuznetsov\", also referred as \"Dzerzhinsky\". The name was later changed to \"Oktyabrskaya Revolutsiya\" (October Revolution), and then just \"Kuznetsov\"; but on 4 October 1990, plans for construction of a fifth vessel were abandoned.\nThe lead ship of the class, , was laid down in March 1974 at Leningrad's Baltiysky Naval Shipyard, launched on 27 December 1977 and commissioned on 30 December 1980. When she appeared for the first time, NATO observers called her BALCOM I (Baltic Combatant I). \"Kirov\" suffered a reactor accident in 1990 during her second deployment, which was in the Mediterranean Sea. Repairs were never carried out due to lack of funds and the changing political situation in the Soviet Union, and she was placed in reserve where she was renamed \"Admiral Ushakov\" in 1992. She is presently laid up and was slated to be scrapped in 2021.\n, the second vessel in the class, was commissioned in 1984. She was assigned to the Pacific Fleet. In 1992, she was renamed \"Admiral Lazarev\". The ship became inactive in 1994 and was decommissioned four years later. On 21 February 2021, the Russian Armed Forces and the Russian State Atomic Energy Corporation Rosatom, signed a contract to dismantle and scrap the nuclear powered heavy cruiser. \"Admiral Lazarev\" set sail 30 April 2021 for 30th Shipyard. Dismantlement should be completed by 30 November 2025.\n, now \"Admiral Nakhimov\", was the third ship to enter service, in 1988. She was also assigned to the Northern Fleet. Renamed \"Admiral Nakhimov\" in 1992, she was mothballed in 1999 and reactivated in 2005. She is undergoing overhaul and modernization at Severodvinsk Shipyard.\nConstruction of the fourth ship, \"Yuriy Andropov\", encountered many delays; her construction was started in 1986 but was not commissioned until 1998. She was renamed (after Peter the Great) in 1992. She currently serves as the flagship of Russia's Northern Fleet.\nIn 1983, a command and control ship, \"SSV-33 Ural\", was launched, although the ship would not be officially commissioned until 1989. She utilized the basic hull design of the \"Kirov\"-class vessels, but with a modified superstructure, different armament, and was intended for a different role within the Soviet Navy. \"Ural\" was decommissioned and laid up in 2001, due to high operating costs, and scrapped starting in 2010.\nOn 23 March 2004, English language press reported the Russian Navy Commander-in-Chief, Fleet Admiral Vladimir Kuroedov said \"Pyotr Veliky\"'s reactor was in an extremely bad condition and could explode \"at any moment\", a statement which may have been the result of internal politics within the Russian Navy. The ship was sent to port for a month, and the crew lost one-third of their pay.\nRussia initially planned to reactivate \"Admiral Ushakov\" and by 2020, but it was later indicated that the condition of the reactor cores of both ships was such that it would prove difficult, expensive and potentially dangerous to remove the spent nuclear fuel and repair the cores. As a consequence, both ships were earmarked for scrapping in 2021. The scrapping of \"Admiral Lazarev\" began in early 2021.\nAs of early 2022, only was operational. Modernization of \"Admiral Nakhimov\" is ongoing and was reported, in 2021, to continue until \"at least\" 2023, with the modernization of \"Pyotr Velikiy\" to immediately follow and last for about three years. However, in early 2022, Sevmash CEO Mikhail Budnichenko stated that the ship would be delivered to the Russian Navy in 2022. This deadline would also be missed, and Sevmash later clarified that they expected to return the ship to service in 2024.\nThe modernization of \"Admiral Nakhimov\" and her sister ship is to be extensive, with \"Admiral Nakhimov\" expected to receive 174 Vertical-launch (VLS) tubes: 80 for anti-surface and 94 for anti-air warfare, among other upgrades. In early 2022, the Sevmash CEO noted that weapons systems for \"Admiral Nakhimov\" would include: the Fort-M (NATO reporting name: SA-N-6 Grumble) and Pantsyr-M (SA-22 Greyhound) air defense systems and Paket-NK and Otvet antisubmarine warfare weapons. It was also reported that the cruiser would potentially be armed with up to 60 3M22 Zircon hypersonic anti-ship missiles.\nDesign.\nThe class was originally conceived to counter the U.S. Navy's submarines with its large payload of SS-N-14 anti-submarine missiles, and later evolved to carry twenty P-700 \"Granit\" anti-ship missiles for countering the U.S. carrier strike groups. Ultimately the class were intended to operate alongside new nuclear-powered aircraft carriers for global power projection, however these carriers never came to fruition.\nWeapon systems.\nThe \"Kirov\" class's main weapons are 20 P-700 Granit (SS-N-19 Shipwreck) missiles mounted in deck, designed to engage large surface targets. Air defense is provided by twelve octuple S-300F launchers with 96 missiles and a pair of Osa-MA batteries with 20 missiles each. \"Pyotr Velikiy\" carries some S-300FM missiles and is the only ship in the Russian Navy capable of ballistic missile defence. The ships had some differences in sensor and weapons suites: \"Kirov\" came with Metel anti-submarine warfare (ASW) missiles, while on subsequent ships these were replaced with 3K95 Kinzhal (Russian: \u041a\u0438\u043d\u0436\u0430\u043b \u2013 dagger) surface-to-air missile (SAM) systems. The \"Kinzhal\" installation is in fact mounted further forward of the old SS-N-14 mounting, in the structure directly behind the blast shield for the bow mounted RBU ASW rocket launcher. \"Kirov\" and \"Frunze\" had eight AK-630 close-in weapon systems, which were supplanted with the Kortik air-defence system on later ships.\nOther weapons are the automatic AK-130 gun system (except in \"Kirov\" which had two single guns instead), 10 torpedo/missile tubes (capable of firing RPK-2 Vyuga ASW missiles on later ships) and \"Udav\"-1 with 40 anti-submarine rockets and two sextuple RBU-1000 launchers.\nRussia is developing a new anti-ship missile to equip \"Kirov\"s called the 3M22 Tsirkon, which is capable of traveling at hypersonic speeds out to at least .\nCombined nuclear and steam propulsion.\nCombined nuclear and steam propulsion system (CONAS) is used on the Kirov battlecruisers. Complementary to the nuclear component, there are two conventional boilers installed as a backup in case of reactor failure. Both components can drive two geared steam turbines, generating 120,000 hp (89 MW), at two prop shafts.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70576", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70576", "title": "Orthoptera", "text": "Order of insects that includes grasshoppers\nOrthoptera (from grc \" ' ()\"\u00a0'straight' and \" ' ()\"\u00a0'wings') is an order of insects that comprises the grasshoppers, locusts, and crickets, including closely related insects, such as the bush crickets or katydids and w\u0113t\u0101. The order is subdivided into two suborders: Caelifera \u2013 grasshoppers, locusts, and close relatives; and Ensifera \u2013 crickets and close relatives.\nMore than 20,000 species are distributed worldwide. The insects in the order have incomplete metamorphosis, and produce sound (known as a \"stridulation\") by rubbing their wings against each other or their legs, the wings or legs containing rows of corrugated bumps. The tympanum, or ear, is located in the front tibia in crickets, mole crickets, and bush crickets or katydids, and on the first abdominal segment in the grasshoppers and locusts. These organisms use vibrations to locate other individuals.\nGrasshoppers and other orthopterans are able to fold their wings (i.e. they are members of Neoptera).\nEtymology.\nThe name is derived from the Greek meaning \"straight\" and \"\" meaning \"wing\".\nCharacteristics.\nOrthopterans have a generally cylindrical body, with elongated hindlegs and musculature adapted for jumping. They have mandibulate mouthparts for biting and chewing and large compound eyes, and may or may not have ocelli, depending on the species. The antennae have multiple joints and filiform type, and are of variable length.\nThe first and third segments on the thorax are larger, while the second segment is much smaller. They have two pairs of wings, which are held overlapping the abdomen at rest. The forewings, or tegmina, are narrower than the hindwings and hardened at the base, while the hindwings are membranous, with straight veins and numerous cross-veins. At rest, the hindwings are held folded fan-like under the forewings. The final two to three segments of the abdomen are reduced, and have single-segmented cerci.\nLife cycle.\nOrthopterans have a paurometabolous lifecycle or incomplete metamorphosis. The use of sound is generally crucial in courtship, and most species have distinct songs. Most grasshoppers lay their eggs in the ground or on vegetation. The eggs hatch and the young nymphs resemble adults, but lack wings and at this stage are often called 'hoppers'. They may often also have a radically different coloration from the adults. Through successive moults, the nymphs develop wings until their final moult into a mature adult with fully developed wings.\nThe number of moults varies between species; growth is also very variable and may take a few weeks to some months depending on food availability and weather conditions.\nEvolution.\nThis order evolved https://\u00a0million years ago with a division into two suborders \u2013 Caelifera and Ensifera \u2013 occurring https://\u00a0million years ago.\nPhylogeny.\nThe Orthoptera are divided into two suborders, Caelifera and Ensifera, that have been shown to be monophyletic. A recent comprehensive phylogeny based on analyses of data from transcriptomes and mitochondrial genomes found the following relationships within Orthoptera.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nTaxonomy.\nTaxonomists classify members of the Caelifera and Ensifera into infraorders and superfamilies as follows: \nRelationships with humans.\nAs pests.\nSeveral species of Orthoptera are considered pests of crops and rangelands or seeking warmth in homes by humans. The two groups of Orthoptera that cause the most damage are grasshoppers and locusts. Locusts are historically known for wiping out fields of crops in a day. Locusts have the ability to eat up to their own body weight in a single day. Individuals gather in large groups called swarms, consisting of up to 80 million individuals and spanning as much as 460 square miles. Grasshoppers can cause major agricultural damage but not to the documented extent as locusts historically have. These insects mainly feed on weeds and grasses, however, during times of drought and high population density they will feed on crops. They are a known pest in soybean fields and will likely feed on these crops once preferred food sources have become scarce.\nAs food.\nMost orthopterans are edible, making up 13% of all insects including some 80 species of grasshoppers being regularly consumed worldwide. In Madagascar and Oaxaca, grasshoppers and locusts are usually collected early in the morning when it is cooler as the orthopterans are less mobile due to being cold-blooded. In Thailand, house crickets are commonly reared and eaten; as of 2012, around 20,000 cricket farmers had farms in 53 of their 76 provinces.\nIn the second century BCE in Ancient Greece, Diodorus Siculus is known to have called people from Ethiopia \"Acridophagi\", meaning \"eaters of locusts.\"\nIn Judaism, the Orthoptera include the only insects considered kosher. The list of dietary laws in the book of Leviticus forbids all flying insects that walk, but makes an exception for certain locusts. The Torah states the only kosher flying insects with four walking legs have knees that extend above their feet so that they hop.\nAs creators of biofuel.\nWith new research showing promise in locating alternative biofuel sources in the gut of insects, grasshoppers are one species of interest. The insect's ability to break down cellulose and lignin without producing greenhouse gases has aroused scientific interest.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70577", "revid": "45804332", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70577", "title": "Levite", "text": "Jewish men descended patrilineally from the Tribe of Levi\nLevites ( ; ) or Levi are Jewish males who claim patrilineal descent from the Tribe of Levi. The Tribe of Levi descended from Levi, the third son of Jacob and Leah. The surname \"Halevi\", which consists of the Hebrew definite article \"\" \"Ha-\" ('the') plus \"Levi\" ('Levite'), is not conclusive regarding being a Levite; a titular use of HaLevi indicates being a Levite. The daughter of a Levite is a (\"Bat\" being Hebrew for 'daughter').\nThe Tribe of Levi served particular religious duties for the Israelites and had political (administering cities of refuge) and educational responsibilities as well. In return, the landed tribes were expected to support the Levites with a tithe (), particularly the tithe known as the First tithe, \"ma'aser rishon\". The Kohanim, a subset of the Levites, were the priests, who performed the work of holiness in the Temple. The Levites, referring to those who were not Kohanim, were specifically assigned to:\nWhen Joshua led the Israelites into the land of Canaan (), the Sons of Levi were the only Israelite tribe that received cities but were not allowed to be landowners \"because the Lord the God of Israel Himself is their inheritance\" ().\nIn modern times, Levites are integrated in Jewish communities, but keep a distinct status. There are estimated 300,000 Levites among Ashkenazi Jewish communities, and a similar number among Sephardic and Mizrahi Jews combined. The total percentage of Levites among the wider Jewish population is about 4%.\nMost scholars view the Torah as projecting the origins of the Levites into the past to explain their role as landless cultic functionaries.\nIn contemporary Jewish practice.\nToday, Levites in Orthodox Judaism continue to have additional rights and obligations compared to lay people, although these responsibilities have diminished with the destruction of the Temple. For instance, \"Kohanim\" are eligible to be called to the Torah first, followed by the Levites. Levites also provide assistance to the \"Kohanim\", particularly washing their hands, before the \"Kohanim\" recite the Priestly Blessing.\nSince Levites (and Kohanim) are traditionally pledged to Divine service, there is no Pidyon HaBen (redemption of the firstborn) ceremony for:\nOrthodox Judaism believes in the eventual rebuilding of a Temple in Jerusalem and a resumption of the Levitical role. A small number of schools, primarily in Israel, train priests and Levites in their respective roles.\nConservative Judaism\u2014which believes in a restoration of the Temple as a house of worship and in some special role for Levites, although not the ancient sacrificial system as previously practised\u2014recognizes Levites as having special status. Not all Conservative congregations call Kohanim and Levites to the first and second reading of the Torah, and many no longer perform rituals such as the Priestly Blessing and Pidyon HaBen in which \"Kohanim\" and Levites have a special role.\nReconstructionist and Reform Judaism do not observe distinctions between Kohanim, Levites, and other Jews.\nRelationship with Kohanim.\nThe Kohanim are traditionally believed and halachically required to be of direct patrilineal descent from the biblical Aaron of the Tribe of Levi. The origins of the name/term \"Levy\" in Hebrew remain unclear. Some hypotheses link this name with the Hebrew root \"lwh\", the Aramaic root \"lwy\", or the Arabic root \"lwy\".\nThe noun \"kohen\" is used in the Torah to refer to priests, both Israelite and non-Israelite, such as the Israelite nation as a whole, as well as the priests (Hebrew \"kohanim\") of Baal. During the existence of the Temple in Jerusalem, Kohanim performed the daily and holiday (Yom Tov) duties of sacrificial offerings.\nToday \"kohanim\" retain a lesser though somewhat distinct status within Judaism, and are bound by additional restrictions according to Orthodox Judaism. During the Priestly Blessing, the Levites traditionally wash the hands of the Kohanim prior to the blessing of the House of Israel. (\"A first-born son washes the Kohen's hands if there is no Levite\".)\nBat Levi.\nIn Orthodox Judaism, children of a Bat Levi, like those of a Bat-Kohen, regardless of the child's father's tribe or the mother's marital status, retain the traditional exemption for their children from the requirement of being redeemed through the Pidyon HaBen.\nConservative Judaism permits a Bat Levi to perform essentially all the rituals a male Levi would perform, including being called to the Torah for the Levite aliyah in those Conservative synagogues which have both retained traditional tribal roles and modified traditional gender roles. In Israel, Conservative/Masorti Judaism has not extended Torah honors either to a bat Kohen or to a bat Levi.\nThe Levites and the Holocaust.\nIn 1938, with the outbreak of violence that would come to be known as Kristallnacht, American Orthodox rabbi Menachem HaKohen Risikoff wrote about the central role he saw for Priests and Levites in terms of Jewish and world responses, in worship, liturgy, and \"teshuva\", repentance. In \"The Priests and the Levites\" (1940), he stressed that members of these groups exist in the realm between history (below) and redemption (above), and must act in a unique way to help move others to prayer and action, and help bring an end to suffering. He wrote, \"Today, we also are living through a time of flood, Not of water, but of a bright fire, which burns and turns Jewish life into ruin. We are now drowning in a flood of blood. ... Through the Kohanim and Levi'im help will come to all Israel.\"\nLevite population.\nLevite Y-chromosome studies.\nA 2003 study of the Y-chromosome by Behar et al. pointed to multiple origins for Ashkenazi Levites, who comprise approximately 4% among the Ashkenazi Jews. It found that Haplogroup R1a1a (R-M17), uncommon in the Middle East or among Sephardic Jews, is present in over 50% of Ashkenazi Levites, while the rest of Ashkenazi Levites' paternal lineage is of certain Middle Eastern origin, including Y-chromosome haplogroups E3b, J2, F, R1b, K, I, Q, N and L. Haplogroup R1a1a is found at the highest levels among people of Eastern European descent, with 50 to 65% among Sorbs, Poles, Russians, and Ukrainians. In South Asia, R1a1a has often been observed with high frequency in a number of demographic groups, reaching over 70% in West Bengal Brahmins in India and among the Mohani people in Sindh, Pakistan. Behar's data suggested a founding event, involving an 'introgression' of anywhere from one to fifty non-Jewish European men, occurring at a time close to the initial formation and settlement of the Ashkenazi community as a possible explanation. As Nebel, Behar and Goldstein speculate:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nA 2013 paper by Siiri Rootsi et al. confirmed a Near or Middle Eastern origin for all Ashkenazi Levites, including the R1a Y-chromosome carriers, and refuted the Khazar hypothesis of Ashkenazi ancestry:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nIn a later 2017 study Behar et al. revised their initially mitigated position, concluding that a \"Middle Eastern origin of the Ashkenazi Levite lineage based on what was previously a relatively limited number of reported samples, can now be considered firmly validated\", precising that a \"rich variation of haplogroup R1a outside of Europe which is phylogenetically separate from the typically European R1a branches\", referring to the R1a-Y2619 sub-clade.\nLineage.\nHaving a last name of Levi or a related term does not necessarily mean a person is a Levite, and many well-known Levites do not have such last names.\nLevitical status is passed down in families from father to child born from a Jewish mother, as part of a family's genealogical tradition. Tribal status of Levite is determined by patrilineal descent, so a child whose biological father is a Levite (in cases of adoption or artificial insemination, status is determined by the genetic father), is also considered a Levite. Jewish status is determined by matrilineal descent, thus conferring levitical status onto children requires both biological parents to be Israelites and the biological father to be a Levite.\nAccordingly, there is currently no branch of Judaism that regards levitical status as conferrable by matrilineal descent. It is either conferrable patrilineally with a Jewish mother, in the traditional manner, or it does not exist and is not conferred at all.\nLevite surnames.\nSome Levites have adopted a related last name to signify their status. Because of diverse geographical locations, the names have several variations:\nModern Levites.\nThe following are some Levites with non-Levite-like last names in modern times:\nExplanatory footnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70578", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70578", "title": "Benjamin Banneker", "text": "American scientist, surveyor and farmer (1731\u20131806)\nBenjamin Banneker (November 9, 1731\u00a0\u2013 October 19, 1806) was an American naturalist, mathematician, astronomer and almanac author. A landowner, he also worked as a surveyor and farmer.\nBorn in Baltimore County, Maryland, to a free African-American mother and a father who had formerly been enslaved, Banneker had little or no formal education and was largely self-taught. He became known for assisting Major Andrew Ellicott in a survey that established the original borders of the District of Columbia, the federal capital district of the United States.\nBanneker's knowledge of astronomy helped him author a commercially successful series of almanacs. He corresponded with Thomas Jefferson on the topics of slavery and racial equality. Abolitionists and advocates of racial equality promoted and praised Banneker's works. Although a fire on the day of Banneker's funeral destroyed many of his papers and belongings, one of his journals and several of his remaining artifacts survived.\nBanneker became a folk-hero after his death, leading to many accounts of his life being exaggerated or embellished. The names of parks, schools and streets commemorate him and his works, as do other tributes.\nBiography.\nEarly life.\nBanneker was born on November 9, 1731, in Baltimore County, Maryland, to Mary Banneky, a free black woman, and Robert, a freed slave from Guinea who died in 1759. \nThere are two conflicting accounts of Banneker's family history. Banneker himself and his earliest biographers described him as having only African ancestry. None of Banneker's surviving papers describe a white ancestor or identify the name of his grandmother. However, two lines of later research both suggest that Banneker's mother was the daughter of a white woman and an African slave, although they differ as to whether the Banneker surname came from his mother or father and the origin of the name, which could be from Banaka, a small village in the present-day Klay District of Bomi County in northwestern Liberia that had once participated in the African slave trade or \"Banaka\", the home of the Vai people, who have lived there since about 1500 when they left the Mali Empire.\nIn 1737, when he was 6, Banneker was named on the deed of his family's farm in the Patapsco Valley in rural Baltimore County. \nIn 1791, a letter writer stated that Banneker's parents had sent him to an obscure school where he learned reading, writing and arithmetic as far as double position. In contrast, unverified accounts, first appeared in books published more than 140 years after Banneker's death suggest that, as a young teenager, Banneker met and befriended Peter Heinrich, a Quaker who later established a school near the Banneker family farm. These accounts state that Heinrich shared his personal library and provided Banneker with his only classroom instruction. Banneker's formal education (if any) presumably ended when he was old enough to help on his family's farm.\nNotable works.\nAround 1753, at about the age of 21, Banneker reportedly completed a wooden clock that struck on the hour. He appears to have modelled his clock from a borrowed pocket watch by carving each piece to scale. The clock continued to work until his death.\nAfter his father died in 1759, Banneker lived with his mother and sisters. Records indicate that in 1768 and 1773, he was living in Baltimore.\nIn 1772, brothers Andrew Ellicott, John Ellicott and Joseph Ellicott moved from Bucks County, Pennsylvania, and bought land along the Patapsco Falls near Banneker's farm on which to construct gristmills, around which the village of Ellicott's Mills (now Ellicott City) subsequently developed. The Ellicotts were Quakers who held the same views on racial equality as did many of their faith. Banneker studied the mills and became acquainted with their proprietors. In 1788, George Ellicott, a son of Andrew Ellicott, loaned Banneker books and equipment to begin a more formal study of astronomy. During the following year, Banneker sent George his work calculating a solar eclipse.\nIn 1790, Banneker prepared an ephemeris for 1791, which he hoped would be placed within a published almanac. However, he was unable to find a printer that was willing to publish and distribute the work.\nSurvey of the original boundaries of the District of Columbia.\nIn early 1791, U.S. Secretary of State, Thomas Jefferson, asked surveyor Maj. Andrew Ellicott to survey an area for a new federal district. In February 1791, Ellicott left a survey in western New York to begin the district survey and hired Banneker to assist him, advancing him $60 for travel expenses to, and at, Georgetown.\nThe territory that became the original District of Columbia was formed from land along the Potomac River ceded by the states of Maryland and Virginia to the federal government (see: Founding of Washington, D.C.). a square to measure 10 miles (16 km) on each side, totaling 100 square miles (260 km2). Ellicott's team placed boundary marker stones at or near every mile point along the borders of the new capital territory.\nBanneker's role in the survey isn't entirely certain. Some biographers have stated that Banneker's duties consisted primarily of making astronomical observations and calculations to establish base points, including one at Jones Point in Alexandria, Virginia, where the survey started and where the south corner stone was to be located. They have also stated that Banneker maintained a clock that he used to relate points on the ground to the positions of stars at specific times.\nHowever, there is little documentation to confirm Banneker's role and a news report covering the April 15 dedication ceremony for the first boundary stone (the south corner stone) credits Andrew Ellicott with \"ascertain[ing] the precise point from which the first line of the district was to proceed\" and did not mention Banneker.\nBanneker left the boundary survey in April 1791 due to other commitments, particularly the calculation of an ephemeris for the year of 1792. The arrival of spring also required him to direct more attention to his farm than was needed during the winter. Banneker, therefore, returned to his home near Ellicott's Mills.\nAndrew Ellicott's two younger brothers, who usually assisted him, had completed the New York survey about the same time and were able to join the survey of the federal district. The surveying team laid the remaining Virginia marker stones in 1791, laying the Maryland stones and completed the boundary survey in 1792.\nBanneker's almanacs.\nAfter returning to Ellicott's Mills, Banneker made astronomical calculations that predicted eclipses and planetary conjunctions for inclusion in an almanac and ephemeris for the year of 1792. To aid Banneker in his efforts to have his almanac published, Andrew Ellicott (who had been authoring almanacs and ephemerides of his own since 1780) forwarded Banneker's ephemeris to James Pemberton, the president of the Pennsylvania Society for Promoting the Abolition of Slavery and for the Relief of Free Negroes Unlawfully Held in Bondage.\nPemberton then asked William Waring, a Philadelphia mathematician and ephemeris calculator, and David Rittenhouse, a prominent American astronomer, almanac author, surveyor and scientific instrument maker who was at the time serving as the president of the American Philosophical Society, to confirm the accuracy of Banneker's work. Waring endorsed Banneker's work, stating, \"I have examined Benjamin Banneker's Almanac for 1792, and am of the Opinion that it well deserves the Acceptance and Encouragement of the Public.\"\nRittenhouse responded to Pemberton by stating that Banneker's ephemeris \"was a very extraordinary performance, considering the Colour of the Author\" and that he \"had no doubt that the Calculations are sufficiently accurate for the purposes of a common Almanac. ... Every instance of Genius amongst the Negroes is worthy of attention, because their suppressors seem to lay great stress on their supposed inferior mental abilities.\" A biographer wrote that Banneker replied to Rittenhouse's endorsement by stating: \"I am annoyed to find that the subject of my race is so much stressed. The work is either correct or it is not. In this case, I believe it to be perfect.\"\nPemberton then made arrangements for Joseph Crukshank (a Philadelphia Quaker who was a founder of the Pennsylvania Society for the Abolition of Slavery and who had since 1770 been publishing almanacs, including at least one that Waring had calculated) to print Banneker's almanac. Having thus secured the support of Pemberton, Rittenhouse and Waring, Banneker delivered a manuscript containing his ephemeris to William Goddard, a Baltimore printer who had published \"The Pennsylvania, Delaware, Maryland and Virginia Almanack and Ephemeris\" for every year since 1782. Goddard then agreed to print and distribute Banneker's work within an almanac and ephemeris for the year of 1792.\nBanneker's \"Pennsylvania, Delaware, Maryland and Virginia Almanack and Ephemeris, for the Year of our Lord, 1792\" was the first in a six-year series of almanacs and ephemerides that printers agreed to publish and sell. At least 28 editions of the almanacs, some of which appeared during the same year, were printed in seven cities in five states: Baltimore; Philadelphia; Wilmington, Delaware; Alexandria, Virginia; Petersburg, Virginia; Richmond, Virginia; and Trenton, New Jersey.\nThe title pages of the Baltimore editions of Banneker's 1792, 1793 and 1794 almanacs and ephemerides stated that the publications contained:\nthe Motions of the Sun and Moon, the True Places and Aspects of the Planets, the Rising and Setting of the Sun, Place and Age of the Moon, &amp;c. \u2013 The Lunations, Conjunctions, Eclipses, Judgment of the Weather, Festivals, and other remarkable Days; Days for holding the Supreme and Circuit Courts of the \"United States\", as also the useful Courts in \"Pennsylvania, Delaware, Maryland\", and \"Virginia.\" Also \u2013 several useful Tables, and valuable Receipts. \u2013 Various Selections from the Commonplace\u2013Book of the \"Kentucky Philosopher\", an \"American Sage\"; with interesting and entertaining Essays, in Prose and Verse \u2013the whole comprising a greater, more pleasing, and useful Variety than any Work of the \"Kind\" and \"Price\" in \"North America\".\nIn addition to the information that its title page described, the 1792 almanac contained a tide table listing the methods for calculating the time of high water at four locations along the Chesapeake Bay (Cape Charles and Point Lookout, Virginia; Annapolis and Baltimore, Maryland). Later almanacs contained tables for making such calculations for those locations as well as for Boston, New York, Philadelphia, Halifax, Quebec, Hatteras, Nantucket and other places. Monthly tables in each edition listed astronomical data and weather predictions for each of the months' dates.\nA Philadelphia edition of Banneker's 1795 almanac contained a lengthy account of a yellow fever epidemic that had struck that city in 1793. Written by a committee whose president was the city's mayor, Matthew Clarkson, the account related the presumed origins and causes of the epidemic, as well as the extent and duration of the event.\nThe title pages of two Baltimore editions of Banneker's 1795 almanac had woodcut portraits of him as he may have appeared. However, a biographer later concluded that the portraits were more likely portrayals of an idealized African-American youth.\nA Baltimore edition of Banneker's 1796 almanac contained a table enumerating the population of each U.S. state and the Southwest Territory as recorded in the 1790 United States census. The table listed the number of free persons and slaves in each state and the territory according to race and gender, as well as to whether they were above or below the age of 16 years. The table also listed the number of members of the U.S. House of Representatives that each state had during the almanac's year. \nThe almanacs' editors prefaced the publications with adulatory references to Banneker and his race. Editions of Banneker's 1792 and 1793 almanacs contained full or abridged copies of a lengthy commendatory letter that James McHenry, the Secretary of the 1787 United States Constitutional Convention and self-described friend of Banneker, had written to Goddard and his partner, James Angell, in August 1791 to support the almanac's publication.\nAs first published in Banneker's 1792 almanac and later given an increased circulation when re-published in Philadelphia within \"The American Museum, or Universal Magazine\", McHenry's full letter began:\nBenjamin Banneker, a free Negro, has calculated an Almanack, for the ensuing year, 1792, which being desirous to dispose of, to the best advantage, he has requested me to aid his application to you for that purpose. Having fully satisfied myself, in respect to his title to this type of authorship, if you can agree to him for the price of his work, I may venture to assure you it will do you credit, as Editors, while it will afford you the opportunity to encourage talents that have thus far surmounted the most discouraging circumstances and prejudices.\"\nIn their preface to Banneker's 1792 almanac, the editors of the work wrote that they:feel themselves gratified in the Opportunity of presenting to the Public, through the Medium of their Press, what must be considered as an extraordinary Effort of Genius \u2014 a complete and accurate EPHEMERIS for the Year 1792, calculated by a sable Descendant of Africa, ... \u2014 They flatter themselves that a philanthropic Public, in this enlightened Era, will be induced to give their Patronage and Support to this Work, not only on Account of its intrinsic Merit, (it having met the Approbation of several of the most distinguished Astronomers in America, particularly the celebrated Mr. Rittenhouse) but from similar Motives to those which induced the Editors to give this Calculation the Preference, the ardent desire of drawing modest Merit from Obscurity, and controverting the long-established illiberal Prejudice against the Blacks.\nAfter Goddard and Angell had published their 1792 Baltimore edition of the almanac, Angell wrote in the 1793 edition (which he alone edited) that abolitionists William Pitt, Charles James Fox and William Wilberforce had introduced the 1792 edition into the British House of Commons to aid their effort to end the British slave trade in Africa. However, the British Parliament's report of the debate that accompanied this effort did not mention either Banneker or his almanac.\nSupported by Andrew, George and Elias Ellicott and heavily promoted by the Maryland and Pennsylvania abolition societies, the early editions of the almanacs achieved commercial success. Printers then distributed at least nine editions of Banneker's 1795 almanac. A Wilmington, Delaware, printer issued five editions for distribution by different vendors. Printers in Baltimore issued three versions of the almanac, while three Philadelphia printers also sold editions. A Trenton, New Jersey, printer additionally sold a version of the work.\nBanneker's journals.\nBanneker kept a series of journals that contained his notebooks for astronomical observations, his diary and accounts of his dreams. The journals additionally contained a number of mathematical calculations and puzzles.\nOn the day of his funeral, a fire destroyed all but one of which Banneker's journals.\nThe surviving journal described in April 1800 Banneker's recollections of the 1749, 1766 and 1783 emergences of Brood X of the seventeen-year periodical cicada (\"Magicicada septendecim\" and related species) and described an effect that the pathogenic fungus, \"Massospora cicadina\", has on its host. The journal also recorded Banneker's observations on the hives and behavior of honey bees.\nPolitical views.\nBanneker's 1792 almanac contained an extract from an anonymous essay entitled \"On Negro Slavery, and the Slave Trade\" that the \"Columbian Magazine\" had published in 1790. After quoting a statement that David Rittenhouse had made (that Negroes \"have been doomed to endless slavery by us \u2014 merely because \"their\" bodies have been disposed to reflect or absorb the rays of light in a way different from \"ours\"\"), the extract concluded:The time, it is hoped \"is not very remote\", when those ill-fated people, dwelling in this land of freedom, shall commence a participation with the white inhabitants, in the blessings of liberty; and experience the kindly protection of government, for the essential rights of human nature.\nA Philadelphia edition of Banneker's 1793 almanac that Joseph Crukshank published contained copies of pleas for peace that the English anti-slavery poet William Cowper and others had authored, as well as anti-slavery speeches and writings from England and America. The latter included extracts from speeches that William Pitt, Matthew Montagu and Charles James Fox had given to the British House of Commons in 1792 during the debate on a motion for the abolition of the British slave trade, an extract from a 1789 poem by an English Quaker, Thomas Wilkinson, and an extract from a query in Thomas Jefferson's 1787 \"Notes on the State of Virginia\".\nCrukshank's edition of Banneker's 1793 almanac also contained a copy of \"A Plan of a \"Peace-Office\", for the United States\". Although the almanac did not identify the Plan's author, writers later attributed the work to Dr. Benjamin Rush, a signer of the 1776 Declaration of Independence.\nThe Plan proposed the appointment of a \"Secretary of Peace\", described the Secretary's powers and advocated federal support and promotion of the Christian religion.\nCorrespondence with Thomas Jefferson.\nOn August 19, 1791, after departing the federal capital area, Banneker wrote a letter to Thomas Jefferson, who in 1776 had drafted the United States Declaration of Independence and in 1791 was serving as United States Secretary of State. Quoting language in the Declaration, the letter expressed a plea for justice for African Americans.\nTo support his plea, Banneker included within his letter a handwritten manuscript of an almanac for 1792 containing his ephemeris with his astronomical calculations. He retained handwritten copies of the letter and Jefferson's August 30, 1791, reply in a volume of manuscripts that became part of a journal.\nIn late 1792, James Angell published a Baltimore edition of Banneker's 1793 almanac that contained copies of Banneker's letter and Jefferson's reply. Soon afterwards, a Philadelphia printer distributed two sequential editions of a widely circulated pamphlet that also contained the letter and reply.\n\"The Universal Asylum, and Columbian Magazine\" also published Banneker's letter and Jefferson's reply in Philadelphia in late 1792. The \"Magazine\"'s editors (A Society of Gentlemen) titled the letter as being \"from the famous self-taught astronomer, Benjamin Banneker, a black man\".\nIn his letter, Banneker accused Jefferson of criminally using fraud and violence to oppress his slaves.\nJefferson's reply did not directly respond to Banneker's accusations, but instead expressed his support for the advancement of his \"black brethren\". His reply, which writers have characterized as \"courteous\", but \"ambiguous\" and \"noncommittal\", stated:\nPhiladelphia Aug. 30. 1791.&lt;br&gt;Sir,&lt;br&gt;I thank you sincerely for your letter of the 19th. instant and for the Almanac it contained. no body wishes more than I do to see such proofs as you exhibit, that nature has given to our black brethren, talents equal to those of the other colours of men, &amp; that the appearance of a want of them is owing merely to the degraded condition of their existence both in Africa &amp; America. I can add with truth that no body wishes more ardently to see a good system commenced for raising the condition both of their body &amp; mind to what it ought to be, as fast as the imbecillity of their present existence, and other circumstance which cannot be neglected, will admit. I have taken the liberty of sending your almanac to Monsieur de Condorcet, Secretary of the Academy of sciences at Paris, and member of the Philanthropic society because I considered it as a document to which your whole colour had a right for their justification against the doubts which have been entertained of them. I am with great esteem, Sir,&lt;br&gt;Your most obedt. humble servt.&lt;br&gt;Th: JeffersonMarie-Jean-Antoine-Nicolas de Caritat, Marquis de Condorcet, to whom Jefferson sent Banneker's almanac, was a noted French mathematician and abolitionist who was a member of the French Soci\u00e9t\u00e9 des Amis des Noirs (Society of the Friends of the Blacks). It appears that the Academy of Sciences itself did not receive the almanac.\nWhen writing his letter, Banneker informed Jefferson that his 1791 work with Andrew Ellicott on the District boundary survey had affected his work on his 1792 ephemeris and almanac. \nOn the same day that he replied to Banneker (August 30, 1791), Jefferson sent a letter to the Marquis de Condorcet that contained the following paragraph relating to Banneker's race, abilities, almanac and work with Andrew Ellicott:I am happy to be able to inform you that we have now in the United States a negro, the son of a black man born in Africa, and of a black woman born in the United States, who is a very respectable mathematician. I procured him to be employed under one of our chief directors in laying out the new federal city on the Patowmac, &amp; in the intervals of his leisure, while on that work, he made an Almanac for the next year, which he sent me in his own hand writing, &amp; which I inclose to you. I have seen very elegant solutions of Geometrical problems by him. Add to this that he is a very worthy &amp; respectable member of society. He is a free man. I shall be delighted to see these instances of moral eminence so multiplied as to prove that the want of talents observed in them is merely the effect of their degraded condition, and not proceeding from any difference in the structure of the parts on which intellect depends.\nIn 1809, three years after Banneker's death, Jefferson expressed a different opinion of Banneker in a letter to Joel Barlow that criticized a \"diatribe\" that a French abolitionist, Henri Gr\u00e9goire, had written in 1808 saying that while \"we know ourselves of Banneker. we know he had spherical trigonometry enough to make almanacs, but not without the suspicion of aid from Ellicot, who was his neighbor &amp; friend, &amp; never missed an opportunity of puffing him. I have a long letter from Banneker which shews him to have had a mind of very common stature indeed\".\nDeath.\nFor reasons that are unclear, the four editions of his 1797 almanac were the last ones that printers published. After selling much of his homesite to the Ellicotts and others, he probably died in his log cabin nine years later on October 19, 1806, aged 74. (Some sources state that Banneker died on Sunday, October 9, 1806, which was actually a Thursday.) His chronic alcoholism, which worsened as he aged, may have contributed to his death.\nBanneker never married. An obituary concluded \"Mr. Banneker is a prominent instance to prove that a descendant of Africa is susceptible of as great mental improvement and deep knowledge into the mysteries of nature as that of any other nation\".\nA commemorative obelisk that the Maryland Bicentennial Commission and the State Commission on Afro American History and Culture erected in 1977 near his unmarked grave stands in the yard of the Mount Gilboa African Methodist Episcopal Church in Oella, Maryland (see Mount Gilboa Chapel).\nArtifacts.\nOn the day of his funeral in 1806, a fire burned Banneker's log cabin to the ground, destroying many of his belongings and papers. \nMythology and commemorations.\nA substantial mythology exaggerating Banneker's accomplishments has developed during the two centuries that have elapsed since his death, becoming a part of African-American culture. Several such urban legends describe Banneker's alleged activities in the Washington, D.C., area around the time that he assisted Andrew Ellicott in the federal district boundary survey. Others involve his clock, his astronomical works, his almanacs and his journals.\nA United States postage stamp and the names of a number of recreational and cultural facilities, schools, streets, and other facilities and institutions throughout the United States have commemorated Banneker's documented and mythical accomplishments throughout the years since he lived. In 1983, Rita Dove, a future Poet Laureate of the United States, wrote a biographical poem about Banneker while on the faculty of Arizona State University.\n(1) \"In\" \n(2) \"In\" \n(1) Pages 3\u201310: \n(2) Pages 11\u201312: \nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n*"}
{"id": "70579", "revid": "44106950", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70579", "title": "Theologian", "text": ""}
{"id": "70580", "revid": "37052726", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70580", "title": "St. John's", "text": ""}
{"id": "70581", "revid": "41143833", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70581", "title": "St. John's, Newfoundland and Labrador", "text": "Capital and largest city of Newfoundland and Labrador, Canada\nSt. John's is the capital and largest city of the Canadian province of Newfoundland and Labrador. It is located on the eastern tip of the Avalon Peninsula on the island of Newfoundland. The city spans and is the easternmost city in North America (excluding Greenland). The closest European settlement is Faj\u00e3 Grande, Azores, Portugal, about away.\nIts name has been attributed to the belief that John Cabot sailed into the harbour on the Nativity of John the Baptist in 1497, although it is most likely a legend that came with British settlement. A more realistic possibility is that a fishing village with the same name existed without a permanent settlement for most of the 16th century. Indicated as \"S\u00e3o Jo\u00e3o\" on a Portuguese map from 1519, it is one of the oldest cities in North America. It was officially incorporated as a city in 1888. With a metropolitan population of approximately 239,316 (as of 16 January 2025), the St. John's Metropolitan Area is Canada's 22nd-largest metropolitan area and the second-largest Census Metropolitan Area (CMA) in Atlantic Canada, after Halifax, Nova Scotia.\nThe city has a rich history, having played a role in the Seven Years' War, the American Revolutionary War, and the War of 1812. Italian inventor Guglielmo Marconi received the first transatlantic wireless signal in St. John's. Its history and culture have made it into an important tourist destination. St. John's was referred to as \"\" (Johnstown), in the poetry of Donnchadh Ruadh Mac Conmara (1715\u20131810), and among speakers of the Irish language in Newfoundland.\nHistory.\nEarly history (1500\u20131799).\nSt. John's was used by fishermen setting up seasonal camps in the early 1500s. Sebastian Cabot declared in a handwritten Latin text in his original 1545 map that St. John's earned its name when he and his father, the Venetian explorer John Cabot, in the service of England, became the first Europeans to sail into the harbour, on the morning of 24 June 1494 (per British and French historians, in 1497), the feast day of Saint John the Baptist. However, the locations of Cabot's landfalls are disputed. A series of expeditions to St. John's by Portuguese from the Azores took place in the early 16th century, and by 1540, French, Spanish and Portuguese ships crossed the Atlantic annually to fish the waters off the Avalon Peninsula. In the Basque Country, it is a common belief the name of St. John's was given by Basque fishermen because the bay of St. John's is very similar to the Bay of Pasaia in the Basque Country, where one of the fishing towns is called St. John (in Spanish, San Juan, and in Basque, Donibane).\nThe earliest record of the location appears as \"S\u00e3o Jo\u00e3o\" on a Portuguese map by Pedro Reinel in 1519. When the English mariner John Rut visited St. John's in 1527, he found Norman, Breton and Portuguese ships in the harbour. On 3 August 1527, Rut wrote a letter to King Henry VIII on the findings of his voyage to North America; this was the first known letter sent from North America. St. Jehan is shown on Nicolas Desliens's world map of 1541, and San Joham is found in Jo\u00e3o Freire's Atlas of 1546.\nOn 5 August 1583, an English Sea Dog, Sir Humphrey Gilbert, claimed the area as England's first overseas colony under Royal Charter of Queen Elizabeth I. There was no permanent population, however, and Gilbert was lost at sea during his return voyage, thereby ending any immediate plans for settlement.\nBernard Drake's Newfoundland Expedition in 1585 landed at Saint John's, re-establishing England's claim on the area. St. John's became a base for his operations, where his ships gathered supplies and fresh water. This expedition virtually wiped out the Spanish and Portuguese fishing industries in the area, and so set the stage for subsequent English and French influence in the region.\nBy 1620, the fishermen of England's West Country controlled most of Newfoundland's east coast. In 1627, William Payne, called St. John's \"the principal prime and chief lot in all the whole country\".\nSometime after 1630, the town of St. John's was established as a permanent community. Before this, English fishermen were expressly forbidden by the English government, at the urging of the West Country fishing industry, to establish permanent settlements along the English-controlled coast.\nThe population grew slowly in the 17th century: St. John's was Newfoundland's largest settlement when English naval officers began to take censuses around 1675. The population grew in the summers with the arrival of migratory fishermen. In 1680, fishing ships (mostly from South Devon) set up fishing rooms at St. John's, bringing hundreds of Irish men into the port to operate inshore fishing boats.\nThe town's first significant defences were likely erected due to commercial interests, following the temporary seizure of St. John's by the Dutch admiral Michiel de Ruyter in June 1665.\nThe inhabitants fended off a second Dutch attack in 1673, when it was defended by Christopher Martin, an English merchant captain. Martin landed six cannons from his vessel, \"Elias Andrews\", and constructed an earthen breastwork and battery near Chain Rock commanding the Narrows leading into the harbour. With 23 men, Martin beat off an attack by three Dutch warships. The English government planned to expand these fortifications (Fort William) in around 1689, but construction did not begin until after the French admiral Pierre Le Moyne d'Iberville captured and destroyed the town in the Avalon Peninsula Campaign (1696). When 1500 English reinforcements arrived in late 1697, they found rubble where the town and fortifications had stood.\nThe French attacked St. John's again in 1705 (Siege of St. John's), and captured it in 1708 (Battle of St. John's), devastating civilian structures with fire on each instance.\nThe harbour remained fortified through most of the 18th and 19th centuries. The final battle of the Seven Years' War in North America (known as the French and Indian War in the US) was fought in 1762, in St. John's. Following a surprise capture of the town by the French early in the year, the British responded and, at the Battle of Signal Hill, the French surrendered St. John's to British forces under the command of Colonel William Amherst.\nIn the late 1700s, Fort Amherst and Fort Waldegrave were built to defend the harbour entrance.\nThe oldest European settlement in Anglophone North America controversy.\nThere has been some controversy regarding which European settlement is the oldest in Anglophone North America. As mentioned above, while English fishermen had set up seasonal camps in St. John's in the 16th century, they were expressly forbidden by the English government, at the urging of the West Country fishing industry, to establish permanent settlements along the English-controlled coast. As a result, the town of St. John's was not established as a permanent community until after the 1630s. With respect to the oldest surviving permanent English settlements in North America, it was preceded by Jamestown, Virginia (1607), the Cuper's Cove colony at Cupids in Newfoundland (1610), St. George's, Bermuda (1612), and the Bristol's Hope colony at Harbour Grace in Newfoundland (1618). Each of these English settlements were far later than other European settlements in North America, such as St. Augustine, Florida established by Spain in 1565.\nModern history (1800\u2013present).\nOn 24 April 1800, the \"United Irish Uprising\" occurred when 19 Irish soldiers who were part of the British garrison stationed in Newfoundland mutinied. The mutineers, who were suspected to be members of the Society of United Irishmen, fled to the countryside after the mutiny failed, and were apprehended in a matter of weeks and court-martialled. Of the 17 mutineers captured, 8 were executed, 4 were let go while 5 were sentenced to penal transportation.\nThe 18th century saw major changes in Newfoundland: population growth, beginnings of government, establishment of churches, reinforcement of commercial ties with North America and development of the seal, salmon and Grand Banks fisheries. St. John's population grew slowly. Although it was primarily a fishing station, it was also a garrison, a centre of government and a commercial hub. St. John's served as a naval base during the American Revolutionary War and the War of 1812.\nGuglielmo Marconi received the first transatlantic wireless signal in St. John's on 12 December 1901 from his wireless station in Poldhu, Cornwall. St. John's was the starting point for the first non-stop transatlantic aircraft flight, by Alcock and Brown in a modified Vickers Vimy IV bomber, in June 1919, departing from Lester's Field in St. John's and ending in a bog near Clifden, Connemara, Ireland. In July 2005, the flight was duplicated by American aviator and adventurer Steve Fossett in a replica Vickers Vimy aircraft, with St. John's International Airport substituting for Lester's Field (now an urban and residential part of the city).\nDuring the Second World War, the harbour supported Royal Navy and Royal Canadian Navy ships that were engaged in anti-submarine warfare. It was the site of an American Army Air Force base, Fort Pepperrell, that was established as part of the \"Lend-Lease\" Destroyers for Bases Agreement between the United Kingdom and United States. The base included several US-manned coast defence guns, and a Canadian-manned battery of two Lend-Lease M1888 guns was at Fort Cape Spear. The base was transferred to Canadian control in 1960 and is now known as CFS St. John's. The Knights of Columbus Hostel fire in December 1942 saw 99 military and civilian lives lost.\nSt. John's, and the province as a whole, was gravely affected in the 1990s by the collapse of the northern cod fishery, which had been the driving force of the provincial economy for hundreds of years. After a decade of high unemployment rates and depopulation, the city's proximity to the Hibernia, Terra Nova and White Rose oil fields led to an economic boom that spurred population growth and commercial development. As a result, the St. John's area now accounts for about half of the province's economic output.\nAs of 2012, St. John's contained 21 National Historic Sites of Canada.\nFires.\nSt. John's was destroyed by major fires in 1816, 1817, 1819, 1846 and 1892, when each time a large part of the city was destroyed. The most famous was the Great Fire of 1892.\nOn 12 February 1816:\n...about eight o'clock, a fire broke out in a house in a part of the town in St. John's in Newfoundland known by the name of the King's Beach, and speedily communicated to the houses adjoining, and burnt with so much fury, that one hundred and twenty houses, the homes of about a thousand men, women, and children, were consumed before the conflagration was stayed.\nThere were two citywide fires in 1817 \"known jointly as 'The Great Fire of 1817'. Then in 1819 fire \"destroyed 120 houses\".\nThere was a further major fire in 1846, which started at the shop of a cabinetmaker named Hamlin, located on George Street off Queen Street, when a glue pot boiled over. The fire spread along Water and Duckworth Streets destroying all of the buildings in its path aided by the large quantities of seal oil that were stored in the merchants' premises. The fire was also aided by an attempt to blow up a house on Water Street which scattered burning embers across the city.\nThe final major conflagration of the nineteenth century began on the afternoon of 8 July 1892 atop Carter's Hill on Freshwater Road. Initially, the fire did not cause any widespread panic; however, a series of catastrophic coincidences caused the fire to spread and devour virtually all of the east end of the city, including much of its major commercial area, before being extinguished.\nGeography.\nSt. John's is along the coast of the Atlantic Ocean, on the northeast of the Avalon Peninsula in southeast Newfoundland. The city is North America's most easterly city, excluding Greenland; it is closer to London, England than it is to Edmonton, Alberta. It is also closer to all of Ireland than to Miami, Florida, United States, also on the east coast of North America. The city is the largest in the province and the second largest in the Atlantic Provinces after Halifax, Nova Scotia. Its downtown area lies to the west and north of St. John's Harbour, and the rest of the city expands from the downtown to the north, south, east and west. The city covers a total of (larger than Montreal), but the majority of its area remains covered by undeveloped woods.\nConiferous trees such as black spruce, white spruce, and balsam fir dominate the native vegetation. The largest deciduous tree is white birch; species of lesser stature include alder, cherry and mountain ash. Of introduced tree species, sycamore maple is most abundant and Norway maple is common. Blue spruce, common horsechestnut, European beech and littleleaf linden are among the other non-native species grown.\nClimate.\nSt. John's has a humid continental climate (K\u00f6ppen \"Dfb\") with smaller seasonal variation than normal for the latitude, which is due to Gulf Stream moderation.\nMean temperatures range from in February to in August, showing somewhat of a seasonal lag in the climate. The city is also one of the areas of the country most prone to tropical cyclone activity, as it is bordered by the Atlantic Ocean to the east, where tropical storms (and sometimes hurricanes) travel from the United States. With an annual average of precipitation, the city is one of the wettest in Canada outside of coastal British Columbia. This is partly due to its propensity for tropical storm activity as well as moist, Atlantic air frequently blowing ashore and creating precipitation.\nOf major Canadian cities, St. John's is the foggiest (124 days) and windiest ( average speed). Precipitation is frequent and often heavy, falling year-round. On average, summer is the driest season, with only occasional thunderstorm activity. June is the driest month, averaging of precipitation. The wettest months are from October to January, with December the wettest single month, with about of precipitation on average. This winter precipitation maximum is unusual for humid continental climates, which typically have a late spring or early summer precipitation maximum (for example, most of the Midwestern United States). Most heavy precipitation events in St. John's are the product of intense mid-latitude storms from the Northeastern United States and New England states, and these are most common and intense from October to March, bringing heavy precipitation (commonly of rainfall equivalent in a single storm), and strong winds.\nIn winter, two or more types of precipitation (rain, freezing rain, sleet and snow) can fall from passage of a single storm. Snowfall is heavy, averaging approximately per winter season. However, winter storms can bring changing precipitation types. Heavy snow can turn into heavy rain, melting the snow cover, and possibly back to snow or ice (perhaps briefly) all in the same storm, resulting in little or no net snow accumulation. Snow cover in St. John's is variable, and especially early in the winter season, may be slow to develop, but can extend well into the spring months (March, April). The St. John's area is subject to freezing rain events (called \"silver thaws\"), the worst of which paralysed the city in April 1984 and April 2017.\nOn 17 January 2020, St. John's declared a state of emergency due to a snowstorm that brought an estimated \u2014a one-day snowfall record for St. John's\u2014and hurricane force winds up to . The following day, the Canadian Army was called in to aid snow removal. The state of emergency ended eight days later.\nThe highest temperature ever recorded in St. John's was on 14 August 1876. The coldest temperature ever recorded was on 16 February 1875.\nDowntown architecture.\nDowntown St. John's architecture has a distinct style. Starting originally as a fishing outpost for European fishermen, St. John's consisted mostly of the homes of fishermen, sheds, storage shacks, and wharves constructed out of wood. As the Industrial Revolution developed and new methods and materials for construction were introduced, and the cityscape changed as the city grew. The Great Fire of 1892 destroyed most of the downtown core, and most residential and other wood-frame buildings date from this period. The City's earliest suburbs in the area now known as Georgestown were not touched by the fire. \nBuilt on hilly terrain and steep maze of residential streets, in St. John's is typically painted in bright colours, hence the nickname Jelly Bean Row for downtown row housing. However, downtown St. John's wasn't always as bright and colourful as it is today. The coal soot that blanketed St. John's in much of the 19th and 20th centuries made light exterior paint colours impractical. Houses along downtown streets and lanes were mostly dark shades of green, red, brown, and grey. Bright colours were introduced in the 1970s when coal was no longer used. \nThe city council implemented strict heritage regulations in the downtown area, including restrictions on the height of buildings. These regulations have caused much controversy over the years. With the city experiencing an economic boom a lack of hotel rooms and office space has seen proposals put forward that do not meet the current height regulations. Heritage advocates argue the current regulations should be enforced while others believe the regulations should be relaxed to encourage economic development.\nTo meet the need for more office space downtown, the city council amended heritage regulations, which originally restricted height to in the area of land on Water Street between Bishop's Cove and Steer's Cove, to create the \"Commercial Central Retail \u2013 West Zone\". The new zone allows for higher buildings. A , 12-storey office building, which includes retail space and a parking garage, was the first building to be approved in this area.\nNeighbourhoods.\nThe city of St. John's is made up of many neighbourhoods. Georgestown was the first suburb. The Goulds and Kilbride are former communities that have been amalgamated with St. John's. The Battery is an outport within the city of St. John's. Quidi Vidi is a similar, former fishing village on the outskirts of St John's.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Stack/styles.css\"/&gt;\nIn the 2021 Canadian census conducted by Statistics Canada, St. John's had a population of 110,525 living in 49,298 of its 54,067 total private dwellings, a change of from its 2016 population of 108,860. With a land area of , it had a population density of in 2021.\nAt the census metropolitan area (CMA) level in the 2021 census, the St. John's CMA had a population of 212,579 living in 89,999 of its 97,429 total private dwellings, a change of from its 2016 population of 208,418. With a land area of , it had a population density of in 2021.\nApart from St. John's, the CMA includes 12 other communities: the city of Mount Pearl and the towns of Conception Bay South, Paradise, Portugal Cove-St. Philip's, Torbay, Logy Bay-Middle Cove-Outer Cove, Pouch Cove, Flatrock, Bay Bulls, Witless Bay, Petty Harbour-Maddox Cove and Bauline.\nAlso as of the 2021 census, there are 178,427 people in the St. John's population centre.\nThere are 52,410 total private dwellings in St. John's with an occupancy rate of 90.9%. The median value of a private dwelling in St. John's is $309,631, lower than the national median value of $341,556 but higher than the provincial median value of $219,228.\nSt. John's has a median age of 40.5 compared to 41.2 nationally and 46.0 in Newfoundland and Labrador. Children under 15 make up 13.9% of the population while people 65 and over make up 16.5%. 70.6% of residents aged 25 to 65 have a post secondary certificate, diploma or degree, while 20.6% have a secondary school diploma or equivalent, 7.4% have an apprenticeship or trades certificate, and 8.8% hold no certificates, diplomas or degrees. The city has an unemployment rate of 8.9%, much lower than the provincial rate of 15.6% but somewhat higher than the national rate of 7.7%.\nThe 2021 census reported that immigrants (individuals born outside Canada) comprise 7,515 persons or 7.0% of the total population of St. John's. Of the total immigrant population, the top countries of origin were United Kingdom (805 persons or 10.7%), Philippines (625 persons or 8.3%), United States of America (510 persons or 6.8%), India (485 persons or 6.5%), Syria (455 persons or 6.1%), China (420 persons or 5.6%), Nigeria (310 persons or 4.1%), Bangladesh (195 persons or 2.6%), Pakistan (155 persons or 2.1%), and Eritrea (150 persons or 2.0%).\nEthnicity.\nAs of 2021, approximately 86.5% of the city was white, 10.1% were visible minorities and 3.3% were Indigenous. The largest visible minority groups were South Asian Canadian (2.8%), followed by Black Canadians (2.3%), Chinese Canadians and Arab Canadians (1.3% each).\nLanguage.\nEnglish is the mother tongue spoken by the majority of residents of St. John's (92.9%). \nIn the Province, as a whole, Chinese is the second most common language; it is the mother tongue of 1.1% of the population. French is the mother tongue of 0.6% of the population. 99.5% of the population speak French or English or both.\nReligion.\nAccording to the 2021 census, religious groups in St. John's included:\n\"The information below is from the 2001 Canadian Census and the National Household Survey 2011.\"\nThe population of St. John's was once divided along sectarian (Catholic/Protestant) lines, but in recent years this sectarianism has declined significantly. The city is the seat of the Roman Catholic Archbishop of St. John's, and the Anglican Bishop of Eastern Newfoundland and Labrador. All major Christian sects showed a decline from 2001 to 2011 with an increase in those with no religion from 3.9% to 11.1%.\nEconomy.\nSt. John's economy is connected both to its role as the provincial capital of Newfoundland and Labrador and to the ocean. The civil service which is supported by the federal, provincial and municipal governments has been the key to the expansion of the city's labour force and to the stability of its economy, which supports a sizeable retail, service and business sector.\nWith the collapse of the cod fishing industry in Newfoundland and Labrador in the 1990s, the role of the ocean is now tied to what lies beneath it \u2013 oil and gas \u2013 as opposed to what swims in or travels across it. The city is the centre of the oil and gas industry in Eastern Canada and is one of 19 World Energy Cities. ExxonMobil Canada is headquartered in St. John's and companies such as Chevron, Husky Energy, Suncor Energy and Statoil have major regional operations in the city. Three major offshore oil developments, Hibernia, Terra Nova and White Rose, are in production off the coast of the city and a fourth development, Hebron, discovered in 1981 and put online in 2017, is estimated to contain over 700 million barrels of producible hydrocarbons.\nThe economy has grown quickly. In 2010 and 2011, the metro area's gross domestic product (GDP) led 27 other metropolitan areas in the country, according to the Conference Board of Canada, recording growth of 6.6% and 5.8% respectively. the city's per capita GDP of $52,000 was the second highest out of all major Canadian cities. Economic forecasts suggested the city would continue its strong economic growth in the near future not only in the \"oceanic\" industries mentioned above, but also in tourism and new home construction as the population continues to grow. In May 2011, the city's unemployment rate fell to 5.6%, the second lowest unemployment rate for a major city in Canada at the time.\nSt. John's is also becoming known as an entrepreneurial city. In a 2009 report by the Canadian Federation of Independent Business, \"Communities in Boom: Canada's Top Entrepreneurial Cities\", St. John's was ranked the best major city in Atlantic Canada and 19th overall in Canada for providing a good environment for small business development.\nTourism.\nTourism is also a significant contributor to the province's economy. An important aspect of this are cruise ships that \"include the Port of St. John's on their \u2026 itineraries as both a home port and in-transit port of call\".\nCulture.\nThe downtown area is the cultural hub of St. John's and is a major tourist destination in Newfoundland and Labrador and Atlantic Canada. Water Street and Duckworth Street are known for their brightly coloured low-rise heritage buildings, housing numerous tourist shops, clothing boutiques, and restaurants.\nGeorge Street, a downtown side street above the western end of Water Street, is the predominant home of the city's nightlife. It holds numerous annual festivals including the George Street Festival in August and the Mardi Gras Festival in October. The street can be credited with kick-starting the careers of many musical acts and is busy nearly every night of the week.\nThe LSPU Hall is home to the Resource Centre for the Arts. The \"Hall\" hosts a vibrant and diverse arts community and is regarded as the backbone of artistic infrastructure and development in the downtown. The careers of many well-known Newfoundland artists were launched there including Rick Mercer, Mark Critch, Mary Walsh, Cathy Jones, Andy Jones and Greg Thomey. The St. John's Arts and Culture Centre houses an art gallery, libraries and a 1,000-seat theatre, which is the city's major venue for entertainment productions.\nTheatre.\nIn 1967, the St. John's Arts and Culture Centre was opened along with the first all-Canadian Dominion Drama Festival.\nOther theatrical venues include the LSPU Hall and the Holy Heart School's theatre.\nLiterature.\nThe City has an annual poet laureate to \"acknowledging and celebrating poets, literary arts, and their value and contribution to civic life\".\nFilm.\nThe Nickel Film Festival and the St. John's International Women's Film Festival are two independent film festivals held annually in St. John's. \n\"Republic of Doyle\" is a Canadian comedy-drama television series set in St. John's, which aired on CBC Television (2010\u20132014). Another TV crime series, \"Hudson &amp; Rex\" was filmed in the city.\nMusic.\nThe city has a symphony orchestra, a string quartet, and several choirs. In addition the School of Music of Memorial University of Newfoundland has several ensembles, including a chamber orchestra. St. Johns also plays host to the Tuckamore Festival of chamber music, which has been held every August since 2001. Opera on the Avalon puts on performances of opera, over several days, in the summer. Established in 1987, the Kittiwake Dance Theatre is one of the province's leading dance companies. Kilautiup Songuninga, formed in 2006, was the first Inuit drum dancing and throat singing group to be based in St. John's.\nLawnya Vawnya is an annual music festival.\nAnother festival is The Sound Symposium, which \"has been running bi-annually since conception in 1983\" that \"brings together musicians, actors, dancers, visual and environmental artists, and creators of all stripes \u2013 both local and international, \u2018new age\u2019 and traditional, in celebration of the beauty of sound\". A major aspect of The Sound Symposium is the Harbour Symphony a compositions played daily at noon by the horns of the ships in the harbour.\nMuseums.\nThe Provincial Museum of Newfoundland and Labrador (c.\u20091892\u20131893) was on Duckworth Street in a building designated as a heritage site by the City of St. John's. In 2005, the museum, along with the Art Gallery of Newfoundland and Labrador and the Provincial Archives of Newfoundland and Labrador, moved into The Rooms. The Rooms is Newfoundland and Labrador's cultural facility, and is in the downtown area.\nOther museums include the Railway Coastal Museum, a transportation museum in the 104-year-old Newfoundland and Labrador train station building on Water Street. The Johnson Geo Centre is a geological interpretation centre on Signal Hill.\nNational Historic Sites.\nThe Murray Premises is a National Historic Site in downtown St. John's. The buildings once served as a fishery premises, with facilities for drying and packaging fish and warehouses for fish, barrels and other items. The oldest of the buildings is the one facing on Beck's Cove. It was built after the 1846 fire and for a time served as both shop and house. The Murray Premises was renovated in 1979 and now contains office suites, restaurants, retail stores and a boutique hotel.\nAnother National Historic Site is Signal Hill, a hill which overlooks the city of St. John's. It is the location of Cabot Tower which was built in 1897 to commemorate the 400th anniversary of John Cabot's arrival in Newfoundland, and Queen Victoria's Diamond Jubilee. The first transatlantic wireless transmission was received here by Guglielmo Marconi on 12 December 1901. Today, Signal Hill is a National Historic Site of Canada, popular among tourists and locals; 97% of all tourists to St. John's visit Signal Hill. Amongst its popular attractions are the Signal Hill Tattoo, showcasing the Royal Newfoundland Regiment of Foot, c.\u20091795, and the North Head Trail which offers an impressive view of the Atlantic Ocean and the surrounding coast.\nParks.\nPippy Park is an urban park in the east end of the city; with over of land, it is one of Canada's largest urban parks. The park contains a range of recreational facilities including two golf courses, Newfoundland and Labrador's largest serviced campground, walking and skiing trails as well as protected habitat for many plants and animals. Pippy Park is also home to the Fluvarium, an environmental education centre which offers a cross section view of Nagle's Hill Brook.\nBowring Park, in the Waterford Valley, is one of the most scenic parks in St. John's. Entrance to the park is via Waterford Bridge Road, passing a sculptured duck pond and a statue of Peter Pan. The parkland was donated to the city in 1911 by Sir Edgar Rennie Bowring on behalf of Bowring Brothers Ltd. on their 100th anniversary of commerce in Newfoundland. The park was officially opened by His Royal Highness, the Duke of Connaught on 15 July 1914.\nBannerman Park is a Victorian-style park near the downtown. The park was officially opened in 1891 by Sir Alexander Bannerman, Governor of the Colony of Newfoundland who donated the land to create the park. Today the park contains a public swimming pool, playground, a baseball diamond and many large open grassy areas. Bannerman Park hosts many festivals and sporting events, most notably the Newfoundland and Labrador Folk Festival and St. John's Peace-a-chord. The park is also the finishing location for the annual Tely 10 Mile Road Race.\nCloseby, the Lieutenant-Governor's residence sits in a park-like setting which is open to the public. \nBotanical Garden.\nMemorial University of Newfoundland operates a Botanical Garden.\nJohnson Geo-Vista Park.\nAssociated with the Johnson Geo Centre there, is on the lower slopes of Signal Hill, a small park that contains a fen, the small lake, Deadman's Pond, as well as a network of walking trails.\nSport.\nHockey.\nSt. John's has been home to several professional hockey franchises. The St. John's Maple Leafs were an American Hockey League (AHL) team from 1991 to 2005. The team left after the 2004\u201305 season to Toronto due to the desire of its parent team, the Toronto Maple Leafs, to reduce travel costs and to have a tenant for its Ricoh Coliseum.\nShortly after, the Maple Leafs were replaced by the St. John's Fog Devils of the Quebec Major Junior Hockey League (QMJHL). The team left St. John's in 2008 after just three seasons due to a poor lease arrangement with the city over the use of Mary Brown's Centre (formerly Mile One Centre) and poor attendance.\nFrom 2011 until 2017, it was home to the St. John's IceCaps in the AHL. The IceCaps operated under two separate franchises and affiliations during its time in St. John's; the first owned by the Winnipeg Jets' True North Sports &amp; Entertainment and the second by the Montreal Canadiens' Molson family. Both franchises were relocated to be closer to their parent team.\nIn 2018, the ECHL approved an expansion team for St. John's with the Newfoundland Growlers. The team became the ECHL affiliate of the Toronto Maple Leafs bringing the Leafs back to St. John's for the first time since 2005. In their first season, they won the Kelly Cup as champions of the league. In April 2024, the Growlers ceased operations before the 2023\u201324 ECHL season concluded.\nIn December 2024, the new ownership group of the Acadie-Bathurst Titan of the Quebec Maritimes Junior Hockey League (QMJHL) relocated the franchise to St. John's. The franchise was renamed the Newfoundland Regiment in January 2025 in honour to the military history of the province and began operation in the following 2025\u201326 QMJHL season.\nOther sports.\nThe St. John's Edge was a Canadian professional basketball team based in National Basketball League of Canada that launched as an expansion team for the 2017\u201318 season at the Mile One Centre. The team was owned by Atlantic Sport Enterprises Ltd. headed by John Graham with Irwin Simon and Robert Sabbagh. The team replaced the IceCaps as the primary tenant at the Mile One Centre after their departure. In 2021, the Edge did not obtain a lease extension at the Mile One Centre.\nIn September 2021, the City of St. John's signed a five-year lease agreement with the American Basketball Association, to bring the expansion Newfoundland Rogues to Mile One Centre. Several weeks after the announcement of a new basketball team, Mary Browns, a fast food chain that originated in Newfoundland, purchased the naming rights to Mile One Centre, renaming it Mary Brown's Centre. The Newfoundland Rogues have since changed leagues, and currently play in the Basketball Super League at Mary Brown's Centre.\nThe Atlantic Rock are a senior men's rugby union team who compete in the Canadian Rugby Championship. The Rock play their home games at Swilers Rugby Park, as did the Rugby Canada Super League champions for 2005 and 2006, the Newfoundland Rock. The city hosted a Rugby World Cup qualifying match between Canada and the United States on 12 August 2006, where the Canadians heavily defeated the United States 56\u20137 to qualify for the 2007 Rugby World Cup finals in France. The 2007 age-grade Rugby Canada National Championship Festival was held in the city.\nSt. John's is home to North America's oldest annual sporting event, the Royal St. John's Regatta, which dates back to at least 1816. The event is important enough in the life of the city that the day of the Regatta (the first Wednesday in August, weather permitting) is a civic holiday \u2013 one of the few weather-dependent holidays in the world.\nThe Tely 10 Mile Road Race is an annual road race that starts in Paradise and finishes at Bannerman Park. The race draws in excess of 2,500 runners. It began in 1922, which makes it one of the oldest road races in Canada.\nSt. John's was where the Canada men's national soccer team qualified for their first FIFA World Cup on 14 September 1985, when they defeated Honduras 2\u20131, at King George V Park.\nCurling has gained prominence in St. John's over the years. The 2005 Scott Tournament of Hearts, the Canadian women's curling championship, was held at Mile One Centre from 19 to 27 February 2005. The 2006 Olympic gold medalist men's curling team, skipped by Brad Gushue, is based in St. John's at the Bally Haly Golf &amp; Curling Club. Gushue and his team launched a campaign to return the Brier to the province for 2017, a successful bid. They went on to win the Brier as well as representing Canada at the World Championships three weeks later going undefeated and winning the gold medal. The Brier win was the second for the province (1976) and the second time as event host (1972). The city has two curling clubs, the St. John's Curling Club and the Bally Haly.\nThe St. John's Avalon Harps are the local hurling and Gaelic football team, that compete in Canadian Gaelic Athletic Association events.\nOther notable sporting events held by Summerside include:\nLaw and government.\nSt. John's is governed by a mayor-council system, and the structure of the municipal government is stipulated by the City of St. John's Act. St. John's City Council is a unicameral legislative body composed of a mayor, deputy mayor and nine councillors. The mayor, deputy mayor and four of the councillors are elected at large while the five other councillors represent geographical wards throughout the city. The mayor and members of the city council serve four-year terms without term limits.\nElections in St. John's are held every four years on the last Tuesday in September. The current city council was elected in the municipal election held in 2025. The Mayor of St. John's is Danny Breen. The St. John's City Hall, on New Gower Street, has housed municipal offices and Council Chambers since being officially opened in 1970.\nSt. John's served as the capital city of the Colony of Newfoundland and the Dominion of Newfoundland before Newfoundland became Canada's tenth province in 1949. The city now serves as the capital of Newfoundland and Labrador; therefore, the provincial legislature is in the city. The Confederation Building, on Confederation Hill, is home to the House of Assembly along with the offices for the Members of the House of Assembly (MHAs) and Ministers. The city is represented by nine MHAs, five who are members of the governing Liberal Party, two that belong to the New Democratic Party (NDP), one that belongs to the Progressive Conservative Party, and one independent.\nSt. John's is represented in the House of Commons by three members of Parliament. Liberal Joanne Thompson represents St. John's East, Liberal Tom Osborne represents Cape Spear, and Liberal Paul Connors represents Avalon.\nThe Newfoundland and Labrador office for the regional federal minister is in downtown St. John's. Regional offices for Government of Canada departments and agencies are throughout the city.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Stack/styles.css\"/&gt;\nCrime.\nPolice services for the city are provided by the Royal Newfoundland Constabulary, which serves as the primary policing body of the metropolitan area. The \"B\" Division headquarters of the Royal Canadian Mounted Police is located in the Pleasantville neighbourhood; however, the RCMP primarily operate in rural Newfoundland and Labrador and not St. John's.\nSt. John's has traditionally been one of the safest cities in Canada to live; however, in recent years, crime in the city has steadily increased. While national crime decreased by 4% in 2009, the total crime rate in St. John's saw an increase of 4%. During this same time, violent crime in the city decreased 6%, compared to a 1% decrease nationally. In 2010, the total crime severity index for the city was 101.9, an increase of 10% from 2009 and 19.2% above the national average. The violent crime severity index was 90.1, an increase of 29% from 2009 and 1.2% above the national average. St. John's had the seventh-highest metropolitan crime index and twelfth-highest metropolitan violent crime index in the country in 2010.\nAccording to Statistics Canada's Juristat reports (1993\u20132007), the metropolitan area reports an average homicide rate of approximately 1.15 per 100,000 population; an average of two homicides per year. An all-time high rate of 2.27 was reported in 1993 (four homicides). This figure is far below the national average and ranks amongst the lowest rates for any metropolitan area in Canada.\nIn 2004, a Hells Angel from Montreal, Patrick \"Big Pat\" Champoux, arrived in St. Johns. Champoux established himself as the most important gangster in St. John's, being involved in a number of assaults and smashing up bars that refused to pay him extortion money. Champoux was sentenced to eight years in prison after his conviction in 2009. However, despite the conviction of Champoux, the Criminal Intelligence Service reported in the same year: \"In Newfoundland and Labrador, despite their lack of a physical presence, the Hells Angels continue to exert their criminal influence in this region through associates and/or local criminals\". In June 2013, both men wearing \"Support 81\" T-shirts, Allan Winfield Porter and Bradley John Summers, were arrested in connection with a number of cases of arson, shootings and assaults in St. John's.\nTransportation.\nSt. John's has a substantial harbour. Among other things, the harbour is the base for the following Canadian Coast Guard (CCG) ships:\n \u2013 icebreaker, \u2013 icebreaker, \u2013 icebreaker, \u2013 icebreaker, \u2013 icebreaker, \u2013 patrol vessel, \u2013 multi role, \u2013 multi role\nAirport.\nSt. John's is served by St. John's International Airport, located 10 minutes northwest of the downtown core. In 2011, roughly 1,400,000 passengers travelled through the airport making it the second busiest airport in Atlantic Canada in passenger volume. Regular destinations include Toronto, Halifax, Montreal, Ottawa, and small destinations throughout the province. International locations include London, Saint-Pierre, Canc\u00fan, Orlando, Tampa, Fort Lauderdale, Varadero, Cayo Coco, and Montego Bay. Scheduled service providers include Air Canada, Air Canada Jazz, Air Saint-Pierre, Air Transat, Porter Airlines, Provincial Airlines, Sunwing Airlines and WestJet.\nHighway.\nSt. John's is the eastern terminus of the Trans-Canada Highway (Route 1), one of the longest national highways in the world. The divided highway, also known as \"Outer Ring Road\", runs just outside the main part of the city, with exits to Pitts Memorial Drive (Route 2), Topsail Road (Route 60), Team Gushue Highway (Route 3A), Thorburn Road (Route 50), Allandale Road, Portugal Cove Road (Route 40) and Torbay Road (Route 20), providing relatively easy access to neighbourhoods served by those streets. Pitts Memorial Drive (Route 2) runs from Conception Bay South, through the city of Mount Pearl and into downtown St. John's, with interchanges for Goulds (Routes 3 and 10), The Parkway (Columbus Drive), Water Street and Hamilton Avenue-New Gower Street.\nTrails.\nThere are numerous recreational paths in the city, many of which are part the Grand Concourse. The Grand Concourse includes the path around Quidi Vidi Lake, parts of Signal Hill, downtown streets, along river banks, and around other lakes. It also extends into Mount Pearl. \nThere are also many kilometres of path within Signal Hill National Historic Park, the Geo-Vista Park on the lower sloe of Signal Hill, Memorial University of Newfoundland Botanical Garden, and within Pippy Park. \nThere are also trails used by mountain bikers, trail runners and walkers on the White Hills, behind the Department of Fisheries and Oceans and the RCMP headquarters. \nThe Trans Canada Trail passes through St. John's. Now starting at Cape Spear, it passes Fort Amherst and the Railway Coastal Museum, which was the original mile zero, before continuing across the Island. The East Coast Trail, also passes through St. John's, coming from Topsail Beach in the north to pass through St. John's via Quidi Vidi, Signal Hill and Water Street before connecting with the Trans Canada Trail at the Railway Coastal Museum, before heading east to Cape Spear, and then continuing south to Cappahayden.\nAlleys and stairways provide other traffic-free routes and are part of the city's historic fabric, especially in the downtown area, including the ecclesiastical district.\nCycling.\nThe St. John's Cycling Master Plan was officially launched in July 2009. Its first phase consists of of on-road painted bike lanes, signs on an additional of roadway, the installation of 20 bicycle parking facilities and the addition of bike racks on the fleet of 53 Metrobuses. There are also plans to create a number of shared-use paths, the first of which, the Kelly's Brook Shared-Use Path, opened in 2025.\nTransit.\nMetrobus Transit is responsible for public transit in the region. Metrobus has a total of 19 routes, 53 buses and an annual ridership of 3,014,073. Destinations include the Avalon Mall, The Village Shopping Centre, Memorial University, Academy Canada, the College of the North Atlantic, the Marine Institute, the Confederation Building, downtown, Stavanger Drive Business Park, Kelsey Drive, Goulds, Kilbride, Shea Heights, the four hospitals in the city as well as other important areas in St. John's and Mount Pearl.\nRailway.\nSt. John's was the eastern terminus of the Newfoundland Railway from 1898 until the abandonment and closure of the railway in September 1988.\nMedical centres and hospitals.\nSt. John's is served by NL Health Services, Newfoundland and Labrador's provincial health authority. The city's major hospitals include the Health Sciences Centre, St. Clare's Mercy Hospital, Waterford Hospital and the Janeway Children's Health and Rehabilitation Centre.\nEducation.\nThere are 32 Anglophone primary, elementary and secondary schools in the city of St. John's, including two private schools. St. John's also has two schools that are part of the province-wide Conseil Scolaire Francophone (CSF), the Francophone public school district. It has two private schools, St. Bonaventure's College and Lakecrest Independent.\nThe main campus of Atlantic Canada's largest university, Memorial University of Newfoundland (MUN), is in St. John's. There are satellite campuses on Signal Hill, St. John's, and the Ocean Sciences Centre in nearby Logy Bay. The Fisheries and Marine Institute of Memorial University of Newfoundland (MI or simply Marine Institute) is a post-secondary ocean and marine polytechnic in St. John's and is affiliated with Memorial University of Newfoundland. MUN provides comprehensive education and grants degrees, and was one of the top ten comprehensive universities in Canada according to Maclean's in 2021.\nThe College of the North Atlantic (CNA) is the public college of the province and operates two main campuses in the city. CNA provides career, trade, degree and university-transfer programs for St. John's residents.\nThe city hosts several private colleges and post-secondary schools; Academy Canada, Eastern College, and Keyin College are the largest of these.\nMedia.\nSt. John's has one daily newspaper, \"The Telegram\". Other local papers include \"The Muse\", \"The Gazette\", \"Le Gaboteur\", \"The Scope\", \"The Business Post\" and \"The Current\". St. John's also receives the nationally distributed newspaper \"The Globe and Mail\".\nCJON-DT, known on air as \"NTV\", is an independent station. The station sublicenses entertainment programming from Global and news programming from CTV and Global, rather than purchasing primary broadcast rights. Rogers Cable has its provincial headquarters in St. John's, and their community channel Rogers TV airs local shows such as \"Out of the Fog\" and \"One Chef One Critic\". CBC Television (CBC) has its Newfoundland and Labrador headquarters in the city and their television station CBNT-DT broadcasts from University Avenue.\nThe city is home to 15 AM and FM radio stations, two of which are French-language stations. The ITU prefix \"VO\" was assigned to the Dominion of Newfoundland before the province joined Canadian Confederation in 1949, and three AM stations kept their existing call letters. However, other commercial radio stations in St. John's that went to air after 1949 use the same range of prefixes (\"CF\"\u2013\"CK\") currently in use elsewhere in Canada, with the exception of VOCM-FM, which was permitted to adopt the VOCM callsign because of its corporate association with the AM station that bore that callsign. VO remains in use in amateur radio.\n\"allNewfoundlandLabrador\" is the city's daily online newspaper, which focuses on business news from across the province.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70582", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70582", "title": "Newfoundland island", "text": ""}
{"id": "70583", "revid": "11308236", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70583", "title": "Gulf of St. Lawrence", "text": "Outlet of the Great Lakes into the Atlantic\nThe Gulf of St. Lawrence is a gulf that fringes the shores of the provinces of Quebec, New Brunswick, Nova Scotia, Prince Edward Island, Newfoundland and Labrador, in Canada, plus the islands Saint-Pierre and Miquelon, possessions of France, in North America.\nThe Gulf of St. Lawrence connects the Great Lakes to the Atlantic Ocean via the St. Lawrence River.\nGeography.\nExtent.\nThe Gulf of St. Lawrence is bounded on the north by the Labrador Peninsula and Quebec, on the east by Saint-Pierre and Newfoundland, on the south by the Nova Scotia peninsula and Cape Breton Island, and on the west by the Gasp\u00e9 Peninsula, New Brunswick, and Quebec. The Gulf of St. Lawrence contains numerous islands, including Anticosti, Prince Edward, Saint Pierre, Cape Breton, Miquelon-Langlade, and the \u00celes-de-la-Madeleine archipelago.\nHalf of Canada's ten provinces adjoin the Gulf: New Brunswick, Nova Scotia, Prince Edward Island, Newfoundland and Labrador, and Quebec.\nThere is no consensus on the demarcation of the St Lawrence River from the Gulf, nor whether it is hydrographically a gulf or an estuary.\nAccording to Commission of Toponymy Quebec, the St. Lawrence River becomes the gulf at Pointe des Monts on the C\u00f4te-Nord and Matane Bas-Saint-Laurent or Sainte-Anne-des-Monts La Haute-Gasp\u00e9sie, the Estuary is upstream, the Gulf of St. Lawrence, much wider, downstream.\nThe International Hydrographic Organization defines the gulf's extent as follows:\n\"On the Northeast:\" A line running from Cape Bauld (North point of Kirpon Island, ) to the East extreme of Belle Isle and on to the Northeast Ledge (). Thence a line joining this ledge with the East extreme of Cape St. Charles (52\u00b013'N) in Labrador.\n\"On the Southeast:\" A line from Cape Canso () to Red Point () in Cape Breton Island, through this Island to Cape Breton [] and on to Pointe Blanche () in the Island of St. Pierre, and thence to the southwest point of Morgan Island ().\n\"On the West:\" The meridian of 64\u00b030'W from Pointe-Jaune () to Magpie (), but the whole of Anticosti Island is included in the Gulf.\nAt Baie-Trinit\u00e9, the Pointe-des-Monts Lighthouse, a National historic site of Canada, was built in 1829\u20131830 on a point that geographers throughout history, since as early as Samuel de Champlain (1567\u20131655), have classified as the demarcation point between the St. Lawrence River and the Gulf of St. Lawrence.\nFisheries and Oceans Canada's \"Estuary and Gulf of St. Lawrence planning area\" covers most of the Estuary and Gulf of St. Lawrence bioregion, an area with some of the warmest surface waters in Atlantic Canada during summer and the largest amount of sea ice during winter. The planning area is approximately 240,000\u00a0km\u00b2.\nTributaries and nested bays.\nBesides the St. Lawrence itself, significant rivers emptying into the Gulf of St. Lawrence include the Miramichi, Natashquan, Romaine, Restigouche, Margaree, Humber and Mingan.\nBranches of the Gulf include Chaleur Bay, Fortune Bay, Miramichi Bay, St. George's Bay, Bay St. George, Bay of Islands, and the Northumberland Strait.\nOutlets.\nAround Anticosti Island and to flow into the Atlantic Ocean, the waters of the Gulf take the following straits:\nUndersea Features.\nThe Laurentian Channel is a feature of the floor of the Gulf that was formed during previous ice ages, when the Continental Shelf was eroded by the St. Lawrence River during the periods when the sea level plunged. The Laurentian Channel is about deep and about long from the Continental Shelf to the mouth of the St. Lawrence River. Deep waters with temperatures between enter the Gulf at the continental slope and are slowly advected up the channel by estuariane circulation. Over the 20th century, the bottom waters of the end of the channel (i.e. in the St. Lawrence estuary) have become hypoxic.\nHistory.\nThe gulf has provided a historically important marine fishery for various First Nations that have lived on its shores for millennia and used its waters for transportation.\nThe first documented voyage by a European in its waters was by the French explorer Jacques Cartier in 1534. Cartier named the shores of the St. Lawrence River \"The Country of Canadas\", after an indigenous word meaning \"village\" or \"settlement\", thus naming the world's second largest country.\nBasque whalers from Saint-Jean-de-Luz sailed into the Gulf of St. Lawrence in 1530 and began whaling at Red Bay. They established their base on the Strait of Belle Isle and worked closely with the Iroquois in the Gulf of St. Lawrence. In 1579 the English government closed all English ports to Spanish oil imports. As a result, a third of Basque whale oil could not be sold. Basque whaling collapsed in the Gulf of St. Lawrence and never recovered.\nEcology.\nMarine Mammals.\nThirteen species of cetaceans inhabit the estuary and gulf of the St. Lawrence River:\nWeather and climate.\nIn winter, large quantities of ice form in the St. Lawrence River. Ice formation begins in December between Montreal and Quebec City. The prevailing winds and currents push this ice towards the estuary, generally reaching east of Les M\u00e9chins around the end of December. Ice covers the entire gulf in January and February.\nIce aids in navigation, preventing the formation of waves and therefore spray, thus having the advantage of preventing the icing process of ships.\nHuman activity.\nPorts.\nAlmost all of Quebec's ports are located along the St. Lawrence River seaway. Ports of the Gulf of St. Lawrence on the C\u00f4te-Nord Shore include Blanc-Sablon, Harrington Harbor, Natashquan, Havre-Saint-Pierre, Mingan, Port-Menier (Anticosti Island), Cap-aux-Meules (\u00celes-de-la-Madeleine).\nProtected Areas and National Parks.\nThe Western Honguedo Strait Coral Conservation Area was created following the signing of the Canada\u2013Quebec Collaborative Agreement to Establish a Network of Marine Protected Areas in Quebec in March 2018.\nSt. Paul Island, located off the northeastern tip of Cape Breton Island, is known as the \"Graveyard of the Gulf\" because of its many shipwrecks. Access to this island is controlled by the Canadian Coast Guard.\nIn 1919 the first Migratory Bird Sanctuaries (MBS) in Canada were established under the Migratory Birds Convention Act on Bonaventure Island, on the Bird Rocks of the Magdalen Islands, and on the Perc\u00e9 Rock. These migratory bird sanctuaries are administered by the Canadian Wildlife Service.\nNational Parks touching the Gulf of St. Lawrence include Mingan Archipelago National Park Reserve, in C\u00f4te-Nord, Forillon National Park on the eastern tip of the Gasp\u00e9 Peninsula, Prince Edward Island National Park on the northern shore of the island, Kouchibouguac National Park on the northeastern coast of New Brunswick, Cape Breton Highlands National Park on the northern tip of Cape Breton Island, and Gros Morne National Park on the west coast of Newfoundland.\nIn Quebec, since March 31, 2024, the network of protected areas extends over 274,431 km2 and is established as follows:\nThe five provinces bordering the Gulf of St. Lawrence have several provincial parks with protected coasts.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70585", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70585", "title": "Hemolysis", "text": "Rupturing of red blood cells and release of their contents\nMedical condition&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nHemolysis or haemolysis (), also known by several other names, is the rupturing (lysis) of red blood cells (erythrocytes) and the release of their contents (cytoplasm) into surrounding fluid (e.g. blood plasma). Hemolysis may occur in vivo or in vitro.\nOne cause of hemolysis is the action of hemolysins, toxins that are produced by certain pathogenic bacteria or fungi. Another cause is intense physical exercise. Hemolysins damage the red blood cell's cytoplasmic membrane, causing lysis and eventually cell death.\nEtymology.\nFrom hemo- + -lysis, from Ancient Greek (, 'blood') + , 'loosening').\nInside the body.\nHemolysis inside the body can be caused by a large number of medical conditions, including some parasites (\"e.g.\", \"Plasmodium\"), some autoimmune disorders (\"e.g.\", autoimmune haemolytic anaemia), drug-induced hemolytic anemia, atypical hemolytic uremic syndrome (aHUS)), some genetic disorders (\"e.g.\", Sickle-cell disease or G6PD deficiency), or blood with too low a solute concentration (hypotonic to cells).\nHemolysis can lead to hemoglobinemia due to hemoglobin released into the blood plasma, which plays a significant role in the pathogenesis of sepsis and can lead to increased risk of infection due to its inhibitory effects on the innate immune system.\nParasitic hemolysis.\nBecause the feeding process of the \"Plasmodium\" parasites damages red blood cells, malaria is sometimes called \"parasitic hemolysis\" in medical literature.\nSee HELLP syndrome, Pre-eclampsia, and Eclampsia\nHemolytic disease of the newborn.\nHemolytic disease of the newborn is an autoimmune disease resulting from the mother's antibodies crossing the placenta to the fetus. This most often occurs when the mother has previously been exposed to blood antigens present on the fetus but foreign to her, through either a blood transfusion or a previous pregnancy.\nHemolytic anemia.\nBecause \"in vivo\" hemolysis destroys red blood cells, in uncontrolled, chronic or severe cases it can lead to hemolytic anemia.\nHemolytic crisis.\nA hemolytic crisis, or hyperhemolytic crisis, is characterized by an accelerated rate of red blood cell destruction leading to anemia, jaundice, and reticulocytosis. Hemolytic crises are a major concern with sickle-cell disease and G6PD deficiency.\nToxic agent ingestion or poisoning.\n\"Paxillus involutus\" ingestion can cause hemolysis.\nSpace hemolysis.\nSpaceflight can cause hemolysis.\nIntrinsic causes.\nHemolysis may result from intrinsic defects in the red blood cell itself:\nExtrinsic causes.\nExtrinsic hemolysis is caused by the red blood cell's environment:\nIntravascular hemolysis.\nIntravascular hemolysis describes hemolysis that happens mainly inside the vasculature. As a result, the contents of the red blood cell are released into the general circulation, leading to hemoglobinemia and increasing the risk of ensuing hyperbilirubinemia.\nIntravascular hemolysis may occur when red blood cells are targeted by autoantibodies, leading to complement fixation, or by damage by parasites such as \"Babesia\". Additionally, thrombotic microangiopathy (TMA) can result in hemolysis of red blood cells. TMA is frequently observed in aHUS patients where clots form in the small vessels of the kidney resulting in damaged red blood cells as they attempt to pass through the restricted vessels.\nExtravascular hemolysis.\nExtravascular hemolysis refers to hemolysis taking place in the liver, spleen, bone marrow, and lymph nodes. In this case little hemoglobin escapes into blood plasma. The macrophages of the reticuloendothelial system in these organs engulf and destroy structurally-defective red blood cells, or those with antibodies attached, and release unconjugated bilirubin into the blood plasma circulation. Typically, the spleen destroys mildly abnormal red blood cells or those coated with IgG-type antibodies, while severely abnormal red blood cells or those coated with IgM-type antibodies are destroyed in the circulation or in the liver.\nIf extravascular hemolysis is extensive, hemosiderin can be deposited in the spleen, bone marrow, kidney, liver, and other organs, resulting in hemosiderosis.\nOutside the body.\n\"In vitro\" hemolysis can be caused by improper technique during collection of blood specimens, by the effects of mechanical processing of blood, or by bacterial action in cultured blood specimens.\nFrom specimen collection.\nMost causes of \"in vitro\" hemolysis are related to specimen collection. Difficult collections, unsecure line connections, contamination, and incorrect needle size, as well as improper tube mixing and incorrectly filled tubes are all frequent causes of hemolysis. \n\"In vitro\" hemolysis during specimen collection can cause inaccurate laboratory test results by contaminating the surrounding plasma with the contents of hemolyzed red blood cells. For example, the concentration of potassium inside red blood cells is much higher than in the plasma and so an elevated potassium level is usually found in biochemistry tests of hemolyzed blood.\nAfter the blood collection process, \"in vitro\" hemolysis can still occur in a sample due to external factors, such as prolonged storage, incorrect storage conditions and excessive physical forces by dropping or vigorously mixing the tube.\nFrom mechanical blood processing during surgery.\nIn some surgical procedures (especially some heart operations) where substantial blood loss is expected, machinery is used for intraoperative blood salvage. A centrifuge process takes blood from the patient, washes the red blood cells with normal saline, and returns them to the patient's blood circulation. Hemolysis may occur if the centrifuge rotates too quickly (generally greater than 500 rpm)\u2014essentially this is hemolysis occurring outside of the body. Increased hemolysis occurs with massive amounts of sudden blood loss, because the process of returning a patient's cells must be done at a correspondingly higher speed to prevent hypotension, pH imbalance, and a number of other hemodynamic and blood level factors. Modeling of fluid flows to predict the likelihood of red cell membrane rupture in response to stress is an active area of research.\nFrom bacteria culture.\nVisualizing the physical appearance of hemolysis in cultured blood samples may be used as a tool to determine the species of various Gram-positive bacteria infections (\"e.g.\", \"Streptococcus\").\nNomenclature.\nHemolysis is sometimes called hematolysis, erythrolysis, or erythrocytolysis. The words \"hemolysis\" () and \"hematolysis\" () both use combining forms conveying the idea of \"lysis of blood\" (\"hemo-\" or \"hemato-\" + \"-lysis\"). The words \"erythrolysis\" () and \"erythrocytolysis\" () both use combining forms conveying the idea of \"lysis of erythrocytes\" (\"erythro-\" \u00b1 \"cyto-\" + \"-lysis\").\nRed blood cells (erythrocytes) have a short lifespan (approximately 120 days), and old (senescent) cells are constantly removed and replaced with new ones via erythropoiesis. This breakdown/replacement process is called erythrocyte turnover. In this sense, erythrolysis or hemolysis is a normal process that happens continually. However, these terms are usually used to indicate that the lysis is pathological.\nComplications.\nPulmonary hypertension has been gaining recognition as a complication of chronic hereditary and acquired hemolysis. Free hemoglobin released during hemolysis inactivates the vasodilator nitric oxide (NO). Hemolysis also releases arginase that depletes L-arginine, the substrate needed for NO synthesis. This reduces NO-dependent vasodilation and induces platelet activation, thrombin generation, procoagulant factors and tissue factor activation, contributing to the formation of thrombosis. This can lead to esophageal spasm and dysphagia, abdominal pain, erectile dysfunction, systemic hypertension, decreased organ perfusion, promotion of inflammation and coagulation, and thrombosis.\nChronic hemolysis may also lead to endothelial dysfunction, heightened endothelin-1-mediated responses and vasculopathy. The release of heme leads to the production of bilirubin and depletion of plasma proteins, such as albumin, haptoglobin, and hemopexin, which may lead to jaundice. It may also lead to increased levels of the heme breakdown product stercobilin in the stool.\nSplenectomy of those with hemolytic disorders appears to increase risk of developing pulmonary thrombosis.\nComplications may also arise from the increased workload for the kidney as it secretes erythropoietin to stimulate the bone marrow to produce more reticulocytes (red blood cell precursors) to compensate for the loss of red blood cells due to hemolysis.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70592", "revid": "20685249", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70592", "title": "Ginger Lynn", "text": "American pornographic actress\nGinger Lynn Allen (born December 14, 1962) is an American pornographic actress and model who was a premier adult-entertainment star of the 1980s. She also had minor roles in various B movies. \"Adult Video News\" ranked her at #7 of the 50 greatest porn stars of all time in 2002. After ending her pornography career, she began using her full name and found work in a variety of B-movies. She returned to the adult industry and appeared in pornographic movies throughout the 2000s. Allen is a member of AVN, NightMoves, XRCO, and Urban X Halls of Fame.\nEarly life.\nBorn and raised in Rockford, Illinois, Allen moved to California in 1982 to become her grandfather's caregiver following his heart attack. After he died, she had her \"first nice boyfriend\" move in with her. Allen, the breadwinner of the two, felt obligated to find a lucrative occupation. When she answered an advertisement from the World Modeling Agency in September 1983, she immediately signed a contract with that agency and did pictorials for \"Cheri\", \"Club\", \"Hustler\", and \"Penthouse\", which brought her to the attention of the adult entertainment industry.\nCareer.\nAdult industry.\nAllen began as a nude model and then began performing in hardcore sex films as Ginger Lynn by December 1983. Her first pornographic movie role was in \"Surrender in Paradise\", in which she starred with Jerry Butler. Allen's \"girl next door\" good looks led to a quick rise in her popularity and eventually she became one of the most popular female performers in adult-entertainment history. She had her own line of videos through Vivid Entertainment with the director Bruce Seven. Allen received the Best New Starlet award in 1985 and is an inductee to the X-Rated Critics Organization (XRCO) and \"Adult Video News\" (AVN) halls of fame. Allen signed a contract with Vivid Entertainment founder, Steven Hirsch, making her the first 'Vivid Girl' and beating out the then-underaged Traci Lords. She was later called to testify on Lords' behalf against porn producers; she refused, and according to her, was then targeted by the Internal Revenue Service for falsification of a tax return.&lt;ref name=\"Collins 3/8/11\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;\nMainstream.\nIn February 1986, Allen left the adult industry in order to establish herself in mainstream films by using her full name. That same year, she contributed vocals to \"Fantasy World\", a single released by the music group \"Ginger\". Allen appeared in several non-adult films, television shows and interactive movie segments of the \"Wing Commander\" computer games. She started her career in mainstream features with a small part in the western \"Young Guns II\", which co-starred her future boyfriend Charlie Sheen's brother, Emilio Estevez.\nAllen was the subject of an episode of the documentary series E! \"True Hollywood Story\" in 2002. Allen appeared in another episode about her relationship with actor Charlie Sheen in 2010.\nIn December 2005, she appeared in \"\" (2005) playing the supporting role of Nurse Sanders. In the same year, she portrayed Fanny in Rob Zombie's thriller film \"The Devil's Rejects\" and later starred as Cherry Bomb in Zombie's slasher film \"31\".\nAdult return.\nAllen returned to the adult-entertainment industry in 1999 for three movies: \"Torn\" (1999), \"White Lightning\" (2000), and \"New Wave Hookers 6\" (2000). In March 2006, she became a host of Playboy Radio's Sirius Satellite Radio show, \"Night Calls Radio\", with former adult-entertainment performer Christy Canyon. In June 2007, Allen performed for two of Kink.com's hardcore websites, \"Ultimate Surrender\" and \"Sex and Submission\".\nPersonal life.\nAllen had a relationship with Charlie Sheen from 1990 to 1992 and accompanied him through drug rehabilitation. Despite consistent claims that Sheen has been physically abusive towards women, Lynn has said she never experienced abuse: \"Not one time did he raise his voice. No violence.\"&lt;ref name=\"Collins 3/7/11\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; She had a relationship with actor George Clooney.\nIn 1991, Lynn served four and a half months in prison for tax evasion. In 1996, Lynn had a son with porn producer Steven Hirsch.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70595", "revid": "433328", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70595", "title": "Chronic viral hepatitis", "text": ""}
{"id": "70596", "revid": "82432", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70596", "title": "May Fourth Movement", "text": "1919 political movement in China\nThe May Fourth Movement was a Chinese cultural and anti-imperialist political movement which grew out of student protests in Beijing on May 4, 1919. Students gathered in front of Tiananmen to protest the Chinese government's weak response to the Treaty of Versailles decision to allow the Empire of Japan to retain territories in Shandong that had been surrendered by the German Empire after the Siege of Tsingtao in 1914. The demonstrations sparked nationwide protests and spurred an upsurge in Chinese nationalism, a shift towards political mobilization, away from cultural activities, and a move towards a populist base, away from traditional intellectual and political elites.\nThe May Fourth demonstrations marked a turning point in a broader anti-traditional New Culture Movement (1915\u20131921) that sought to replace traditional Confucian values and was itself a continuation of late Qing reforms. Even after 1919, these educated \"new youths\" still defined their role with a traditional model in which the educated elite took responsibility for both cultural and political affairs. They opposed traditional culture but looked abroad for cosmopolitan inspiration in the name of nationalism and were an overwhelmingly urban movement that espoused populism in an overwhelmingly rural country. Many political and social leaders of the next five decades emerged at this time, including those of the Chinese Communist Party (CCP).\nBackground.\nOxford University historian Rana Mitter observed that the \"atmosphere and political mood that emerged around 1919 are at the center of a set of ideas that has shaped China's momentous twentieth century.\" The Qing dynasty had disintegrated in 1911, marking the end of thousands of years of imperial rule, and ushered a new era in which political power nominally rested with the people, but Confucianism still had a profound influence on social and political relations. After the death of President Yuan Shikai in 1916, China became dominated by warlords who were concerned with building political power and rival regional armies. The government in Beijing could do little to counter foreign influence and control. Chinese Premier Duan Qirui's signing of the secret Sino-Japanese Joint Defence Agreement in 1918 enraged the Chinese public when it was leaked to the press, and sparked a student protest movement that laid the groundwork for the May Fourth Movement. The March 1st Movement in Korea in 1919, the Russian Revolution of 1917, continued defeats by foreign powers and the presence of spheres of influence further inflamed Chinese nationalism among the emerging middle class and cultural leaders.\nLeaders of the New Culture Movement blamed traditional Confucian values for the political weakness of the nation. Chinese nationalists called for a rejection of traditional values and the adoption of Western ideals of \"Mr. Science\" () and \"Mr. Democracy\" () in place of \"Mr. Confucius\" in order to strengthen the new nation.352 These iconoclastic and anti-traditional views and programs have influenced China's politics and culture to the present day.\nTwenty-One Demands.\nThe twenty-one demands were a set of proposals presented by the \u014ckuma Shigenobu government to the Yuan Shikai administration in hopes of expanding Japanese affairs in China. The demands consisted of a variety of economic, territorial and power-hungry provisions. An important component of these demands were in regards to Chinese territory. These included intentions for expanding Japanese interests in southern Manchuria, eastern Mongolia, in addition to the confirmation of Japan's seizure of German ports in China's Shandong province.\nIn early 1915, Japan's submission of the twenty-one demands were revealed to the Chinese public, causing an increase in political tension and frustration towards Japan. In light of these revelations, the Chinese press became very critical towards Japan, and Chinese citizens' views of Japan soured. The twenty-one demands ultimately added fuel to the rising tensions between the two countries, playing an important role in triggering the impending May Fourth Movement.\nShandong Problem.\nChina had entered World War I on the side of the Triple Entente in 1917. Although that year, 140,000 Chinese laborers were sent to the Western Front as a part of the Chinese Labor Corps, the Treaty of Versailles ratified in April 1919 awarded rights to the German territories in Shandong to Japan. The representatives of the Chinese government put forth the following requests:\nThe Western allies dominated the meeting at Versailles, and paid little heed to Chinese demands. The European delegations, led by French Prime Minister Georges Clemenceau, were primarily interested in punishing Germany. Although the American delegation promoted Woodrow Wilson's Fourteen Points and the ideals of self-determination, they were unable to advance these ideals in the face of stubborn resistance by David Lloyd George and Clemenceau. American advocacy of self-determination at the League of Nations was attractive to Chinese intellectuals, but their failure to follow through was seen as a betrayal. This failure of diplomacy at the Paris Peace Conference created what became known as the \"Shandong Problem\".\nProtests.\nMay 4, 1919.\nOn the morning of May 4, 1919, student representatives from thirteen different local universities met in Beijing and drafted five resolutions:\nOn the afternoon of May 4, over 4,000 students of Yenching University, Peking University and other schools marched from many points to gather in front of Tiananmen. They shouted such slogans as \"struggle for the sovereignty externally, get rid of the national traitors at home\", \"Give Qingdao back to us!\", \"do away with the Twenty-One Demands\", and \"don't sign the Versailles Treaty\".\nProtestors voiced their anger at the Allied betrayal of China, denounced the government's spineless inability to protect Chinese interests, and called for a boycott of Japanese products. Demonstrators insisted on the resignation of three Chinese officials they accused of being collaborators with the Japanese. After burning the residences of these officials and beating some of their servants, student protesters were arrested, jailed, and severely beaten.\nParticipants.\nOn May 4, 1919, a group of Chinese students began protesting the contents of the Paris Peace Conference. Under the pressure, the Chinese delegation refused to sign the Treaty of Versailles. The original participants of the May Fourth Movement were students in Paris and Beijing, who joined forces to strike and take to the streets to express their dissatisfaction with the government. Some advanced students in Shanghai and Guangzhou joined the protest movement as it progressed, gradually forming a wave of mass student strikes across China. In June 1919, the Beijing government carried out the \"June 3\" arrests, in which nearly 1,000 students were arrested. However, this did not suppress the patriotic student movement, instead further angering the Chinese public and increasing revolutionary sentiment. Workers and businessmen across the country went on strike in support of the students' movement, marking the entrance of the Chinese working class into the political arena.\nWith the emergence of working-class support, the May Fourth Movement developed to a new stage. The center of the movement shifted from Beijing to Shanghai, and the working class replaced students as the main force of the movement. The Shanghai working class staged a strike of an unprecedented scale. The growing scale of the national strike and the increasing number of its participants led to a paralysis of the country's economic life and posed a serious threat to the government in Beijing. The working class took the place of the students to stand up and resist. The support for this movement throughout the country reflected the enthusiasm for nationalism and national rejuvenation, which was also the foundation for the development and expansion of the May Fourth Movement. Benjamin I. Schwartz added, \"Nationalism which was, of course, a dominant passion of the May Fourth experience was not so much a separate ideology as a common disposition.\"\nDuring the May Fourth era, pledges of celibacy were a means through which participants resisted traditional marriage and devote themselves to revolutionary causes.97\nExpansion.\nOn May 5, students in Beijing as a whole went on strike and in the larger cities across China, students, patriotic merchants, and workers joined protests. The demonstrators skillfully appealed to the newspapers and sent representatives to carry the word across the country. On the morning of May 6, students from Shanghai gathered at Fudan University in response to the events in Beijing. By the evening, meetings and special committees were held at various campuses in Shanghai, and telegrams were sent to the Beijing government in the name of the 33 representatives of different campuses in Shanghai to express their protest. Over the next few days, the movement grew in size. Students in Shanghai began striking at the end of May. During this time, disagreements arose within the protesters about the intensity of the protests, but the protests as a whole were seen to be intensifying.\nOn June 3, police in Beijing arrested a large number of students. To express their disapproval to it, businessmen and workers in Shanghai joined the strike. The center of the movement shifted from Beijing to Shanghai. Chancellors from thirteen universities arranged for the release of student prisoners, and Cai Yuanpei, the principal of Peking University resigned in protest. Although at this point the event was defined as a multi-class protest action, overall it was still a student-led movement.\nNewspapers, magazines, citizen societies, and chambers of commerce offered support for the students. Merchants threatened to withhold tax payments if China's government remained obstinate. In Shanghai, a general strike of merchants and workers nearly devastated the entire Chinese economy. On June 12, the general strike ended because under intense public pressure, the Beijing government dismissed Cao Rulin, Zhang Zongxiang and Lu Zongyu that had been accused of being collaborators with the Japanese. Nevertheless, students continued to express their protest against the content of the Versailles Peace Treaty by organizing rallies and other events at that time, and organized the National Student Union. Finally, Chinese representatives in Paris refused to sign the Versailles Treaty: the May Fourth Movement won an initial victory which was primarily symbolic, since Japan for the moment retained control of the Shandong Peninsula and the islands in the Pacific. Even the partial success of the movement exhibited the ability of China's social classes across the country to successfully collaborate given proper motivation and leadership.\nSignificance.\nScholars rank the New Culture and May Fourth Movements as significant turning points, as David Der-wei Wang said, \"it was the turning point in China's search for literary modernity\", along with the abolition of the civil service system in 1905 and the overthrow of the monarchy in 1911. The challenge to traditional Chinese values, however, was also met with strong opposition, especially from parts of the Kuomintang. From their perspective, the movement destroyed the positive elements of Chinese tradition and placed a heavy emphasis on direct political actions and radical attitudes, characteristics associated with the emerging Chinese Communist Party (CCP). Two of the CCP's founding members, Li Dazhao and Chen Duxiu, were leaders of the movement. The CCP viewed it more favorably, although remaining suspicious of the early phase which emphasized the role of enlightened intellectuals, not revolution. Li and Chen were the most influential promoters of Marxism in China during the May Fourth period. In its broader sense, the May Fourth Movement led to the establishment of radical intellectuals who went on to mobilize peasants and workers into the CCP and gain the organizational strength that would solidify the success of the Chinese Communist Revolution.\nDuring the May Fourth Movement, the group of intellectuals with communist ideas grew steadily, such as Chen Tanqiu, Zhou Enlai, Chen Duxiu, and others, who gradually appreciated Marxism's power. This promoted the sinicization of Marxism and provided a basis for the birth of the CCP and socialism with Chinese characteristics.\nThe legacy of the May Fourth Movement is embraced both by the CCP and its critics, who express different understandings of the movement and its importance.\nKuomintang members such as Luo Jialun, Shao Lizi and Duan Xipeng played an active role in the Movement, and some Kuomintang leaders claimed that their party and its founder Sun Yat-sen were active in leading the movement. However, Kuomintang influence on the Movement was minimal. In British Malaya, May Fourth-influenced riots in Penang and Singapore involving Kuomintang teachers and sympathetic students led the British to pass the Registration of Schools Ordinance, an attempt to remove Kuomintang influence from local education. From 1922, the British also instituted a ban on the Kuomintang itself.\nBirth of Chinese communism.\nFor many years, the orthodox view in the People's Republic of China was that after the demonstrations of 1919 and their subsequent suppression, the discussion of possible policy changes became more and more politically realistic. Influential leaders such as Chen Duxiu and Li Dazhao shifted to the left and became founders of the CCP in 1921, while other intellectuals became more sympathetic. Originally voluntarist or nihilist figures like Li Shicen and Zhu Qianzhi made similar turns to the left as the 1920s saw China become increasingly turbulent. In 1939, Mao Zedong claimed that the May Fourth Movement was a stage leading toward the fulfillment of the Chinese Communist Revolution:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The May Fourth Movement twenty years ago marked a new stage in China's bourgeois-democratic revolution against imperialism and feudalism. The cultural reform movement which grew out of the May Fourth Movement was only one of the manifestations of this revolution. With the growth and development of new social forces in that period, a powerful camp made its appearance in the bourgeois-democratic revolution, a camp consisting of the working class, the student masses and the new national bourgeoisie. Around the time of the May Fourth Movement, hundreds of thousands of students courageously took their place in the van. In these respects the May Fourth Movement went a step beyond the Revolution of 1911.\nPaul French argues that the only victor of the Treaty of Versailles in China was communism, as rising public anger led directly to the formation of the CCP. The Treaty also led to Japan pursuing its conquests with greater boldness, which Wellington Koo had predicted in 1919 would lead to the outbreak of war between China and Japan.\nWestern-style liberal democracy had previously had a degree of traction among Chinese intellectuals. Still, after Versailles, which was viewed as a betrayal of China's interests, it lost much of its attractiveness. Woodrow Wilson's Fourteen Points, despite being rooted in moralism, were seen as Western-centric and hypocritical. Many Chinese intellectuals believed that the United States had done little to convince the other nations to adhere to the Fourteen Points and observed that the United States had declined to join the League of Nations. As a result, they turned away from the Western liberal democratic model. With the October Revolution in Russia in 1917, Marxism began to take hold in Chinese intellectual thought, particularly among those already on the Left. Chinese intellectuals such as Chen Duxiu and Li Dazhao began serious study of Marxist doctrine.\nCultural.\nThe May Fourth Movement focused on opposing Confucian culture and promoting a new culture. As a continuation of the New Culture movement, the May Fourth Movement greatly influenced the cultural field. The slogans of \"democracy\" and \"science\" advocated in the New Culture Movement were designed to attack the old culture and promote the new culture. This purpose can be summed up in a sentence from David Wang: \"It was the turning point in China's search for literary modernity.\" As historian Wang Gungwu notes, the May Fourth Movement became subsequently identified as the predecessor and inspiration for the later Cultural Revolution.\nParticipants at the time, such as Hu Shih, referred to this era as the \"Chinese Renaissance\", because there was an intense focus on science and experimentation. In Chinese literature, the May Fourth Movement is regarded as the watershed after which the modern Chinese literature began and the use of written vernacular Chinese gained currency over Literary Chinese, eventually replacing it in formal works. Intellectuals were driven toward expressing themselves using the spoken tongue under the slogan , although the change was gradual: Hu had already argued for the use of the modern vernacular language in literature in his 1917 essay \"Preliminary discussion on literary reform\".\nIn 1917, Chen Hengzhe published the short story \"One Day\" () in an overseas student quarterly ()\u2014a year before the publication of Lu Xun's \"Diary of a Madman\" and \"The True Story of Ah Q\" (not published until 1921), which has often been incorrectly credited as the first vernacular Chinese fiction.\nMore ordinary people also began to try to get in touch with new cultures and learn from foreign cultures. Joseph Chen said: \"This intellectual ferment had already had an effect in altering the outlook of China's new youth.\" After the May Fourth Movement, the Chinese modern female literature developed a literature with modern humanistic spirit, taking women as the subject of experience, thinking, aesthetics, and speech.\nInstead of the formerly euphemistic language for sex, May Fourth reformers used the broader, more explicit term \"xing\".\nIn honor of the May Fourth Movement, May 4 is now celebrated as Youth Day in China and as Literary Day in Taiwan.\nFeminist.\nThe domination of Confucian ideologies shaped gender inequalities in Chinese culture, labeling and treating women as second-class citizens. The May Fourth Movement played a crucial role in women's emancipation in China, representing a social and cultural shift toward societal transformation.\nWomen in the May Fourth Movement were often restricted to indoor speeches and debates, lacking the same freedom of movement as their male counterparts. Although most activists and protesters were male, male intellectuals believed women's liberation was essential for a stronger and unified China. They argued that Confucian family structures hindered China's development. Stating that \"Women's liberation had to be achieved to save China from disarray and humiliation.\" Many supported the movement as they believed that women's emancipation was essential for a modern China. They saw it as intertwined with nationalism and new democratic values driven by the anti-imperialist movement.\nEconomic.\nAnger against Japan led many elements of society to join students in a movement to boycott Japanese products. Many hoped that when Japanese products were suppressed, China's national industry would benefit. However, the strike in Shanghai that occurred in June damaged the economy. One of the main reasons was that shop owners were not willing to open their shops during the strike, despite the use of police force.\nCriticism and resistance.\nMany intellectuals at the time opposed the anti-traditional message, some felt it did not go far enough, and many political figures ignored it. In the late twentieth century, voices more strongly questioned the premise that Chinese traditional culture had to be destroyed rather than developed. \nKuomintang leader Chiang Kai-shek, as a Confucian and a nationalist, was against the iconoclasm of the May Fourth Movement. As an anti-imperialist, he was skeptical of Western culture. He criticized these May Fourth intellectuals for corrupting the morals of youth. When the Nationalist party came to power under Chiang's rule, it carried out the opposite agenda. The New Life Movement promoted Confucianism, and the Kuomintang purged China's education system of western ideas, introducing Confucianism into the curriculum. Textbooks, exams, degrees, and educational instructors were all controlled by the state, as were all universities.\nSome conservative philosophers and intellectuals opposed any change, but many more accepted or welcomed the challenge from the West but wanted to base new systems on Chinese values, not imported ones. These figures included Liang Shuming, Liu Shipei, Tao Xisheng, Xiong Shili, Zhang Binglin and Lu Xun's brother, Zhou Zuoren. In later years, others developed critiques, including figures as diverse as Lin Yutang, Ch'ien Mu, Xu Fuguan, and Yu Ying-shih. Li Changzhi believed that the May Fourth Movement copied foreign culture and lost the essence of its own culture. (Ta Kung Pao, 1942). This is consistent with what Vera Schwarcz has said: \"Critically-minded intellectuals were accused of eroding national self-confidence, or more simply, of not being Chinese enough.\"\nAnother view was that \"this limited May Fourth individualist enlightenment did not lead the individual against the collective of the nation-state, as full-scale, modern Western individualism would potentially do.\"\nChinese Muslims ignored the May Fourth movement by continuing to teach Classical Chinese and literature with the Qur'an and Arabic along with officially mandated contemporary subjects at the \"Normal Islamic School of Wanxian\". Ha Decheng did a Classical Chinese translation of the Quran. Arabic, vernacular Chinese, Classical Chinese and the Qur'an were taught in Ningxia Islamic schools funded by Muslim General Ma Fuxiang.\nNeotraditionalism versus Western thought.\nAlthough the May Fourth Movement attack on traditional Chinese culture was largely successful, opponents still argued that China's traditions and values should be the fundamental foundations of the nation. These opponents of Western civilization formed three neotraditional schools of thought: national essence, national character, and modern relevance of Confucianism. Each school of thought denounced the western values of individualism, materialism and utilitarianism as inadequate avenues for the development of China. Each school held to specific objectives. The \"national essence\" school sought to discover aspects of traditional culture that could potentially serve the national development of China. Such traditional aspects consisted of various philosophical and religious practices that emerged parallel with Confucianism. Most particularly, China imported Buddhism during antiquity from India. Under the \"national character\" school, advocates promoted the traditional family system, the primary target of the May Fourth Movement. In this school, reformers viewed Westerners as shells without morals. Finally, the modern relevance of Confucianism was centered on the notion that Confucian values were better than Western ones. In response to western culture's primary concentration on rational analysis, China's neo-traditionalists argued that this was misguided, especially in the practical, changing milieu of the world. Most importantly, these three neo-traditionalist thoughts did not consider the individual, which was the main theme of the May Fourth Movement.\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWorks cited.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70597", "revid": "42431019", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70597", "title": "Suze Randall", "text": "English photographer\nSuze Randall (born 18 May 1946) is an English model, photographer, and pornographer. After giving up modelling, she devoted her time to erotic photography and became the first woman to shoot Page 3 for \"The Sun\" newspaper. She was the first female staff photographer for both \"Playboy\" and \"Hustler\". Randall is one of the early female pornographic film directors; she made \"Kiss and Tell\" in 1980. She is the president of adult content website Suze Network.\nCareer.\nWorking first as a nurse and then as a fashion model in the early 1970s, Randall gained attention for erotic photographs she took of her fellow model friends. In 1972, she played an au pair in \u00c9ric Rohmer's film \"Love in the Afternoon\". She gave up modelling and devoted her time to erotic photography becoming the first female to shoot \"Page 3\" for \"The Sun\" newspaper. After working for years for top adult magazines such as \"Penthouse\" and \"Playboy\", she now continues her career as a freelance photographer. In recent years, her work has included bondage imagery.\nHer breakthrough came when she spotted the pinup model Lillian M\u00fcller and photographed her for \"Playboy\". M\u00fcller was chosen as Playmate of the Month in August 1975 and subsequently Playmate of the Year in 1976. In a pictorial in \"Playboy\"'s May 1976 issue, Randall was both photographer and model. She went on to shoot a much more explicit self-portrait in a June 1977 \"Hustler\" pictorial.\nRandall was staff photographer from 1975 until 1977 for \"Playboy\" under the supervision of the magazine's West Coast editor, Marilyn Grabowski, and from 1977 until 1979 staff photographer for \"Hustler\". Later, she provided \"Penthouse Pet\" feature photo layouts.\nRandall has shot album covers for recording artists including Revenge and Robert Palmer, a music video for Capitol Records, and also has photographed the imagery for the British Lamb's Navy Rum calendar.\nIn 2005, she received the NightMoves Lifetime Achievement Award.\nIn 2025, she was inducted into the Adult Social Network (ASN) Lifestyle Magazine Hall of Fame.\nPersonal life.\nIn the 1970s Randall married writer Humphry Knipe, who helped write her biographical book \"Suze\" (1977), wrote and directed several of her films as Victor Nye, and managed Suze Randall Productions websites. They had three children together, including erotic photographer Holly Randall (born 1978). Knipe died in 2023.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70598", "revid": "7469377", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70598", "title": "Robert Cecil, 1st Earl of Salisbury", "text": "English government minister (1563\u20131612)\nRobert Cecil, 1st Earl of Salisbury, (1 June 1563\u00a0\u2013 24 May 1612) was an English statesman noted for his direction of the government during the Union of the Crowns, as Tudor England gave way to Stuart rule (1603). Lord Salisbury served as the Secretary of State of England (1596\u20131612) and Lord High Treasurer (1608\u20131612), succeeding his father as Queen Elizabeth I's Lord Privy Seal and remaining in power during the first nine years of King James I's reign until his own death.\nThe principal discoverer of the Gunpowder Plot of 1605, Robert Cecil remains a controversial historic figure as it is still debated at what point he first learned of the plot and to what extent he acted as an \"agent provocateur\".\nEarly life and family.\nCecil (created Earl of Salisbury in 1605) was the younger son of William Cecil, 1st Baron Burghley by his second wife, Mildred Cooke, eldest daughter of Sir Anthony Cooke of Gidea, Essex. His elder half-brother was Thomas Cecil, 1st Earl of Exeter, and philosopher Francis Bacon, 1st Viscount St Albans, was his first cousin.\nRobert Cecil was tall, had scoliosis, and was hunchbacked. Living in an age which attached much importance to physical beauty in both sexes, he endured much ridicule as a result: Queen Elizabeth I called him \"my pygmy\", and King James I nicknamed him \"my little beagle\". Nonetheless, his father recognised that it was Robert rather than his half-brother Thomas who had inherited his own political genius.\nCecil attended St John's College, Cambridge, in the 1580s, but did not take a degree. He also attended \"disputations\" at the Sorbonne.\nIn 1589, Cecil married Elizabeth Brooke, the daughter of William Brooke, 10th Baron Cobham by his second wife, Frances Newton. Their son, William Cecil, was born in Westminster on 28 March 1591, and baptised in St Clement Danes on 11 April. He was followed by a daughter, Lady Frances Cecil (1593\u20131644). Elizabeth died in 1597, leaving Cecil with two small children. Her brothers Henry, 11th Baron Cobham, and George Brooke were arrested by Cecil for their involvement in the Bye and Main Plots; George, her younger brother, was executed at Winchester on 5 December 1603 for high treason.\nIn 1608, Frances Cecil caught the eye of King James I's daughter Elizabeth and she made Sir John Harington write to Salisbury to invite her to join her household. She married the 5th Earl of Cumberland and had one daughter but no sons.\nSecretary of State.\nUnder Elizabeth.\nIn 1584, Cecil sat for the first time in the House of Commons, representing his birthplace, the borough of Westminster, and was re-elected in 1586. He was a back bencher, never making a speech until 1593, after having been appointed a Privy Councillor. In 1588, he accompanied Lord Derby in his mission to the Netherlands to negotiate peace with Spain. He was elected for Hertfordshire in 1589, 1593, 1597, and 1601, was made a Privy Counsellor in 1591 and was leader of the Council by 1597.\nFollowing the death of Sir Francis Walsingham in 1590, Burghley acted as Secretary of State, while Cecil took on an increasingly heavy work-load. He was also knighted and subsequently appointed to the Privy Council in 1591, and began to act as Secretary of State in 1589, although his formal appointment came later. He participated in the social life of the royal court, on 15 September 1595 he went hawking with the queen and they caught three partridges, which they gave to Elizabeth Wolley.\nIn 1597, he was made Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster, and in February 1598 dispatched on a mission to Henry IV of France, to prevent the impending alliance between that country and Spain. Three ambassadors, Cecil, John Herbert, and Thomas Wilkes left from Dover, but Wilkes died soon after arrival at Rouen. Cecil and Herbert lodged at a house of the Duke of Montpensier in Paris, and subsequently travelled south to meet the French king at Angers in March. They had their final audiences with the king at Nantes and the Duke de Bouillon gave Cecil a locket with the king's portrait. They sailed home to Portsmouth from Ouistreham, a port near Caen, in the \"Adventure\" commanded by Sir Alexander Clifford. Cecil became the leading minister after the death of his father in August 1598, serving both Queen Elizabeth and King James as Secretary of State.\nCecil fell into dispute with the 2nd Earl of Essex, and only prevailed at Court upon the latter's poor campaign against the Irish rebels during the Nine Years War in 1599. He was then in a position to orchestrate the smooth succession of King James. Lord Essex's unsuccessful rebellion in 1601, which resulted in his final downfall and death, was largely aimed at Sir Robert Cecil, as he then was, who was to be removed from power and impeached. Whether Essex intended that Cecil should actually die is unclear.\nIt is to Cecil's credit that the Queen, largely at his urging, treated the rebels with a degree of mercy, which was unusual in that age. Essex himself and four of his closest allies were executed, but the great majority of his followers were spared: even Essex's denunciation of his sister Penelope, as the ringleader of the rebellion, was tactfully ignored. This clemency did him no good in the eyes of the public, who had loved Essex and mourned him deeply. Cecil, who had never been very popular, now became a much-hated figure. In ballads like \"Essex's Last Good Night\", Cecil was viciously attacked.\nCecil was extensively involved in matters of state security. As the son of Queen Elizabeth's principal minister and a prot\u00e9g\u00e9 of Francis Walsingham (Elizabeth's principal spymaster), he was trained by them in spy-craft as a matter of course. The \"Rainbow Portrait\" of Queen Elizabeth at Hatfield, decorated with eyes and ears, may relate to this role.\nCecil, like his father, greatly admired the Queen, whom he famously described as being \"more than a man, but less than a woman\". Despite his careful preparations for the succession, he clearly regarded the Queen's death as a misfortune to be postponed as long as possible. During her last illness, when Elizabeth would sit motionless on cushions for hours on end, Cecil boldly told her that she must go to bed. Elizabeth roused herself one last time to snap at him: \"Little man, little man, 'Must' is not a word to use to princes. Your father were he here durst never speak to me so\"; but she added wryly \"Ah, but ye know that I must die, and it makes you presumptuous\".\nUnder James I.\nSir Robert Cecil now promoted James as successor to Elizabeth. Around 1600, he began a secret correspondence with James in Scotland, to persuade James that he favoured his claims to the English throne. An understanding was now effected by which Cecil was able to assure James of his succession, ensure his own power and predominance in the new reign against Sir Walter Raleigh and other competitors, and secure the tranquillity of the last years of Elizabeth. Cecil demanded as conditions that James stop his attempts to obtain parliamentary recognition of his title, that absolute respect should be paid to the queen's feelings, and that the communications should remain a secret.\nJames took the throne without opposition, and the new monarch expressed his gratitude by elevating Cecil to the peerage. Cecil also served as both the third chancellor of the University of Dublin, and chancellor of the University of Cambridge, between 1601 and 1612.\nIn 1603, his brothers-in-law, Henry Brooke, Lord Cobham and George Brooke, along with Sir Walter Raleigh, were implicated in both the Bye Plot and the Main Plot, an attempt to remove King James I from the throne and replace him with his first cousin, Lady Arbella Stuart. Cecil was one of the judges who tried them for treason: at Raleigh's trial, Cecil was the only judge who appeared to have some doubts about his guilt (which is still a matter of debate, although the prevailing view now is that Raleigh was involved in the Plot to some extent). Though they were found guilty and sentenced to death, both Cobham and Raleigh were eventually reprieved; this may have been due in part to Cecil's pleas for mercy, although the King kept his intentions a secret until the last minute.\nKing James I raised Robert Cecil to the peerage, on 20 August 1603, as Baron Cecil of Essendon in the County of Rutland. Baron Cecil then led the English delegation at the Treaty of London that brought peace between Spain and England after a long war. Between 1603 and 1604 difficult negotiations with the Spanish delegation took place, but through Cecil's determined statesmanship the treaty bought an \"honourable and advantageous\" peace for England. This was a personal triumph for Cecil which reflected well on James who wanted to be styled as a European peacemaker between the Protestants and the Catholics. Cecil accepted a pension of \u00a31,000 that year, which was raised the following year to \u00a31,500. The King also rewarded Cecil further creating him Viscount Cranborne soon after the treaty had been signed and then Earl of Salisbury the following year. Cecil was appointed to the Order of the Garter as its 401st Knight in 1606. In 1607, James appointed him as Lord Treasurer, succeeding Thomas Sackville, 1st Earl of Dorset. As a result, the whole conduct of public affairs was solely in his hands, although the king often interfered.\nAlthough King James would often speak disparagingly of Cecil as \"my little beagle\" or \"young Tom Durie\", he gave him his absolute trust. \"Though you are but a little man, I shall shortly load your shoulders with business\", the King joked to him at their first meeting. Cecil, who had endured a lifetime of jibes about his height (even Queen Elizabeth had called him \"pygmy\" and \"little man\"; he had a curvature of the spine and was barely tall), is unlikely to have found the joke funny, while the crushing weight of business with which the King duly loaded him probably hastened his death at the age of 48. The Venetian ambassador, Nicol\u00f2 Molin, described Cecil as short and \"crook-backed\", with a noble countenance and features.\nCecil was the principal discoverer of the Gunpowder Plot of 1605: at what point he first learned of it, and to what extent he acted as an agent provocateur, has been a subject of controversy ever since. On balance, it seems most likely that he had heard rumors of a plot, but had no firm evidence until the Catholic peer, William Parker, 4th Baron Monteagle, showed him the celebrated anonymous letter, warning Monteagle to stay away from the opening of Parliament. The Gunpowder Plot itself was a belated reaction to what was seen as the King's betrayal of a pledge to repeal, or at least mitigate, the Penal Laws. Cecil was undoubtedly among those who advised King James I not to tamper with the existing laws. However, his attitude to Catholics was not, for the time, especially harsh: he admitted that he was unhappy with the notorious Jesuits, etc. Act 1584, by which any Catholic priest who was found guilty of acting as a priest in England was liable to the death penalty in its most gruesome form. Like most moderate Englishmen at the time, he thought that exile, rather than death, was the appropriate penalty for the priests. Cecil did hope, like his father, to make England the head of the international Protestant alliance, and his last energies were expended in effecting the marriage in 1612 of the princess Elizabeth, James's daughter, with Frederick, the Elector Palatine. Still, he was averse to prosecution for religion, and attempted to distinguish between the large body of law-abiding and loyal Catholics and those connected with plots against the throne and government.\nThe Kingdom of Ireland was a major source of concern and expense during Robert Cecil's time in government. The Nine Years' War there had ended with the leader of the rebels, Hugh O'Neill, Earl of Tyrone, submitting to the Crown and being restored to his estates, following the Treaty of Mellifont (1603). Four years later, Tyrone led his followers into exile during the Flight of the Earls. The response of the government was to plan a Plantation of Ulster, to share out Tyrone's lands between the Gaelic Irish lords and the settlers from Britain. In 1608, Sir Cahir O'Doherty launched O'Doherty's rebellion by attacking and burning Derry. In the wake of O'Doherty's defeat at Kilmacrennan, a much larger plantation was undertaken.\nCecil wrote humorous letters to his friend Adam Newton the tutor of Prince Henry. Apologizing for a minor breach of manners, he compared himself to the court jester Tom Durie. In another letter he wrote that if a certain man failed to gain a place in Prince Henry's household, he should be sent to \"Tom Dyrry or to me\". Although the applicant was poor he could become rich by charging a fee to all the girls in England who wished to meet the Prince.\nIn 1611 Cecil disapproved of the proposed marriage between the Prince of Wales and the Infanta of Spain. He may have also received a pension from France.\nLord Treasurer.\nAs Lord Treasurer, Lord Salisbury, as he became in 1605, showed considerable financial ability. During the year preceding his acceptance of that office in 1608, the expenditure had risen to \u00a3500,000, leaving a yearly deficit of \u00a373,000. Lord Salisbury took advantage of the decision by the judges in the Court of Exchequer in Bates's Case in favour of the King's right to levy impositions (import duties), and imposed new duties on articles of luxury and those of foreign manufacture which competed with English goods. By this measure, and by a more careful collection, the ordinary income was raised to \u00a3460,000, while \u00a3700,000 was paid off the debt.\nIn 1610\u201311, Salisbury worked hard to persuade Parliament to enact the Great Contract, under which the King would give up all his feudal and customary sources of revenue (wardship and purveyance) in return for a fixed annual income of approximately \u00a3300,000. The rationale was that the King was spending extravagantly, exceeding his income by \u00a3140,000, and putting the kingdom into debt. By 1608, the debt was \u00a31.4 million, although the Lord Treasurer managed to get that down to \u00a3300,000 by 1610. The project was one to which Salisbury attached great importance, but the House of Commons eventually lost interest in the plan, and Francis Bacon argued against it, calling it humiliating. King James I also did not show much enthusiasm for it, and it lapsed when the King, against Salisbury's advice, dissolved Parliament in 1611. This was a double blow to Lord Salisbury, who was sick and prematurely aged, and conscious that the King now increasingly preferred the company of his male favourites, like The 1st Earl of Somerset. Although it failed to be implemented, the concept of paying an annual income to the monarch was revived some five decades later as a solution to the nation's financial problems and formed the basis for the financial settlement at the Restoration of Charles II, through which Charles was to receive an income of approximately \u00a31,200,000 per annum. One historian describes this annual payment as the eventual \"implementation of Cecil's Great Contract\".\nHouses and the arts.\nIn May 1591 Cecil was involved in an entertainment for the arrival of Queen Elizabeth at Theobalds, the Hertfordshire family home. The \"Hermit's Welcome at Theobalds\" made allusion to his father's potential retirement from public life. In July 1593 a Scottish suitor for Cecil's favour, William Dundas of Fingask wrote to him from Edinburgh. Dundas had heard Cecil was completing a gallery in one of his houses and would like paintings with \"such toys\" or emblems as he had seen himself in Scotland.\nIn 1606, Lord Salisbury, as Cecil was now, entertained King James I and his brother-in-law, King Christian IV of Denmark, at Theobalds, under the sardonic eye of Queen Elizabeth's godson, Sir John Harrington. Both monarchs were notoriously heavy drinkers, and according to some of those present, the occasion was simply an orgy of drunkenness, as few English or Danish courtiers had their rulers' capacity to hold their drink. According to Harrington, who may have been mischievously fictionalising, the masque put on to honour the two kings was a drunken fiasco: \"the entertainment and show went forward, and most of the players went backward, or fell down, wine did so occupy their upper chambers\".\nIn 1607, King James took possession of Theobalds, giving Hatfield Palace to Lord Salisbury in exchange, a relatively old-fashioned property that the King disliked. Salisbury had a disposition for building and tore down parts of it and used its bricks to build Hatfield House. Work continued on the house until 1612. He remodelled Cranborne Manor, originally a small hunting lodge, and built Salisbury House (also referred to as Cecil House), his London residence on the Strand.\nThe Cecil family fostered arts: they supported musicians such as William Byrd, Orlando Gibbons, Thomas Robinson, and the Irish harper and composer Cormac MacDermott. Byrd composed his famous pavane \"The Earle of Salisbury\" in his memory. Salisbury's motto was \"Sero, sed serio\", which can be translated as 'late but in earnest'.\nDeath.\nIn poor health and worn out by years of overwork, Salisbury, in the spring of 1612, went on a journey to take the waters at Bath in hope of a cure; but he obtained little relief. He started on the journey home but died of cancer, \"in great pain and even greater wretchedness of mind\", at Marlborough, Wiltshire, on 24 May 1612, a week short of his 49th birthday. He was buried in St Etheldreda's Church, Hatfield, in a tomb designed by Maximilian Colt.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
